Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Central bank evolution in the digital age
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at "Perspectives", organized by Citi Markets, Manila, 8 August 2018.
 Citi Philippines CCO Aftab Ahmed, Country Treasurer Paul Favila, industry partners, esteemed
guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
Last month, the BSP celebrated its 25th anniversary.  Our theme, “Navigating the Future,” was
apt and meaningful in a time of digitalization and technological advancement. Your chosen theme
for this year’s economic forum tells me we are on the same page. 
Indeed,  digitalization  transforms  business  models.    Services  must  level  up  to  remain  relevant
and responsive to increasingly demanding needs and to cater to a more sophisticated market. 
This principle applies also to central banking.
The idea that central banks must evolve appears simple. But it is actually quite controversial and
fraught with debate. 
Tradition and Embracing Change
The traditional notion is that since central banks are focused on maintaining stability, they must
remain conservative.  For the cautious mind, the notion of encouraging innovation (of embracing
disruption) is not only challenging, it may even be threatening.
But all around us are drivers that compel us to evolve.  We see the fast pace of technological
advancement, the increasing interconnectedness of markets, globalization, regionalization and
the growing technically-savvy millennial population.
These drivers make the case that to stay ahead even central banks (and not just businesses and
firms) must find novel approaches to address shifts in the economic landscape and to protect
developing consumer interests. 
Indeed, old ideas are being challenged.  For instance, central banking has historically focused the
spotlight  on  achieving  low  and  stable  inflation.    Monetary  and  financial  stability  were
conventionally  thought  of  as  two  separate  goals.    Blinders  were  almost  always  worn  in  the
pursuit of one over the other. 
In a hard and devastating way, the global financial crisis taught us that monetary and financial
stability  policies  are  inseparable  as  financial  institutions  evolve  and  as  economic  activities
become more complex. 
Another force that compels us to rethink how we must approach reforms and conduct policy is
the advent of the “fourth industrial revolution” – the rise of the digital economy.  
There is now burgeoning awareness that we must leverage on technology to conduct monetary
policy  and  research.  There  is  a  present  urgency  to  develop  regtech  to  address  fintech
developments and their attendant risks.  The rise of digitization also forces us to focus on the
third  pillar  of  central  banking      (which  admittedly,  has  not  received  as  much  attention  in  the
past!).  With digitalization and technological disruption, the payment system is now seen as an
essential tool for the effective implementation of monetary policy and as a critical infrastructure of
a stable and inclusive financial system.
These  are  all  exciting  prospects.   Allow  me  to  talk  about  the  BSP’s  three  mandates  in  this
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
context.
Evolution in the Pursuit of Price Stability
The BSP’s constant commitment to its primary mandate of price stability has led to managed
and stable inflation in an environment of high economic growth.
The Philippines has achieved uninterrupted growth for the past 77 consecutive quarters despite
domestic and global economic challenges.  For six consecutive years (in 2009 to 2014), as well
as in 2017, inflation settled within the national government’s inflation target range.
Amid this resilience, the Philippine economy is being tested by external headwinds emanating
from  the  normalization  of  monetary  policy  by  advanced  economies,  and  the  brewing  trade
tensions among key economies.  These exert depreciation pressure on the peso even as the
flexible  exchange  rate  policy  continues  to  be  a  stabilizing  mechanism  against  unsustainable
imbalances. 
The  overall  external  position  of  the  domestic  economy  remains  resilient.    The  sustained
resilience  of  foreign  direct  investments,  overseas  Filipino  (OF)  remittances,  and  business
process outsourcing (BPO) receipts have provided additional buffers to the domestic economy.
Our external debt metrics have also improved as exhibited in the continued decline in the external
debt to GDP ratio.
These external transactions yielded positive results in terms of comfortable gross international
reserves  of  US$76.9  billion  as  of  July  2018,  covering  7.4  months  of  imports  of  goods  and
payments of services and income.
In the meantime, the peso continues to reflect day-to-day market conditions.  Over the last ten
years, the peso has generally maintained its external price competitiveness against baskets of
currencies of all trading partners and trading partners in advanced and developing economies.
On  the  domestic  front,  the  country’s  inflation  environment  is  confronted  by  a  confluence  of
supply-side  factors.  This  posed  a  challenge  as  monetary  policy  instruments  more  effectively
address demand-side driven shocks.  This was the case early this year when economic data
suggested  that  an  adjustment  in  policy  rate  was  not  yet  warranted.    Moreover,  our  forecast
continued to show inflation upticks as transitory and moderating within the target in 2019. 
Nevertheless, recognizing increasing volatilities in world oil prices and interest rates, the BSP
adjusted monetary conditions by adjusting auction volumes and allowing the term deposit facility
(TDF) rates to rise, creating an effective tightening in the market. This allowed the BSP a channel
to provide guidance to short-term market interest rates which have firmly anchored to the BSP’s
interest rate corridor.
The  two  successive  rate  hikes  in  May  and  June  were  measured  responses  to  the  evolving
economic  environment  and  dynamic  market  conditions.  The  two  rate  hikes  signal  the  BSP’s
strong  commitment  to  ensuring  macroeconomic  stability,  which  could  help  anchor  inflation
expectations and temper further second-round effects.
To date, inflation remains elevated as inflation averaged 4.5 percent.  The latest inflation reading
in  July  is  on  the  high  end  of  our  forecast  but  remains  consistent  with  the  assessment  that
inflation will remain elevated in 2018 and will converge to the inflation target of 2 to 4 percent in
2019. 
At  any  rate,  we  will  consider  latest  data  as  we  determine  the  strength  of  our  follow-through
response during tomorrow’s policy meeting. 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
With  the  development  of  auction-based  instruments  complementing  the  overnight  reverse
repurchase  borrowing  rate  as  the  policy  rate  signal,  the  BSP  has  expanded  its  options  for
maintaining firm monetary control.  We reiterate our strong resolve to ensure that inflation returns
to target by 2019.
With  the  recent  firm  anchoring  of  market  rates  to  the  Interest  Rate  Corridor,  we  now  have
flexibility to move towards market-based monetary instruments.  This is one evolutionary aspect
as  well.    We  now  have  the  opportunity  to  significantly  reduce  the  reserve  requirement  ratio
(RRR) over the medium term.  To date, we have reduced RRR by 200 bps.  The goal of reaching
single-digit RRR at the end of my term is attainable without compromising effective monetary
control.
I emphasize that the RRR cuts are not intended to be expansionary.  They are an operational
adjustment  to  promote  market  development.    Data  suggests  we  were  able  to  neutralize  the
immediate liquidity impact through open market and FX operations.  Following the cuts, the level
of domestic liquidity actually grew at a slower rate.  M3 expanded by 11.7 percent year-on-year
(y-o-y) in June 2018, slower than the 14.3-percent growth rate in the previous month.   
We are ready to continue reducing the RRR next year as inflation returns to target based on our
latest forecast.  As challenges evolve globally and domestically, we will further improve our open
market operations and expand our policy toolkit.  We are currently studying and consulting with
the  industry  for  operational  refinements  to  further  strengthen  our  ability  to  guide  short-term
market interest rates and the transmission of monetary policy to the economy. 
As we refine our monetary operations, we also recognize that fintech has the potential to alter
how central banks conduct monetary policy.  Digitalization of the payments system, adoption of
new  forms  of  electronic  payments  and  stores  of  value,  and  the  issuance  of  digital  currency
fundamentally affect money demand. 
In staying ahead, economic information is an integral part of the BSP’s processes to effectively
deliver on its core mandates.  We are venturing into using big data to supplement our current
data needs. We are developing experimental price measures to measure changes in prices paid
by consumers as they immigrate to digital economy transactions.
Evolution in the Pursuit of Financial Stability
Parallel to our positive economic story is the steady growth of our banking industry. Reforms put
in place by the BSP along with the banks’ commitment to improve their ability to manage risks
have  resulted  in  significant  improvements  in  the  quality  of  banks’  assets  and  loan  portfolios. 
Reforms  through  the  years  have  also  bolstered  capitalization  –  overall  bank  capitalization  is
comfortably  above  local  and  international  standards.    Bank  loans  (majority  of  which  went  to
productive sectors) continues to expand at double-digit rates.
But this is not enough.  As a regulator, BSP supports responsible fintech innovations given its link
to  increased  efficiencies  and  financial  inclusion.    We  have  refined  regulations  to  effectively
respond  to  trends  in  digitalization,  fintech  and  technology-related  risks  while  still  remaining
supportive of financial innovation.
Innovations are allowed to flourish while ensuring risks are managed and consumer welfare is
protected. We also protect the integrity of the financial system.
To achieve this, we have issued various regulations. We updated the regulatory framework for
money service business to enhance the customer due diligence expectations and to re-balance
the  objectives  of  financial  integrity  and  financial  inclusion.  We  established  a  framework  for
regulating virtual currency (VC) exchanges. We are also collaborating with other regulators such
as the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for a harmonized regulatory approach to
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Initial Coin Offerings and VC trading activities. We are discussing with supervised institutions on
their respective plans to launch private digital currencies and other pioneering technologies.
We  recognize  that  digital  finance  delivered  through  mobile  technology  alone  cannot  reach
everyone.  That  is  why  we  issued  regulations  enabling  cash  agents  to  provide  improved  “last
mile”  delivery  of  financial  services  to  the  unbanked  and  under-banked.  The  cash  agents
themselves can be technology-enabled by fintech solutions.
In  the  meantime,  the  BSP  is  likewise  piloting  Regtech  solutions  to  strengthen  its  risk-based
regulatory and supervisory activities.  Our two pilots have to do with using chat bots to effectively
handle consumer complaints and Application Programming Interface (APIs) to make supervisory
reporting as painless as possible for banks while capturing more information for the BSP.
Evolution in the Payments and Settlements System
The  BSP  recognizes  the  fundamental  need  to  create  a  secure,  reliable  and  efficient  digital
financial  ecosystem  where  all  these  innovations  can  come  together  to  achieve  the  greatest
synergy.
In 2015, we launched the National Retail Payments System (NRPS).  It provides a policy and
regulatory framework for establishing a safe, efficient, affordable, interoperable, and reliable retail
payment  system.  The  payment  ecosystem  envisioned  to  arise  from  this  planned  platform  for
financial innovations encourages Industry players, – from big banks to small banks to non-bank
electronic money issuers – to utilize fintech solutions and provide services within an organized,
commercially-viable, and efficient retail payments system.
Since  the  launch  of  the  NRPS,  we  have  already  achieved  critical  milestones.  These  include
establishing two priority Automated Clearing Houses (ACH) by transitioning the batch interbank
fund transfer service of the Philippine Clearinghouse Corporation (PCHC) to PESO Net, and the
launch of InstaPay, a new ACH which supports 24/7 low-value electronic push payments among
participating member financial institutions.  We are now exploring further enhancements to the
large value payment system even as the private sector contemplates other ACHs for other useful
retail payment schemes.
Our current efforts also include development of an inter-operable national QR code standard to
accelerate the digitalization of merchants to close the loop on the digital payment system. 
On August 6, 2018, the Philippine ID System (Philsys) Act was signed into law by the President.
Republic  Act  No.  11055  establishes  a  biometric-based,  foundational,  national  identification
system that will provide every Filipino and foreign residents with a trusted and verifiable digital
identity.  This milestone can exponentially push forward our digitalization and financial inclusion
agenda.
Among other benefits, this will democratize access to transaction accounts.  Full participation to
the digital payment ecosystem envisioned under the NRPS will be within reach.  Key barriers to
account opening will be removed. 
This  will  directly  benefit  low-income  and  vulnerable  sectors  of  our  society  as  costs  of  on-
boarding  are  lowered  and  the  need  to  present  acceptable  identification  forms  is  addressed. 
Philsys can also remove friction points and facilitate powerful use-cases for digital payments like
government cash transfers. Down the road, it will allow convenient fund transfers with individual
Philsys numbers as identifiers.  The possibilities and prospects are endless.
Concluding Remarks
The  vision  of  an  ever-evolving  central  bank  in  this  new  digital  age  is  one  that  comes  with
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
rewards… But it is also one that demands hard work and decisiveness.  In the BSP, we are
committed to staying relevant and responsive to leveling up as we deliver on our mandates.
We staunchly safeguard price and financial stability and aim to provide a safer and more efficient
payments system. 
We do this in partnership with you, our stakeholders, as we are open to fresh and innovative
ideas and to collaboration, cooperation and consultation to drive our economy to new heights.  
Thank you very much.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
