Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Press  statement  for  the  2017  Financial
Stability Report Press Briefing
Press statement by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the
central bank of the Philippines), for the 2017 Financial Stability Report Press Briefing, Manila, 28
August 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
 Thank  you  for  joining  the  Financial  Stability  Coordination  Council  (FSCC)  as  we  mark  an
important milestone. Today, the FSCC – composed of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP),
the  Department  of  Finance  (DoF),  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  the
Insurance Commission (IC), the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC),– is proud to
issue the 2017 Financial Stability Report (FSR).
The 2017 FSR embodies our firm and collective resolve not only to build-up and highlight the
benefits of sustained stability.  It also aims to address any emerging or incipient instability.
The 2017 FSR is the FSCC’s first publication. While the BSP has in the past, crafted FSRs for
its  internal  use,  the  2017  FSR  we  issue  today  emphasizes  the  consultative  and  collaborative
nature of the FSCC.  The report is tangible and clear output which leverages on the respective
expertise and insights of FSCC member-agencies.
The 2017 FSR will be publicly accessible on each of our individual websites. This accessibility
supports our unwavering intention to communicate, raise awareness and to help businessmen,
financial market players, scholars, as well as the general public to make informed choices about
our respective futures.  The report is not just a compilation of technical expressions.  Rather, it is
narrative, and is a compelling one.
Thus  far,  the  Philippines  has  enjoyed  78  quarters  of  uninterrupted  growth.  The  FSCC  is
committed to sustaining and encouraging — with policies, initiatives and regulatory frameworks
— the Filipino’s innate innovative spirit.  Greater use of financial technology is targeted along with
the adoption of measures to tap the transformational benefits of credit in the context of evolving
and dynamic market conditions and their attendant risks.
One  of  these  challenges  and  risks  is  that  of  changing  market  prices  and  their  impact  on  the
servicing of debt. This issue is a primary focus of this 2017 FSR. As interest rates rise globally
and  as  emerging  market  currencies  depreciate,  outstanding  debt  obligations  will  have  to  be
repaid,  re-priced,  and  refinanced  at  higher  rates.  While  financial  market  interventions  are
highlighted  in  this  report,  the  continuing  value  of  sustaining  our  economic  momentum  is  also
emphasized.
In the 2017 FSR, there are discussions on the ASEAN integration and on the advent of financial
technology applications. The FSCC sees a strong upside in these initiatives. Discussion of these
topics contextualizes our shared goal to accrue benefits derived from them while at the same
time, remaining vigilant and prepared to intervene should systemic risks develop.
Finally,  the  FSR  also  explores  data  gaps  and  other  areas  of  policy  interest.  Better  data  is
essential as empirical basis for our actions is required. However, data gathering and analysis are
recurring challenges in the field of financial stability.  Thus, a strong emphasis is placed on this
work to support and address other policy issues along the way.
Our Technical Team put considerable effort in completing the 2017 FSR.  We expect that future
issues will be released in the first trimester of every year. We also expect more engagement
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
from the public, market players and the media, not just to highlight future content but to raise
appreciation for financial stability issues through a concerted communication plan.
We have much to look forward to.
Thank you again for joining us today and good afternoon.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
