William  C  Dudley:  Puerto  Rico  and  the  US  Virgin  Islands  after
hurricanes Irma and Maria
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Economic Press Briefing on Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands after
Hurricanes Irma and Maria, New York City, 22 February 2018.
 Good morning, and welcome to the New York Fed’s Regional Economic Press Briefing.  Today,
we  will  provide  an  update  on  the  economies  of  Puerto  Rico  and  the  U.S.  Virgin  Islands,  with
particular focus on the impacts of Hurricanes Irma and Maria.  As always, what I have to say
reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the
1
Federal Reserve System.
Initial fallout from the storms
Hurricanes  Irma  and  Maria  did  immense  damage  to  Puerto  Rico  and  the  U.S.  Virgin  Islands,
severely exacerbating what were already very difficult economic conditions.  My heart goes out to
our fellow citizens who have suffered so much and who face a long and difficult recovery ahead.
Maria was the most devastating hurricane to hit Puerto Rico in nearly a century.  Many lives were
lost,  homes  and  businesses  suffered  immense  damage,  and  large  parts  of  the  Island’s
infrastructure and agriculture were destroyed.  Moreover, Puerto Rico’s power outage was, by
far, the most severe in U.S. history, in terms of total customer-hours lost, and it will still likely take
many more months to fully restore electricity and other critical infrastructure to all of the Island’s
residents.  As a result, a sizable number of residents went to the U.S. mainland in the weeks
following Maria, and it still is unclear how many will return once circumstances improve.
Even before the storms hit, Puerto Rico was struggling with severe fiscal difficulties and a long
period of poor economic performance.  For over a decade, the Island has been experiencing a
shrinking  economy,  contracting  employment,  low  and  declining  labor  force  participation,  and
persistent  out-migration  of  residents  to  the  mainland.    Furthermore,  public  debt  reached  a
problematic  level,  and  the  Commonwealth  and  its  instrumentalities—including  the  power  and
water authorities—lost their ability to borrow in the public markets.  Defaults and ongoing debt
restructuring efforts followed.
In the U.S. Virgin Islands, the situation is similar in many ways.  St. Thomas and St. John were
ravaged by Irma, and St. Croix was devastated by Maria just two weeks later.  Their economy,
which is much more dependent on tourism than that of Puerto Rico, has also been contracting
for the better part of a decade.  However, the population of the U.S. Virgin Islands has not fallen
nearly  as  sharply  as  Puerto  Rico’s,  and  its  economy  had  stabilized  in  the  past  two  years
following the closure of a major refinery in 2012.  Still, while by some measures the U.S. Virgin
Islands are not as fiscally stressed as Puerto Rico, they, too, do not have access to the debt
markets.
Recovery and rebuilding
The combined impact of complex preexisting economic problems and the hurricanes has made
recovery much more challenging.  The loss of market access has severely hampered the ability
of the governments to mobilize resources to respond to the damage and rebuild and upgrade
infrastructures.
One example is Puerto Rico’s electrical grid, which is a major obstacle to recovery.  Even before
Maria, Puerto Rico suffered frequent blackouts, and the high cost and unreliability of electricity
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
had reduced business competitiveness.  Puerto Rico’s power plants are largely outdated and
inefficient, and the electrical distribution system is poorly maintained and extremely fragile.  In my
mind, given this poor starting point, now is a perfect opportunity for Puerto Rico to essentially
start  from  scratch  and  build  a  resilient  power  generation  and  distribution  network.    I  would
assume that an emphasis on renewable energy would be part of this effort, especially given the
dramatic fall in costs for this form of electricity generation.  The challenge, of course, will be how
to finance this investment, when the Commonwealth is already mired in debt.
Despite these woes, there are signs of resilience in Puerto Rico.  As we will show, job losses
following the storm were very substantial, totaling around 4 percent in Puerto Rico and 8 percent
in  the  U.S.  Virgin  Islands.    These  losses  are  considerably  steeper  than  after  most  major
hurricanes  that  have  hit  the  United  States.  However,  they  are  not  as  devastating  as  Katrina’s
impact  on  the  New  Orleans  economy  more  than  a  decade  ago,  which  was  and  remains
unprecedented.  Nonetheless, the labor market, at least in Puerto Rico, appears to be stabilizing
as  jobs  in  sectors  that  were  most  affected—such  as  leisure  and  hospitality—have  started  to
come back.  And, as repair and rebuilding efforts get underway in both Puerto Rico and the U.S.
Virgin  Islands,  jobs  are  being  created  in  sectors  such  as  construction.    These  job  gains  are
expected to continue for some time to come.
Looking ahead
Puerto Rico now must not only complete the recovery from the hurricane, but also do what is
necessary  to  get  on  a  sustainable  economic  and  fiscal  path.    Given  the  Island’s  high  debt,
unfunded pension obligations, declining population, and now the hurricane, the outlook may seem
grim.
But  there  are  good  reasons  not  to  despair.   As  I  have  noted  previously,  New  York  City  went
through a similar crisis during the 1970s: its population was declining, the economy was in a five-
year recession, and the city had literally run out of money to pay its employees and could not
borrow in the debt markets.  However, leaders had the courage to confront these problems head
on, and they adopted a series of reforms, including the establishment of a fiscal oversight board
and  a  more  transparent  budgeting  process.    All  of  this  helped  transform  the  city  from  an
increasingly blighted urban landscape to the vibrant economy of today.  And, New York City is not
the  only  example  of  a  major  turnaround.    Now-dynamic  cities  such  as  Washington,  D.C.,
Pittsburgh, and Seattle also went through wrenching economic and fiscal contractions.  While
Puerto Rico’s path to prosperity will not look exactly like that of New York or other cities, history
can provide valuable lessons, as well as hope for a better future.  The same can be said for the
U.S. Virgin Islands.
In addition, Puerto Rico has a number of unique attributes and endowments that it can leverage
as it seeks a path toward prosperity, including its educated and bilingual workforce, its proximity
and access to markets on the U.S. mainland, and its extensive experience as a host to various
major U.S. multinational corporations.
But, a recovery is not going to happen on its own.  We at the New York Fed have made a number
of suggestions over the years that we think can help improve Puerto Rico’s competitiveness and
economic prospects.    Some of these issues are now being addressed, and still more are at
least being discussed.  Among others, lowering the costs and disincentives to doing business,
helping  Island  residents  develop  and  use  their  human  capital,  and  improving  labor  market
opportunities are all important steps that must be taken.
2
On  the  fiscal  side,  the  Financial  Oversight  and  Management  Board  and  the  Commonwealth
together will be making a series of difficult choices over the coming months.  It will be critically
important  that  these  decisions  put  the  Commonwealth  on  a  sustainable  fiscal  path  going
forward.  As in other examples, such as New York City in the 1970s, the fiscal adjustment will be
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
painful, and many important decisions will undoubtedly be unpopular.  While the pain has been—
and will continue to be—widely shared, it is also critical to seek ways to ensure that the benefits
from the restoration of growth are shared broadly.  How exactly to make this work is an open
question that I am certain the oversight board and its stakeholders will consider carefully over the
coming months.
The  New  York  Fed  will  continue  to  help  in  the  best  ways  we  can—by  providing  independent
research and analysis, and by leveraging our convening authority to bring together stakeholders
to share expertise, explore opportunities, and provide information to those who need it most.  We
recently held two events on the Island—one for small business owners impacted by the storm
and another for credit unions.  We plan to do more in the months and years ahead, and I look
forward to gaining a better understanding of conditions on the ground and how we can help when
I travel to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands next month.
Now, I’d like to turn it over to Jason Bram, who will talk more about what we are starting to see in
terms of the economic impact of the storms.
1
2
Jaison Abel,  Jason  Bram,  Gerard  Dages,  Richard  Deitz,  Suzanne  Elio,  Jack  Gutt,  and Andrew  Haughwout
assisted in preparing these remarks. 
See, for example, our Report on the Competitiveness of Puerto Rico’s Economy, June 2012, and An Update on
the Competitiveness of Puerto Rico’s Economy, July 2014.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
