Peter  Praet:  Maintaining  price  stability  with  unconventional
monetary policy
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
Council of the European Union, Brussels, 29 January 2018.
 Accompanying slides
I would like to thank F. Holm-Hadulla for his support in preparing this speech.
Responding to the crisis in the euro area
The  crisis  that  erupted  in  2008  sparked  a  sharp  downturn  in  the  global  financial  cycle.  In  the
preceding years, over-optimistic growth expectations had taken hold in a number of advanced
economies. Despite slowing productivity growth, agents overestimated future income growth and
borrowed  against  it,  accumulating  excessive  levels  of  debt.  At  the  same  time,  financial
liberalisation  and  deregulation  encouraged  financial  leverage  and  rapid  credit  growth.  The  ten
years since that eruption has been a changeable period of deleveraging and de-risking, with a
number of different phases.
The first phase was the immediate liquidity crisis triggered by the turning of the global financial
cycle and the subsequent collapse of Lehman Brothers. Market funding came to a sudden stop
for many financial institutions. The ECB’s response was to lower its main refinancing rate to the
then record low of 1% in May 2009, to expand the range of eligible collateral for our refinancing
operations  and  to  provide  liquidity  elastically  to  the  banking  sector,  at  both  increasingly  long
durations and against a wider range of collateral.
The second phase was the sovereign debt crisis of 2011–12, which was intensified by the bank-
sovereign nexus. Bank funding markets fragmented along national lines and banks in vulnerable
countries  lost  access  to  wholesale  funding.  It  led  to  a  serious  disruption  of  the  monetary
transmission  mechanism  and  prevented  our  accommodative  policy  stance  from  reaching  the
economy.
Our policy response was twofold. First, we carried out two three-year refinancing operations at
the end of 2011 and beginning of 2012. Second, we announced our conditional Outright Monetary
Transactions in summer 2012, which acted as a powerful circuit breaker against self-reinforcing
fears in sovereign bond markets. But the sovereign debt crisis nonetheless left the economy with
a damaging legacy and paved the way for the third phase of the crisis.
As the euro area entered into a prolonged slump, banks in many parts of the euro area embarked
on a slow process of deleveraging, mainly by reducing lending. A credit crunch was looming: by
end-2013 loans to the private sector were falling by more than 2% per year. By mid-2014, the
economic recovery was losing momentum and the weakness in aggregate demand was starting
to  depress  inflation  expectations.  The  sharp  fall-off  in  oil  prices  that  began  in  late  summer
exerted further disinflationary pressures.
Given the weak underlying trend in inflation, we saw a growing risk that low inflation could de-
anchor  inflation  expectations  and  unleash  a  deflationary  spiral.  Short-term  interest  rates  that
were already close to zero hampered our ability to use conventional monetary policy instruments.
The ECB had to resort to a new approach to ease its monetary stance, based more on directly
influencing the whole constellation of interest rates that are relevant for the financing conditions of
the economy. This strategy was articulated in three measures.
The first was the launch of a negative interest rate policy, as we lowered the interest rate paid on
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
our deposit facility to –0.1% in June 2014. The second instrument was our targeted longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTROs), which are specifically designed to support bank lending to the
private sector. The third instrument was our asset purchase programme (APP) involving private
and public sector securities, which helped further depress the term structure of interest rates by
compressing risk premia out along the yield curve.
These instruments were complemented by the use of forward guidance, where we started to
communicate  about  our  expectations  of  future  policy,  along  with  the  conditions  that  would
warrant a change in the policy stance.
A solid and broad-based economic expansion with subdued price pressures
Our monetary policy strategy has borne fruit. We have now seen 18 quarters of positive growth
and the short-term economic indicators all point to a continued economic upswing with above-
trend growth. The breadth of the expansion is notable: the dispersion of growth rates across both
countries and sectors is at its lowest level for two decades.
The euro area recovery has so far been mostly home-grown, with monetary policy creating the
conditions for a virtuous circle between rising income and spending in both the corporate and the
household sector. Annual growth in employment has reached its highest level since before the
crisis and the unemployment rate fell to 8.7% in November, the lowest rate for nearly nine years.
An important factor underlying the good performance of domestic demand is the very favourable
financing  conditions  for  firms  and  households,  which  are  heavily  influenced  by  our  policy
measures. Bank lending rates to non-financial corporations (NFCs) have fallen by around 120
basis points since June 2014, a large proportion of which can be attributed to the impact of our
measures.
Moreover, the decline has been more marked in those countries that suffered more acutely from
financial fragmentation during the crisis, showing that our measures have not only provided the
necessary  monetary  accommodation,  but  also  rehabilitated  the  transmission  mechanism  to
ensure  an  even  transmission  of  monetary  policy  throughout  the  euro  area.  Loans  to  NFCs  –
sharply  down  when  we  introduced  our  unconventional  measures  –  are  growing  again,  and
reached an annual growth rate of 2.9% in December 2017.
Taking these factors together, the overall impact of the ECB’s policy measures since mid-2014
are  estimated  to  have  contributed  significantly  to  output  growth  –  and  by  around  half  a
percentage point in 2017.
While  our  measures  have  clearly  played  a  decisive  role  in  keeping  inflation  expectations
anchored and have contributed to an improved inflation outlook, an ample degree of monetary
accommodation remains necessary to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels
that are below but close to 2%, as reaffirmed by the Governing Council at last week’s meeting.
Despite  the  strong  cyclical  momentum,  domestic  price  pressures  remain  subdued,  as  do
measures of underlying inflation.
The evolution of the ECB’s forward guidance
Our monetary policy stance is determined by the combination and mutual interaction of our asset
purchase programme, our policy rates and our forward guidance on each of these tools. The
stimulus  provided  by  these  policy  tools  is  complemented  by  the  TLTROs,  which  will  remain
outstanding for the next three years.
When our key policy rates reached exceptionally low levels, asset purchases became the main
monetary policy instrument for calibrating our stance. This is why, since January 2015, when the
APP  started,  we  have  been  signalling  the  traditionally  tight  connection  between  the  ECB’s
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary policy and our price stability objective by linking an assessment of the medium-term
outlook  for  inflation  to  the  size  and  duration  of  our  net  asset  purchases.  Accordingly,  when
communicating  about  net  purchases,  we  have  expressed  our  intention  to  continue  with  our
chosen pace of monthly purchases until we see “a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation
consistent with our inflation aim”. This phrase describes the key contingency that has guided the
course of our policy in the past few years and will continue to do so in the future. In addition, the
pledge  to  re-invest  the  proceeds  from  the  principal  payments  that  accrue  from  the  maturing
securities  in  our  portfolio  should  be  seen  as  a  necessary  complement  to  the  net  asset
purchases.
Central bank asset purchases ease monetary conditions primarily by taking long-duration bonds
out of private hands. It is by withdrawing such assets from the market and holding them for a
possibly lengthy period of time that the central bank spurs a rebalancing of private portfolios, and
thus lowers term premia and eases financing conditions.
Forward guidance on both policy rates and the APP plays a key role in determining our monetary
policy stance. Its function has evolved significantly over time. Before the APP was launched, our
forward  guidance  related  only  to  the  expected  path  of  our  policy  rates.  When  the  Governing
Council decided to start issuing statements on its expectations concerning the future evolution of
the ECB’s key interest rates, in July 2013, forward guidance was mainly intended to insulate the
euro area from external tightening pressures, notably those originating from the global financial
turmoil that had followed the “taper tantrum” a few weeks before.
As  macroeconomic  conditions  deteriorated  in  the  course  of  the  following  year,  though,  the
statement that the Governing Council expected “the key ECB interest rates to remain at present
or lower levels for an extended period of time” turned into a vehicle for easing the monetary policy
stance.
With the adoption of our APP, forward guidance has been extended to key parameters of our
purchases, and has helped investors form expectations about the size of APP and its duration.
We have indicated a minimum horizon – an intentional end-date – until which time we plan to
carry out net monthly purchases, while always retaining the option of extending the programme
beyond  that  intentional  end-date  if  the  “sustained  adjustment”  condition  has  not  been  met.  In
October  2017,  for  example,  as  we  extended  our  net  purchases  past  the  end  of  the  year,  we
signalled that, starting in January 2018, we would “continue at a monthly pace of €30 billion until
the  end  of  September  2018,  or  beyond,  if  necessary,  and  in  any  case  until  the  Governing
Council  sees  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  consistent  with  its  inflation  aim”.
Moreover, in view of the key role played by the accumulated stock of assets in our portfolio as an
ongoing  source  of  stimulus,  we  committed  to  “reinvest  the  principal  payments  from  maturing
securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time after the end of its net asset
purchases, and in any case for as long as necessary.”
Our  instruments  are  configured  in  such  a  way  that  our  forward  guidance  on  policy  rates  has
been reinforced by our forward guidance on net asset purchases. We have linked the expected
path of our key interest rates to the intended horizon of the net asset purchases by saying that
we “expect them to remain at their present levels for an extended period of time, and well past
the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases”.  This  sequenced  guidance  has  served  to  exploit
important  complementarities  between  policy  rates  and  asset  purchases.  On  the  one  hand,
having the horizon over which policy rates are expected to remain constant tied to – and longer
than – the APP horizon has largely prevented the easing impact of our purchases on the yield
curve from being countered by a destabilisation of short-term interest rate expectations. On the
other hand, announcing that the APP would have a certain lifespan signalled that policy rates
would  remain  at  their  present  levels  for  longer.  And  this  has  reinforced  the  power  of  the
statements concerning the evolution of the policy rate path. The forward guidance on policy rates
acts as an enabling condition for the purchases to exert their full impact on term premia, and the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
language on the intended horizon of our net asset purchases has reinforced the signalling power
of our forward guidance on rates.
Looking ahead, the question is: how will our monetary policy toolbox evolve in the foreseeable
future?  Monetary  policy  will  evolve  in  a  data-dependent  and  time-consistent  manner.  The
transition towards a normalisation will begin once we have established that there is a sustained
adjustment in the path of inflation. Our assessment will be based on three criteria for the inflation
outlook: convergence, confidence and resilience.
First, convergence: headline inflation will have to be on course to reach levels below, but close
to, 2% by the end point of a meaningful medium-term horizon. Two things are noteworthy here:
the salience of our inflation aim and the forward-looking perspective. There should be no doubt
about our steadfast commitment to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels
that are below, but close to,, 2%. And the perspective should be forward-looking because our
monetary  policy  framework  directs  us  to  shape  monetary  policy  with  a  firm  medium-term
orientation.  Since  the  start  of  Monetary  Union,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  has  always  been
formed  with  a  view  to  stabilising  medium-term  headline  inflation  around  levels  that  are  most
consistent with our price stability definition. Since 2003, we have said that those levels should be
below, but sufficiently close to, 2%.
The second criterion on which our assessment is based is confidence, since meeting the first
criterion – convergence – is a necessary but not sufficient condition for a sustained adjustment.
The Governing Council wants to be sure that the expectation of an upward adjustment in inflation
has a sufficiently high probability of being realised and is being met on a sustainable basis, i.e.
not as the result of a transitory shock or measurement error. In other words, we need to build
strong  confidence  in  the  accuracy  of  our  baseline  outlook  for  inflation:  the  range  of  possible
outcomes around that baseline path should be reasonably contained. This is our second criterion
for a sustained adjustment. At our last Governing Council meeting, we have communicated our
increasing confidence that inflation will converge towards our inflation aim of below, but close, to
2%.
How can we substantiate today that inflation convergence has sufficiently strong legs to support
its  upward  trajectory  towards  our  aim?  By  looking  at  a  broad  range  of  indicators  of  price
pressures, for example measures of inflation trends, notably including core inflation indices. As
these  underlying  inflation  statistics  –  available  today  –  contain  information  that  is  valuable  for
predicting the level of headline inflation in the future, when short-term shocks that may influence
its  level  today  have  faded  away,  we  want  to  cross-check  our  medium-term  projections  for
headline inflation with these measures. In parallel, an eye on capacity utilisation and the extent of
unutilised resources can help reinforce our confidence in inflation convergence as a more robust
real economy is likely to support a build-up of broad-based price pressures looking forward.
Our  third  criterion,  resilience,  measures  the  robustness  of  inflation  convergence  to  a  partial
withdrawal  of  monetary  policy  accommodation.  If  the  inflation  outlook  is  overly  dependent  on
monetary support, the upward adjustment cannot be considered sustained. So, we want to verify
that the path would be maintained even in less supportive monetary policy conditions.
Today, we are still some distance away from meeting all three criteria at the same time. So, we
still need patience and persistence in steering our policy conduct.
Patience is necessary because it takes time for price pressures to build up, and to be reflected in
the  information  that  forms  the  basis  for  our  assessment  of  progress  towards  a  sustained
adjustment in the path of inflation.
Persistence  is  necessary  because  the  recovery  in  inflation  is,  in  itself,  a  consequence  of  the
prevailing  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  Even  if  incoming  data  were  to  validate  the
expectation of a gradual build-up of inflationary pressures, this would not be sufficient to affirm a
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
sustained  adjustment,  if  even  less  supportive  monetary  policy  conditions  were  to  imperil  the
inflation trajectory.
Monetary policy will evolve in a data-dependent and time-consistent manner. Once the Governing
Council  judges  that  the  three  criteria  for  sustained  adjustment  have  been  met,  net  asset
purchases will expire, in line with our guidance. From that point in time, the evolution of inflation
will remain conditional on reinvestments continuing for an extended period of time and on policy
rates remaining at their present levels well past the end of our net asset purchases. The stock of
long-duration assets held in our portfolio will continue to put downward pressure on longer-term
interest rates well beyond the end of our net purchases. Policy rates remaining at their present
levels well past the end of our net purchases will contribute to holding the short to intermediate
portions  of  the  yield  curve  in  check  for  as  long  as  necessary,  thereby  ensuring  that  financial
conditions remain consistent with a sustained adjustment of inflation.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
