Carolyn  Wilkins:  At  the  crossroads  -  innovation  and  inclusive
growth
Remarks  by  Ms  Carolyn  Wilkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  G7
Symposium on Innovation and Inclusive Growth, Montebello, Quebec, 8 February 2018.
 Ooh, standin' at the crossroad, tried to flag a ride
Ooh-ee, I tried to flag a ride
Didn't nobody seem to know me, babe, everybody pass me by
“Cross Road Blues” by Robert Johnson, 1936
Introduction
Welcome to Canada—and to a snowy Montebello. This day is dedicated to a discussion about
innovation and inclusive growth. It is great to have so many experts with us today. Thank you.
We know that technological advances are key to improving an economy’s potential to grow. They
have raised living standards in G7 countries and across the globe, and have helped lift more than
1
 The
one billion people around the world out of extreme poverty since the Second World War.
current wave of innovation—digitalization and automation—promises to raise trend growth in the
economy even more.
However,  as  we  are  discussing  today,  technological  advances  can  leave  people  behind.  It  is
perhaps only in the last decade or so that mainstream macroeconomists have sharpened their
focus on how income distribution may affect long-term growth and macro dynamics. There is
compelling  evidence  that  innovation  has  been  an  important  reason  behind  rising  income
inequality in advanced economies in recent decades.  Research also finds that rising inequality
can  result  in  weaker  and  less-stable  macroeconomic  outcomes.  This  places  us,  as  policy-
makers, at a crossroads. Do we choose to stay on the same road and repeat the past? Or do
we apply fresh thinking to policy and choose a new road where innovation delivers even stronger
and more-inclusive growth?
2
This is the challenge that the G7 countries have set for themselves for 2018. Canada is proud to
lead  the  G7’s  work  this  year  to  better  understand  the  issues  so  that  we  can  set  priorities  for
policy.
The  context  we  are  working  in  matters.  The  global  economy  is  enjoying  the  most  robust  and
synchronous growth we’ve seen in close to a decade. Businesses and consumers are feeling
more confident. Yet, we know that many people in advanced economies are also anxious about
what  digitalization  and  automation  might  bring.  They  are  worried  about  being  left  behind.  For
workers in some industries, such as manufacturing, this may seem like old news. For drivers,
lawyers, investment advisors and many others, it’s new. By some estimates, close to half of the
3
tasks done by workers could already be automated using current technology.
This anxiety has real costs. It has eroded trust in the framework for international co-operation in
areas that have served us well in the past: trade policy and financial sector regulation are good
examples.
As a way of spurring discussion today, I will cover three points:
1.  Technological progress will raise economic growth, although the channels through which it
contributed to rising inequality in the past are still forces to be reckoned with.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
2.  It doesn’t have to be this way—if we apply fresh thinking in some key areas, we can make
policy choices that manage the side effects of innovation, without stifling it.
3.  Policy-makers themselves need to dig into the technology—the better we understand it and
the underlying business incentives, the better policy choices we will make.
The past provides insight for the future
Technology has transformed our daily lives at an astonishing pace. Google is not yet 20 years
old.  Who  knew,  even  5  years  ago,  that  some  people  would  be  making  a  small  fortune  as
professional  video-game  players?  And,  while  parents  have  been  worrying  about  how  much
screen  time  their  kids  should  have,  a  growing  number  of  professions—from  firefighters  to
surgeons—have embraced the “gamification” trend, integrating video exercises into their training
programs.
Let’s remember that per capita output has increased around five times in G7 countries since the
early 1950s. Our average life expectancy during this period has risen from 67 to 81 years.  Not
bad. Yet, recent voting behaviour and public discourse make it clear that many people question
what is in it for them and their families when it comes to technology and globalization. A study
here at home showed that the more pessimistic people were about technology, the more worried
5
they were about their own prospects.
4
Many of us would agree that the data point to a concerning trend. The share of income going to
labour has been declining in many economies, including the G7.  The share of income going to
the top 1 per cent has nearly doubled since 1980 in some of our countries, amounting now to as
7
much as 20 per cent.
6
If we want to find a better road forward, identifying the underlying issues is the right place to start.
One question is, what is it exactly about innovation—and, to a lesser extent, globalization—that
opens the door to these outcomes? There’s a lot of good research, including by people in this
room, pointing to many possible forces at play. I think three stand out:
Technology  has  benefited  skilled  workers  more  than  other  workers  because  it  has  made
them  more  productive.People  in  more-routine  jobs  have  tended  to  be  replaced  entirely.
Digitalization will likely reinforce this dynamic. Machine learning and other technologies mean
that tasks requiring routine cognitive skills, such as reading medical scans or preparing legal
and investment advice, can now be automated too. That said, I do not share the dystopian
view of a world without workers. People will still have an absolute advantage in tasks that
require common sense and a human touch. And they will also find employment in areas
where they have a comparative advantage. The question is not so much whether there will
be jobs for people, but, rather, how well they will pay, and what the working arrangements
8
will be.
9
Some  types  of  technology  lead  to  market  concentration  and  the  rise  of  “superstar”
firms. These  firms  tend  to  have  fewer  employees  than  conventional  companies  and  can
earn  impressive  monopoly  profits.   Market  concentration  happens  quite  naturally  in
industries with prominent network effects and other scale economies. There is nothing new
in that. Phone companies are traditional examples, and social media companies and online
marketplaces are more-modern examples. What is new is that the “winner-takes-all” effect
is  magnified  in  the  digital  economy  because  user  data  have  become  another  source  of
monopoly power. Data from  a  large  network  create  a  formidable  barrier  to  entry. Another
barrier to entry can come from firms using their position as gatekeepers to crucial online
services to impede their competitors. And, it’s easier to avoid taxes when production is not
tied to a large factory with a fixed physical location.
10
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Technology has helped to separate work into discrete tasks, allowing businesses to make
more  use  of  short-term,  temporary  jobs  to  maintain  flexibility  or  respond  to  changing
needs.  Workers  in  these  types  of  jobs  tend  to  have  less  bargaining  power  than  regular
employees.  They  usually  earn  lower  incomes,  get  fewer  benefits  and  have  less  job
security.
  This  may  be  one  reason  why  we  have  seen  relatively  weak  wage  growth  in
Canada and other G7 countries despite improving labour market conditions. With the current
wave of innovation, the “gig economy” is likely to keep growing.
11
12
It doesn’t have to be this way
We do not have to be hostage to these forces. That’s my second point. Canada’s priority as G7
host  is  to  find  ways  to  embrace  technological  progress  while  handling  the  challenges  of
digitalization and automation.
Adequate income and equality of opportunity are critical to handling the challenges of the digital
economy.  Adequate  financial  incentives  to  innovate  and  take  ideas  to  market  are  critical  to
embracing technological progress. Trade-offs need to be made between these two objectives,
and  there  are  different  views  about  what  “adequate”  means  in  practice.  It  is  the  job  of
governments to make these important choices, not central banks.
In any case, central bankers do not have the mandate or the tools to directly influence the pace of
technological progress or the distribution of income. We do have a stake in supporting strong
and sustainable growth, and that is why we play an important advisory role and help shed light on
some of the trade-offs at play.
There  are  many  policy  areas  to  consider.  Let  me  talk  about  a  couple  that  I  think  should  be
priorities: developing skilled workers through inclusion, and keeping market power in check.
Developing a skilled workforce
Developing  a  skilled  workforce  is  about  education,  training  and  continuous  learning.  It’s  also
about reducing the barriers to participation in the workforce.
We know that the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) are an
important part of the equation. Businesses in Canada tell us that it is increasingly difficult to find
the right people in these areas, and I imagine this is the case globally. The obvious implication is
that we need to find better ways to make these fields of study more accessible and interesting to
students, starting at an early age. Improving our track record in terms of gender balance would
add to the pool of STEM skills, but this will require some new ideas.
13
We also know that on-the-job training and reskilling will become even more important because of
the accelerating pace of change. Even a recent graduate may not have the exact skills needed to
be a perfect match for the job. An increasing number of mid-career employees may find that their
skills  have  become  obsolete  and  that  retraining  is  needed.  As  Governor  Stephen  S.  Poloz
mentioned recently, we will need more engagement from businesses to tackle this issue. They
are best placed to know their own people and their own business needs in real time.
14
The question is, how can public policy and academic institutions encourage and complement
any new efforts by businesses? Each of our countries has interesting approaches to build on.
Germany’s  apprenticeship  program  is  well  known  and  established.  It  has  been  successful  in
giving students valuable vocational training while also meeting business needs.
 The Creative
Destruction Lab in Canada is a lesser-known example in the tech field of universities working
with students and businesses to bring the best ideas in science, machine learning and artificial
intelligence to market.
15
16
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let’s not forget that technology itself can be used to better match people with jobs, and to attract
people  into  the  labour  force  and  keep  them  there.  This  will  strengthen  sustainable  economic
growth while supporting inclusiveness at the same time. Finding ways to include more women in
the labour force, and empower them, is a priority for the G7 this year.
Another  promising  avenue  to  explore  is  how  to  adopt  technologies  that  remove  barriers  for
people  with  disabilities.  Right  now,  just  over  10  per  cent  of  the  labour  force  across  the  G7
consists of persons with disabilities. If their employment rate were raised to the same level as
that for the rest of the labour force, we could add up to 12 million workers.
 Chat and email
functions  on  our  phones  have  already  transformed  workplace  accessibility  for  the  hearing-
impaired. Entrepreneurs in Canada and elsewhere are developing technology to help people who
are visually impaired see far-away details. Soon, driverless cars will help make people with a
range of disabilities more mobile. As governments work to nurture innovative tech start-ups, they
could emphasize technologies to enhance workplace and social inclusion.
Keeping market power in check
17
We are not going to get the full benefits of innovation if we leave market power unchecked.
I’m focusing on the tech industry because the discussion is about digitalization, but some of my
points  could  apply  elsewhere.  The  five  biggest  global  technology  companies  have  a  market
capitalization of about US$3.5 trillion. That’s almost one-fifth of the size of the US economy. The
tech industry is making a valuable contribution to our economic performance. That said, the size
and market dominance of some of the tech firms raise many of the usual concerns about the
potential effects of monopoly power on prices and competition.
18
A new source of market dominance relates to data. Access to and control of user data could
make some firms virtually unassailable.
 They can easily drive out competition by combining
their scale with innovative use of data to anticipate and meet evolving customer needs, at a lower
price  (and  sometimes  for  free).  This  has  a  couple  of  undesirable  consequences.  First,  firms
operating in less-competitive environments innovate less; we need the dynamism from firm entry
and 
line  on  growth  as  much  as
 Second, the biggest firms may well return to monopoly pricing in the long run. These
possible.
consequences get in the way of stronger, more-inclusive growth.
the  contestability  of  markets 
to  raise 
trend 
the 
19
That is why we should prioritize the modernization of anti-trust and competition policy, as well as
the  relevant  legal  frameworks.  There  are  many  unanswered  questions,  especially  about  how
best to remove barriers to entry. If user data are the primary source of monopoly rents in the
digital  age,  how  should  we  regulate  who  owns  these  data  and  how  they  are  shared?  Some
interesting ideas include giving users control of their data—perhaps even making firms pay users
for  their  data—and  regulating  tech  platforms  as  utilities.
  Intellectual  property  rights  present
similar  issues.  Patents  are  a  key  way  to  protect  the  return  on  valuable  research  and
development. Given that they create barriers to entry and that the pace of technological change is
accelerating, do we need to rethink our approach? It is good to see authorities across the G7
countries looking at all these issues.
 International collaboration is necessary because of the
ubiquity and cross-border nature of many digital services.
20
21
New  technologies  pose  additional  regulatory  and  legal  questions.  For  example,  the  sheer
complexity  of  algorithms  used  for  data  analytics  makes  them  difficult  to  interpret,  audit  and
govern. In some cases, algorithmic pricing could lead to tacit collusion—price fixing without the
quiet glass of scotch between commercial rivals. Even if it were identified, tacit collusion would
not  meet  some  current  legal  definitions  of  collusion.
  Legal  clarity  is  also  required  in  many
jurisdictions with respect to data privacy, information security and consumer rights.
22
We also need to determine how best to manage the risks that concentration in digital services
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
can pose for the financial system. Top of mind for me are the growing operational risks (including
cyber  risks)  from  a  very  concentrated  set  of  third-party  service  providers  that  our  financial
institutions use—cloud services, data aggregators and related analytics. How concerned should
we be about these third parties—telecommunications companies and  tech  companies—given
that  they  typically  fall  outside  the  current  regulatory  perimeter?  This  is  another  question  that
would benefit from concerted attention at the international level. Good progress is already being
made on issues related to international taxation to avoid base erosion and profit shifting.
Policy-makers need to dig in
23
This  brings  me  to  my  final  point.  Policy-makers  need  to  dig  in  and  be  proactive.  Good  policy
decisions can only come from a clear understanding of the new technologies and the related
business incentives.
Let me give some examples from my own backyard.
At the Bank of Canada, we are focused on understanding the many ways in which digitalization
and  automation  are  affecting  the  economy  and  the  financial  system.  For  example,  as  non-
traditional  pricing  models  become  more  prevalent,  we  are  rethinking  how  best  to  measure
inflation.  We  are  looking  at  how  digitalization  might  be  affecting  labour  markets  and  the
transmission of monetary policy, and how a global digital marketplace for goods and services
changes  the  ways  in  which  domestic  inflation  pressures  are  generated.  Our  researchers  are
also studying emerging technologies in financial services to understand how the ecosystem is
evolving, and to spot new risks as they emerge.
The workforce needs to have the right skills for the digital economy. So do public policy-makers.
The Bank of Canada has several irons in the fire that take a learning-by-doing approach; one
example  is  the  work  staff  are  undertaking  to  apply  machine  learning  and  techniques  such  as
distant reading to analyze vast amounts of unstructured information. The goals are to increase
the range and depth of skills of our staff, improve our projections and reduce the uncertainty we
face when making policy decisions. We are also working on how we could use machine-learning
applications to increase efficiencies and manage operational risks in all parts of our business. All
the institutions represented in this room are doing interesting work in this area.
24
Public  sector  institutions  need  to  innovate  in  their  business  cultures.  We  should  be  open  to
more-diverse perspectives and expertise, work more often with private sector experts and take
manageable risks.
 The Bank of England and the Monetary Authority of Singapore are leaders in
exploring fintech with the private sector.
 The Bank of Canada also has several experiments
under way. One is in partnership with the TMX Group and Payments Canada. It uses distributed
ledger  technology  to  build  a  delivery  versus  payment  settlement  system  for  securities.
  Our
experience with these types of partnerships so far is that we can quickly harness deep subject
matter  and  business  expertise,  define  realistic  yet  ambitious  objectives  and  make  faster
progress than if we were working alone.
25
26
It’s good to see that G7 central banks, among others, have already been comparing notes on our
work in these areas.
Conclusion
It is time to conclude. I do not need to convince you that the digital economy is a promising way
to raise trend growth and overall living standards. We cannot be satisfied, though, if some of the
potential  gains  are  left  on  the  table,  because  many  people  will  be  left  behind  and  important
markets will be virtually uncontestable.
It  does  not  have  to  be  this  way  if  we  choose  a  road  for  policy  that  effectively  manages  the
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
downsides  of  innovation  without  stifling  it.  Of  all  the  areas  where  we  could  develop  and
implement  a  better  strategy,  here  are  my  top  three:  (i)  develop  a  dynamic  workforce  with  the
skills to match the jobs, and encourage more labour force participation; (ii) keep market power in
check,  particularly  the  power  that  comes  from  control  of  consumer  data,  to  encourage
competition and limit monopoly profits; and (iii) manage the growing operational risks associated
with the digital services that are provided by a concentrated set of firms to systemically important
financial institutions.
We will need to judge wisely when it is best to use public policy tools to manage risks and when
to  let  private  enterprise  work  its  magic.  We’ll  need  to  work  together  and  in  the  field  to  inform
these judgments. I am confident that, together, the G7 will show leadership and will build with the
private sector a shared sense of responsibility for the future.
I  would  like  to  thank  Gurnain  K.  Pasricha,  Lori  Rennison  and  Eric  Santor  for  their  help  in
preparing this speech.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
The  data  for  this  calculation  are  taken  from  M.  Roser  and  E.  Ortiz-Ospina, Global  Extreme  Poverty  (2018).
Poverty is defined as a consumption level below Int$1.90 per day, adjusting for price differences and inflation.
See International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, “Understanding the Downward Trend in
Labor Income Shares,” April 2017; and G. Michaels, A. Natraj and J. Van Reenen, “ Has ICT Polarized Skill
Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries over Twenty-Five Years ,” Review of Economics and Statistics 96, no.
1 (March 2014): 60–77.
According to McKinsey & Company, 46 per cent of tasks could be automated in the United States using current
technology. In Canada, the share is slightly lower (42 per cent). See C. Lamb, “The Talented Mr. Robot: The
Impact of Automation on Canada’s Workforce,” Brookfield Institute, June 2016.
Data  were  taken  from  the Penn World Table  and  the  UN  World  Population  Prospects:  The  2017  Revision.
Between 1950–55 and 2010–15, life expectancy at birth increased from 67 years to 81 years, calculated as an
average across the G7 countries.
Ipsos, “Ipsos Canada Next,” 2017.
T.  Piketty, Capital  in  the  Twenty-First  Century  (Cambridge,  MA:  Harvard  University  Press,  2014);  The  World
Inequality  Lab, World  Inequality  Report  2018.  Countries  included  are  the  United  States,  Canada  and  28
European countries.
The richest 1 per cent of the population in the G7 countries took home between 7 and 11 per cent of national
pre-tax income in 1980. That share has grown to between 9 and 20 per cent in recent years. Data were taken
from the World Wealth and Income Database.
See  L.  G.  Kletzer,  “The  Question  with  AI  Isn’t  Whether  We’ll  Lose  Our  Jobs—It’s  How  Much  We’ll  Get
Paid,” Harvard Business Review, January 31, 2018.
See D. Autor, D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson and J. Van Reenen, “ The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of
Superstar Firms,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23396 (May 2017); and S. Barkai,
“Declining Labor and Capital Shares,” Job Market Paper, University of Chicago (2017).
See J. De Loecker and J. Eeckhout, “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Implications,” draft
working paper, August 24, 2017.
See A. Haldane, “Work, Wages and Monetary Policy”  (speech  at  the  National  Science  and  Media  Museum,
Bradford, UK, June 21, 2017).
Monopsonies are also increasingly prevalent in labour markets in the United States, which may be driving down
wage growth and contributing to the decline in labour share. See J. Azar, I. E. Marinescu and M. Steinbaum,
“Labor Market Concentration,” SSRN (December 15, 2017).
See A. M. Munoz-Boudet, “STEM Fields Still Have a Gender Imbalance. Here's What We Can Do About It,” World
Economic Forum, March 16, 2017.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
See S. S. Poloz, “Three Things Keeping Me Awake at Night” (speech to the Canadian Club Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, December 14, 2017).
More  information  on  Germany’s  program  is  available  on  its  Federal  Ministry  for  Economic  Affairs  and
Energy website.
The Rotman School of Management launched the Creative Destruction Lab at the University of Toronto six years
ago. The lab has since expanded to Vancouver in collaboration with the University of British Columbia’s Sauder
School of Business, and elsewhere across Canada.
This  calculation  excludes  Japan.  Data  were  taken  from EuroStat  for  Germany,  France,  Italy  and  the  United
Kingdom (2011); from the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the United States (2016); and from Statistics Canadafor
Canada (2012).
P.  Aghion,  N.  Bloom,  R.  Blundell,  R.  Griffith  and  P.  Howitt,  “ Competition  and  Innovation:  An  Inverted-U
Relationship,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, no. 2 (May 2005): 701–728.
One striking example of this issue is that concentration has increased in three-quarters of US industrial sectors
since the early 1970s. See S. Leduc, “Seeking Gazelles in Polar Bear Country”  (speech  to  the  Sherbrooke
Chamber of Commerce, Sherbrooke, Quebec, October 3, 2017). 
I. A. Ibarra, L. Goff, D. J. Hernández, J. Lanier and E. G. Weyl, “Should We Treat Data as Labor? Moving Beyond
‘Free,’” American Economic Association Papers & Proceedings 1, no. 1 (December 27, 2017), forthcoming.
For example, see the Japan Fair Trade Commission’s Competition Policy Research Center, Report of Study
Group  on  Data  and  Competition  Policy,  June  6,  2017;  Competition  Bureau, Big  Data  and  Innovation:
Implications  for  Competition  Policy  in  Canada,  September  2017;  and  Autorité  de  la  concurrence  and
Bundeskartellamt, Competition Law and Data, May 10, 2016.
See “Price-Bots Can Collude Against Consumers,” The Economist, May 6, 2017.
The Group of 20 and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development have made some progress
with an initiative known as BEPS (base erosion and profit shifting). The idea behind BEPS is to make it harder
for global firms to shift profits to other countries and keep them hidden from their home tax authorities. This
makes  sense  for  fairness  considerations  and  for  ensuring  that  governments  have  enough  resources  for
effective social programs.
The Bank of Canada’s Risk Appetite Statement can be found on page 51 of the Bank’s 2015 Annual Report.
The Bank of England’s Fintech accelerator program brings central bank and private sector experts together to
create  proofs  of  concept  that  could  be  useful  in  central  banking  and  demonstrate  solutions  for  real-world
problems. The Monetary Authority of Singapore’s FinTech Regulatory Sandbox gives financial institutions and
fintech firms an opportunity to experiment with new financial products without having to comply with all current
legal and regulatory requirements. The MAS and the Bank of Canada are working together on a proof of concept
for cross-border payments using blockchain technology.
More information on the Bank of Canada’s research and experiments is available on its website.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
