Jorgovanka  Tabaković:  Current  situation  and  challenges 
supervision of the domestic insurance market
Introductory address by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at
the Insurance Gathering "Serbian Insurance Days", Aranđelovac, 29 November 2017.
in
 Dear  ladies  and  gentlemen,  esteemed  representatives  of  the  insurance  industry,  state
institutions, corporate sector and university, dear international guests, 
I  have  the  pleasure  of  introductory  address  at  this  gathering,  the  first  large-scale  event  fully
dedicated  to  insurance  business.  First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  extend  my  full  support  to  the
organisers’ idea to contribute, by this event, to putting insurance business in its rightful place, not
only in the country’s financial system, but also in the lives of each one of us, as citizens and
beneficiaries. This important and yet unjustifiably neglected activity, managed to remain healthy
in its core and to continue its slow, but still unstoppable development. Though the pace of that
development  is  not  what  we,  workers  in  the  financial  sector,  would  like  it  to  be,  insurance  is
definitely looking at a bright future. As the Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, the insurance
supervisor for already thirteen years, I will briefly recapitulate for you today our vision of insurance
business, issues that are topical and pending, and desirable ways to address them, as well as
other aspects and challenges of our supervisory work.
Insurance  business  in  Serbia  has  seen  some  drastic  changes  and  improvements  since  the
National  Bank  of  Serbia  assumed  the  role  of  its  supervisor.  This  business  is  still  constantly
changing and aligning with the European standards. All entities that failed to meet the criteria of
such  alignment  left  the  insurance  business,  making  room  for  new  market  players,  mostly  as
subsidiaries of internationally recognised insurance undertakings. Therefore, in the last decade
the insurance business was very dynamic also in terms of foreign direct investment. Insurance
undertakings founded by foreign owners started from very high pecuniary founder’s stakes, and
with the growth of their business, became also serious investors in government bonds and other
financial instruments; not so rarely they even founded their own subsidiaries and invested in real
estate  construction.  Today,  the  Serbian  insurance  market  comprises  seventeen  insurance
undertakings and four reinsurance undertakings. Six undertakings are engaged in both life and
non-life insurance, while four are exclusive life insurers and seven exclusive non-life insurers. In
addition  to  insurance  and  reinsurance  undertakings,  the  market  consists  of  nineteen  banks,
seven lessors and one public postal operator, which are licensed for insurance agency. There
are  also  eighty  six  legal  persons  engaged  in  insurance  brokerage/agency  and  ninety  four
entrepreneurs – insurance agents.
Financial  indicators  are  still  modest,  if  observed  in  absolute  amounts,  but  it  is  certainly
commendable that all of them have recorded stable growth for a number of years. Thus, total
insurance premium in the first half of 2017 equalled RSD 48.8 billion (or EUR 404 million), up by
8.1% relative to the same period last year. The share of non-life insurance in the structure of the
premium was 77.5%, while life insurance accounted for 22.5%. Of individual insurance types, the
largest share in the total premium was that of motor liability insurance (32%), followed by life
insurance  (22.5%),  property  insurance  (20.9%)  and  full  coverage  motor  vehicle  insurance
(8.5%).  The  balance  sheet  total  of  insurance  undertakings  increased  to  RSD  230.9  billion  (or
EUR 1.9 billion) in mid-2017, up by 10.3% relative to the end of the second quarter a year earlier.
Debt  securities  available  for  sale  made  up  44.1%  of  assets  of  insurance  undertakings,  debt
securities with fixed income 14.5%, property, plant and equipment 8%, receivables 7.6%, cash
and short-term deposits 6%, while debt securities recognised at fair value through profit and loss
account  made  up  3.7%.  The  liabilities  were  composed  of  technical  provisions  (70.3%)  and
capital  and  reserves  (20.7%).  Insurance  undertakings  meet  the  capital  adequacy  criteria,  as
stipulated by valid regulations, and are solvent and liquid. In this sense, the insurance market is
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
stable  and  capable  of  servicing  liabilities  to  policyholders,  insurance  beneficiaries  and  injured
parties.
The regulatory framework for the insurance industry was thoroughly reformed, modernised and
upgraded  in  2014/15.  Since  then,  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  has  introduced  an  entirely  new
dimension  in  its  supervisory  activities  given  that  we  prepared  the  insurance  legislation  in  its
entirety,  whereby  we  rounded  up  the  supervision  process.  Having  become  aware  of  such
possibilities, as well as of the need to improve insurance regulations and supervision, I personally
set up and led a working group that prepared the reform Law on Insurance in 2014, which was
adopted  by  the  Serbian  Parliament  by  end-2014  at  our  proposal.  Back  then  we  also  received
positive opinions on proposed solutions from all relevant stakeholders – the Serbian Government,
the European Commission, insurance sector representatives, companies and science workers,
and we were even more bound by that to continue on this path. This we did the very following
year by adopting a set of bylaws to the Law on Insurance. During the two and a half years of
implementation, these regulations yielded numerous positive effects which have been spoken of
a good deal, but I would like to use this opportunity to underline that our expectations have been
fulfilled,  namely  that  we  now  have  a  regulatory  framework  which  has  resolved  a  number  of
disputable  issues,  defined  mechanisms  enabling  better  protection  of  users,  stimulated
investment and the development of new insurance products, raised and accurately defined the
capital  adequacy  criteria,  modernised  insurance  administration  systems,  as  well  as  ensured
better transparency of work, i.e. more fair business conditions in this sector. Everything we have
achieved in this manner allows us not only to have a better insurance sector now, but also to
build  on  those  foundations  and  continue  with  modernisation  and  alignment  with  contemporary
European standards.
Insurance  supervision  conducted  in  the  past  two  and  a  half  years  essentially  differs  from  the
same  activity  performed  in  some  earlier  periods.  This  is  why  I  will  use  this  opportunity  and
present to all of you some specific results of our work, as well as positions on certain issues
which have arisen while performing that activity. Above all, we invested effort into reforming the
regular  financial  reporting  system  of  insurance  undertakings  as  well  as  the  system  of  their
reporting to us, as the supervisor. In this way we obtained concise and reliable information on the
grounds of which it is possible to identify potential problems fast and easy. We delivered a clear
message to this industry’s representatives, at times including through unpopular measures, that
neither manipulations in the financial statements, nor major errors in them would be tolerated.
This enabled us to reduce by far the level of supervisory intervention in on-site inspections of
reliability  of  business  books  and  financial  statements,  giving  us  the  opportunity  to  devote  our
resources  and  time  to  new  topics,  introduced  by  the  challenges  of  the  contemporary
environment.  Therefore,  in  our  supervisory  activities  today  we  address  business  planning,
market  behaviour,  and  many  other  areas  of  business  operation  of  insurance  undertakings,
seeking, as supervisors, to guide those operations towards good and useful business practice.
Business plans, for example, were for years prepared only as a matter of form, while today we
invest  joint  efforts  into  producing  quality  documents  useful  both  for  insurance  undertakings
themselves, helping them in their business organisation and also serving their supervisor to keep
track  of  the  defined  business  models  and  objectives.  The  dissemination  of  information  to
insurance policy holders is a new obligation, which insurance undertakings continue to perceive
with  certain  resistance,  but  luckily  this  is  rarer  and  rarer,  as  acting  jointly  we  understand  the
importance of the issue and how much it contributes not only to better consumer protection but
also  to  rising  quality  and  credibility  of  insurance  industry.  Additional  costs  of  pre-contractual
information,  which  many  market  participants  tried  to  avoid,  must  in  fact  be  perceived  as
investment in consumers, whose personal satisfaction will make them more loyal in the future,
and that is the most important resource of any business entity in the contemporary environment.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The NBS on-site supervisions are more efficient today, with very clearly defined objectives and
outcomes. Special attention is devoted to the sale of insurance, as we believe it is the reflection
of  this  industry  in  front  of  citizens.  That  is  why  any  form  of  unauthorised  operation,  false
presentation  or  non-adjusting  of  insurance  products  to  the  real  consumer  needs  must  not  be
allowed.  Only  sound  growth  based  on  a  satisfied  consumer  is  desirable.  The  principle  of
voluntary insurance, apart from exceptional cases defined by the state, is guaranteed. No one
has  the  right  to  breach  these  principles  for  the  sake  of  quick  profit,  as  such  breach  would
jeopardise  the  reputation  of  the  entire  industry.  In  that  sense  we  endorse  actions  of  the
Association of Serbian Insurers, but we also expect them to be more intensified in the future.
Insurance promotion, by means of pointing to the benefits for citizens, is the right path for the
development  of  this  industry. Also,  internal  mechanisms  of  the  professional  association  may
deter all those who breach the proclaimed values. The supervisor’s objective is not insurance
promotion nor is it our intention to delve in it. However, everything which makes the industry, with
appropriate and noble motives, will receive our support. The sales method is a crucial element in
life  insurance  development  as  it  is  a  kind  of  substitute  to  long-term  savings,  while  in  case  of
property insurance one needs to pay special attention to compensation claims, which, in fact, are
the best promotion before the citizens. Naturally, we must never forget about the injured parties
who,  without  the  status  of  insured  persons,  find  themselves,  with  no  fault  of  their  own,  in  a
property  or  life  threatening  situation.  The  compensation  right  of  these  persons  is  and  must
remain  inviolable,  which  is  why  this  aspect  will  remain  to  be  intensely  present  in  our  on-site
supervisions.
Off-site insurance supervision of the National Bank of Serbia is a high-quality innovation which
surely marked this year. Our goal was to find some specific aspects of business of insurance
undertakings, which are not of particular interest in standard supervision, but are nonetheless
very  important  for  citizens.  In  that  way,  we  tried  to  provide  better  protection  to,  for  instance,
students  of  primary  and  secondary  schools,  hotel  guests,  citizens  paying  for  public  utilities,
public  transport  commuters  and  other  persons  that  are  or  can  be  in  the  role  of  the  insured.
Through  such  supervision,  we  first  learned  about  the  business  of  the  insurance  undertakings
selected as representative in those segments, after which we established the standards of good
business practices, which we then recommended to the entire market with the aim of improving
it. I particularly wish to emphasise that insurance undertakings have recognised this intention of
ours, to which they not only responded appropriately, but even chose to voluntarily take part in the
proliferation and promotion of such practices. In this way, we managed to together create better
work conditions for all market participants, which should in the first place be working based on
uniform principles, and to which their supervisor should apply the same standards and criteria.
We are very pleased with the achieved results. Some poor practices have been entirely done
away with, others have been improved, while some brand new, good and desirable practices are
becoming  the  standard  for  doing  business.  Off-site  insurance  supervision  has  thus  greatly
stepped out of the mould of a passive collector of various reports and data, bringing the scope of
its activity to the level the modern insurance market requires and deserves.
Perspectives of insurance supervision are inextricably bound to Serbia’s path towards Europe.
The National Bank of Serbia particularly supports the commitment of the Serbian Government to
European  integration  and  acts  as  an  active  participant  in  this  process,  through  negotiations,
mainly in the area of financial services, but also through a wide array of other activities aimed at
harmonising  regulations  and  creating  an  economic  environment  that  is  more  favourable  and
secure for both companies and citizens. It is already well known that the regulatory objective of
the  Serbian  insurance  sector  and  its  supervision  is  the  Solvency  II  regulatory  framework.
Countries  in  the  European  Union  already  started  implementing  it  last  year,  whereas  we,  as  a
country aspiring to access the Union, have another fresh challenge before us. We are profoundly
aware of this fact, which has been taken into utmost consideration in all our activities to this day.
The Insurance Law that we have today has already integrated some elements of the Solvency II
regulatory framework, and we have established a strategy for the path to full harmonisation. In
view of the new deadlines to complete the national legal framework entirely built on European
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
standards, our plan is to prepare new regulations by 2020 or 2021 to meet this objective. What
remains until then is for us to prepare well and also to prepare the market under our supervision.
For this reason, we have already conducted a preliminary stress test, and plan on implementing
a number of quantitative impact studies and defining an optimal model of legal amendments and
secondary legislation, which will implement the Solvency II framework by the stated deadline. The
question, however, is when they will be applied. A number of future provisions is also expected to
have  a  delayed  effect.  What  lies  before  us  is  certainly  a  complex  task  of  meeting  European
standards, all the while maintaining the stability of the domestic insurance market.
At the moment, perhaps the largest challenge is improving regulations concerning compulsory
traffic  insurance.  This  is  a  task  undertaken  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  though  with  the
wholehearted  help  and  coordination  of  other  public  institutions,  including  the  National  Bank  of
Serbia.  At  our  initiative,  the  insurance  sector  was  directly  involved  in  this  task  through  the
Association  of  Serbian  Insurers.  Therefore,  it  is  very  good  to  have  all  the  relevant  parties
gathered  here  today,  where  one  of  the  central  topics  for  further  discussion  will,  in  fact,  be
compulsory  traffic  insurance.  My  close  associate  will  also  take  part  in  these  discussions,  but
something I wish to tell you personally is that market participants must reach a consensus about
sensitive  matters,  for  this  is  the  only  way  that  we  can  ultimately  get  regulations  that  are
applicable in practice. The lack of such applicability is precisely the greatest drawback of a large
number of provisions under the current Law on Compulsory Traffic Insurance. Once that job is
done, we will have a well-rounded and high-quality regulatory framework for insurance, paving the
way for further improvements of regulations, which have already been mentioned.
In addition to all what has been said, the National Bank of Serbia makes effort, within its main
competences, to have a continuous influence on the business and investment climate in Serbia,
as well as overall price and financial stability. Bearing this in mind, my today’s address would be
incomplete without at least several words about the results that we have achieved in this field.
Starting from this year, the inflation target has been reduced to 3%±1.5 percentage points, and
inflation is successfully maintained  within  its  bounds.  Low  and  stable  inflation  that  Serbia  has
today and has had for the past several years, is imperative for the preservation of the real value
of  wages  and  pensions,  and  the  creation  of  predictable  terms  of  business  for  all  market
participants. By continuously lowering the key policy rate since May 2013, we have opened room
for the recovery of lending activity and for further economic growth. Falling interest rates are one
of  the  factors  of  acceleration  of  economic  growth,  while  at  the  same  ensuring  considerable
saving  for  the  economy,  citizens  and  the  state.  Economic  growth  is  also  propped  up  by  net
foreign direct investment in Serbia which, as I have already mentioned, has been exceptionally
important for the insurance industry. By making these efforts, we have managed to strengthen
credibility among all stakeholders that consider the avenues for investment in Serbia. Adding to
this  anchored  inflation  expectations,  a  relatively  stable  exchange  rate,  a  stable  and  resilient
financial  system,  growing  confidence  in  the  domestic  currency  along  with  a  rise  in  dinar
household borrowing and elevated dinar savings, we certainly have the results that we can be
proud of. We have achieved all this owing to our own commitment, bravely facing the challenges
of the international environment and global financial trends. That this is not only our opinion is
confirmed  by  concrete  and  publicly  available  information,  as  well  as  increasingly  better
assessments  of  credit  agencies  and  relevant  international  institutions.  We  have  reduced  the
budget  deficit,  met  all  the  criteria  set  before  us  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  and  have
recently completed the last, eighth review of the current arrangement with this institution.
Finally, I wish to emphasise the good cooperation that the National Bank of Serbia fosters with
the  Association  of  Serbian  Insurers,  which  we  will  continue  to  streamline  towards  the
development and modernisation of domestic insurance. May this conference be a step towards
that goal, but also a step towards much broader cooperation involving other institutions of our
country,  as  well  as  countries  of  the  region  and  the  European  Union.  The  exchange  of  ideas,
experiences  and  knowledge  is  always  a  process  that  brings  multiple  benefits  to  both  sides.
Therefore, today, by proclaiming this conference open, I wish that it should become a traditional
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
event,  contributing  in  the  best  way  to  enhancing  the  quality  of  insurance  in  Serbia  –  first  and
foremost to the benefit of all our citizens and economic entities related to insurance, either as
employees or business partners, or as beneficiaries of its services. The National Bank of Serbia
will remain an unbiased, quality and reliable supervisor of the insurance business.
Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
