Karnit  Flug:  On  the  importance  of  strategic  planning  and  the
difficulty of implementing it in the political reality
Remarks  by  Dr  Karnit  Flug,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Eli  Hurvitz  Conference  on
Economy and Society, Tel Aviv, 19 June 2018.
Bank of Israel Governor Dr. Karnit Flug:
 In order to achieve economic and social goals over time, it is very important that there be a
strategic plan.
At the start of the current government’s term in 2015, it adopted a socioeconomic strategic
assessment and directions of action.  The test will be in its implementation over time .There
is built-in and natural tension between advancing the agenda of an elected government and a
policy based on a long-term vision and advancing a strategic plan.
In  governments  with  a  fragile  coalition  that  relie  on  many  parties,  the  tendency  to  make
decisions that advance short-term achievements becomes stronger.
It  is  therefore  important  to  strengthen  the  mechanisms  that  tie  the  work  of  government
ministries to the strategic plan, and to strengthen the professional echelon in the government
ministries.
Background
The Eli Hurwitz Conference is focusing this year on strategy: the design of policy that directs
reality while looking far into the future.  The conference contains various sessions in which
analyses of the basic demographic and global trends are presented, and discussions are
held regarding the policy required today to achieve targets in the coming decades in areas
that  affect  the  standard  of  living,  inequality,  the  quality  of  public  services,  the  level  of
infrastructure and more.
  It  is  needless  to  go  into  detail  about  the  importance  of  strategic  planning  in  this  forum. 
There are a number of layers: setting targets; designing policy that will be consistent
with the long-term planning; and no less important, avoiding policy measures that
will make it difficult to attain the strategic targets in the future.  The late Eli Hurwitz, for
whom this conference is named, led many strategic planning efforts, and today’s conference
marks  a  decade  since  the  presentation  of  the  “Israel  2028—Socioeconomic  Vision  and
Strategy in a Global World” plan, which was formulated by a team led by Eli Hurwitz and
managed by David Brodet, together with many partners. 
The plan was presented and discussed by the government in May 2008.  A decade later, we
are at an appropriate place to stop and assess: Have the governments since then acted in
view of the vision presented in the plan?  Have they turned it into an operative work plan in
various areas?  And what have we achieved in terms of the targets that were set in the plan?
The plan indicated areas that required government focus, while presenting warning signs for
Israeli society.  It also presented the vision in quantitative terms for the level of per capita
GDP,  the  GINI  index  of  inequality,  the  labor  force  participation  rate,  and  the  employment
level.    (It  is  important  to  note  that  the  two  latter  goals,  which  relate  to  employment,  were
achieved, and the current data are better than the targets that were set).
One  of  the  areas  emphasized  in  the  2028  plan  is  the  need  for  “a  fundamental  reform  of
education, from kindergarten through the end of secondary school and higher education”,
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  another  was  “integration  of  the  ultra-Orthodox,  Arab,  and  peripheral  populations  in
economic efforts.”  The plan also emphasized the risks created by the development of a
dual  economy,  in  which  there  is  an  advanced  economy  that  leads  in  innovation  and
technology, benefits from high productivity and answers the challenges of globalization, and
which  employs  6  percent  of  the  workers  in  the  economy  (today  9  percent),  alongside
traditional industries that are characterized by low productivity and low growth.  Later on, it is
noted that “the income gaps in Israel are among the highest in the advanced economies,
economic  polarization  is  dividing  society  and  preventing  the  maximization  of  economic
growth.”  These issues remain a significant challenge for policy today. 
Government decisions and actions to formulate a strategy
Despite the fact that the plan itself was not adopted as a government plan, it did provide
inspiration  for  in-depth  strategic  work  within  the  government  that  followed.    In  2012,  the
government decided, based on the work done by the National Economic Council, to adopt a
plan  to  consolidate  and  improve  the  government’s  ability  to  formulate  and  manage  a
socioeconomic strategy (Decision 5208).  The plan included:
Establishing  a  socioeconomic  strategic  assessment  that  is  to  be  presented  to  each
government  in  the  first  100  days  of  its  term,  in  which  the  areas  of  action  that  provide  a
significant response to main trends and characteristics are detailed;
Establishing a ministerial committee for strategic matters (in practice, this recommendation
was not accepted);
Establishing  a  strategic  management  team  led  by  senior  officials  in  the  Prime  Minister’s
Office and the Ministry of Finance (in practice, the team held very few meetings);
Establishing  a  forum  of  Depute  Directors  General  of  Planning  and  Strategy  in  the
government ministries (the forum is active and holds professional discussions). 
In  June  2015,  the  government  adopted  a  socioeconomic  strategic  assessment,  and  then
approved  a  series  of  government  decisions  to  adopt  directions  of  action  in  response  to
various issues, and to integrate them into the detailed work plans of the ministries, and into
their budgets (Decision 145).  The strategic issues that were defined were: cultivating and
maximizing  human  capital,  productivity  and  competition,  financing  infrastructure,
housing  strategy,  regional  economic  development,  preparedness  for  the  aging  of
the population, and “Digital Israel”. 
An analysis of the performance of all items in the government decisions in the various fields,
which was done by the National Economic Council in the past few months, shows a positive
picture in the performance of most of the decisions.  These are mainly decisions to create
the  frameworks  and  processes,  such  as  establishing  teams,  presenting  and  formulating
programs, and progress reports to various forums.  Of course, the most important test will
relate to the formulation and implementation of detailed plans, and achieving the targets over
time.  At this stage, it is too early to assess the extent to which they will be realized. 
Examples  of  issues  that  require  a  strategic  plan  that  were  included  in  the
government decision in 2015
Human capital—As early as the Israel 2028 plan, the area of education and professional
training was identified as a main component in providing the basic values and skills required
in the modern labor market.  This is one of the areas where the importance of a strategic
plan  is  clear—a  plan  that  formulates  targets,  defines  work  plans  for  achieving  them,  and
allocates budgets is essential in order to achieve an education system that is tasked with
providing values, abilities and skills that will enable its graduates to deal—as workers and in
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
general as citizens—with the challenges of a changing labor world, for many years to come.
The low achievements and the gaps in scholastic achievement and in the abilities relevant
for the labor market are constantly being raised by the findings of PISA and PIAAC tests. 
Despite the increase in the average number of years of schooling, literacy, numeracy and
functioning  in  a  digital  environment  among  the  adult  population  in  Israel—at  all  levels  of
education—are lower than those in most of the advanced economies, and the situation is no
better among students.
The  need  to  deal  with  low  abilities  and  skills  is  also  shown  by  an  analysis  of  labor
productivity  trends  in  Israel  relative  to  the  other  advanced  economies,  and  by  productivity
and wage gaps between various groups.  Improvement is needed in the education system
and in professional training, so that it will prepare its graduates for the labor market of the
21   century,  which  will  require  a  variety  of  cognitive  skills  as  well  as  critical  thinking,
creativity, teamwork ability, and more. 
st
The Ministry of Education, led by various education ministers, has set various goals, and has
focused on dealing with various issues in each period.  While in Gideon Sa’ar’s term, the
ministry  focused  mainly  on  improving METZAV  test  scores,  during  Shai  Piron’s  term  it
focused  on  advancing “significant learning”.  In the current term, under Naftali Bennett,
the focus moved to increasing the number of students learning mathematics.  During
the  term  of  the  previous  government,  the  need  to  provide  basic  skills  to  everyone  was
emphasized,  and  budget  allocations  were  even  supposed  to  be  conditional  on  providing
courses such as mathematics, English and sciences, but the current government cancelled
that condition.
These changes in priorities, concepts and emphases included budgetary changes and the
diversion of a significant portion of the ministry’s flexible budget every time a new minister
took office.  The variance in philosophies, and as a direct result in the action strategy and the
targets derived from it, impaired consistency and made it difficult to qualitatively implement
the plans.
In 2015, as part of the strategic assessment, one of the decisions made by the government
was to focus on “cultivating and maximizing human capital”.  Most of the activity directions
proposed  by  the  government  at  the  time  were  approved  and  are  being  advanced.    For
instance, increasing the number of students studying 5 units in mathematics, increasing hi-
tech manpower through various means, and reforming the technological colleges.  However,
it is clear that achieving a target such as increasing the number of students studying 5 units
in  mathematics  requires  consistency  over  time,  as  providing  mathematical  thinking  skills
must start at a very young age, and only based on that can we reach high proportions of
children with the potential to cope with studying the highest levels of mathematics. 
It  therefore  seems  that  the  strategic  goal  adopted  by  the  government  to  cultivate  and
maximize human capital, and individual decisions derived from it, have an impact on Ministry
of  Education  goals  and  work  plans.    However, it  is  too  early  to  determine  whether
setting the strategic goal leads to focusing the Ministry’s efforts on achieving the
goal  over  time,  and  particularly  whether  the  required  continuity  is  created  even
when there are changes in government or in ministers.
Another example of an area in which it is necessary to adopt a strategic plan that will
be implemented over time is housing.
The  need  for  a  strategic  plan  in  this  field  is  due  to  the  long  time  needed  for  policy  to  be
implemented.  Decisions made have an impact on how land is used and conceptualized,
and are to a large extent irreversible.  Decisions on dispersal of the population also form the
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
basis for infrastructure planning.  There is also need for a high planning inventory based on
the  strategic  plan  so  that  it  will  be  possible  to  respond  relatively  quickly  to  changes  in
demand,  and  particularly  in  view  of  the  long  time  required  from  initiation  to  completion  of
construction (about 12–15 years). 
In 2005, the government approved National Outline Plan 35, which was intended to define
the policy of planning and the placement of localities in Israel until 2020.  The main points of
the plan are strengthening existing localities and avoiding suburbanization, urban renewal,
and strengthening public transport.  The national outline plan is intended to serve as a basis
for  all  construction  and  development  initiatives  in  Israel  according  to  the  principles  upon
which it is based, and set geographic dispersal targets that would increase the proportion of
the population in the northern and southern regions at the expense of the proportion in the
center of the country.  The plan was supposed to be updated every four years. 
Examining the developments since then we find that the targets of the plan in the area of
construction planning, both in relation to the overall volume and in relation to the dispersal of
the population, did not succeed in directing demand to the housing market in the periphery
(the gap between the number of residents in the periphery according to the target and the
actual number is 600,000), which increased the gaps between demand and supply in the
center of the country.  We may assume that this also has to do with the non-use of transport
development plans. 
In May 2017, the strategic plan for housing that was led by the Planning Administration and
the National Economic Council was published.  The plan set active targets for the planning
system that will enable the construction of 1.5 million housing units between 2014 and 2040,
in accordance with the need shown by models based on demographic trends.  The plan also
set  targets  for  the  future  geographic  dispersal  of  dwellings,  taking  into  account  the
periphery’s  absorption  capabilities,  the  shortage  of  land  in  the  center  of  the  country,  the
distribution of demand, and the economy’s efficiency.  This target differs substantially from
the targets that were included in the previous plan.  (In this context, by the way, it is worth
asking  whether  the  Housing  Minister’s  decision  to  advance  the  construction  of  18  new
localities in the Negev is consistent with this strategic plan). 
The importance of advancing a strategic plan in the area of housing is also derived from the
certainty that it is supposed to create for the synchronization of the infrastructure required for
building the dwellings and adding more residents to the localities. 
The  Planning  Administration,  which  led  the  plan,  continues  to  implement  the  decision,
including  by  mapping  building  cites,  formulating  a  detailed  work  plan,  coordinating  the
surface  infrastructure  that  is  required,  and  advancing  processes  in  terms  of  employment
and  industry  that  are  intended  to  provide  a  response  to  the  employment  needs  of  the
population in places that will be built. 
It  is  entirely  possible  that  had  the  strategic  plan  in  housing  been  implemented  at  the
beginning of the 2000s, it would have helped create a large planning inventory and would
have enabled policy makers to deal with the rapid increase in demand for homes in 2007 in a
more rapid and successful manner. 
And one last example that mainly indicates difficulty in the implementation of a strategic plan
is in the area of transport infrastructure.
One of the factors that affects both the difficulty in geographic dispersal of the population and
the low level and slow growth of productivity in Israel is the low level and poor quality of the
transport infrastructure, particularly public transit.  In order to deal with this, the government
made a number of decisions on long-term investment plans in transport infrastructure that
are  intended  to  improve  and  expand  the  road  network  and  the  public  transit  system,
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
including “Netivei Yisrael”, the light rail systems in Jerusalem and tel Aviv, and the Tel Aviv-
Jerusalem train route.  Monitoring the performance of these plan over time shows that they
have encountered many problems in implementation and time tables.  Only a fraction of the
plans ever make it to execution, and most of those significantly overshoot the planned time
tables  for  their  completion,  leading  in  the  medium  term  to  underinvestment  in  transport
infrastructure. 
For instance, the gap between the 2012 expectation of budgetary expenditure on transport
infrastructure in 2015 and the expectation at the beginning of 2015 was NIS 10 billion.  In
other  words,  actual  expenditure  was  45  percent  lower  than  planned,  even  though  the
government  did  not  cancel  significant  transport  development  plans.    This  is  not  a  cost
savings:  the  plans  are  simply  being  executed  at  a  slower  pace  than  planned.    The  slow
progress has significance beyond the lack of transport infrastructure: The delay impairs the
ability  to  plan  residential  and  business  locations,  since  the  construction  of  residential
neighborhoods requires roads and access to employment areas for future residents, and the
functioning of businesses is affected by their access to transport infrastructure. 
Alongside areas where it seems that the government’s decision to adopt a strategic plan at
least to the formulation of a working plan derived from it, there are also examples of issues
that were included in a plan and are not being implemented.  For instance:
Establishing a financial stability committee.  There is agreement over the text of the law, but
it is still delayed in the Knesset Finance Committee.
Gradual adjustment of the retirement age.  In July 2017, the Knesset Finance Committee
again  stopped  the  automatic  increase  of  the  retirement  age  for  women,  which  was
supposed to gradually rise from January 1, 2017 until 2022 to the age of 64 in a number of
increases.
Dealing with the actuarial deficit of the National Insurance Institute.  A process for solving the
problem  has  not  been  formulated.    A  public  committee  (Domenicini-Nissan)  submitted
recommendations in 2012, which weren’t even discussed by the government and remained
in  a  drawer.    Since  the  decision  in  2015,  the  issue  hasn’t  been  discussed  by  the
government. 
What all these things have in common is that the way they are being dealt with is not bearing
results in the short term, and some of them even carry a public cost in the short term.  No
politician gets credit for an actuarial or financial crisis that does not happen. 
Alongside the government’s progress in creating the infrastructure for planning the strategy,
there is room to strengthen this process and to assimilate it further in the government work
process, similar to the budget process.  This can be done in such a way that the strategic
trends presented and approved by the government will constitute the vision with which five-
year plans and annual work plans will be formulated.  In particular, it is important that the
annual government targets for the ministries be derived from the long-term targets of the
government’s strategic plan. 
The existing mechanisms must be strengthened and supported by the establishment of a
ministerial committee for strategy, and through the strategic management team. 
In summation:
There is a natural built-in tension between promoting the agenda and priorities of the elected
government and policy that is based on a long-term vision and the advancement of strategic
plans.  On one hand, planning, formulation and implementation of a strategic plan that acts
to achieve targets over time are necessary conditions for progressing consistently toward
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the achievement of goals that affect main areas of economic and social development.  On
the other hand, every government elected naturally has the desire to impact policy directions
and leave its mark.  This desire is brought into sharper relief when the government relies on
a fragile coalition in which the composite parties will be tested at the ballot box in the not-too-
distant  future  (and  at  timing  that  is  not  always  known).    Such  a  government  has  an
increased natural tendency toward making decisions that focus on short-term achievements
rather  than  the  alternative  of  following  a  strategic  path  that  was  outlined  by  the  previous
government, or the fruits of which may be harvested only by the next government.
The  test  of  the  government’s  strategic  work  will  be  in  implementing  work  plans  for  the
government  ministries  that  are  derived  from  the  strategic  plan,  and  the  continuity  of  their
implementation over time and during the terms of different governments.  The plans must be
based on an infrastructure of broad knowledge (in this context, the Bank of Israel’s role as a
professional, and independent advisory body is important) and on high-quality staff work in
the  relevant  ministries,  monitored  when  necessary  by  the  Budget  Department.    For  that
purposes,  it  is  also  very  important  to  strengthen  a  stable  professional  echelon  that  will
ensure the proper weight is given to continuity and to a long-term vision.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
