Jacqueline Loh: The FX Global Code – one year on
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of
Singapore, at the 14th FX Week Asia Conference, Singapore, 29 August 2018.
Ms Eva Szalay, Editor, FX Week,
 1   Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. How time flies. It did not seem too long ago when I was
invited to speak at last year’s conference and I am very happy to be here again at the 14th FX
Week Asia Conference.
2   Last year, I shared the launch of the FX Global Code (or the Code), its unique features and the
elements that have been put in place to promote industry adherence. One year has passed, and
it is timely to review developments since the launch of the Code and its impact on the global FX
industry. More importantly, I would like to share with you, the priorities ahead to further embed the
Code within the global FX market.
FX Global Code: Overview
3   I am sure that by now, most of you would have heard of the Code. But for the benefit of those
who may not have, let me provide a quick overview.
4   The Code was launched in May last year by the Bank for International Settlements (or BIS) as
a single, global code of conduct for the wholesale FX market.
It was developed over 2 years through a public-private partnership between central banks
and key FX market participants.
The  Code’s  content  reflects  good  practices  where  clarity  is  needed,  and  applies  to  all
wholesale  market  participants,  including  sell-side,  buy-side,  trading  platforms  and  other
market infrastructure.
The  Code  incorporates  the  principle  of  proportionality,  given  the  diverse  nature  of  market
participants.
The  Code  is  now  owned  and  maintained  by  the  local  Foreign  Exchange  Committees  (or
FXCs), through the Global Foreign Exchange Committee (or the GFXC).
The  GFXC  is  chaired  by  Mr  Simon  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  and  has  two  newly  appointed  Co-Vice  Chairs  from  the
private sector – Mr Adrian Boehler, Global Co-Head of FX Local Markets & Commodity
Derivatives  at  BNP  Paribas,  and  Mr  Akira  Hoshino,  Managing  Director  and  Head  of
Global Markets Trading at MUFG Bank.
FX Global Code: A Look Back
5   Since the launch of the Code, we have been fully committed to promoting adherence in our
respective markets by market participants, from both sell- and buy-sides, to the Code. One year
on, the GFXC has done a “stock-take” of our achievements, and I will share some of these with
you today.
6   First, on awareness and commitment to the Code.  On this front, the GFXC, together with the
FXCs in each jurisdiction, has made good progress.
A key part of the Code is the Statement of Commitment. This is a single, common basis by
which each market participant can demonstrate that it commits to adhere to the Code.
One year on, we have seen a significant number of market participants from all over the
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
world using the Statement as a means to demonstrate adherence to the Code.
To lead by example, many central banks, including MAS, have also issued Statements and
published  these  on  our  websites.  Central  banks  have  also  requested  that  our  FX
counterparties issue the Statement. Many FXCs have linked membership of the FXC with
Code  adherence.  These  efforts  have  resulted  in  a  “bumper  crop”  of  Statements  being
issued at the one-year anniversary of the Code.
We  have  also  seen  about  12  public  registers  being  established  in  response  to  market
demand. These are repositories where market participants can publish their Statements, to
publicly demonstrate adherence to the Code.
In addition, the GFXC launched a Global Index of Public Registers (or the Global Index) in
May this year, which links these public registers.
The Global Index has a search function which enables the quick identification of market
participants that have published Statements on the participating public registers.
As  at  mid-August,  the  Global  Index  had  about  420  Statements,  from  9  participating
public registers.
The GFXC is continuing with efforts to include more public registers, and this will be an
important and highly visible way to track adherence progress to the Code.
The GFXC has also been expanding its membership to include more jurisdictions. From the
original 8 FXCs, we have seen a number of new FXCs being established in the last year.
These include the FXCs in Mexico, South Africa, Scandinavia and Switzerland. Through the
membership  expansion,  the  Code  will  become  more  global  as  these  FXCs  promote  the
adoption of the Code within their jurisdictions.
7   Second, on embedding the Code and integrating it into the FX market. If done well, we should
see market behaviours reflect the good practices set out in the Code.
We have seen that the process of issuing the Statements has prompted internal reviews
within many firms, where market participants considered how the Code could apply to their
business. In issuing our Statement, we have done the same in MAS. It has been a helpful
and meaningful exercise to benchmark our internal processes against these good practices.
We  have  also  seen  a  number  of  training  tools  being  developed  by  market  participants  to
support learning, and these have enhanced the ecosystem of good practices within the FX
market.
Another key area where we think the Code has enhanced market behaviour is that a number
of market participants have updated client disclosures to provide greater transparency, and
to incorporate the principles within the Code.
8   Third, on evolution of the Code. When the Code was launched, the GFXC has stated that the
Code will need to evolve over time to promote a robust, liquid and transparent FX market.
The Code has become the platform or reference point for discussing issues relating to the
FX  market.  This  is  a  good  outcome  where  emerging  issues  are  identified,  debated  and
addressed within the Code. And this is an important element to keep the Code relevant over
time.
Over the past year, the GFXC has also consulted on a particular aspect of Principle 17 on
“last look”. Through that consultation process, the Code has been updated. Feedback from
market participants has indicated that the consultation process in place is an appropriate
one to update the Code going forward.
It has also been heartening to hear feedback from many FXCs at the recent GFXC meeting
that  the  Code  is  “fit  for  purpose”.  There  is  also  general  acknowledgement  that  the  Code
provides a credible platform to further strengthen good practices and market behaviour.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
9   Having looked back on our achievements over the past year, the GFXC is committed to build
on the momentum to further promote the Code.
10   I will share briefly on the GFXC’s key priorities in the year ahead.
FX Global Code: Looking Forward
11   First, to step up outreach efforts to the buy side. To those in the audience from the buy-side,
you are important participants in the global FX market whom we will engage further.
The Code is intended to promote a more transparent, liquid, fair and sustainable FX market
for all FX market participants. It is not a Code for the sell-side only, nor is it for only select
groups of the market. It is single Code that has relevance to all who have a stake in the
global FX market.
While we have seen about 420 Statements on the Global Index, only a small number are
from buy-side market participants. At the global level, there is acknowledgement that more
can  be  done  to  demonstrate  to  the  buy-side  community  the  benefits  of  the  Code,  and  to
articulate more clearly the benefits of adherence.
For  example,  the  Code  helps  the  buy-side  understand  the  practices  that  your
counterparties  abide  by,  and  helps  to  inform  what  you  should  expect  from  the
relationship, and in turn, who you may want to transact with.
The Code also provides a useful opportunity for the buy-side to benchmark your internal
processes against global standards of best practices.
The  GFXC  has  launched  a  group  that  will  focus  on  buy-side  outreach  to  create  greater
awareness and adoption of the Code. This will not be an effort bound by time, but will be a
journey and one which we are committed to.
In Singapore, we have seen strong support from buy-side associations and we will continue
to  encourage  Singapore-based  buy-side  market  participants  to  issue  Statements  to
demonstrate adherence.
12   Second, to continue the existing work on cover and deal which arose in response to the
feedback  received  from  the  consultation  on  “last  look”  practices,  and  to  strengthen  FX
disclosures.
On  this  front,  further  work  will  be  done  to  understand  the  role  that  disclosures  play  in
informing  market  participants  how  their  trade  requests  are  handled  in  ‘cover  and  deal’
arrangements.
In addition, the GFXC hopes to develop a framework that can assist market participants to
review  or  develop  their  client  disclosures,  and  to  identify  any  challenges  to  appropriate
transparency.
13   Third, to continue to embed and integrate the Code into the FX market.
A survey was conducted by the GFXC last year, to assess the industry’s baseline in Code
awareness  and  adoption.  We  plan  to  conduct  another  survey  later  this  year,  to  see  how
market  participants  are  embedding  the  Code  and  how  practices  and  behaviours  have
evolved.
This survey will be rolled out across the key FX jurisdictions likely through the FXC network.
We look forward to your active participation when the survey is rolled out. From the survey
findings, we hope to identify ways to deepen adoption and broaden awareness over time and
across jurisdictions. 
14   These efforts need the support of you as market participants, and we hope that you can do
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
your  part  in  promoting  the  good  practices  set  out  in  the  Code,  from  your  respective  vantage
points and positions within the FX market.
Singapore’s approach
15   Last year, I shared that the Singapore Foreign Exchange Market Committee (or SFEMC) has
taken on the responsibility to promote and encourage adherence to the Code in Singapore.
16   Given Singapore’s position as the preeminent FX centre within the Asian time zone, it is
important for us to continue to take a leading role in adopting the Code.
17   One year on, I am proud to share that all SFEMC members, across sell-side and buy-side,
have issued Statements to the Code. A significant number of banks operating in Singapore have
also  already  issued  the  Statements,  with  many  of  them  publishing  these  Statements  on  their
websites and public registers. Notwithstanding this commendable outcome thus far, SFEMC will
continue to work with the key industry associations in Singapore to further promote and embed
the  Code.  For  example,  we  have  recently  collaborated  with  the  Association  of  Banks  in
Singapore to encourage all banks with FX operations in Singapore to issue Statements by the
end of this year.
18   SFEMC will also be establishing a public register in the second half of this year, for market
participants in Singapore to post their Statements. This is in response to demand from market
participants.
19   SFEMC believes that having such a public register in Singapore would help in our promotion
efforts in getting more market participants, particularly buy-side entities, to issue Statements to
the Code.
20   Where your firm has issued a Statement, we welcome you to publish your Statement on the
SFEMC public register when this is ready.
Developing Singapore to be an e-trading hub for FX
21      I  am  confident  that  the  Code  will  further  strengthen  the  integrity  and  vibrancy  of  our  FX
market.  This  will  complement  our  co-creation  efforts  with  industry  players,  like  yourselves,  to
grow  the  FX  market  further.  These  initiatives  are  set  out  in  the  Financial  Services  Industry
Transformation  Map  (or  ITM),  a  roadmap  that  paints  Singapore’s  vision  as  a  leading  global
financial centre in Asia in 2020. 
22   In the ITM, our action plan includes the following:
First, growth strategies by business lines – leveraging global and regional opportunities, and
strengthening  our  position  in  activities  where  we  already  have  a  strong  competitive
advantage;
Second,  innovation  and  technology  adoption  –  embracing  innovation,  sharpening  our
competitiveness and injecting even greater dynamism into the sector;
Third, programmes for upgrading skills – expanding and deepening our talent pool.
23   I will briefly share two areas of relevance to this audience. The first area is on the strategy to
grow our FX market into the e-trading centre in this time zone.
Today we are already an established international financial centre and FX market, ranked
third globally after London and New York by FX volumes. 
In the next phase of our transformation, we want to become a global FX pricing and liquidity
centre, operating in the Asian time zone. 
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Many  of  you  have  provided  valuable  feedback  to  MAS  that  there  is  further  opportunity  for
price discovery of Asian FX trading to take place in Singapore. As Asia’s FX trading needs
grow, and as electronification of Asian FX trading progresses, there is a need for a more
efficient price discovery venue where pricing and matching of FX trades take place.
We aim for Singapore to be the e-trading ecosystem in the region. We are encouraging and
working with key FX players and platforms to anchor their e-trading facilities, matching and
pricing engines in Singapore.
As the e-trading ecosystem builds up, this will bring about
better connectivity and latency;
enhance pricing and trade execution; and
improve clients’ trade fill-ratios and hence customer satisfaction, for market participants
operating in Singapore and the Asia Pacific region.
To date, MAS has received good interest from a strong pipeline of players – global tier 1
banks, non-banks and platforms – looking to set up their trading engines in Singapore. XTX
Markets and our own home-grown Spark Systems are good examples of the first movers as
a start. We will see more in time to come.
24   Next, skills. Complementing the business strategies and innovation agenda will be an active
SkillsFuture programme to help the financial sector workforce build world-class skills.
The  financial  industry  is  no  stranger  to  transformation.  It  was  not  too  long  ago  that
exchanges were physical floor trading venues where buyers and sellers met and negotiated.
But look at how that has changed today.
The financial industry has been nimbler than other industries in the adoption of technology
and data. As we enhance our market structure, analysis and business processes with the
use of artificial intelligence (or AI), algorithmic trading, big data and coding skills, and new
financial technology such as distributed ledger technology, the nature of job roles in the FX
market will continue to evolve too. 
MAS  and  key  industry  associations  such  as ACI  Singapore,  the  Institute  of  Banking  and
Finance  (IBF),  Association  of  Banks  in  Singapore  (ABS),  are  committed  to  equip  our
financial  workforce  with  the  necessary  skills  and  knowledge  through  seminars  and  other
training programmes.
MAS  will  also  continue  to  collaborate  with  financial  institutions,  the  tripartite  partners,  and
institutes of higher learning to build a strong local pipeline of specialised talent, particularly in
areas such as information technology, computing, data analytics.
25   If we can do well in these two key areas, it will position our FX market and participants to
capture growth opportunities and serve the needs of the Asian markets.
Conclusion
26      Promoting  and  embedding  the  Code  within  the  global  FX  market  and  in  Singapore,  is  a
journey that we have committed to. We hope that you can support these efforts, from your firms
and in your individual capacity as market participants.
27   We have also co-created our medium term business strategies with market participants like
yourselves, and we are committed to making them work, and bringing more innovation into the
market place.
28   With this, I hope that you will have a productive and rewarding conference ahead.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
