  Remarks by Lesetja Kganyago,  
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the annual dinner in honour of  
the Ambassadors and High Commissioners  
to the Republic of South Africa 
 South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
31 July 2018 
 Introduction 
 Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, Ambassadors, High Commissioners, Counsellors and 
Diplomats, ladies and gentlemen – a very good evening and a warm welcome to the 
South African Reserve Bank (SARB). I would like to extend my heartfelt gratitude to 
you for accepting our invitation to this annual event. 
 This year, we celebrate the 100th anniversary of the birth of Nelson Mandela. Earlier 
this month, for the first time in the nearly 100-year history of the SARB, we issued a 
commemorative banknote series as well as a third commemorative R5 circulation coin 
in honour of the life of former President Mandela. Tonight, I would like to briefly reflect 
on  what  we  can  learn  from  Tata  Madiba’s  legacy,  both  as  a  statesman  and  as  a 
champion of institutions.  
 After all, it was under Nelson Mandela’s presidency that the defining characteristics of 
South Africa’s foreign policy and trade policy, as well as our interaction with foreign 
investors, were established.  
Madiba had a vision that South Africa should be ‘ready to play a role in fostering peace 
and prosperity in the world that we share with the community of nations’.  
 In  1993,  a  year  before  he  became  president,  Nelson  Mandela  highlighted  that  ‘our 
foreign policy will rest on the belief that economic development depends on growing 
 Page 1 of 6 
regional and international economic cooperation in an interdependent world’.1 Since 
Madiba’s presidency, the foundation of all of South Africa’s interactions with the rest 
of the world has always been strong domestic institutions and a robust macroeconomic 
framework that provides policy certainty, supported by our participation in multilateral 
institutions and forums that are transparent and fair. 
 Looking at the state of the global and domestic economies today, it is worth reflecting 
on the importance of institutions in managing risks and dealing with crises. 
 Reflecting on the global economy 
 The  global  economy  today  looks  very  different  from  a  year  ago.  Last  year,  the 
backdrop for South Africa and other emerging markets was generally constructive, as 
the recovery of  the  advanced economies continued on a steady path. The stronger 
demand  supported  higher  commodity  prices,  while  expectations  of  a  moderate 
withdrawal of monetary stimulus in the advanced economies were supportive of strong 
capital flows to the emerging markets. 
 However, this favourable setting did not last long. A number of key risks have since 
emerged that threaten to unsettle the global economy. During the early part of 2018, 
growing expectations of a faster pace of monetary tightening began to emerge, as the 
stronger pace of United States (US) growth was sustained and fiscal policy became 
more expansionary. Growth in Europe and Japan has slowed, while the strengthening 
of the dollar has resulted in a reversal of capital flows from the emerging markets. 
 In  addition,  concerns  about  the  rise  in  protectionism  have  materialised,  thus 
contributing to an escalation in trade tensions. Concerns about a possible trade war 
have  contributed  to  uncertainty  about  world  trade,  which  could  derail  the  global 
economic  recovery  that  policymakers  have  been  working  hard  at  since  the  global 
financial crisis. We are already witnessing the adverse effects. In April, for example, 
we saw the largest decline in world trade since May 2015.   
                                                           
1 ‘South Africa’s future foreign policy’, an article by Nelson Mandela in Foreign Affairs, Vol. 72, No. 5, 
November / December 1993, African National Congress 
 Page 2 of 6 
 Trade wars are, in effect, a ‘zero sum’ game. Small open economies suffer the most, 
as they rely on trade with the advanced economies and large economies - who are the 
price setters. Addressing these risks at both country and global level requires strong 
institutional frameworks and a commitment to cooperation and coordination.  
 The rising interconnectedness has widened the set of shared problems that are more 
effectively  addressed  through  a  global  agenda.  In  this  respect,  collaboration  is 
essential. This includes, among other things: 
 reaffirming the open and rules-based multilateral trade system; 
  strengthening the global financial safety net; 
  addressing the excess external imbalances; 
  completing the financial regulatory reform agenda; and  
 reaching the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals.  
 These issues are central to the agendas of the Group of Twenty (G20), the Financial 
Stability  Board,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  the  International  Monetary 
Fund, and the World Bank. South Africa is an active participant in all these institutions. 
 As  you  may  be  aware,  the  10th  BRICS2  Summit,  this  time  under  South  Africa’s 
presidency, concluded a few days ago. Its theme was ‘BRICS in Africa: collaboration 
for inclusive growth and shared prosperity in the Fourth Industrial Revolution’. Since 
the beginning of 2018, the SARB has actively driven a number of initiatives among the 
BRICS central banks. This has included initiatives directed at enhancing the research 
capacity  of  the  Contingency  Reserve  Arrangement  (CRA),  further  work  on  the 
establishment of the BRICS Bond Fund to support the development of local-currency 
bond  markets  in  the  other  BRICS  countries,  and  a  stocktake  exercise  on  financial 
technology as it relates to crypto-assets and the regulation thereof. Finally, and very 
significantly, the BRICS central banks have, for the first time, conducted a test run of 
the CRA with an actual transfer of funds. This exercise commenced on 3 July and was 
completed successfully today.  
                                                           
2 Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa 
 Page 3 of 6 
Building strong institutions on the African continent is also very important to support 
development and improve the continent’s resilience to shocks. The SARB – through 
its  chairing  of  the  Association  of  African  Central  Banks  and  as  the  Chair  of  the 
Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  in  the  Southern  African  Development 
Community – has been involved in a number of activities in support of economic and 
financial  integration  on  the  continent.  These  initiatives  have  spanned,  among  other 
things, the areas of banking supervision,  strengthening central-bank independence, 
regional  payment  systems,  financial-market  deepening,  financial  stability,  and 
financial  inclusion.  Other  issues  that  require  urgent  attention  include  the  negative 
impact of the withdrawal of correspondent banking relationships on trade flows and 
remittances, as well as the limits to domestic revenue mobilisation due to illicit flows.  
 The South African economy  
 South Africa’s growth outlook remains challenging. At the most recent meeting of the 
SARB’s Monetary Policy Committee earlier this month, the growth forecast for 2018 
was revised downwards to 1.2% from 1.7% in May. The growth forecast for 2019 is 
1.9% and 2.0% for 2020, both of which are significantly lower than the levels required 
to generate employment and to reduce inequality and poverty rates. While we consider 
the current monetary policy stance to be broadly supportive of the economy, inflation 
risks are to the upside, and our fiscal framework is vulnerable. 
 Faced with similar conditions  back  in 1996 under Nelson Mandela’s leadership, the 
South African government had to make some really difficult decisions. It was resolved 
to make the required policy choices and strengthen macroeconomic institutions. This 
garnered investor confidence and placed South Africa on a strong economic footing in 
the early 2000s. 
 Recent research conducted by the SARB3 suggests that the collapse in the levels of 
confidence over the past few years had shaved off around  1 percentage point from 
                                                           
3 Theo Janse van Rensburg and Erik Visser, 2017, ‘Decoupling from global growth – is confidence 
becoming a scarce commodity?’, South African Reserve Bank Occasional Bulletin of Economic 
Notes, October 
 Page 4 of 6 
growth in both 2015 and 2016. In the months since December 2017, we have seen a 
rebound in business and consumer confidence. However, a cyclical recovery based 
on a rebound in confidence will not be enough to grow the economy lower levels of 
poverty,  reduce 
inequality,  generate  much-needed  employment,  and  boost 
government  revenues.  Given  the  weak  medium-term  growth  prospects,  structural 
reforms  and  appropriate  fiscal  policies  are  critical  to  boosting  potential  growth  and 
sustaining  confidence  levels,  by  raising  productivity  and  promoting  human  and 
physical capital, and enhancing inclusiveness.  
 Underlying the subdued growth performance of the South African economy has been 
the weak trend in gross fixed capital formation, particularly by the private sector. We 
need  to  reverse  the  downward  trend  in  the  ratio  of  gross  fixed  capital  formation  to 
gross domestic product, which had declined to 18.7% in 2017, down from a peak of 
23.5% in 2008. This is some way off the 25% target set in the National Development 
Plan. 
 The role of the South African Reserve Bank 
 Achieving higher potential output growth is not within the power of the central bank. 
The SARB can, however, contribute to an improved environment in a number of ways. 
For  some  time,  ratings  agencies  and  investors  had  identified  South  Africa’s 
institutional strength as one of the stand-out features of its economy. Unfortunately, 
the  past  few  years  have  seen  a  steady  erosion  of  some  of  our  key  institutions. 
Fortunately, there is now a renewed focus on reversing this negative trend. In fact, this 
renewed focus is part of the reason forwarded by Moody’s for retaining the country’s 
investment grade rating.  
 The SARB, specifically its independence coupled with its mandate on price  stability 
and financial stability, is seen as an important part of the institutional strength of the 
country. We  have  vigorously  and  successfully  defended  attempts  to  undermine  our 
independence and integrity, and we will continue to do so.  
   Page 5 of 6 
Conclusion  
 To sum up, here is what I have learnt from Madiba’s legacy:  
    To occupy its rightful place in the global economy, South Africa must first get 
its own house in order.  
   We must start by implementing those policies that we have identified for growth 
and the development of our people.  
   To protect ourselves from external shocks, we must build buffers by allowing 
our institutions to work as they were intended to work.  
   As a small open economy, securing future growth requires us to work with our 
neighbours and trading partners, directly and through multilateral institutions.  
Let  me  conclude  by  quoting  from  a  speech  that  Nelson  Mandela  delivered  to  the 
diplomatic corps in 1999: 
  “I do need to say to each and every diplomatic representative this evening that 
whilst our achievements – like our hope for the future – would not be possible 
without the patience, sacrifice, commitment and determination of all our people. 
Our task has been made easier because we have been blessed and sustained 
by  the  goodwill  and  support  of  our  subregion,  our  continent  and  the  global 
community. For this we are very grateful to you all.4 
Thank you, and enjoy the evening. 
                                                           
4 http://www.mandela.gov.za/mandela_speeches/1999/990205_diplomat.htm 
 Page 6 of 6 
