Mugur Isărescu: The 39th Meeting of the Central Banks Governors’
Club of the Central Asia, Black Sea region and Balkan countries
Speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the Conference
"The 39th Meeting of the Central Banks Governors' Club of the Central Asia, Black Sea region
and Balkan countries", Bodrum, Turkey, 14 May 2018.
Dear colleagues,
 Let  me  start  by  saying  that  I  am  honoured  to  have  been  invited  to  speak  here,  in  beautiful
Bodrum, at the 39th Meeting of the Central Banks Governors’ Club of the Central Asia, Black Sea
Region and Balkan Countries. Our club includes central banks from EU countries, some already
in the Eurozone, while others belong to countries outside the EU. Some of the members in our
group come from countries that have enormous economic potential and belong to G20, which
has  become  an  essential  part  of  the  architecture  that  has  fostered  international  debate  on
financial and economic issues after the crisis. This is why our club reflects quite interestingly the
constellation of political and economic interests that defines our world.
This  meeting  comes  at  a  time  when  the  international  landscape  is  dominated  by  an  overall
positive mood, on the economic front at least, even though, recently, a number of downside risks
have become more apparent. In the European Union, economic growth reached in 2017 its post-
crisis  peak,  with  most  Member  States  witnessing  higher  GDP  dynamics. At  the  same  time,
unemployment  continued  on  a  downward  path  and  economic  sentiment  improved  across  the
board.  Some  recent  signals  point  to  a  slowdown,  yet  they  seem  to  have  more  to  do  with
temporary influences, growth prospects continuing to look strong. The past year recorded, on
average,  positive  developments  in  EU  candidate  and  potential  candidate  countries  as  well,  in
spite of GDP dynamics delivering a more mixed picture (from over 7 percent in Turkey to around
2  percent  in  Serbia  and  even  stagnation  in  the  Former  Yugoslav  Republic  of  Macedonia).
Nevertheless, the outlook is positive, with recent forecasts pointing to relatively robust growth in
the coming years.
However,  against  this  relatively  rosy  background,  I  should  highlight  that  our  economies,  even
those that belong to the Eurozone, have still much to do in order to become robust and offer
good living standards to most of their citizens. Some members of this Club, Romania included,
had to go through very painful adjustments during the past decade, as the global crisis found
them trapped in a pro-cyclical policy stance and it remains to be seen to what extent they will
manage  to  break  free  from  this  pattern  in  the  current  good  times;  some  need  to  fight  high
inflation, pressures on their currencies or to correct their external imbalances. Nevertheless, the
common denominator of all our economies is having to deal with institutional weaknesses and
the need to undertake reforms that should make them stronger.
A common challenge our emerging economies are facing is the need to speed up convergence
towards the development level of mature economies. In order to achieve this, the responsible
policymaker  should  be  concerned  with  steady  progress  and  not  with  delivering  bouts  of
accelerated growth, which may turn out to be reversible. This brings us to the need to address
bottlenecks  to  potential  growth  –  even  though  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  for  instance,
growth is now much stronger than in the euro area, most countries have still work to do in order
to  ensure  that  potential  growth  matches  the  catching-up  needs. At  least  in  the  non-euro  EU
members  in  Eastern  Europe,  bottlenecks  to  sustainable  growth  usually  stem  from  structural
impediments  to  labour  supply  (high  emigration,  low  participation  rate,  decline  in  working  age
population,  skill  mismatch),  inefficiencies  in  public  administration,  quality  of  institutions,  in
general, and in some cases, inadequate infrastructure.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
While  inflation  has  reemerged  in  Central,  Eastern  and  South-Eastern  European  countries,  in
most  cases  it  remains  tepid  (broadly,  around  2  percent).  Nevertheless,  it  has  spiked  in  such
cases  as  Romania  and  Turkey,  where  it  currently  stands  at  5  percent  and  11  percent
respectively.  Part  of  this  reemergence  is  related  to  the  global  cycle,  as  it  comes  from
international  commodity  prices,  with  idiosyncratic  supply-side  factors  and  domestic  demand
pressures accounting for the rest of the explanation. These latter two sources are particularly
relevant in Romania, where changes in indirect taxation and regulated utility prices have played a
significant  role  in  the  recent  inflationary  spell,  adding  to  the  underlying  inflationary  pressures
stemming  from  the  opening  of  the  positive  output  gap  (to  which  contributed  a  persistently
expansionary  fiscal  policy),  increases  in  wage  costs,  and,  last  but  not  least,  an  upward
adjustment in inflation expectations.
As a matter of fact, significant acceleration in wage growth is a common feature of the non-euro
EU member group. Nevertheless, in most cases this has not led to a deterioration in the current
account  positions,  which  remained  in  surplus.  Unfortunately,  Romania  appears  as  an  outlier
within the group: while its current deficit is well below pre-crisis levels, it widened rapidly from a
minimum of 0.7 percent in 2014 to 3.4 percent in 2017, which puts Romania closer to the group
of  EU  candidate  countries  (around  5.5  percent  in  Serbia  and  Turkey).  Against  such  a
background, it is no wonder that – while the monetary stance remains largely accommodative –,
the picture is quite heterogeneous regarding inflation expectations, inflation targets, and policy
tools used.
Romania has already started the tightening of monetary policy by hiking the rate three times this
year, after further narrowing the corridor around the policy rate last year, but going forward we
believe  a  gradual  approach  is  warranted. And  this  brings  us  to  the  issue  of  monetary  policy
normalisation. What I believe most people understand by this concept is a return to the standard
operating mode of monetary policy, i.e. the withdrawal of the unconventional policy tools deployed
during the crisis, which would entail a gradual increase in short-term interest rates and a gradual
unwinding  of  bloated  central  bank  balance  sheets.  The  latter  is  by  far  the  most  challenging
process, as the impact on global asset prices is a delicate issue, which not only requires good
planning and favorable macroeconomic conditions, but is also bound to be lengthy.
As regards the other element of policy normalisation – the increase in short-term interest rates –,
while less controversial, it is by no means problem-free, considering its implications for financial
stability.  To  quote  the  BIS Annual  Report  2017,  “policy  normalisation  presents  unprecedented
challenges, given the current high debt levels and unusual uncertainty”.
The increase in short-term interest rates is an element of normalisation that also applies to the
central banks that did not step out of the conventional framework – and this is the case in most
Central,  Eastern  and  South-Eastern  European  countries.  Personally,  I  see  normalisation  as
amounting ultimately to a return to real positive interest rates. I doubt, however, that this will be a
swift  process.  In  the  case  of  Romania,  the  steps  taken  so  far  along  the  road  to  policy
normalisation, were facilitated by two favourable developments in the banking sector.
First, the NPL ratio dropped from above 20 percent at end-2014 to almost 6 percent presently,
making it the largest adjustment in the EU over a relatively short time period. At the core of this
adjustment  were  conservative  requirements  for  provisioning  NPLs,  our  hands-on  supervisory
approach, and a fiscal facility that was conducive to the development of the secondary market for
NPLs. Second, the share of leu-denominated loans in the total stock of loans has increased from
one third prior to the crisis to two thirds nowadays, with the benefit of reducing contagion risk and
improving the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy.
However, it would be risky to press ahead too fast. In the case of the ECB, while the tapering of
its QE has already started, an upward move in the interest rate is not likely to happen soon. As
for peer countries such as Poland and Hungary, their macroeconomic conditions do not seem to
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
warrant a start of the tightening cycle this year either, with still below-target inflation. As long as
real interest rates remain negative all over Europe, straying too far away from our regional peers
in terms of policy rate would invite disproportionate appreciation pressures, which – while helpful
in  terms  of  inflation  –  would  not  be  a  welcome  development,  given  Romania’s  increasingly
negative external imbalance.
Therefore, striking the right balance in terms of the interest rate differential is of the essence –
after the substantial tightening undertaken so far, translating into money market rates increases
by almost 200 bps (a normal development given the size of the inflation differential), it is probably
wise to proceed more cautiously from now on. As such, the future action of the NBR is likely to
depend on how the process of monetary policy normalisation will be unfolding in Europe.
Policy normalisation is a question of “when”, not “if”. It will eventually gain momentum and the
impact  of  major  central  banks’  policy  reversals  on  emerging  economies  should  not  be
underestimated.  When  the  tide  eventually  hits,  the  extent  of  the  damage  depends  on  how
vulnerable emerging economies are to external financing. A contained current account deficit, a
long average maturity on public and private foreign currency debt and a proper policy mix will help
limit the negative externalities.
Summing up, keeping internal and external imbalances in check is the only way our economies
will be able to cope with the strong volatility headwinds ahead of us. Indeed, it would be a shame
if the necessary reforms were not undertaken now, while there is a window of opportunity.
14 May 2018, Bodrum, Turkey
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
