François Villeroy de Galhau: New ideas for Europe
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, Munich, 15 February
2018.
 Mr. Prime Minister,
Ministers,
Dr. Theo Waigel,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
1
It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  speak  here  this  evening,  following  on  from  my  compatriot  from  the
Saarland,  the  Finance  Minister,  Peter  Altmaier.  I  am  100%  French,  but  with  family  roots  in
Germany that go back two centuries... and Dr. Altmaier even represents my town of Saarlouis in
the  Bundestag.  However,  all  honour  today  goes  to  Munich  and  to  Bavaria,  and  I  would  like  to
thank  Dr.  Theo  Waigel  for  so  kindly  inviting  me.  Dr.  Waigel,  you  played  a  key  role  in  the
construction of our European currency. I would like to repeat the words that you used before the
Bundestag in April 1998 in anticipation of the transition to the third phase of our Economic and
Monetary Union: “After two devastating and painful world wars, the European project is opening
up opportunities to our children and grandchildren that our mothers and fathers, our ancestors,
would never have dared dream of".  Twenty years later, we can state that monetary union is a
success:  74%  of  euro  area  citizens  support  the  euro,  and  this  figure  is  as  high  as  81%  in
Germany. The Economic Union on the other hand, has not yet fulfilled its potential. And that is a
concern for two reasons. First, because even though the current economic cycle is in a very
robust phase today, it will come to an end at some point. If we have not armed ourselves with
stronger  economic  instruments  by  that  time,  there  is  a  risk  that  monetary  policy  will  be
overburdened. This is a well-founded German worry that as a central banker I share entirely; but
it is for that very reason that I say to our German friends that they must aspire to an enhanced
economic union. Second, because the absence of a genuine economic union is holding the euro
area back, at a time when we must stimulate growth to catch up our past lag, particularly vis-à-
vis the United States, and address the radical technological transformation. The theme of this
evening  is  “new  ideas  for  Europe".  But  to  have  new  ideas,  we  must  begin  by  putting  the  old
clichés that are paralysing the debate behind us. That is what I will begin by doing, before setting
out my three new ideas for Europe.
**
1. Three old clichés that we must put behind us
The first old cliché that emerges when we speak about reforming the euro area, is the idea – and
a lazy idea at that – that economic union would be a substitute for national reforms. I would
like  to  repeat  right  away  that  on  the  contrary,  national  reforms  are  a  prerequisite  for  any
enhancement of the Economic Union, and today, France is well aware of this. I say this in my
capacity as a totally independent central banker: the new government in France is taking reforms
very seriously and is acting with impressive speed. France is now a reliable economic partner of
Europe and Germany.
Second, it would be ridiculous to reduce the debate to the old caricature that contrasts "German
rules”  with  “French  expenditure".  To  my  mind,  it  is  out  of  the  question  to  implement  a
“transfer  union”,  which  would  only  benefit  certain  countries,  or  to  introduce  Eurobonds,  which
would amount to collectivising debts. Need I remind that France too is a net contributor to the
European  budget,  or  to  financing  for  Greece?  But  I  am  convinced  that  risk  sharing  between
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries can – and should – go hand-in-hand with risk reduction mechanisms. It is wrong to
draw a distinction between solidarity and responsibility: in reality, they are complementary. For
crisis prevention to be credible, it must also have the instruments needed to cushion the effects
of substantial shocks that may arise regardless.
As for the third cliché, let’s stop pitting the "French vision” against “German pragmatism". In
order to reform the euro area, we must be practical and take real needs, and particularly those of
businesses and entrepreneurs, as our starting point – as I aim to do in the second part of my
speech. In 1978, Helmut Schmidt said that “the citizens of Europe just want solutions to concrete
issues".  Nonetheless, we need a political ambition if we are to act – call it a “vision", if you wish.
We need this because we have to make progress – it’s now or never: thanks to the economic
recovery, and thanks to President Macron’s initial proposals at the Sorbonne, and the European
chapter of the German coalition agreement – it is obviously not my place to comment on the rest
of the agreement – we are enjoying historically favourable conditions. If we don’t act in 2018 –
first the French and Germans, and then all 19 member countries of the euro area – we will never
make headway.
2. How to strengthen the euro area: three new ideas
2
I  will  now  turn  to  my  three  new  ideas  to  strengthen  the  euro  area.  In  order  to  make  genuine
progress in Europe, we must first start with the real needs for corporate investment, and the
resources at our disposal.  In  terms  of  needs,  the  key  to  growth  in  the  euro  area  today  is,
without  doubt,  innovation.  Chancellor  Merkel  spoke  about  it  in  Davos  three  weeks  ago,  while
companies  in  Bavaria  are  well  placed  to  recognise  its  importance:  over  the  past  50  years,
Bavaria has radically transformed its economy by rising to the challenge of innovation. But to
innovate, in digital technology, or in energy transition for example, companies need to be able to
take  more  risks,  which  requires  more  equity  financing,  over  the  long  term,  rather  than  debt
financing. The euro area is seriously lagging behind in this respect: equity capital amounted to
only 73% of GDP in 2017, compared with 123% in the United States. As for resources, let’s take
what is often a difficult debate – on Germany’s substantial surpluses – and transform it into a
positive: we have abundant savings in the euro area. In order to match resources to needs, I
propose  a  European-level  “Financing Union for Investment and Innovation",  which  would
better channel the EUR 350 billion savings surplus into equity financing and innovation, in digital
or energy technologies. This Union should bring together existing initiatives, and as a priority, the
Capital Markets Union, but also the Banking Union and the Juncker Investment Plan. The Capital
Markets Union requires concrete progress on several fronts: amending accounting rules, taxes
and  insolvency  laws  to  facilitate  cross-border  investment,  notably  in  equity  capital;  and
developing  pan-European  long-term  savings  products.  Within  the  Governing  Council,  and
together  with  my  colleague  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Bundesbank,  we  find  it  most
regrettable that the Capital Markets Union is currently being overlooked in political discussions on
enhancing the euro area.
My second idea to make progress in Europe is to start with the quality of public spending and
give  priority  to  investment  and  expenditure  for  the  future.  Until  now,  we  have  mainly  been
concerned with “quantities", and I would just like to say a word in this respect on the Stability and
Growth Pact: in my mind, it would be both dangerous and illusory to want to change the rules –
rather,  let’s  respect  them.  But  at  the  same  time,  we  should  consider  the  quality  of  public
spending: in order to boost potential growth, in the long term, expenditure on investment and on
our future are vital, including on education and training and, of course, new technologies. This is
true of national budgets, but we could amplify the effect through a euro area investment budget.
This budget could be used to finance, for the benefit of all countries, certain “common goods”
such as digital technology, energy transition, security, and external border protection.
Finally, my third idea begins with a question: how to deal with stabilisation? In other words, how
to deal with the shocks that can have a brutal effect on certain national economies? Private risk
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
sharing through the Capital Markets Union and the Financing Union that I mentioned earlier, is
part of the answer. In the United States for example, the stock market is capable of absorbing
around 40% of a State-specific shock. But that is not enough and it is absolutely vital that we go
further  still.  Otherwise  monetary  policy  may  bear  too  much  of  the  burden  during  a  future
recession, which would be dangerous – monetary policy should not be the only game in town. In
the euro area, we therefore need better economic policy coordination. Countries will continue to
be  responsible  for  their  economic  policies,  but  we  can  aim  for  a  better  collective  economic
strategy with more reforms in countries where they are needed and with more fiscal or wage
support in countries with room for manoeuvre. This collective strategy could be supplemented by
enhancing the European Stability Mechanism to transform it into a European Monetary Fund; this
would require that the scope of its actions be expanded to include a genuine crisis prevention
role and that its governance be amended. Otherwise, it would be a simple change of window
dressing.
 To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  mention  another  reason  why  2018  must  be  Europe’s  year:  our
international  environment,  with  the  prospect  of  Brexit  and  the  presidency  of  Mr.  Trump  in  the
United  States.  Confronted  with  the  challenges  of  globalisation,  Europe’s  twofold  message  is
essential. First, our common social model – die Soziale Marktwirtschaft – combines a high level
of public service, relatively low levels of inequality and a strong intensity of social dialogue; it is
the ideal response to the debate on inequality, which is returning to the forefront. Second, our
commitment to multilateralism is vital to confronting the temptations of protectionism. We must
resolutely defend, alongside Canada and certain Asian partners, the commonly respected rules
and multilateral institutions. Today’s world needs a stronger Europe. And so it’s time that we,
Europeans, took our destiny into our own hands.
1
2
Address given by Theo Waigel on the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union, 23 April 1998.
Speech by Helmut Schmidt on the outcomes of the Brussels European Council, 21 December 1978.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
