Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Monetary policy and inflation dynamics
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at a luncheon meeting of the Rotary Club of Makati, Makati, 14 August
2018.
 Distinguished  Rotarians,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good  afternoon.  Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to
share the Bangko Sentral’s views on the recent developments in inflation. It is my pleasure to join
you today,  my second time over a year.
My presentation will be in 3 parts. First, we examine trends in headline inflation with focus on key
drivers behind recent price movements. Next, I will present the BSP’s outlook for 2018 and 2019
based  on  available  data  and  as  well  as  market  expectations.  Finally,  I  will  discuss  the  BSP’s
policy responses.
The  year-to-date  (January-July  2018)  headline  inflation  averaged  at  4.5  percent  year-on-year,
which is above the government’s announced target range of 2 – 4 percent for the year. The BSP
continues to see supply-side factors as the main drivers of overall inflation. These supply-side
factors relate to rising international oil prices, higher excise taxes, and weather-related supply
disruptions.  These factors are generally considered to be outside the scope of monetary policy.
In  this  slide,  we  show  the  contribution  of  each  CPI  subcomponent  to  overall  month-on-month
inflation. Headline inflation fell in month-on-month terms for July 2018.  We also see the tapering
off  of  month-on-month  changes  of  CPI  items  related  to  excise  tax  adjustment  in  the  first  five
months.
The month-on-month changes for electricity, tobacco and sweetened beverages are also slowly
tapering off as we pass 7 months of 2018. This supports our view that the impact of excise tax
adjustments are transitory.
Latest baseline forecasts have shifted higher over the policy horizon, suggesting that inflation will
remain elevated in 2018, with the peak occurring sometime in the third quarter, and will revert to
the inflation target of 2-4 percent in 2019.
We have dealt with similar inflation dynamics during supply shocks in the past.  Notably in 2008,
international oil prices and food prices increased and inflation averaged 8.3 percent year-on-year
(based  on  2006  CPI  series)  but  subsequently  dropped  sharply  to  4.2  percent  in  the  following
year.  This  is  depicted  in  the  right-hand  side  chart,  where  actual  inflation  during  this  period
showed a hump-shaped path.  This shape is similar to the forecasted path for the remaining
2018 to 2019, as shown in the fan chart.
In 2008, the BSP was aware that the initial rise in prices was primarily supply in origin and that
commodity shocks are transitory in nature. Therefore, following an approach consistent with the
widely accepted principle that supply-side developments are best addressed by non-monetary
measures, the BSP kept its policy rates steady. The BSP considered the rise in prices during the
first  half  of  2008  to  be  a  supply  shock  episode  and  accommodated  the  first-round  effects,
allowing them to “pass through” in the form of higher prices.
However, as supply shocks from rising food and energy prices continued over a longer period,
these  contributed  to  second-round  effects,  affecting  the  wage  and  price-setting  behavior  of
businesses and households by the end of the second quarter. A rise in inflation expectations was
also evident from surveys and financial market data, while the BSP’s forecasts showed the risk
of  inflation  exceeding  targets  for  2008  and  2009.  The  BSP  responded  to  these  second-round
effects with decisive action and strong anti-inflation pronouncements. It raised key policy rates by
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
a  total  of  100  basis  points  from  June  to  August  2008  while  strengthening  its  anti-inflation
commentary.
Moving  back  to  our  current  inflation  outlook,  based  on  our  latest  assessment,  upside  risks
continue  to  dominate,  as  the  sustained  increase  in  core  inflation  suggests  broadening  price
pressures amid resilient aggregate demand conditions.
The following are the key upside risks to the baseline inflation path:
(1)    additional wage adjustments;
(2)    pending petitions for adjustments in transport fares and electricity rates;
(3)    faster-than-expected monetary policy normalization in advanced economies; and
(4)    the proposed increase in the NFA’s buying price of rice from farmers.
Slower  global  economic  growth  due  to  protectionist  policies  in  advanced  economies  and
geopolitical tensions along with potential price adjustments from the proposed reform in the rice
industry involving the replacement of quantitative restrictions with tariffs and the deregulation of
rice imports are seen as the main downside risks to inflation.
Meanwhile, the BSP keeps a close eye on developments in the foreign exchange market and
note their potential impact on inflation in the coming months.
Surveys of private sector forecasts as of July show elevated inflation expectations for 2018 but
within  target  inflation  projection  for  2019.  Private  sector  expectations  range  from  4.2  –  4.5
percent (based on BSP and AP Consensus) in 2018 and 3.6 – 3.9 percent in 2019.
The  increase  in  inflation  expectation  of  private  sector  economists  is  attributed  to  higher
projections to volatile global oil prices, a weaker peso, and the transitory effects of recent tax
measures on the prices of domestic goods and services.
As  an  inflation-targeting  central  bank,  our  decisions  on  the  monetary  policy  stance  are  data-
dependent  and  guided  by  our  inflation  forecasts  over  a  given  policy  horizon.   As  a  matter  of
discipline,  we  refrain  from  reacting  to  short-term  market  fluctuations  or  commentaries  but
instead  focus  on  obtaining  comprehensive  information  and  making  reasonable  assumptions
about the future.
In responding to the recent uptrend in inflation, the BSP follows the standard approach among
central  banks  in  responding  to  supply-side  factors.  In  a  supply  shock  episode,  central  banks
would typically not react, as these historically tend to be transitory or short-lived in nature, but
remain vigilant and undertake action against incipient signs of second-round effects.
This  was  the  case  early  this  year  when  economic  data  indicate  the  country’s  inflation
environment  was  driven  by  supply-side  factors  and  our  forecast  continued  to  show  inflation
upticks as transitory and moderating within the target in 2019.  Thus, adjustment in policy rate
was not yet warranted. 
Nevertheless, recognizing increasing volatilities in world oil prices and interest rates, the BSP
adjusted monetary conditions by adjusting auction volumes and allowing the term deposit facility
(TDF) rates to rise, creating an effective tightening in the market. This allowed the BSP a channel
to provide guidance to short-term market interest rates which have firmly anchored to the BSP’s
interest rate corridor.
Starting in Q2 2018, the Monetary Board (MB) noted that latest baseline forecasts have shifted
higher  over  the  policy  horizon.  Upside  risks  also  continue  to  dominate  the  inflation  outlook.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Meanwhile, inflation expectations remain elevated. Therefore, in response to dynamic economic
and market conditions, the BSP raised the policy interest rate by 25 basis points each on 10 May
2018 and 20 June 2018 and by 50 basis points on 10 August 2018.
In the latest policy meeting, the MB noted increased risk of inflation exceeding the target in 2019. 
Thus,  a  stronger  monetary  action  is  necessary  to  rein  in  inflation  expectations  and  prevent
sustained supply-side pressures from driving further second-round effects, even as we expect
average inflation to ease to within the inflation target of 2-4 percent in 2019. 
Overall,  the  three  rate  hikes  are  meant  to  signal  the  BSP’s  strong  commitment  to  ensuring
macroeconomic stability and will help reduce further risks to inflation, including those emanating
from  ongoing  normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies  and  its  impact  on  the
foreign  exchange  market,  and  bring  inflation  toward  a  target-consistent  path  over  the  medium
term.
Favorable  conditions  arising  from  sustained  domestic  growth  suggest  that  the  economy  can
accommodate  monetary  policy  tightening.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  Philippine  domestic
economy has experienced sustained expansion for the past 78 quarters (or a period of more
than 19 years).
In 2017, the domestic economy posted an annual growth rate of 6.7 percent. This growth has
been  increasingly  broad-based,  thereby  providing  more  opportunities  across  all  segments  of
society.
In the first half of 2018, output grew by 6.3 percent year-on-year on higher government spending
as well as capital formation, supported by resilient domestic demand.
In  the  meantime,  the  overall  external  position  of  the  domestic  economy  remains  resilient,
supported  by  sustained  foreign  direct  investments,  overseas  Filipino  (OF)  remittances,  and
business process outsourcing (BPO) receipts.  These provide additional buffers to the domestic
economy.
Our external debt metrics have also improved as external debt to GDP ratio continues to decline.
Gross  international  reserves  of  US$76.9  billion  as  of  July  2018  remain  more  than  adequate,
covering 7.4 months of imports of goods and payments of services and income.
Meanwhile, on the current account, two factors are motivating the modest shortfall. One is the
surging  growth  of  the  Philippine  economy  which  requires  higher  imports  of  capital  goods  like
machineries  and  equipment  and  the  other  is  the  continued  softness  of  the  global  economy
particularly in 2015–2016.
The current account shortfall indicates that the economy is, on a net basis, importing what is
required  to  continue  its  expansion.  Our  imports  are  mostly  comprised  of  capital  goods,  raw
materials, and intermediate products which together account for more than 80 percent of total
imports.
The  peso  also  continues  to  be  flexible  and  has  maintained  its  external  price  competitiveness
against  baskets  of  currencies  of  all  trading  partners  and  trading  partners  in  advanced  and
developing economies.
The BSP likewise strongly supports the carefully coordinated efforts of the National Government
(NG)  to  further  temper  the  potential  adverse  impact  of  inflation  on  households  via  the  full
implementation of various safety-net programs (e.g., targeted cash transfers, Pantawid Pasada
program, etc.)
All of this is by the way of saying that when it comes to responding to inflation, monetary policy is
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
not  the  only  game  in  town;  non-monetary  intervention  can  go  a  long  way  towards  addressing
inflation pressures especially in the face of strong supply shocks.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  our  recent  policy  actions  demonstrate  our  strong  resolve  to  ensure
inflation returns to target by 2019.  We have likewise demonstrated that with the development of
auction-based instruments complementing our policy rate, the BSP has expanded its option for
maintaining firm monetary control. 
We continue to pursue refinements in our monetary operations.  This includes shifting reliance
on reserve requirements to more market-based instruments.  To date, we have reduced reserve
requirement ratio (RRR) by 200 bps, an operational adjustment to promote market development. 
I reiterate that the RRR cuts are not intended to be expansionary.  Data suggest we were able to
neutralize the immediate liquidity impact through open market and FX operations.  Following the
cuts, the level of domestic liquidity actually grew at a slower rate.  M3 expanded by 11.7 percent
year-on-year  (y-o-y)  in  June  2018,  slower  than  the  14.3-percent  growth  rate  in  the  previous
month.
 We are ready to continue reducing the RRR next year as inflation returns to target based on our
latest forecast.  Ultimately, the goal is to reach single-digit RRR at the end of my term.  This can
be pursued without compromising effective monetary control.The Philippine economy remains
resilient supported by its strong fundamentals. Prospects for the domestic economy continue to
remain  favorable  as  domestic  growth  fundamentals  are  expected  to  remain  intact.  Private
demand  is  expected  to  remain  firm,  aided  mainly  by  sustained  remittance  inflows  and  a
manageable inflation environment.
At the same time, macroeconomic stability will be supported by strong policy response in terms
of fiscal policy (i.e., tax reforms), monetary policy, and flexible exchange rate policy. The policy
agenda  of  the  government  to  strengthen  both  hard  and  soft  infrastructures  supported  by  the
increase  in  revenue  from  tax  reforms  is  expected  to  further  increase  the  country’s  potential
output.
Equally important are the strong buffers in place which continue to support the positive outlook on
the  macroeconomy.  Sufficient  capitalization  of  the  Philippine  banking  system  along  with  a
comfortable level of gross international reserves provides buffers to mitigate shocks.
In closing, let me emphasize that while the recent inflation outturns are underpinned by factors
outside  the  scope  of  monetary  policy  such  as  higher  global  oil  prices,  weather-related  supply
disruptions, and increased excise tax, the BSP stands firm in its intent to take immediate and
appropriate measures to ensure that the monetary policy stance continues to support the BSP’s
price stability objective.
Thank you for your attention!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
