REMARKS  BY  JAVIER  GUZMÁN  CALAFELL,  DEPUTY  GOVERNOR  AT  THE 
BANCO  DE  MÉXICO,  ON  “MEXICO’S  MONETARY  POLICY  AND  ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK”.  THE  UNITED  STATES-MEXICO  CHAMBER  OF  COMMERCE, 
NORTHEAST CHAPTER. February 15-16, 2018.1 
First  of  all  allow  me  to  thank  the  US-Mexico  Chamber  of  Commerce,  and 
especially Alejandro Ramos, for the invitation to share with you some views on 
monetary  policy  and  the  economic  outlook  for  Mexico  in  these  challenging 
times. 
World economic activity seems to be gaining steam at the beginning of 2018 
and a number of timely indicators point to further strength in coming months. 
In addition, its generalization among different countries, from both advanced 
and  emerging  economies,  continues.  Not  surprisingly,  then,  projections  for 
global growth for this year and the next have been revised upwards. Given its 
relevance for the Mexican economy, it is important to highlight that, according 
to IMF figures,2 within the advanced world it is the US economy that has seen 
one  of  the  largest  improvements  in  projections  for  GDP  growth  during  the 
period 2018-2019. 
The  momentum  shown  by  world  economic  expansion,  combined  with  the 
stimulus resulting from the tax reform recently approved in the United States, 
has  improved  the  balance  of  risks  for  global  growth  in  the  short  term. 
However, when seen from a longer-term perspective, a number of clouds in 
the  horizon  continue  to  tilt  this  balance  to  the  downside.  In  fact,  recent 
                                                            
1 The views and opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a 
whole. 
2 International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook Update, January 2018.  
 1 
developments represent a timely reminder of the nature of the challenges that 
we might be facing in the not-to-distant future.  
One  of  the  most  important  among  them  relates  to  the  normalization  of 
monetary policy in the United States. The Federal Open Market Committee has 
insisted  once  and  again  that  it  expects  gradual  adjustments  in  its  monetary 
policy stance. However, it is clear that the possibility of surprises on this front 
has increased. Under a situation of limited, if any, slack in the US economy, a 
policy of fiscal stimulus as the one under way can lead to an acceleration of 
price growth, which, combined with its implications for public finances, could 
give rise to an increase in interest rates above current expectations.   
Uncertainty in this respect is of course not limited to the United States. As is 
well known, a noticeable improvement in economic activity has been observed 
in other advanced economies, the euro area and Canada among them, that 
has  also  aroused  concern  about  the  possibility  of  a  faster  normalization  of 
monetary policy in these countries.  
Secondly,  and  closely  linked  to  the  above,  the  risk  of  sharp  valuation 
adjustments  in  some  financial  assets,  particularly  among  the  high-risk 
segment, has increased. In fact, mostly as a result of the above-noted anxiety 
with the speed of normalization of monetary policy in advanced economies, 
and the possible overvaluation of some of those assets, barely a month and a 
half into 2018 we have already seen a significant increase in the yields of long- 
term bonds in many advanced economies and sharp downward corrections in 
their  stock  exchanges.  Obviously,  bearing  in  mind  the  magnitude  of  the 
potential  market  disruption,  the  possibility  of  disorderly  adjustments  in  the 
 2 
future with adverse effects on global economic activity and financial stability 
cannot be discarded. 
Thirdly, the functioning of world markets can also be affected by a number of 
other  factors,  including  problems  of  a  geopolitical  nature  and/or  the 
proliferation  of  protectionist  trends.  For  instance,  notwithstanding  progress 
on  negotiations  between  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  European  Union, 
uncertainty  regarding  the  possible  final  outcome  has  not  dissipated.  In 
addition,  the  potential  for  problems  in  other  countries  or  regions,  such  as 
North  Korea  or  the  Middle  East,  lingers.  And  one  must  add  to  this  the 
possibility of further actions aimed at obstructing trade flows, particularly in 
the United States.  
In a context of strong risk appetite and a generally favorable economic outlook, 
emerging  economies  have  continued  to  attract  substantial  capital  flows. 
However, the materialization of the previously noted risks or others, such as 
more serious economic difficulties in China, would tighten external financial 
conditions for these economies and impact their asset prices, with more acute 
effects on those countries beset with more evident vulnerabilities.  
Naturally,  the  recent  evolution  of  the  Mexican  economy  has  been  heavily 
influenced by the peculiarities of the external environment. In fact, as will be 
noted below, external factors have impinged on economic activity in divergent 
ways,  while  simultaneously  being  a  source  of  anxiety  for  domestic  financial 
markets.  
Economic  activity  in  Mexico  showed  wide  fluctuations  in  the  second  half  of 
2017, as a result of the natural disasters that took place in the third quarter of 
 3 
the year. Thus, after a decline during the period July-September, GDP growth 
recorded a strong rebound in the following quarter, in response to the efforts 
of  reconstruction  and  the  recovery  of  oil  output,  which  had  been  affected 
temporarily  by  the  September  earthquakes  and  other  meteorological 
phenomena. Notwithstanding the above, the trend of deceleration that began 
in 2016 continued during this period, as the annual rate of economic growth 
fell  from  3  percent  in  the  first  semester  of  the  year  to  1.6  percent  in  the 
second. 
Economic activity in Mexico is expected to face winds in opposing directions in 
coming months. On the one hand, expectations of a favorable performance of 
the world economy and an additional stimulus to growth in the US from the 
recently approved fiscal reform in that country, combined with a competitive 
exchange rate, should continue to foster export growth. 
On the other hand, a number of sources of uncertainty may restrain domestic 
demand.  In  particular,  fears  of  an  adverse  result  of  the  ongoing  NAFTA 
renegotiation  have  lessened  but  not  disappeared,  and  the  possibility  of  a 
prolonged process, with a more persistent impact than previously thought on 
consumption and especially on investment, has increased.  To  this one must 
add  the  potential  implications  for  these  variables  of  the  apprehension  that 
may result from the electoral process that will take place in Mexico this year. 
In addition, as already noted, fiscal stimulus in the United States may lead to 
faster than anticipated increases in interest rates in that country, and the risks 
for Mexico resulting from lower corporate tax rates in the US should not be 
disregarded either. The advent of these risks would be troublesome, in view of 
 4 
early  signs  of  deceleration  of  consumption  and  the  weakness  displayed  by 
investment. 
Projections  by  the  Banco  de  México  estimate  that  the  combination  of  the 
above factors will lead to a moderate strengthening of economic activity in the 
next couple of years. In my opinion, the balance of risks is to the downside. 
A  crucial  issue  here  relates  to  the  economy’s  cyclical  position  today  and  in 
future months. Slack in the labor market has declined substantially in recent 
years  and  a  detailed  analysis  of  a  set  of  other  indicators  provides  mixed 
evidence in this regard. Given the evolution of a number of macroeconomic 
variables (the current account deficit, total financing, wages and the real wage 
bill, among them), I am inclined to believe that we are not facing a situation of 
excess demand in the economy. Technical estimates suggest that the output 
gap  is at  present not statistically  different  from zero and that no significant 
demand pressures are likely to emerge during the period 2018-2019. However, 
it is also true that the potential for risks from this source cannot be discarded.  
Inflation  declined  sharply  in  January  2018,  as  a  result  of  both  an  arithmetic 
effect deriving from the increase in energy prices in the same month of the 
previous year, and the lower rate of growth of core prices. Nevertheless, the 
decline in inflation did not match expectations prevailing only a few weeks ago, 
due  to  the  behavior  of  non-core  prices,  since  the  core  component  in  fact 
undershoot previous projections. 
In this context, inflation expectations for the end of 2018 have increased, to 
levels  slightly  above  the  upper  end  of  the  variability  interval  around  the  3 
percent target. On the other hand, monetary policy has succeeded in avoiding 
 5 
second-round  effects  from  the  recent  shocks,  as  suggested  by  the  fact  that 
long-term inflation expectations have remained relatively stable. While this is 
a  laudable  outcome,  it  is  also  important  to  take  into  consideration  that  we 
cannot  be  satisfied  yet,  since  long-term  inflation  expectations  based  on 
surveys  remain  at  around  3.5  percent,  i.e.  above  the  target,  and  the 
differential  between  nominal  and  real  yields  on  government  securities 
continue to point to upward risks for inflation in the medium and long terms. 
It is difficult to define a baseline scenario for the behavior of inflation in coming 
months, in a context of unusually high uncertainty as the one prevailing today. 
However, in view of the recent behavior and the prospects for inflation, even 
assuming an orderly behavior of the exchange rate, no demand pressures on 
prices, and the absence of new supply shocks, a convergence of inflation to the 
3 percent target by the end of this year appears to be unrealistic. In fact, under 
these assumptions, it is estimated that the target would be achieved during 
the first quarter of 2019. 
In  my  opinion,  the  balance  of  risks  for  this  scenario  is  clearly  tilted  to  the 
upside. As I noted above, given the current cyclical position of the economy 
and  the  balance  of  risks  for  coming  months,  the  emergence  of  demand 
pressures on prices does not seem to be the main source of concern. Non-core 
inflation should decline, but it is also true that its components tend to be highly 
volatile and therefore its behavior is subject to a high degree of uncertainty.  
In any case, I am of the view that the main risks for inflation, especially during 
the first semester of the year, are related to the possibility of wide fluctuations 
of the exchange rate. For the reasons noted above, the potential for pressures 
 6 
on the peso related to the renegotiation of NAFTA seems to have declined, at 
least  in  the  short  term.  At  the  same  time,  those  deriving  from  the 
normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  the  United  States  have  exacerbated, 
particularly  with  the  recent  approval  of  a  fiscal  reform  in  that  country.  In 
addition,  experience  shows  that  electoral  periods  like  the  one  that  will  be 
taking place in Mexico this year, may prompt episodes of substantial volatility 
in the foreign exchange market. 
The Mexican peso has shown a moderate appreciation vis-à-vis the US dollar 
in  recent  weeks,  although  in  a  context  of  wide  fluctuations,  with  sentiment 
about the renegotiation of NAFTA as the main determinant. A combination of 
other factors has also influenced, in one direction or another, the evolution of 
the  peso-dollar  rate,  including  expectations  related  to  the  normalization  of 
monetary policy in the United States, the  perception of risk  in international 
financial  markets,  and  some  concern  about  the  electoral  process  in  Mexico 
later in the year. 
On  the  other  hand,  domestic  interest  rates  have  continued  to  follow  an 
upward trend, a result both of monetary policy actions by the central bank and 
the  behavior  of  external  interest  rates.  It  should  be  noted  that  Mexican 
financial markets have adjusted in an orderly way to the recent episodes of 
international turbulence. Consequently, with the recent increase in long-term 
interest rates in the United States, the corresponding differential for the long 
end of the curve has narrowed during the course of this year. 
To sum up, monetary policy in Mexico is facing a scenario where attaining the 
inflation target by the end of 2018 seems no longer feasible. This is explained 
 7 
essentially  by  the  pass-through  from  the  exchange  rate  to  prices,  and  by  a 
recent  and  anticipated  trajectory  for  non-core  inflation  which  is  above 
previous projections. Even though no evident demand pressures on inflation 
are  neither  observed  nor  envisaged,  the  mixed  signals  from  different 
indicators and the uncertain future path for the economy, provide additional 
reasons for caution in the implementation of monetary policy. 
In  view  of  the  nature  of  inflationary  pressures  and  the  adjustment  to  the 
monetary policy rate that would be required to reduce inflation to 3 percent 
by December of this year,  with  the costs  for the real sector that this  would 
imply, in my opinion monetary policy must focus on convergence to the target 
over a time frame that allows: 1. to preserve the credibility of the Central Bank; 
2.  to  continue  to  avoid  second-round  effects  of  the  observed  and  potential 
future  shocks  on  inflation;  and  3.  to  minimize  costs  for  economic  activity. 
Consequently, it is necessary to lengthen the period over which the target will 
be met. Under the assumptions noted above, this would be achieved in early 
2019, although materialization of some of the previously mentioned risks may 
imply postponement of this objective for later in the year. 
The  increase  in  the  monetary  policy  interest  rate  in  early  February  was 
essential to move in this direction. At the same time, this adjustment should 
protect  the  Mexican  economy  from  the  risks  derived  from  the  expected 
increase in the federal funds rate in the United States in March of this year, 
since if similar adjustments finally take place in both countries, the differential 
between  policy rates would remain constant. Irrespective of the above, the 
need for an additional change in the monetary policy stance in Mexico within 
that  time  frame,  would  need  to  be  assessed  on  the  basis  of  incoming 
8 
 information on inflation and its prospects. I am also of the view that in the face 
of major risks ahead, the possibility of additional upward movements of the 
monetary policy rate in Mexico in subsequent months persists. 
Mostly for the reasons already explained, 2018 will probably be a challenging 
year for the Mexican economy. I wish to conclude by stressing that while the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  is  a  fundamental  piece  in  overcoming 
these challenges, this is only one component of a set of policy tools available 
to face them.  
In  this  respect,  it  is  important  to  note  the  following:  the  fiscal  adjustment 
carried  out  over  the  last  couple  of  years  has  allowed  to  record  a  primary 
surplus and to revert the upward trend of public debt as a share of GDP; the 
flexible  exchange  rate  has  worked  efficiently  as  a  shock  absorber,  with  the 
support of a mechanism for the hedging of foreign exchange risks focused on 
dealing with difficulties of a temporary nature; international reserves can be 
considered as adequate under international standards, and a Flexible Credit 
Line  with  the  IMF  is  available  in  case  of  need;  the  financial  sector  is  well 
capitalized,  profitable  and  liquid,  with  no  evident  risks  of  a  systemic  nature 
observed; and the ambitious efforts of structural reform set in motion a few 
years ago are already showing concrete results.  
On the other hand, it is also true that, if we look beyond the challenges that 
we may be facing in the short term, we cannot be satisfied with the results 
achieved up to date. Indeed, much remains to be done. To this end, it will be 
essential to continue and build on the policies carried out so far, and to tackle 
those areas where progress is still insufficient.  
 9 
