INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND DEPUTY MANAGING 
DIRECTOR, MR TAO ZHANG, VISIT TO BOTSWANA 
 Welcome Remarks 
 by  
 Moses D Pelaelo  
Governor, Bank of Botswana  
 July 25, 2018 
 Distinguished  Guests,  I  am  privileged  to  welcome  you  to  this  special 
dinner,  hosted  by  the  Bank  of  Botswana,  in  honour  of  our  esteemed 
guest, the Deputy Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, 
Mr  Tao  Zhang.    On  behalf  of  the  Board,  Management  and  Staff  of  the 
Bank,  we  very  much  appreciate  your  honouring  the  invitation  and  your 
presence tonight. Thanks to you all. 
 In  welcoming  the  Deputy  Managing  Director,  I  wish  to  observe  that, 
coincidentally, his visit to Botswana comes shortly after the conclusion of 
the annual Article IV Consultation that took place just over a month ago.  
It  is  also  two  weeks  after  the  Workshop  on  Fintech,  Payments  and 
Financial  Inclusion,  jointly  organised  by  the  Bank  of  Botswana,  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  Bank  of  Canada.  Thus,  the  visit 
reinforces 
the  beneficial  relationship  between  Botswana  and 
the 
International Monetary Fund. 
 Mr  Zhang  is  accompanied  by  his  Advisor,  Mr  Steven  Allen  Barnett,  Mr 
Enrique  Gelbard,  the  Mission  Chief  for  Botswana’s  IMF  Article  IV 
consultations, who is quite familiar to several of us; and                 Mr 
Abdulqafar  Abdullahi,  Advisor  to  the  Executive  Director  for  the  Africa 
Group 1 Constituency at the IMF, to which Botswana belongs. 
 Tonight  Mr  Zhang  will  address  the  global,  regional  and  Botswana 
connections  with  respect 
to  economic  and  policy  developments.  
Previously,  in  2007,  the  then  Deputy  Managing  Director,                            Mr 
Takatoshi  Kato,  while  visiting  Botswana  dealt  with  challenges  and 
opportunities  for  growth  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  with  special  focus  on 
Botswana. In 2011, Mr Naoyuki Shinohara discussed challenges relating 
to 
the  management  of  natural 
resources  and  developmental 
opportunities in Botswana.  In 2016, Mr Zhang’s immediate predecessor, 
Mr  Min  Zhu,  eloquently  articulated  technological  progress  and  evolving 
industry  arrangements  that  nations,  such  as  Botswana,  can  harness  to 
take development to the next level.  
 Honourable Minister, Distinguished Guests, given the high level attention 
given to Botswana by the IMF, it is fitting to briefly highlight the benefits 
of  being  a  member  and  working  with  the  IMF  since  1968.    First,  the 
capacity  of  the  IMF  to  analyse  global  developments  and  potential 
transmission  channels  and  spillover  to  various  regions  and  countries  is 
key  to  timely  responses  to  harness  opportunities  and/or  mitigate  risks. 
Second,  the  regular  consultations,  on  the  main  through  the  Article  IV 
Missions,  enables  dialogue  with  local  stakeholders  in  the  policy  arena, 
industry, as well as economic analysts and civil society.  This enables an 
understanding  of  the  unique  situation  of  Botswana  and  the  interaction 
with  global  and  regional  developments;  thus,  structural  evolution  and 
trends, developmental aspirations and needs that inform policy priorities 
and  key  data  trends.    In  turn,  such  exchange  of  information  enables 
evaluation of prospects and policy options, going forward. 
 Third, the Bank, as well as institutions such as the Non-Bank Financial 
Institutions  Regulatory  Authority  and  Statistics  Botswana,  benefit  from 
targeted  technical  assistance  and  skills  development  provided  by  the 
 2 
IMF  from  the  headquarters  in  Washington  DC  or  through  the  Regional 
Technical  Assistance  Centres,  such  as  AFRITAC  South  based  in 
Mauritius,  to  which  Botswana  is  affiliated.    This  technical  assistance 
enables  improvements  in  areas  such  as  legislation,  macroeconomic 
policy  frameworks  and  formulation,  regulatory  approaches,  as  well  as 
structuring  and  governance  of  institutions  as  necessary.    In  addition  to 
improving  operational  competencies,  access  to  training  and  skills 
development  also  encompasses  interaction  with  other  practitioners 
globally to share experiences.   
 Distinguished  Guests,  it  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  IMF  facilitates 
access  to  resources  that  members  can  opt  to  tap  into  subject  to 
evaluation  and  assessment  of  their  needs.    In  this  regard,  sustained 
judicious and prudent management of resources and the economy, as is 
the case in Botswana, enables a wider range of choices and options with 
respect  to  policies,  prioritisation  of  resource  allocation,  as  well  as  the 
timing of implementation to achieve the desired objectives.  
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  you  will  be  aware  that  Botswana 
desires to transit from upper middle income status to high income status, 
and  globally  this  transition  is  judged  to  be  challenging,  as  it  requires 
substantial  structural  transformation  and  shifts  in  growth  strategies  and 
policies.    For  Botswana,  it  is  estimated  that  this  requires  annual  GDP 
growth rates of 8 percent over a six year period to leap from the current 
per capita income of just under USD8 000 per annum to above USD12 
000.   
 As a country, in the recent years, we noted challenges of slower growth 
rates  compared  to  when  we  graduated  from  low-income  status,  slower 
than  desired  rate  of  economic  diversification,  as  well  as  relatively  high 
 3 
level  of  unemployment.    In  this  respect,  it  is  expected  that,  going 
forward,  our  relationship  with  the  IMF  will  focus  on  drawing  on  their 
expertise  and  sharing  of  experience  of  other  countries  to  support 
transformation  policies  and  strategies  to  enable  Botswana  to  fulfil  its 
aspirations for a high-income status on a sustainable basis.  
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your  kind 
attention. 
 4 
