Marja Nykänen: Banking in the digital age
Opening  remarks  by  Ms  Marja  Nykänen,  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the
Banking in the Digital Age Conference, Helsinki, 14 June 2018.
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear fellow bankers and digital enthusiasts,
Money  makes  the  world  go  round,  as  they  say.  It  facilitates  trade,  enables  transactions,  and
lubricates  the  economy.  But  what  does  money  look  like?  Is  it  metal  coins,  paper  banknotes,
account entries on bank ledgers, or something completely different? The truth is, it is all of the
above, and it keeps evolving.
Money  is  created  by  the  banking  sector  as  a  whole,  that  is,  by  the  central  bank  and  the
commercial  banks  together,  and  it  takes  many  forms.  In  a  world  that  is  turning  increasingly
digital, so does money and banking.
Today’s event is about looking into the future and about understanding the change. We will hear
five  excellent  presentations  from  true  leaders  in  this  transformation,  as  well  as  a  panel
discussion which includes the top three banks operating in Finland.
We  will  also  have  a  live  illustrator  drawing  pictures  of  the  presentations.  You  can  see  the
illustrations  taking  shape  on  the  screen  above.  So  don’t  be  surprised  if  there  is  something
strange happening on that screen!
Digital technology is transforming the financial industry both from the bottom up and from the top
down. On the one hand, improved infrastructures and back office technology will help to make
financial  companies  more  cost  efficient.  At  the  same  time,  however,  financial  services  are
becoming more mobile, more 24/7, and more fit-for-purpose.
From the perspective of an individual consumer, the financial industry’s digital transformation will
be most evident in the nature of payments. Credit transfers between bank accounts will soon
happen without delay. Although the use of cash has decreased in recent years and cards have
become  the  most  popular  form  of  retail  payment,  banknotes  and  coins  are  in  no  danger  of
disappearing soon.
Change is not always perceived as beneficial. The financial industry is already feeling the impact
of automation which is making many jobs obsolete. There are many who have been diligently
working  in  the  banking  industry  for  decades,  but  who  are  now  on  individual  level  facing
uncertainty and the need for acquiring new skills.
A  more  digital  bank  relying  more  on  automation  is  also  more  vulnerable  to  cyber-attacks  and
systems  malfunctions.  Information  security  has  traditionally  concentrated  on  the  role  of  the
organisation,  focusing  on  measures  such  as  antivirus  protection,  software  updates  and  data
backups. Moving forwards, more attention needs to be placed on containing systemic risks that
threaten the entire financial system which may arise from these new technologies, products and
services.
Two weeks ago we experienced what a large impact on everyday life the failure of a major card
network can have. It is crucial to have payment and settlement systems that function under all
circumstances  to  prevent  the  economy  from  being  disrupted.  The  objective  is  to  develop  a
framework  which  guarantees  the  operational  integrity  of  all  critical  infrastructure  that  are  also
shared  by  financial  market.  I  am  confident  that  we  can  reach  this  target  in  good  cooperation
between the financial industry and the authorities.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Going forward, the industry landscape will look more diverse, with different kinds of companies,
both  small  and  large,  providing  financial  services.  It  is  important  that  the  authorities  actively
monitor the structural transformation, maintain financial stability and do their part in ensuring that
the use of digital financial services is safe and reliable. We need both the experience and stability
of the established institutions, as well as the agility and innovative spirit of the newcomers. At the
same time, to ensure fair and uniform operating environment, entities who offer similar products
or services ought to be subject to the same rules and regulatory oversight.
Today is the final day of our three-day conference Money in the Digital Age. On Tuesday and
Wednesday, we hosted an academic seminar, and we were deeply impressed by the brilliant
work presented there. Today we will complement that work with insights from leading industry
players.
I wish you all will enjoy the programme, and I look forward to continuing the dialogue with you also
after the event.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
