Andreas Dombret: Living with fragmentation – post-Brexit realities
in financial services
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the AIMA Global Policy and Regulatory Forum, Dublin, 20 March 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you for the kind introduction. It is a pleasure to be in Dublin and at the 2018 AIMA Forum.
"Managing a fragmented world” is, in my view, a well-chosen topic. Most economic policymakers
currently have their hands full trying to escape the doom loop of a trade war and a potentially hard
Brexit. At the same time, banks, investors and most other firms have to prepare for these worst-
case scenarios – not least, because supervisors urge them to.
And of course such fragmentation in financial services and its regulation may cause nightmares
for  many  in  the  industry  as  well  as  for  policymakers. And  I  do  understand  that  –  because  it
implies a great deal of uncertainty.
But we should not, I believe, panic: greater fragmentation seems inevitable after Brexit. Though,
repercussions  will  not  be  as  bad,  as  some  fear,  when  we  succeed  in  managing  this  greater
fragmentation  constructively  –  that  means  without  resorting  to  nationalism  that  would  just  be
destructive for all of us.
My topic today, then, is to look at the estimated extent of fragmentation in regulation of financial
services after Brexit and what we should do about it.
2 Brexit and financial services
In Brexit negotiations common ground still seems hard to find. Even the basic principles of a new
partnership remain vague. Given that and because time for preparation is running out for firms,
uncertainty among businesses weighs heavier every day.
From an economic and financial market perspective, the two most important questions probably
are:
Will there be a free trade or a comparable agreement?
Would a possible free trade agreement also include financial services?
In my view, there is substantial scope for a general free trade agreement. The main question to
me  is  therefore  how  far-reaching  can  this  future  relationship  be.  For  example  an  agreement
without tariffs would be of high value and is possible. Another, less clear and highly complicated
question is how to deal with non-tariff barriers like product standard regulations.
However,  with  a  view  to  the  financial  services  sector,  a  far-reaching  free  trade  agreement  is
rather unlikely given the UK’s aspired exit from the single market and the customs union.
Likewise,  I  am  rather  sceptical  about  the  approach  via  mutual  recognition  or  about  similar
approaches based on regulatory harmonisation through technical committees and independent
arbitration mechanisms.
Approaches of this kind could well undermine the ability of jurisdictions to set their own rules and
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the ability to safeguard financial stability.
The options that remain on the table are a “no deal” scenario or one with quite limited freedoms
for financial services, as in the case of CETA.  What would such scenarios mean to financial
transactions between the UK and the EU?
1
First, the “no deal” scenario would mean that the EU and the UK would trade under rules set by
the World Trade Organization – where services sectors are only thinly covered.
Service providers would then have to apply for comprehensive licenses in both jurisdictions and
have all the necessary elements of a fully functioning bank ready in both places.
And second, even a CETA-like deal would most likely not mean far-ranging freedoms to provide
financial services in the respective foreign jurisdiction.
3 Living with fragmentation
Therefore,  it  is  –  like  it  or  not  –  quite  likely  that  we  will  see  greater  fragmentation  in  financial
regulation and supervision in Europe. What exactly that will mean is, however, unclear up to now.
It is this uncertainty about the exact nature of fragmentation post-Brexit that makes it so hard to
assess the costs and benefits of more fragmentation.
Financial  firms  highlight  that  fragmentation  is  likely  to  mean  organisational  inefficiencies  and
higher organisational costs. And there can be no doubt that at least the transition to a new regime
and new organisational structure will be costly. However, these costs may be less substantial in
the  long  term  –  once  firms  have  adapted  to  the  new  regime,  clever  managers  will  find  new
organisational solutions that integrate new compliance realities with organisational efficiencies.
Significant as these costs may be, politicians, regulators, and supervisors nevertheless have to
take a broader perspective, one that is in line with the changed democratic preferences.
Thus, from the UK perspective, a far-reaching free trade agreement for financial services – and
services in general – could be considered an obstacle to taking back legal and regulatory power.
At  the  same  time,  from  the  EU  perspective,  we  cannot  accept  a  liberalised  common  market,
without a common supervision. Otherwise, as a supervisor, I would be concerned about financial
stability. It seems therefore that some degree of fragmentation is almost inevitable.
But, should we simply wait for the end of EU-UK financial relations? Should we simply hope for
the best?
Of course not. We have to manage fragmentation constructively –  we have to find innovative
approaches for a new reality.
But let me make one thing very clear: this must not result in a race to the bottom. Fragmentation
should not lead to competition through lax regulation or supervision. Such policies may seem to
be in the best national interest, but ultimately they represent special interest politics. We must
expose these policies for what they really are: threats to financial stability.
And that is why politicians, firms and supervisors have to deliver on three crucial points: first, a
transition  agreement;  second,  pragmatic  supervisory  cooperation;  and  third,  managerial
innovation.
Let me take each of these briefly, starting with the transition – or implementation phase, as it is
now called.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
4 The need for a transition phase
A  transitional  deal  between  the  UK  and  the  EU  was  agreed  yesterday  on  negotiators’  level.
During the implementation phase, which is to last until end 2020, EU rules would continue to
apply in the UK and the exact terms of the future partnership shall be worked out. It is of utmost
importance in order to give firms more time to adjust to the new realities.
It furthermore can reduce the long-term costs of Brexit. Firms can weigh up their options and
decide which markets they want to serve and with which organisational design. They have now
time to re-arrange their organisations on the basis of an analytical and forward-looking approach,
rather  than  an  approach  of  simply  minimising  uncertainty.  The  inefficiencies  and  potentially
higher costs of financial intermediation can be reduced with this agreement.
 I am confident that both sides have apparently recognised the importance of a transition phase
in making Brexit less abrupt and, in the long run, less painful. 
Despite all this positive news, it is still too early to lay back. Many issues are still to be discussed
and the transitional period is still not fully guaranteed. It remains to be subject to a successful
conclusion of an Article 50-deal within the next twelve months. For instance, the Irish question –
i.e. keeping the border between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland invisible – needs to
be resolved. Hence, the recently widely used phrase that “nothing is agreed until everything is
agreed” still holds true.   
5 Managing financial firms in a fragmented world
But even after a transition phase, Brexit and fragmentation would mean two things. First, future
access  to  financial  services  markets  would  be  more  like  the  access  given  to  a  third  country.
Second, a successful conclusion of the Brexit negotiations is not guaranteed as it depends on
whether a fully-fledged long-term agreement is achieved and ratified.
This  is  why  I  see  no  alternative  to  timely  preparation,  and  to  preparing  for  the  worst-case
scenario of a hard Brexit without any free trade agreement.
Looking at banks, proper preparation would include establishing at least basic entities in the other
economic area – that is, the EU27 or the UK – in order to continue doing business there. The
concept of a “basic entity” is not easy to define. As far as we are concerned, I can repeat that we
will  certainly  not  accept  empty  shells  or  letterbox  companies  where  the  business  effectively
continues to be run  from  London.  For  critical  functions  such  as  management,  controlling  and
compliance, qualified personnel need to be present at the EU entity at all times. We expect any
branch or subsidiary to retain chief responsibility for its business.
And banks have to begin implementing their plans and submitting their license applications no
later than at the end of the second quarter of 2018. Otherwise, it will be very difficult to prevent a
cliff edge.
Firms have a lot to complain about with regard to Brexit, and I do not mean to play this point
down. But if the UK and the EU are attractive markets, I think there is something to be said for
innovative approaches to comply with this new regime. That’s why firms will have to find new,
efficient organisational strategies. For example, I am convinced that profitable business models
can be organised with two independently licensed entities.
6 Managing regulation and supervision in a fragmented world
But don’t get me wrong: regulators and supervisors, too, have to be pragmatic and innovative to
achieve our goals of efficiency, stability, and ensuring the real economy is provided with credit.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
With  financial  sector  firms  relocating  their  business  between  London  on  the  one  hand  and
Frankfurt,  Dublin  and  other  cities  on  the  other  hand,  close  supervisory  cooperation  becomes
even more important, especially over the coming years when we have to break new ground in
supervision.
The cooperation between the EU and the UK authorities will have to be put on a new foundation.
We will need to ensure information exchange, and of course we will have to think about how we
can reduce unnecessary burdens from double licensing.
Whatever political decision is taken, bank supervisors will not only do all they can to make the
transition to a new regime as smooth as possible; they will also, in the long run, try to reduce
unnecessary inefficiencies where possible.
2
In  December  last  year,  the  PRA   published  a  draft  proposal  for  a  post-Brexit  supervisory
approach. I very much appreciate the spirit behind this approach. It reflects a solution-oriented,
pragmatic,  yet  stability-oriented  stance.  In  the  same  vein,  the  SSM  has  developed  quite
pragmatic, cooperative policy stances on many of the relevant issues. I am confident that this
cooperative style can make an important contribution towards a smooth transition.
7 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, greater fragmentation will most likely be an inevitable result of Brexit.
Instead  of  wishing  to  do  away  with  what  is  beyond  our  control,  we  should  set  about  finding
pragmatic and at times innovative solutions to managing Brexit and the ensuing fragmentation
constructively.
However,  such  a  constructive  approach  will  take  time,  because  it  means  many  complex
answers have to be developed – which is why we need a sufficiently long transition phase.
And  I  have  to  say  that  I  was  really  facilitated  well  and  truly  relieved  when  I  heard  the  news
yesterday that a transition phase had been agreed, because this could make Brexit less abrupt
and, in the long run, less painful.
During that phase, supervisors will have to find solutions that enhance financial stability without
undermining economic efficiency.
And  financial  firms  will  have  to  find  innovative  and  pragmatic  ways  to  comply  with  the  new
demands while maintaining their efficiency and profitability.
For all the bullet points on our to-do list, we need an honest dialogue – if unnecessary problems
and burdens arise, firms and investors should always come and talk to us. Brexit is both too
complex and too important to muddle through.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement between Canada and the EU.
Prudential Regulatory Authority.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
