Benoît Cœuré: The future of central bank money
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 14 May 2018.
Accompanying slides
 Central bank balance sheets have received much attention in recent years, mostly reflecting their
considerable  expansion  on  the  back  of  large-scale  asset  purchases  and  long-term  lending
1
operations. 
In my remarks this evening I would like to share some more general thoughts on the role of the
central bank’s balance sheet in the economy. My focus will be on central bank liabilities – that is,
money created by central banks to be used as a means of payment and store of value.
The  development  of  private  digital  tokens  based  on  the  blockchain  technology,  which  is  the
theme of one of the two Geneva reports that we will discuss tomorrow, has generated a debate
over  whether  central  banks  should  issue  a  new  liability  –  their  own  digital  currency  –  to  the
general  public.  While  the  Geneva  report  focuses  on  blockchain’s  impact  on  finance,  I  will
consider  the  potential  broader  impact  on  the  economy  of  central  banks  issuing  new  forms  of
money. Since the general public already holds central bank liabilities in the form of banknotes and
coins, this is clearly a question of how.
But  I  will  also  consider who.  In  an  environment  of  excess  liquidity  and  new  regulatory
requirements for financial market participants, broadening access to the liability side of central
banks’ balance sheets to parties other than banks may help better align financial conditions with
the central bank’s intended stance.
Central bank digital currencies
Who has access to the central bank balance sheet, and how, is a debate that has been going on
for hundreds of years. In the early years of central banking, this discussion was mostly about the
optimal provision of money as a means of payment. The banks of Amsterdam and Hamburg, for
example, which are now considered as having performed key central bank functions as early as
the beginning of the 17th century, were created to provide giro deposits as an efficient and stable
2
method for merchants to pay each other, greatly facilitating trade.
An anecdote from Sweden, where another early central bank was founded in the middle of the
17th  century,  demonstrates  these  benefits  quite  nicely.  Coinage  at  that  time  was  minted  in
copper but set to be the same value as silver. This meant so-called coins were the size of your
dinner plates tonight. The largest one weighed just shy of 20 kilograms.
Clearly this was inconvenient for trade. Indeed, one tale tells of two thieves who tried to make off
with  170  copper  daler  but  couldn’t  lift  the  coins  above  knee  height.   The  Bank  of  Stockholm
addressed this problem by issuing the first modern banknotes.
3
More generally, central bank liabilities provided a convenient means of payment to allow clearing
and establish trust in the financial system. But debate raged in the 18th and 19th centuries over
the relative merits of different central bank liabilities. The universal nature of banknotes, and the
possibility to use them in a decentralised way, eventually made them the more important central
4
bank liability.
But over time, technological advances, financial intermediation based on a stable bank-borrower
relationship and the obvious inconveniences of currency – it can get lost, be destroyed or stolen
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
– all led to banknotes gradually being superseded by bank deposits. Yet, repeated banking crises
highlighted  that  commercial  bank  deposits  were  themselves  vulnerable  to  runs,  since  banks’
assets are typically illiquid while their liabilities can be withdrawn at will.
This insecurity led central banks to gradually take on their role of lenders of last resort to avoid
economically  and  socially  disruptive  banking  crises,  well  before  Henry  Thornton  (1802)  and
Walter Bagehot (1873) articulated their views on the subject.  But others, most notably James
Tobin (1987), wanted to go further, allowing not only banks to deposit funds at the central bank,
but also individuals.  Safety was his primary concern.
5
6
In many ways, this debate over the relative merits of banknotes and accounts, and over central
banks and banks as main issuers of money, has once more returned.
With  the  recent  fad  about  crypto  assets,  pioneered  by  bitcoin,  the  idea  has  been  floated  for
central banks to issue their own digital currencies – let’s call them “universal reserves” – that
would allow all individuals to hold central bank liabilities in the form of both banknotes and coins
7
as well as electronic central bank reserves.
What  distinguishes  the  discussion  today  from  previous  discussions,  however,  are  three  new
facts:
The first is that we are seeing a dramatic decline in the demand for cash in some countries,
in particular Sweden and Norway.
The  second  is  that  central  banks  today  could  make  use  of  new  technologies  that  would
enable  the  introduction  of  what  is  widely  referred  to  as  a  “token-based”  currency  –  one
based on a distributed ledger technology (DLT) or comparable cryptographic technology.
And the third “new” fact, at least from a long-term perspective, relates to the role of central
banks in setting monetary policy, and more recently to the emergence of negative rates as a
policy instrument and the consequences for the transmission of monetary policy.
I would argue that, in most countries, the first fact – the disappearance of cash – is not a cause
for imminent action. You can see this on my first slide. Demand for banknotes is still growing
around the world, and in the euro area cash remains a popular means of payment.
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  second  fact  is  the  subject  of  the  first  report  that  will  be  presented  tomorrow:  distributed
ledger technologies. Universal reserves could be implemented in principle either as central bank
deposits – this was Tobin’s original idea of “deposited currency accounts” – or as DLT-based
digital tokens.
Digital tokens – call them “FedCoin”, “ECBCoin” or why not “BIScoin” – are different in two main
ways.  First,  they  would  save  the  central  bank  the  operational  risks  and  costs  related  to
administering  individual  central  bank  accounts  for  millions  of  households  and  companies.
Second, they may share one of the key features of cash, namely that the identity of the holders
8
would – at least in principle – not be known to the central bank.
However, the technology is still immature, costly to maintain and possibly prone to vulnerabilities.
Existing  retail  payment  systems,  on  the  other  hand,  are  convenient,  efficient  and  reliable  and
have earned public trust. Today they may be slower and costlier than schemes based on crypto
assets, but with the introduction of 24/7 instant payments in many jurisdictions – and assuming
that  similar  efforts  can  be  made  to  improve  the  cost,  timeliness  and  transparency  of  cross-
border payments  – they appear to still be superior to what we have seen from crypto assets
thus  far.  The  same  holds  true,  for  the  moment,  for  wholesale  payment  systems,  even  if
distributed ledgers show more promising applications in that area.
10
9
That  being  said,  developing  economies’  successful  experience  with  mobile  payment  systems
suggests that cash may be sidelined sooner rather than later, even in economies where it today
reigns  supreme.
  Indeed,  our  own  efforts  to  upgrade  retail  payment  systems  may  even  be
accelerating this evolution.
11
12
In a not so distant future, universal reserves could enable people to hold a central bank liability
comparable  to  cash,  without  the  risks  associated  with  commercial  money.  The  social
consequences  of  such  an  evolution  deserve  a  more  thorough  discussion.  But  one  anecdote
emphasises the risks of leaving the public sector exposed to private payment systems.
In  2010,  two  bitcoin  enthusiasts  agreed  to  exchange  two  large  pizzas  for  the  price  of  10,000
bitcoins.  In  a  forum  one  of  them  wrote:  ”I’ll  pay  10,000  bitcoins  for  a  couple  of  pizzas…  like
 3 / 14
13
BIS central bankers' speeches
maybe two large ones so I have some left over for the next day.”
 At that time, 10,000 bitcoins
were worth about €32. Today, 10,000 bitcoins are worth more than €70 million. Last year, this
would have been enough to buy Van Gogh’s 1889 painting “Laboureur dans un champ”. So, as it
stands today, bitcoin is bad money and a poor payment system.
Universal reserves and the transmission of monetary policy
13
Much of the historical discussion on central bank liabilities developed at a time when monetary
policy was quite different from how we know it today. Central banks now play a more active role
in macroeconomic management, meaning that they would need to carefully consider the costs
and benefits that issuing a digital currency would have for the conduct of monetary policy – the
third fact I mentioned before.
You can see the potential motivation for this on my next slide.
Although the Eurosystem has been charging an annual interest rate of –0.4% on banks’ excess
reserves for more than two years now, almost no euro area banks have passed these negative
rates on to their household clients. In some jurisdictions this is due to legal impediments, but in
most  cases  it  simply  reflects  banks’  long-run  perspective  –  that  is  their  efforts  to  maintain  a
sustainable source of profit and, hence, a stable deposit base.
This rigidity does not only blur the transmission of our policy rates. Empirical evidence suggests
that it also weakens the bank lending channel. A decline in the policy rate typically lowers the cost
of banks’ liabilities first, thus increasing their net worth and relaxing their financial constraints,
14
which  causes  them  to  increase  lending.
  But  if  negative  rates  are  not  passed  through,  this
channel will fail to develop to its full potential.
An  interest-bearing  central  bank  digital  currency  may  help  overcome  these  constraints.  This
does not actually require cash to be abolished, but rather that it no longer acts as an effective
15
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
competitor for large transactions.
15
Under  these  conditions  the  central  bank  could  gain  greater  control  over  the  transmission  of
interest rates to households and businesses. In a deep recession, it could reduce interest rates
by  more  than  is  currently  possible  and  stabilise  economic  activity  more  quickly,  reducing  the
need for other non-conventional measures. And in an upswing, the ability to pay positive interest
rates  on  digital  currency  would  put  increased  upward  pressure  on  deposit  rates  provided  by
banks.
The potential effects on output and inflation could be sizeable.
 You can see this on my next
slide, where ECB staff have used a medium-scale structural macro-finance model to simulate
the macroeconomic effects of a stronger pass-through of a conventional 100 basis point cut in
our main refinancing rate.
16
The benchmark – the solid blue line – is how we would currently expect output and inflation to
react, given the empirical evidence of banks’ sluggish pricing behaviour. The dashed line shows
the effects we would observe under a full pass-through scenario. You can see that, at the peak,
both output and inflation would increase by around 30% more than under the baseline scenario.
In the case of negative interest rates, however, the benefits might be less clear-cut. On the one
hand, banks’ interest margins may be better protected by a higher pass-through to households,
pushing down the economic lower bound (or “reversal rate”) at which negative rates are thought
to  become  contractionary.
  On  the  other  hand,  faced  with  very  negative  rates,  households
might start saving more rather than less. Given the downward rigidity in retail rates, and the fact
that households often suffer from money illusion, household consumption planning with nominal
negative interest rates is unchartered territory.
Digital bank runs and the future of financial intermediation
17
This brings me to the potential dark side of universal reserves.
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Interest-bearing  universal  reserves  would  directly  compete  with  bank  deposits.  In  a  systemic
crisis, despite the protection provided by government deposit guarantee schemes, households
and businesses could seek to hold their wealth in the riskless central bank liability rather than the
riskier private sector one.
 While this shift could also happen now between deposits and cash,
a digital currency would make it cheaper and faster, making “digital bank runs” more frequent and
more severe.
18
In the steady state, the risk is that households and firms find digital currency more convenient
than bank deposits, depriving banks of a stable source of funding and undermining their social
role at a time when some of their other functions, such as the provision of payment services, are
already severely challenged by new entrants.
19
In  the  euro  area,  for  example,  non-monetary  financial  institutions  have  considerably  expanded
their  share  of  financial  intermediation  in  recent  years.  In  terms  of  total  assets,  their  share
increased from 43% in 2008 to 55% in early 2017.
 Fintechs are also challenging the role of
banks in providing credit.
 In other words, maturity transformation still plays an important role,
but it is no longer the sole preserve of banks.
20
21
This means that universal central bank reserves may accelerate the euro area’s journey towards
a less bank-based economy.
I see two reasons why this could be problematic. First, in spite of recent regulatory initiatives, the
externalities  created  by  maturity  mismatch  in  market-based  finance  aren’t  nearly  as  well
addressed as those created by banks.
 Second, financial structures should be the outcome of
market forces. They should be driven by consumer preferences and technological change, and
constrained  as  needed  by  regulation,  including  antitrust  law.  In  other  words,  central  banks
should, in principle, play no active role here.
22
So,  before  taking  decisions  that  could  potentially  nudge  the  financial  system  away  from
traditional, deposit-based financial intermediation, we should carefully ponder the consequences
from  issuing  universal  reserves  for  both  financial  stability  and  the  financial  system’s  ability  to
match savings and investment in an efficient manner.
Safe asset scarcity and the dispersion of short-term interest rates
23
Either way, it’s likely that universal central bank reserves would fundamentally transform many
aspects of today’s financial system. But there could be a case for a more incremental reform,
consisting of widening access to central bank liabilities to a broader but limited range of financial
market participants.
As you know, when central bank reserves are in short supply – that is, they are just sufficient to
satisfy  the  demand  for  banknotes  and  other  autonomous  factors  –  access  to  central  bank
facilities by credit institutions has in the past ensured that very short-term interest rates were
closely aligned with the interest rate at which the central bank provides reserves.
24
You can see this for the euro area on my next slide. From the launch of the euro up to the global
financial  crisis,  unsecured  short-term  interbank  rates  lay  within  the  corridor  bounded  by  the
ECB’s marginal lending facility and deposit facility rates and were concentrated around our main
policy refinancing rate.
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
This relationship did not fundamentally change in 2007 with the emergence of the financial crisis.
But when we granted unlimited liquidity to our counterparties against sound collateral, and when
we  later  started  purchasing  assets,  an  environment  of  excess  reserves  caused  unsecured
money market rates to converge towards the deposit facility rate.
You can see this on my next slide. Whenever excess liquidity is large, the spread between the
EONIA and the deposit facility rate narrows, as the latter is the rate that determines the marginal
cost of interbank lending when there is excess supply of central bank reserves. This was fully in
line  with  our  policy  intentions.  Our  policy  framework  was  able  to  provide  a  hard  floor,  at  our
desired level, for the EONIA.
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time, the transmission of our policy intentions started to become less uniform as
excess liquidity mounted.
You can see this on my next slide. In the past, different short-term rates, such as unsecured
money  market  rates  or  repo  rates  backed  by  either  general  or  security-specific  collateral,  on
average  moved  in  tandem  and  the  spread  between  them  was  typically  very  small  and  rather
stable over time.
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
But as excess liquidity increased, these rates started to diverge. As you can see from the chart,
most money market rates have remained below the ECB’s deposit facility rate, sometimes by a
substantial margin.
Some of these divergences are transitory and have no broader implications for monetary policy.
Regulatory  “window-dressing”,  for  example,  causes  repo  rates  to  decline  on  balance  sheet
reporting dates, but they typically bounce back quickly. You can see this clearly at year-ends, in
particular in December 2016.
Other  divergences,  however,  have  proved  more  permanent  and  have  sometimes  been  rising
with the level of excess liquidity. The reason for this is that many of the ultimate holders of the
securities we purchase under our asset purchase programme are either non-banks – typically,
asset  managers,  pension  funds,  insurance  companies  or  corporate  treasurers  –  or  banks
located outside the euro area. And although central bank asset purchases in effect replace one
safe asset with another – central bank reserves with government bonds – differences in who can
hold these assets may result in persistent price effects.
In other words, while the deposit facility rate provides an effective floor for direct monetary policy
counterparties  (i.e.  banks)  and  those  with  access  to  the  facility,  other  financial  market
participants must look elsewhere for safe and liquid investments. Although banks are willing to
accept  cash  from  the  latter  and  deposit  it  at  the  central  bank,  this  service  is  not  for  free,  as
banks’ balance sheet capacity has become costly.
25
This means that in an environment where the supply of safe assets shrinks and where demand
for them increases, due to changes in regulation for example, safe and liquid short-term assets
26 
9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
other than central bank reserves become scarce.
26
You can see this on my next slide. Next to central bank reserves, Bunds are typically considered
the  safest  and  most  liquid  financial  instrument  in  the  euro  area. As  a  result,  our  purchases,
together  with  the  growing  demand  from  non-counterparties,  have  caused  the  Bund’s
“specialness” premium to widen noticeably over time.
The  Governing  Council’s  decision  in  December  2016  to  also  accept  cash  as  collateral  in  our
securities  lending  facility  successfully  stopped  the  spread  from  widening  further.  But  there
remains  a  persistent  and  sizeable  spread  between  unsecured  interbank  rates  and  repo  rates
backed by scarce safe collateral.
Such protracted dispersion of short-term rates may matter for three broad reasons.
27
First,  there  may  be  a  social  cost.
  Market  allocation  of  funds  requires  the  real  costs  of
intermediation to have genuine price signals so lenders and borrowers can be matched for
the  lowest  cost.  When  institutional  arrangements  create  wedges  between  different  short-
term rates, funds may be inefficiently matched, potentially creating a deadweight loss.
Second, the current arrangement under which credit institutions have privileged access to
central bank facilities is the outcome of their historical monopoly role in collecting deposits
and lending to the economy. To the extent that a growing and increasingly diverse range of
market  participants  starts  to  offer  similar  services,  structural  disparities  in  their  ability  to
place safe and liquid investments may become a source of concern.
And third, the dispersion of short-term rates may affect the transmission of our monetary
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy stance. In effect, it could make overall financial conditions looser or tighter than we
intend.
To demonstrate this, on my next slide I show so-called financial conditions indices, which are
simple  summary  indicators  of  the  monetary  policy  stance.  They  are  weighted  averages  of
developments in short and long-term interest rates, exchange rates and stock markets, with the
weights determined by the variable’s importance for policy transmission.
You can see that such indicators would, at times, have pointed towards a measurably looser
stance when using the one-year German sovereign bond as the short-term rate as opposed to
the one-year overnight indexed swap rate that is typically used to calculate these measures.
Such differences, if persistent, may entail real economic effects.
The reason for this is that banks typically price their loans off market interest rates, and in some
instances they use the prevailing sovereign yield curve. This could lead to banks pricing loans
differently when short-term rates diverge, thereby affecting the ultimate borrowing conditions of
households and firms.
In other words, it may well matter for banks whether the actual opportunity cost for issuing a
short-term  loan  is  –70  basis  points,  the  year-to-date  average  of  the  yield  of  a  three-month
German Treasury bill, or –33 basis points, the current rate of the three-month EURIBOR. In fact,
differences  in  sovereign  rates  across  Member  States  were  the  key  reason  for  the  significant
dispersion in bank lending rates that we observed in the midst of the euro area sovereign debt
crisis.
None of this can be observed today, of course. Thanks to our unconventional policy measures,
bank  lending  rates  in  the  largest  euro  area  countries  have  converged  to  a  degree  not  seen
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
before.
But the divergence between our key policy rates and market rates could become more important
in  the  future  once  policy  rates  begin  to  normalise.  Let  me  be  clear:  this  is  not  a  short-term
concern. The Governing Council expects our key policy rates to remain at their present levels for
an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases.
But looking beyond, with our reinvestment policy ensuring continued excess reserves, there is a
risk that, under the current framework, some short-term market rates would not respond fully to
changes in our key interest rates or, even if they would, that a continued dispersion of short-term
rates would adversely impact the transmission of our monetary policy stance.
The case for widening access to central bank liabilities
28
One  possible  way  to  overcome  this  situation,  if  and  when  needed,  would  be  to  consider
expanding access to the liability side of central bank balance sheets to other actors in financial
markets.
There  are  various  ways  to  do  this.  I  will  not  discuss  these  options  in  detail  today.  But  the
important thing to note is that this could help tie the range of short-term rates more closely to our
policy stance, mainly by relieving downward pressure on the “scarcity premium” of some safe
assets.
 For these reasons, some central banks have already successfully widened access,
such as the Federal Reserve via its overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility.
29
In the euro area, some non-bank market players already have access to the liability side of our
balance sheet via account facilities. Central counterparties (CCPs) from the European Economic
Area,  for  example,  can  open  a  settlement  account  subject  to  the  harmonised  terms  and
conditions of the TARGET2 Guideline.
30
CCPs often need to manage significant cash amounts that they receive as collateral from their
clearing  members.  If  they  invest  these  cash  amounts  in  the  market,  they  need  to  largely
collateralise  the  investments  with  high-quality  liquid  assets  in  accordance  with  prudential
requirements.  Allowing  CCPs  to  leave  their  funds  at  the  central  bank  may,  therefore,  have
somewhat eased downward pressures on some market rates, including repo rates backed by
the safest collateral.
Of course, any expansion beyond the current regime would have to respect the ECB’s Treaty
obligations. Our deposit and marginal lending facilities are instruments of monetary policy and
our  rules  for  opening  central  bank  accounts  also  take  monetary  policy  needs  into  account.
Extending them to other counterparties would have to be consistent with that objective.
31
Before reaching this conclusion we need to carefully study whether allowing non-banks to leave
deposits at the ECB overnight would, first, have a tangible effect on those short-term rates that
are currently trading at a noticeable spread below our deposit facility rate and, second, whether
and to which extent these rates are ultimately significant for the transmission of our monetary
policy stance.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Technological advances, changes in the structure of the financial system and recent monetary
policy developments all mean that, in the future, central banks will need to consider whether the
current arrangements for accessing their balance sheets are optimal.
It doesn’t only matter how central bank money is created, but also to whom it is issued.
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
From today’s perspective, there are no clear benefits from allowing the general public to hold
digital central bank reserves, in particular in economies where demand for cash remains robust,
such  as  in  the  euro  area.  This  assessment  includes  considerations  related  to  the  potential
impact of central bank digital currencies on financial structures in general, and the stability of
bank deposits in particular.
In  the  medium  term,  a  more  incremental  reform  could  consist  of  giving  a  broader  range  of
financial  market  participants  access  to  the  liability  side  of  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet,
provided that this can help strengthen the transmission of monetary policy in an environment of
excess liquidity.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
I  would  like  to  thank  Fabian  Eser  and  Christoph  Ohlerich  for  their  contributions  to  this  speech  and  Ulrich
Bindseil and Benjamin Sahel for their comments. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.
See, for example, Roberds, W. and F. Velde (2014), “ Early Public Banks”, Working Paper No 2014–03, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago; Bindseil, U. (2018), “Pre-1800 central bank operations and the origins of central
banking”, mimeo; and Ugolini, S. (2011), “What  do  we  really  know  about  the  long-term  evolution  of  central
banking? Evidence from the past, insights from the present”, Norges Bank’s bicentenary project, Working Paper
2011/15.
See Wetterberg, G. (2009), Money and Power, From Stockholm’s Banco 1656 to Sveriges Riksbank Today.
In  the  18th  century,  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  of  banknote-issuing  central  banks,  such  as  the  Bank  of
England or the Caisse d’ Escompte, easily surpassed that of their older cousins in Amsterdam and Hamburg,
which continued to rely exclusively on deposits
See, for example, Bindseil, op.cit.; and Schnabel, I. and H.S. Shin (2004), “Liquidity and contagion: the crisis of
1763”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 2, pp. 929–968.
See Tobin, J. (1987), “The case for preserving regulatory distinctions”, Proceedings of the Economic Policy
Symposium, Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 167–83.
For  an  overview,  see  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  and  Markets  Committee  (2018),
“Central bank digital currencies”, Bank for International Settlements, March; and Cœuré, B. and J. Loh (2018),
“Bitcoin not the answer to a cashless society”, op-ed published in the Financial Times, 13 March. The BIS report
also discusses a second option of introducing a central bank digital currency, namely in the form of restricted-
access digital settlement tokens for wholesale payment and settlement transactions.
In reality, current private crypto assets only allow for pseudo-anonymity, as all transactions are publicly recorded.
But users do not necessarily have to reveal their true identities.
See  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (2018),  “Cross-border  retail  payments”,  Bank  for
International Settlements, 16 February.
See Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and Markets Committee, op. cit. Joint research by the
ECB and the Bank of Japan has found that distributed ledger technologies are not (yet) mature enough for large
wholesale  payment  systems.  See  Bank  of  Japan  and  ECB  (2017),  “Payment  systems:  liquidity  saving
mechanisms in a distributed ledger environment”, Report on the STELLA project.
See Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and World Bank Group (2016), “Payment Aspects of
Financial Inclusion”, Bank for International Settlements, April.
See, for example, “We don’t take cash’: is this the future of money?”, Financial Times, 10 May 2018.
Source: Bitcoin Forum, 18 May 2010.
See Heider, F., F. Saidi and G. Schepens (2018), “ Life Below Zero: Bank Lending Under Negative Policy Rates”,
mimeo, available on SSRN.
For example, scalable deposit and withdrawal fees, as proposed by some academics, would allow cash to still
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
be used for small, necessary transactions while penalising large holdings more severely. See Goodfriend, M.
(2016), “The Case for Unencumbering Interest Rate Policy at the Zero Bound”, prepared for the 2016 Economic
Policy Symposium Proceedings, Jackson Hole: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 26 August; Agarwal, R.
and M. Kimball (2015), “Breaking Through the Zero Lower Bound”, IMF Working Paper No 15/224; and Rogoff, K.
(2014), “Costs and Benefits to Phasing Out Paper Currency”, NBER Working Paper No 20126.
This  analysis  does  not  consider  any  potential  disintermediation  of  the  banking  sector  as  a  result  of  the
introduction of a central bank digital currency.
See Cœuré, B. (2016), “Assessing the implications of negative interest rates”, speech at the Yale Financial
Crisis Forum, Yale School of Management, New Haven, 28 July; and Brunnermeier, M. and Y. Koby (2018), “ The
Reversal Interest Rate”, Princeton University, mimeo.
In this sense, considerations related to the introduction of universal reserves are also linked to the parallel
discussion on the future size of central bank balance sheets, where some academics argue that central banks
should keep balance sheets close to current levels in an effort to promote financial stability by providing a safe
asset (see, for example, Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson and J. C. Stein (2016), “The Federal Reserve’s Balance
Sheet as a Financial-Stability Tool”, paper prepared for the 2016 Economic Policy Symposium Proceedings,
Jackson Hole: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City).
For an illustration of this risk in relation to the Swiss “Vollgeld” initiative, see Jordan, T. (2018), “Why sovereign
money would hurt Switzerland”, speech at the Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance at the University of St.
Gallen, Zürich, 3 May.
See, for example, ECB (2017), “Report on financial structures”, October.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “The known unknowns of financial regulation”, panel contribution at the conference on
Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy IV, Washington D.C., 12 October.
See Financial Stability Board (2017), “Assessment of shadow banking activities: risks and the adequacy of post-
crisis policy tools to address financial stability concerns”, July.
This includes a more thorough discussion on the design features of universal reserves that could potentially
help mitigate a destabilising shift away from bank deposits.
Interbank rates can also be steered towards the main refinancing rate in an environment of excess reserves.
But this requires additional liquidity-absorbing operations.
Moreover, investors are limited in what they can invest with banks due to their own risk control frameworks.
See also Cœuré, B. (2017), “Bond scarcity and the ECB’s asset purchase programme”, speech at the Club de
Gestion Financière d’Associés en Finance, Paris, 3 April; and Cœuré, B. (2017), “Asset purchases, financial
regulation  and  repo  market  activity”,  speech  at  the  ERCC  General  Meeting  on  “The  repo  market:  market
conditions and operational challenges”, Brussels, 14 November.
See also Duffie, D. and A. Krishnamurthy (2016), “Passthrough Efficiency in the Fed’s New Monetary Policy
Setting”,  paper  prepared  for  the  2016  Economic  Policy  Symposium  Proceedings,  Jackson  Hole:  Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
It may be argued that overall financial conditions always and everywhere reflect a constellation of interest rates
embedding  different  term  and  credit  premia.  But  the  central  bank’s  control  of  short-term  interest  rates  is
essential to signal its monetary policy stance and helps market participants form their interest rate expectations.
See also D’Amico, S., R. Fan and Y. Kitsul (2013), “The Scarcity Value of Treasury Collateral: Repo Market
Effects of Security-Specific Supply and Demand Factors”, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper No
2013–22; and Corradin, S. and A. Maddaloni (2017), “The importance of being special: repo markets during the
crisis”, ECB Working Paper No 2065.
Depending on the bilateral arrangements between the CCP and the national central bank holding the account,
the  CCP  may  be  permitted  to  hold  positive  overnight  balances  on  the  settlement  account.  Such  overnight
balances have an interest rate of either 0% or the deposit facility rate, whichever is lower.
Under Article 127(2) first indent of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
