Jens Weidmann: Towards a more stable monetary union - what is
the right recipe?
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman
of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Conference “Economic
and Monetary Union – Deepening and Convergence”, Linz, 5 July 2018.
 1 Introduction
Dear Ewald
Dear President Mahrer
Ladies and gentlemen
It is always a great pleasure for me to visit Austria.
One year ago, almost to the day, I was in Vienna to talk about the future of the monetary union.
Back then, the key issue was how to ensure that the union is permanently preserved as a union
of stability. Today, we are still dealing with this issue. In fact, it concerns us now more than ever.
The meeting of the EU’s heads of state or government last week marked yet another milestone
on this journey.
As Austria  has  just  taken  over  the  presidency  of  the  Council  of  the  EU,  it  plays  a  key  role  in
moderating the reform process. In that sense, we are in exactly the right place to discuss the
way forward for the economic and monetary union.
I am particularly pleased to be here in Linz. Since it is my first visit, I am looking forward to tasting
Linzer Torte, the nutty jam-filled cake named after the town.
The first recorded recipes for Linzer Torte date from the 17th century. It is therefore believed to
be the oldest known cake recipe in the world. And from the outset, there wasn’t just one recipe,
but a range of variants with slight differences in ingredients and ways of preparing it.
Thus, there is one problem that every baker has to solve: which is the “right” recipe?
When we talk at this conference about the future of economic and monetary union, we are in a
somewhat similar position. There are a large number of proposals on the table concerning the
future  design  of  the  euro  area. All  proposals  share  the  ambition  to  make  the  monetary  union
more stable and more resilient. But it is an open question which of the recommendations are
appropriate to this end.
Allow me to approach this question in three stages. I will set out with the basic ingredients for a
stable union. As you will see, these are largely not in dispute. Then I will turn to the institutional
framework which, one might say, resembles the fundamentals of baking. Finally, I will discuss
some recent reform proposals – or specific baking instructions, if you like.
 
2 Basic ingredients
Turning  to  the  basic  ingredients,  you  won’t  be  surprised  that,  as  a  central  banker,  my
considerations start from monetary policy geared to price stability.
The European treaties provide us with an ideal framework for this: the Eurosystem is equipped
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
with  wide-ranging  independence  and  has  a  clear  mandate  with  price  stability  as  its  primary
objective. And that has paid off. With an inflation rate of 1.7% on an average of the past 20 years,
price developments have broadly been in line with our definition of price stability. The promise of
a stable currency has thus been kept.
But the success of monetary policy also depends on conditions which it cannot create on its
own. In particular, it is dependent on a stable financial system.
After  the  “Great  Inflation”  of  the  1970s,  advanced  economies  experienced  a  long  period  of
remarkable  economic  stability  that  came  to  be  known  as  the  “Great  Moderation". Academics
were still debating the specific role of monetary policy in bringing about this period of economic
calm when the global financial crisis ended it.
Important  lessons  have  been  drawn  from  the  crisis.  The  regulation  of  banks,  insurers  and
financial markets has been strengthened. And, along with the reform of traditional supervision,
macroprudential policy has been established as a new policy field. It can be deployed against
regional and sectoral pockets of exuberance in case they are suspected of posing a systemic
risk.
As the sovereign debt crisis has painfully reminded us, such risks can also arise from unsound
public finances.
In a monetary union, the risk of excessive debt is greater than in countries which have their own
currency. Saying that, I do not so much mean the lack of the option to service government debt
simply by printing money. For a central bank committed to price stability, that is a complete non-
starter anyway – whether in a monetary union or not.
Something else is more important: in a monetary union, the incentive to run up debt is greater
because the negative consequences are smaller. For instance, interest rates may not rise as
much in response to fiscal profligacy. In order to prevent such behaviour, the member states
agreed on joint fiscal rules. But rules can only be of help where there is a will to observe them.
In retrospect, ever since the euro was introduced, there has not been a single year in which all
countries  have  kept  their  new  borrowing  below  the  ceiling  of  3%  of  GDP.  The  Commission
projects that this will be achieved this year for the first time. That would be good news indeed, but
it is no cause for jubilation, as the Stability and Growth Pact calls for more to be achieved in two
respects.
First,  the  3%  mark  is  not  a  benchmark,  but  a  ceiling.  Fiscal  policy  should  be  focused  on  the
medium-term objective, which requires that member states have a structurally close-to-balance
budget.
Consequently, we have to consider the economic environment when assessing fiscal policy. And
the underlying conditions have improved remarkably in recent years: the robust economic upturn
means  higher  revenues  from  taxes  or  social  security  contributions  and  lower  outlays  for
unemployment benefits.
Moreover,  government  interest  spending  has  fallen  thanks  to  low  interest  rates. According  to
Bundesbank calculations, this has generated savings of approximately one trillion euros in the
1
euro area over nine years.
In  times  such  as  these,  fiscal  policy  should  not  be  satisfied  with  merely  adhering  to  the  3%
threshold: it should be aiming for the zero mark or surpluses. That would give governments the
leeway  they  need  to  take  fiscal  measures  in  the  future,  when  economies  may  enter  another
downturn.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
It would also help to reduce the overall debt burden, which – and that is my second point – is
much too high in some countries. As things currently stand, just 7 out of 19 euro area member
states meet the debt ceiling of 60% of GDP. For the euro area as a whole, debt stood at 87% of
GDP last year. And these figures do not account for implicit future burdens in connection with
demographic change. When considering such implicit debt, public finances in most countries –
and certainly including Germany – face demanding challenges.
Elevated debt levels must not become permanent, also because persistent breaches harm the
binding effect of the common fiscal rules. Benjamin Franklin already warned us that it is easier to
prevent bad habits than to break them.
Moreover,  high  levels  of  government  debt  limit  the  fiscal  room  for  manoeuvre.  They  make  it
difficult  to  channel  government  spending  towards  investment,  weaken  resilience  and  thereby
raise uncertainty, which is very likely to dampen economic growth in the long term.
And  this  brings  us  to  the  last  basic  ingredient  for  a  stable  monetary  union:  competitive
economies which are resilient enough to withstand or recover from adverse shocks.
Unlike  countries  with  their  own  currency,  euro  area  member  states  cannot  resort  to  the
instruments  of  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  flexibility  when  they  face  country-specific
shocks. And the single monetary policy looks only at the euro area as a whole. It can respond to
the  specific  situation  of  individual  member  states  only  in  so  far  as  they  affect  euro  area
aggregates.
In the wake of the crisis we witnessed that some countries bounced back quite quickly from the
economic slump, while in others growth remained low and unemployment stayed high for a long
time. If the monetary union is to function free of tensions, member countries have to improve the
underlying structures so that their economies become – or remain – competitive and resilient.
One element, for instance, is that easier market entry for new enterprises – and easier market
exit for failing firms – can unlock the innovative potential of companies. Both would facilitate what
the  great  Austrian  economist  Joseph  Schumpeter  called  “creative  destruction",  which  he
described  as  a  process  that  “incessantly  revolutionizes  the  economic  structure  from  within,
incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one."
OECD  research  suggests  that  policy-induced  exit  barriers  matter  for  productivity  growth,
2
because  unproductive  firms  that  do  not  exit  the  market  lock  workers  into  unproductive  jobs.
According to OECD estimates, reducing barriers to restructuring could, for instance, add more
3
than 2 percentage points to productivity growth within laggard firms in Italy.
Beyond  pro-competitive  regulations  for  product  markets,  there  is  a  wide  range  of  possible
policies  for  enhancing  resilience,  including  such  diverse  areas  as  the  quality  of  institutions,
4
political stability, infrastructure and labour market reforms.
 
3 Fundamentals of baking: an act of balancing
Ladies and gentlemen
We  have  identified  four  basic  ingredients  for  a  stable  union:  monetary  policy  geared  towards
price stability, a sound financial system, healthy public finances, and resilient economies.
Four basic ingredients are also needed for shortcrust pastry, the base of the Linzer Torte: flour,
sugar, eggs, and butter.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
One  secret  of  the  pastry  is  the  right  level  of  gluten.  It  provides  the  dough  with  stability  and
elasticity,  and  it  forms  when  proteins  in  the  flour  build  a  network  of  chains.  This  happens  by
adding liquid to the flour and kneading the mixture. However, the gluten content must be limited in
order to produce a tender short pastry. Too much gluten makes the dough tough. Therefore, it is
important to refrain from kneading too much.
A  similar  act  of  balancing  is  required  for  a  stable  monetary  union,  when  we  frame  the  basic
ingredients within a crisis-proof institutional set-up to provide the right incentives for responsible
behaviour. The particular architecture of monetary union doesn’t make things any easier. In the
euro  area  one  single  monetary  policy  co-exists  with  19  autonomous  fiscal  and  economic
policies.
The autonomy reflects and enables the diversity of member states in terms of their economic
and social structures, which is an expression of our societies’ distinct preferences and identities.
In  my  view,  such  great  variety  is  an  asset  and  contributes  to  Europe’s  richness.  It  is  not  by
chance  that  the  official  motto  of  the  European  Union  is  “in  varietate  concordia”  –  “united  in
diversity".
But the asymmetric construction also makes the monetary union vulnerable.
The original recipe as enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty focussed on a no-bailout clause that
would unleash the disciplining power of financial markets. This framework did not prevent the
crisis, nor did it provide any mechanisms or tools to overcome it.
Since the crisis, however, the design of the union has already been adapted in some important
aspects. The establishment of the ESM as a permanent rescue facility and the creation of the
banking  union  remedied  design  weaknesses  that  were  either  ignored  or  overlooked  when
monetary union was founded.
However,  the  euro  area  is  not  yet  permanently  crisis-proof. And  that’s  why  there  is  a  broad
consensus that further institutional reforms are needed.
The proposals that are currently under discussion differ on one point in particular, namely on the
extent to which risks should be shared. Some place their faith in greater joint liability, while others
would like to strengthen individual responsibility.
However,  the  true  challenge  consists  in  striking  a  balance  between  actions  and  liability.  That
means the decision-making power and responsibility for the effects of the decision have to be
placed on the same level. Responsible decisions are taken only if the decision-makers also bear
the consequences. Why, for example, should a government refrain from risky policies if, at the
end of the day, the community has to pay the bill?
In  the  2010  sequel  to  the  classic  movie  “Wall  Street”  the  fictional  character  Gordon  Gekko,
played  by  Michael  Douglas,  explains  the  problem  more  eloquently  than  I  ever  could:  “Moral
hazard is when somebody takes your money and is not responsible for it."
Rebalancing actions and liability by no means rules out a greater sharing of risks. In order to
maintain the balance, however, the relevant powers would have to be transferred along with the
risks to the European level.
Having said that, I can identify very few member states that display a willingness to forgo national
competences. Quite the opposite: over the past few weeks it has again become apparent that
those  who  may  call  the  loudest  for  greater  risk  sharing  explicitly  insist  on  their  national
sovereignty in fiscal policy matters.
And that highlights the current dilemma: demanding greater solidarity of the community and, at
the same time, rejecting any transfer of competences to the community does not match up. The
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
saying “You can’t have your cake and eat it too” also applies to this trade-off between national
sovereignty and risk sharing.
 
4 A closer look at some instructions
Ladies and gentlemen
At last week’s Euro Summit in Brussels, the heads of state or government identified the need for
further discussion in many areas with regard to the framework underpinning the EMU. This has
prompted a great deal of criticism and calls for faster decisions. But I am in favour of putting
thoroughness before speed. Further debate ought to take priority over preconceptions or hasty
decisions.
Nevertheless, the governments confirmed that further reductions in risks are necessary before
the  banking  union  can  be  completed  by  introducing  the  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme
(EDIS).
The  Bundesbank  has  long  recommended  that  risks  which  banks  incurred  under  national
responsibility should not be retroactively mutualised through the EDIS. To a casual observer the
proper sequencing has always been a matter of common sense. In the end, when you have just
crashed your car, it’s too late to take out insurance with comprehensive coverage.
Obviously,  reducing  risks  requires  addressing  the  legacy  of  non-performing  loans  on  banks’
balance sheets. But we cannot stop there. Going forward, more needs to be done to rein in future
risks  by  severing  the  sovereign-bank  nexus.  It  is  crucial  that  we  abandon  the  preferential
treatment  of  sovereign  debt  in  banking  regulation.  If  this  matter  is  not  resolved,  further  steps
towards completing the banking union would imply a significant increase in fiscal risk sharing.
In the coming months, discussions will also focus on possible new fiscal tools.
At this point, allow me a general word of caution. We need to be mindful of public debt: higher
budget deficits today mean higher taxes tomorrow.
Given the burden of government debt in the euro area, the creation of additional possibilities for
borrowing is precisely what we should not be aiming for. Instead, we should start by considering
the specific tasks that are to be performed at the European level and the value added that these
tasks are supposed to create.
As I set out earlier, the promotion of competitiveness and convergence is an important objective.
A euro area budget designed for this purpose could be a welcome advancement and refinement
of the existing European structural and investment funds.
That  does  not  necessarily  mean  an  increase  of  the  overall  size  of  fiscal  transfers.  Instead,  it
would be desirable for this to be part of a fundamental reform of the EU budget as a whole, with
the  focus  resting  squarely  on  designing  and  efficiently  carrying  out  projects  that  can  deliver
added value for Europe.
As far as new European stabilisation facilities are concerned, we have to keep in mind that a lot
of the declared stabilisation objectives can be achieved in a much less complex national form
within the existing framework.
In  the  event  of  a  recession,  member  states  with  sound  finances  can  themselves  take  fiscal
countermeasures. There is nothing in the European fiscal rules that stands in the way of such
action. And if a crisis threatens to overwhelm a member state financially, the ESM is on hand to
grant aid on condition that reforms are carried out.
 
5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  believe  there  is  considerable  promise  in  strengthening  the  ESM.  However,  it  is  important  to
preserve the principle of solidarity in connection with joint agreements, and not to weaken it by
granting largely unconditional access to the programmes.
Finally, further progress towards a capital markets union would foster private risk sharing within
Europe  and,  in  this  way,  facilitate  macroeconomic  adjustment  following  asymmetric  shocks.
After all, we should bear in mind that in federations like the USA and Canada, economic risks are
primarily shared through private channels. By comparison, fiscal policy takes a back seat, as
5
only 10% to 25% of risks are shared in this way.
The Bundesbank is therefore explicitly backing the project of the European capital markets union.
I am sure that this will be one of the key projects as we move ahead.
 
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
A permanently stable economic and monetary union will benefit all of us. It will create the basis
for a stable currency and robust economic growth, thus ultimately safeguarding our prosperity in
Europe.
It  would  be  wonderful  if  there  were  a  single  and  straightforward  recipe  for  eliminating  EMU’s
shortcomings.  But,  I  am  afraid,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  “right”  recipe.  Instead,  I  have
stressed that any viable reform must entail a rebalancing of actions and liability.
In a similar vein, what makes the Linzer Torte so distinguishable is the combination of the typical
lattice of dough and the layer of jam beneath. Nevertheless, the recipe can be adapted to different
tastes. Our Austrian hosts may forgive those who choose raspberry jam for their cakes. I, for my
part, prefer the traditional Linzer Torte with redcurrant jam.
When  it  comes  to  preferences,  however,  it  is  essential  that  voices  from  all  over  Europe  are
heard in the debate on the future of EMU. And that is exactly why conferences like this one are so
important.
Karl Popper, another great Austrian thinker, went even further when he wrote: “All that is needed
is a readiness to learn from one’s partner in the discussion, which includes a genuine wish to
understand what he intends to say. If this readiness is there, the discussion will be more fruitful
the more the partners’ backgrounds differ. Thus the value of a discussion depends largely upon
the variety of the competing views. Had there been no Tower of Babel, we should invent it."
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
Deutsche Bundesbank, The development of government interest expenditure in Germany and other euro-area
countries, Monthly Report, July 2017, 33–67.
M A McGowan and D Andrews (2016), Insolvency Regimes And Productivity Growth: A Framework For Analysis,
OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1309.
M A  McGowan,  D Andrews  and  V  Millot  (2016),  Insolvency  Regimes,  Technology  Diffusion  and  Productivity
Growth: Evidence from Firms in OECD Countries, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1425.
In particular, a Bundesbank study has argued that greater wage flexibility would probably have helped overcome
the  crisis  and  safeguard  employment  in  some  euro  area  countries.  See  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Wage
dynamics amid high euro-area unemployment, Monthly Report, December 2016, 33 55.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
Allard, C, P K Brooks, J C Bluedorn, F Bornhorst, K Christopherson, F Ohnsorge, T Poghosyan and an IMF staff
team (2013), Toward a Fiscal Union for the Euro Area, IMF Staff Discussion Note, 13/09.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
