Nestor A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Ensuring  price  stability  through  monetary
policy
Presentation by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the
central bank of the Philippines), during the Forum of the Economic Journalists’ Association of the
Philippines (EJAP), Manila, 28 August 2018.
 Secretary of Finance Carlos Dominguez III, DBM Secretary Benjamin Diokno, NEDA Director-
General  Ernesto  Pernia,  DOTr  Secretary  Arthur  Tugade,  DPWH  Secretary  Mark  Villar, 
esteemed guests, ladies and gentlemen, a pleasant morning to all of you. I would like to thank
EJAP President Louella Desiderio, the Economic Journalists’ Association of the Philippines for
inviting me to share the Bangko Sentral’s views on inflation, as well as our game plan to address
it.
In the first part, I will dissect the numbers to identify the real drivers of the recent spike in inflation.
I will then explain the BSP’s inflation outlook, or how we expect the inflation environment to evolve
over the next two years. Casting inflation against this proper context helps put into sharper focus
the  policy  measures  needed  to  address  the  issue.    I  maintain  that  not  only  have  the  BSP’s
monetary responses been timely and appropriate, but that tempering inflation and its side-effects
will require the coordinated efforts of various government agencies as well.
Let me begin with the recent inflation numbers. In the first seven months of 2018, year-on-year
headline  inflation  averaged  4.5  percent,  well  above  the  government’s  target  range  of  2  –  4
percent  for  the  year. As  this  chart  shows,  supply-side  factors  are  the  main  drivers  of  overall
inflation.  These  include  rising  international  oil  prices,  higher  excise  taxes,  and  weather
disturbances that affected food supply.
Meanwhile, in this next chart, we see how supply-side forces drive inflation on a month-on-month
basis, with factors such as the recent increase in jeepney fares and utility rates contributing to
the July inflation print.
There are two important points that I need to highlight in this chart. The first is that the inflation
momentum  is  slowing  down,  as  headline  inflation  has  generally  declined  in  month-on-month
terms from 0.9 percent in January 2018 to 0.5 percent in July 2018. In particular, after spiking in
the first quarter of 2018, the month-on-month changes for electricity, tobacco, and sweetened
beverages are seen to be slowly tapering off as we head deeper into the third quarter of the year.
This supports our analysis that the impact of the excise tax adjustments is transitory.
The second point is that supply-side factors have tremendous implications for monetary policy. In
particular,  central  bankers  generally  consider  these  supply-side  forces  as  beyond  the  direct
influence of monetary policy, which limits the effectiveness of monetary interventions. This is why
central  banks  typically  look  through  commodity  price  increases  in  a  transitory  supply  shock
episode. Instead, central banks undertake action when there are incipient signs of second-round
effects, like when price pressures spill over to the demand side, as we shall also see later.
Now, what do all these imply for inflation and monetary policy in the next few months?
Our baseline forecasts as of the recent Monetary Board meeting in August have generally shifted
higher relative to the forecasts during the policy meeting in June. Inflation is expected to remain
elevated in 2018 with the peak occurring sometime in the third quarter. Nonetheless, we expect
inflation  to  revert  to  the  inflation  target  range  of  2  –  4  percent  in  2019,  as  the  effect  of  the
transitory supply shocks dissipate.
We have seen similar pattern in the past. For example, in 2008, international oil prices and food
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
prices rose sharply, resulting in a year-on-year average inflation rate of 8.3 percent during the
year, before easing sharply to 4.2 percent in 2009.
What  did  the  BSP  do  to  ensure  price  stability  during  this  period? As  the  rise  in  prices  was
primarily supply-driven in origin, the BSP kept its policy rate steady and accommodated the first-
round effects.
However,  supply-side  pressures  persisted  and  gave  rise  to  second-round  effects  in  terms  of
wage and price-setting behavior. The BSP subsequently delivered timely and decisive action by
raising the key policy rates by a total of 100 basis points between May and August 2018 while
also strengthening its anti-inflation commentary.
            Similar to what happened in 2008, we see from our assessment that upside risks
continue to dominate the inflation outlook, as the sustained increase in core inflation points to a
possible broadening of price pressures. Key upside risks include additional wage adjustments;
pending  petitions  for  adjustments  in  transport  fares  and  electricity  rates;  faster-than-expected
monetary policy normalization in advanced economies; and the proposed increase in the NFA’s
buying price of rice from farmers.
Conversely, the main downside risks to inflation are the following: slower global economic growth
due  to  protectionist  policies  in  advanced  economies;  geopolitical  tensions  in  the  Middle  East,
along with potentially lower rice prices resulting from the proposed replacement of quantitative
restrictions with tariffs and the deregulation of rice imports.
At the same time, the BSP recognizes the potential price pressures of excessive volatility in the
foreign exchange market and remains vigilant on the impact of sustained peso depreciation on
inflation expectations.
In sum, the BSP held the policy rate steady in the first quarter of 2018 amid the supply-driven
inflation outturn. However, information beginning in the second quarter suggests incipient signs of
second-round  effects,  given  the  potential  broadening  of  price  pressures,  the  continued
dominance of upside risks to the inflation outlook, and the elevated inflation expectations over the
policy  horizon.  These  considerations  prompted  the  BSP  to  raise  the  policy  rate  by  25  basis
points (bps) in May 2018. To enhance our anti-inflation signal and help bring inflation toward a
target-consistent path over the medium term, we followed this up with another 25-bps hike in
June, and a stronger 50-bps hike earlier this month.  
These monetary responses were necessary to help rein in the public’s inflation expectations and
prevent sustained supply-side pressures from giving rise to further second-round effects, even
as we continue to expect average inflation to ease to within the inflation target of 2–4 percent in
2019.  Further, the hikes are meant to ease excessive market pressure on the peso and address
the potential impact of excessive peso volatility on inflation.
Looking ahead, the BSP’s decisions on monetary policy will continue to be data-dependent and
guided by our inflation forecasts. 
Sustained domestic growth also suggests that the economy can accommodate monetary policy
tightening. This growth is broad-based, thereby providing more opportunities across all segments
of society.
In the meantime, our external position is strong. Gross international reserves of US$76.9 billion
as  of  July  2018  remain  more  than  adequate,  covering  7.4  months  of  imports  of  goods  and
payments of services and income. 
Our external debt metrics are also favorable as external debt to GDP ratio continues to decline.
On the current account, the moderate deficit is driven by robust growth of the Philippine economy
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
which  requires  higher  imports  of  capital  goods.  Our  imports  are  mostly  capital  goods,  raw
materials,  and  intermediate  products,  which  are  necessary  for  the  economy’s  sustained
expansion.
The peso continues to be flexible and market-determined, which allow us to conduct independent
monetary policy focused on domestic conditions. The peso has likewise maintained its external
price competitiveness against baskets of currencies of all trading partners and trading partners in
advanced and developing economies. Nevertheless, we are cognizant that the peso can also be
subject  to  excessive  volatility  especially  in  light  of  global  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate
developments. We have to take these into account.
At the same time, the BSP recognizes that because monetary responses do not fully address
the  root  causes  of  inflation,  addressing  inflation  will  require  mitigating  measures  from  other
government agencies in order to temper the impact of supply-side forces on prices and social
welfare.  
Before  I  end  my  presentation,  let  me  stress  out  that  while  the  recent  inflation  outturns  are
underpinned by factors outside the direct influence of monetary policy such as the higher excise
tax,  the  rise  in  international  oil  prices,  and  adverse  weather  conditions,  the  BSP  reiterates  its
strong  commitment  and  readiness  to  take  all  necessary  policy  actions  to  safeguard  the
government’s inflation targets and deliver on our primary mandate of price stability.
Thank you and good day!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
