Philip  Lowe:  Opening  statement  to  the  House  of  Representatives
Standing Committee on Economics
Opening statement by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Sydney, 16 February 2018.
Chair
Members of the Committee
 My  colleagues  and  I  welcome  these  opportunities  to  explain  our  thinking  on  the  Australian
economy and to answer your questions. We view it as an important part of the accountability
process for the Reserve Bank.
Since  we  last  met  in  August,  the  improvement  in  the  global  economy  has  continued  and
forecasts for world growth have been revised up. Rather than just one or two economies doing
better,  the  improvement  has  been  broadly  based,  with  a  synchronised  upswing  taking  place.
Partly  as  a  result,  both  international  trade  and  commodity  prices  have  picked  up  and  this  is
helping the Australian economy.
The stronger economic growth has resulted in unemployment rates falling further. In a number of
countries,  the  unemployment  rate  is  now  below  conventional  estimates  of  full  employment.
Inflation has remained low, partly reflecting the fact that wage growth has been quite subdued
despite the low unemployment rates. Low inflation has meant low interest rates. And for much of
past year, volatility in asset prices was also unusually low.
Over recent times, many investors have been proceeding on the basis that this combination of
strong growth, low unemployment, low inflation and low interest rates would persist. Many also
expected  the  low  volatility  in  asset  prices  to  continue. A  couple  of  weeks  ago  we  saw  a  re-
evaluation of some of these assumptions by some investors, with the catalyst being a pick-up in
wage growth in the United States. The result has been an increase in bond yields, a decline in
equity prices and increased market volatility.
While the exact timing of changes in investors’ assumptions is difficult to predict, the fact that
some reassessment took place, at some point, is not that surprising. Above-trend growth at a
time  of  low  unemployment  should  be  expected  to  see  inflation  lift,  even  if  that  lift  is  gradual
because of factors that are affecting wage and price pressures globally. To add to the mix, fiscal
policy in some countries, most noticeably the United States, is becoming more expansionary. So
I  expect  rising  inflation  pressures  will  figure  more  prominently  in  discussions  of  the  global
economy than they have for some time.
Another important international influence on our economy is what happens in China. Like other
economies, China is benefiting from the global upswing. At the same time, there are ongoing
efforts to increase the sustainability of China’s economic growth, both in terms of its financing
and  the  environment.  These  efforts  are  affecting  both  the  structure  of  finance  in  the  Chinese
economy and commodity markets. The Chinese authorities face the difficult challenge of getting
the balance right between containing medium-term risks and supporting near-term growth, and
we continue to watch developments there closely.
I would now like to turn to the Australian economy. On balance, the news over the summer has
generally  had  a  more  positive  tone  than  it  has  had  for  a  while.  For  some  time  we  had  been
expecting GDP growth to be a bit stronger in 2018 and 2019 than in the recent past. The recent
data have been consistent with this. Over this year and next we expect GDP growth to be a bit
above 3 per cent, which is faster than our current estimate of trend growth for the Australian
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy. This outlook has not been affected by the recent volatility in the equity market.
The Australian  labour  market  has  been  noticeably  stronger  than  we  were  expecting,  which  is
good news. Over the past year, the number of people with a job increased by 400 000, and there
has been a marked increase in the participation rate for women. We don’t expect a repeat of
these very strong outcomes in 2018, but we do expect employment growth to be fast enough to
see a further gradual reduction in the unemployment rate. The unemployment rate, though, is
likely to remain above conventional estimates of full employment in Australia for some time.
A range of business indicators have also improved since we last met. Business conditions have
lifted and so too has the outlook for capital expenditure. It would be an exaggeration to say that
animal spirits have fully returned, but the mood has certainly brightened in much of the business
community. There are a number of reasons for this, but in parts of the country the lift in mood is
being helped by the large infrastructure projects underway. Not only are these projects creating
jobs today, but they are building much needed productive capacity for the future.
Against this general backdrop of improving conditions, one uncertainty remains the strength of
consumer spending. In the September quarter, spending growth was quite weak, especially for
discretionary  items.  More  recently,  the  retail  trade  figures  have  been  better  and  suggest  a
stronger outcome for the December quarter.
Most households are experiencing only slow growth in their incomes and many expect that this
will continue for some time yet. This lowering of expectations about income growth is likely to be
affecting spending, especially in an environment of high levels of household debt. A pick-up in
income growth, by way of ongoing increases in jobs and stronger wage growth should help here.
We continue to look carefully at household balance sheets. On balance, our assessment is that
there  has  been  some  containment  of  the  build-up  of  risk  in  this  area.  This  is  a  positive
development.  Lending  standards  are  stricter  than  they  were  previously  and  there  has  been  a
welcome decline in the share of interest-only loans, following measures taken by APRA. Housing
credit growth has also slowed a bit, especially to investors. In the property market, prices are no
longer rising in Sydney, and have fallen for higher-priced houses. The Melbourne market has also
cooled  somewhat.  Increased  supply  of  housing,  changes  in  the  nature  and  availability  of
financing, and some reduction in foreign demand have all played a role. While the Reserve Bank
does  not  target  housing  prices  or  household  debt,  it  would  be  a  good  outcome  if  we  now
experienced a run of years in which the rate of growth of housing costs and debt did not outstrip
growth in our incomes in the way that they did over the past five years.
In terms of CPI inflation, the picture is pretty much the same as it was when we met six months
ago. Inflation, in headline and underlying terms, is still running at a little under 2 per cent. This is
higher than the inflation rate a year ago, but inflation does remain low.
The  most  recent  data  confirmed  themes  that  we  have  been  seeing  for  some  time.  Strong
competition from new entrants and changes in retailers’ business models are putting downward
pressure on the prices of consumer durables and groceries. The prices of many of these goods
are lower than they were a few years ago. This is good news for consumers, although not for
some retailers. We do expect to see some lessening of this downward pressure on prices at
some point, although not for a while yet.
The second ongoing theme is higher prices for utilities and tobacco. Both of these have added
materially to the CPI over the past year, and further increases are expected.
The third theme is the subdued increase in wages feeding through into subdued price increases,
particularly for a range of market services. This, too, is likely to continue for a while yet.
We have discussed on previous occasions the reasons for the subdued wage increases. These
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
include  the  continuing  spare  capacity  in  the  economy  after  the  unwinding  of  the  mining
investment  boom;  the  heightened  sense  of  competition  due  to  globalisation  and  technological
change;  and  changes  in  bargaining  arrangements.  These  factors  are  still  at  work,  although
through  our  liaison  program  we  hear  reports  of  pockets  where  the  labour  market  is  tight  and
firms are finding it hard to find workers with the right skills. In some of these areas wages are
now rising more quickly than previously, but many firms remain wary of adding to their cost base
in the current environment.
Over time, we expect wage growth to pick up as the labour market strengthens further. The pick-
up, though, is likely to be gradual. This increase in wage growth and the more general reduction
in spare capacity in the economy are expected to contribute to inflation picking up as well. But to
continue  the  theme,  this  pick-up,  too,  is  expected  to  be  only  gradual.  This  year  and  next,  we
expect CPI inflation to be between 2 and 2½ per cent.
As you would be aware, the Reserve Bank Board has held the cash rate at 1½ per cent since
August 2016. This represents an accommodative setting of monetary policy, aimed at supporting
the economy and employment, and returning inflation towards the mid-point of the medium-term
target range. As we have discussed with this Committee on previous occasions, the Board has
sought to strike a balance between these benefits of monetary stimulus and the medium-term
risks associated with the increase in the already high level of household debt. We have sought to
steer a middle course, promoting sustainable growth in the economy.
Over the past year the economy has been moving in the right direction. Progress has been made
in reducing unemployment and having inflation return to around the mid-point of the target range.
And on the financial side, the build-up of risks in household balance sheets has been contained,
although risks there remain.
Over  the  coming  year  we  expect  to  make  further  progress.  Our  central  scenario  for  the
Australian  economy  is  for  a  further  reduction  in  the  unemployment  rate  and  an  increase  in
inflation towards the mid-point of the target range. Of course, this is just the central scenario, and
there are other scenarios as well.
But  if  this  is  how  things  play  out,  at  some  point  it  will  be  appropriate  to  have  less  monetary
stimulus and for interest rates in Australia to move up, as is already happening in some other
countries. In other words, it is more likely that the next move in interest rates will be up, rather
than down.
The timing of any future move will depend upon the extent and pace of progress that we make in
reducing the unemployment rate and having inflation return to target. As things currently stand,
we  expect  that  progress  to  be  steady,  but  to  be  only  gradual.  Given  this  assessment,  the
Reserve Bank Board does not see a strong case for a near-term adjustment of monetary policy.
We will, of course, keep that judgement under review at future meetings.
Before finishing, I would like to mention a couple of developments on the payments side of the
Bank’s responsibilities.
The first is the launch this week of the New Payments Platform. This is a major piece of national
infrastructure, which will benefit households and businesses. Its development is the result of a
very complex collaborative industry effort over many years. This new payment system will allow
Australians to make faster, simpler and smarter payments on a 24/7 basis. One element of this
is  the  use  of  PayIDs  instead  of  having  to  know  BSBs  and  account  numbers  for  many
transactions. A major focus of the development effort has been security and to protect people
from fraud. The process for initially registering PayIDs, which is now underway, requires users to
verify  their  identity.  The  new  platform  also  requires  users  to  confirm  the  recipient  before  a
payment is completed. We would be happy to discuss further details of the new arrangements
during the course of this hearing.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second development on the payments side is the release yesterday of the design of the new
$50 banknote. This new banknote will be issued into circulation from October this year. There are
more $50 banknotes in circulation than any other note, so it is a big task. All up, there are 700
million  $50s  on  issue  –  they  are  used  heavily  in  transactions  as  well  as  being  the  main ATM
banknote.
The new $50 banknote will feature the same world-leading security features as the $5 and $10
banknotes, including the clear top-to-bottom window. It will also have four bumps to help people
with impaired vision recognise the note. As with the current $50 banknote, the new one honours
two very significant Australians: David Unaipon and Edith Cowan.
While these two Australians came from very different backgrounds, they were both significant
pioneers.  David  Unaipon  was Australia’s  first  published Aboriginal  author,  writing  about,  in  his
owns words, Aboriginal ‘customs, beliefs and imaginings’. The micro-text on the banknote is an
extract from his book, the Legendary Tales of the Australian Aborigines . Edith Cowan was the
first  female  member  of  an  Australian  parliament,  being  elected  to  the  Western  Australian
Parliament in 1921. I am pleased to be able to say that the new banknote contains text from her
first speech to that parliament. We are proud to have these two distinguished Australians on our
most widely used banknote.
Thank you. My colleagues and I look forward to answering your questions.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
