  Keynote Address by Ms Caroline Abel 
Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles at the  
Launch of the Financial Markets Index 
12 April 2018 
Venue: Eden Bleu Hotel  
  
 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentleman, 
 
Good afternoon. 
 
It is an honour and indeed, a great pleasure for me to be afforded the opportunity to 
address this forum, which is launching the Barclays Africa Group Financial Markets 
Index 2017. 
 
The development of financial markets is of the utmost importance for the development 
of the economy. I am not the first to make this statement, nor will I be the last. It is a 
fact that cannot be over-emphasised, as a stable and well developed financial market 
is a key part of the foundation for a healthy economy. 
 
The Index that is being launched today, provides us with a good analysis of the state 
of affairs of the financial markets in Africa. Most importantly for Seychelles, it provides 
us with a marker of where we are and the areas which we need to focus on in order to 
increase the level and efficiency of our financial market. 
 
Out of the 17 African countries that feature in this Index, Seychelles has scored 22 out 
of a possible 100 across the pillars that were assessed, with an overall ranking of 16. 
The  question  we  need  to  ask  ourselves  is  this:  how  can  we  get  the  Seychelles 
economy to mature and strive for continued improvement in our financial market? 
 
The indication of the way forward is clear. As per the analysis, we need to improve on 
the depth and breadth of our financial market, increase our access to foreign exchange 
and bring our regulatory environment on par with international norms.  
 
  However, the challenge is to get on that path and stay the course. Small economies 
like  ours  do  not  necessarily  have  big  opportunities  for  trade  in  financial  assets  and 
what little opportunities we have, there is a lack of diversity of assets that are traded. 
 
Nevertheless, our placement on the Index is one that should spur us to move forward. 
With  the  recent  developments  in  our  financial  sector,  combined  with  our  efforts  in 
improving  transparency  and  developing  tighter  and  sounder  regulations,  I  firmly 
believe  that  there  is  much  hope  for  the  development  of  the  financial  market  in 
Seychelles, which will allow us to contribute towards the greater development of not 
just our own economy, but also the economy of the African continent. 
 
One area that we are already working on is the development of the foreign exchange 
market. I anticipate that the 2-day workshop currently underway on Foreign Exchange 
Trading,  being  facilitated  by  Barclays  Bank  Seychelles  with  the  participation  of  the 
local  banks  and  the  Central  Bank,  will  mark  a  milestone  in  the  development  of  the 
foreign exchange market in Seychelles and that we will see an improvement of the 
interbank  market  in  foreign  exchange,  as  well  as  the  introduction  of  new  foreign 
exchange-denominated products, as we align ourselves with the target of  improving 
access to foreign exchange.  To the participants, I would say let us make the most of 
this exposure.  
 
I would like to reiterate my pleasure for being at today’s forum and I look forward to 
the fruitful deliberations that are to follow.  I now declare the Official Launch of the 
Africa Financial Markets Index Research in Seychelles. 
 
Thank you. 
  