Yves Mersch: Financial stability and the European Central Bank
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the ESCB Legal Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 6 September 2018.
Introduction
 The growing importance of “financial stability” in the post-crisis public debate
The  recent  crisis  put  financial  stability  at  the  centre  of  public  discussions  on  how  to  improve
economic resilience. What should the institutional architecture of financial stability look like and
what should be the role of central banks in this context? While such questions have largely been
settled regarding price stability, no similar consensus exists when it comes to financial stability.
There is neither a settled institutional template for financial stability nor a consensus about the
role of central banks. The economic literature has suggested various models, some of which
have  been  tested  around  the  world.   In  my  speech  today,  however,  I  will  not  go  into  the
economics of financial stability. I will instead approach the issue from a legal perspective. The
question I will address is: what role does EU law ascribe to the ECB in contributing to the stability
of the financial system?
The general constitutional framework
1
When we talk about the role of the ECB from a legal perspective, we are essentially referring to
its tasks, mandates and competences. In the compound EU legal order, these are covered by a
set  of  basic  principles.  First  and  foremost,  the  EU  is  a  union  based  on  the  rule  of  law. This
means that every action taken by EU institutions needs to be founded on Union law and ultimately
on the Treaties. This fundamental constitutional value has two manifestations.
2
3
First,  the principle  of  conferral  requires  that  the  EU  should  act  only  within  the  limits  of  the
competences conferred upon it by the Member States in the Treaties to attain the objectives set
out therein.   Moreover,  in  exercising  its  competences,  the  EU  must  respect  the  principles  of
subsidiarity and proportionality.  Second, the principle of institutional balance provides that all EU
institutions  must  act  in  accordance  with  the  powers  conferred  on  them  by  the  Treaties  and
respect  the  competences  of  other  EU  institutions.  These  two  principles  should  guide  the
discussion on the role of the ECB in financial stability. They also highlight the fact that getting the
answer right is ultimately a rule-of-law issue.
4
As I will argue today, the authors of the Treaties did not make financial stability an ECB objective.
The ECB’s only primary responsibility is price stability. The Treaty-makers did not provide either
for specific financial stability-oriented instruments or for a dedicated financial stability institutional
set-up at the Union level, if I abstract from the coordination role of the European Systemic Risk
Board (ESRB). And without an objective and dedicated instruments, the Treaties could not have
conferred on the ECB a stand-alone task. In financial stability, thus, the ECB has only a limited,
contributory role according to the Treaties.
Financial stability in ECB law
Financial stability: a protean concept
The Treaties do not contain a definition of financial stability. Like price stability, financial stability is
an objective of public policy. Unlike price stability, however, financial stability remains a protean
concept, with various manifestations and different understandings of its basic aspects.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, the notion of financial stability is nebulous and much more difficult to capture than price
stability. The term financial stability is sometimes used in a very broad way to cover objectives
and institutions that encompass the stability of the economy as a whole and also include the
financial stability of governments, as in the Treaty establishing the European Stability Mechanism
or in the title of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF). In my speech today, I will use the
term financial stability in a narrow sense to refer to the “stability of the financial system”, which is
the wording used in Article 127(5) of the TFEU.
5
But  even  within  this  narrow  meaning,  there  is  no  single  or  even  widely  accepted  definition  of
financial stability.   Some  authors  and  institutions  have  tried  to  arrive  at  a  positive  definition  of
financial  stability  by  describing  its  essential  features,  while  others  start  from  its  absence  –
financial instability.  The  ECB  approaches  financial  stability  in  terms  of  systemic  risk:  financial
stability is a state whereby the build-up of systemic risk is prevented. In turn, systemic risk is
“the risk that the provision of necessary financial products and services by the financial system
will  be  impaired  to  a  point  where  economic  growth  and  welfare  may  be  materially  affected”.
Simply  put,  financial  stability  means  that  the  ﬁnancial  system  is  expected  to  withstand
unforeseeable events or shocks without major disruption and to continue providing its services to
the economy.   Compare  this  definition  with  the  much  more  concrete  ECB  definition  of  price
stability, which is a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the
euro area of below 2%. In the pursuit of price stability, the ECB aims to maintain inflation rates
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. These two definitions clearly illustrate that, when
it comes to financial stability, we are operating at a much more abstract level, with considerably
8
vaguer metrics.
6
7
Financial stability and monetary policy also differ in terms of the instruments they use to pursue
their objectives. Monetary policy has a fairly settled set of tools – first and foremost, at least in
conventional  times,  the  short-term  interest  rate.  Financial  stability,  however,  has  neither  a
primary instrument nor a standard taxonomy of instruments. Instead, there are various different
instruments, ranging from those from the toolbox of the supervisory regulations (Article 5 of the
SSMR), such as maximum loan-to-value limits and countercyclical capital buffers, to taxation, as
well  as  interest  rates.  Could  this  become  an  example  of  policymaking  with  other  people’s
instruments?
Some  of  these  instruments  are  used  at  national  level,  while  others  are  deployed  in  a  certain
sector or with regard to an individual financial institution. Many of these instruments which have
financial stability as their stated aim advance macroprudential policies. And so macroprudential
policies, like financial stability, are often a concept onto which “anyone could project their own
sense of priorities”  – priorities that often compete with each other.
9
Third, unlike price stability, financial stability does not fall under the exclusive competence of a
single  institution.  Instead,  various  actors  at  national,  supranational  and  international  level  are
given  different  roles  and  responsibilities  in  pursuing  financial  stability.  Finance  ministries,
supervisors, expert bodies (the ESRB, national macroprudential committees and/or regulators
which diverge widely in terms of their powers and composition), central banks and the Basel-
based Financial Stability Board have all been ascribed a role in financial stability.
Thus, in all these respects, financial stability is still not a settled field of public policy in the same
way that price stability is. And this is not just a matter of theoretical interest. It also has a bearing
on the question of who should ultimately be responsible in this field: experts or political bodies. I
will come back to this point at the end of my speech.
What is the role of the ECB in the field of financial stability?
Let me now come to my basic question. What role does EU law, and especially primary EU law,
foresee for the ECB in the field of financial stability?
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The basic Treaty provision to start from is Article 127 of the TFEU under the chapter on monetary
policy, which contains the objectives and tasks of the ECB/ESCB. This Article does not explicitly
point to any clear, unambiguous role for the ECB regarding financial stability. Financial stability is
not among the objectives of the ECB enshrined in the first paragraph of Article 127. The primary
objective is defined there as being the maintenance of price stability. And, without prejudice to
this objective, the ECB has a mandate to support the general economic policies in the Union with
a view to contributing to the general objectives of the Union. Nor is financial stability one of the
four basic tasks referred to in the second paragraph of Article 127. First in the list is, of course,
the basic task of defining and implementing the monetary policy of the Union. This basic task is
accompanied by certain monetary tools, specifically provided for in primary law.
 As I already
mentioned, no such tools are provided for in the area of financial stability.
The ECB’s contributory role in financial stability
10
The  only  explicit  reference  to  financial  stability  in  Article  127  is  in  the  fifth  paragraph.  This
paragraph sets out the ESCB’s duty to “contribute” to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by
“competent authorities” relating to the stability of the financial system. Thus, the ESCB is given a
contributory role in the field of financial stability. That contribution can be exercised through its
monetary  policy  task  or  its  supervisory  task,  both  of  which  embed  financial  stability  as  a
contribution to competent authorities.
What is the scope of the ECB’s contributory role?
The concept of a “contribution” appears not just in Article 127 of the TFEU. It is also used by the
Treaties  to  describe  the  allocation  of  powers  and  to  demarcate  competences  between  the
Member States and the EU in a variety of fields. For example, Article 170(1) of the TFEU provides
that  “the  Union  shall contribute  to  the  establishment  and  development  of  trans-European
networks in the areas of transport, telecommunications and energy infrastructures”. The same
formulation is used in Article 169(1) of the TFEU regarding consumer protection. In these fields,
the  EU  has  a  shared  competence  with  the  Member  States.  There  is,  however,  a  significant
difference between these Articles and Article 127(5). In the case of such shared competences,
the EU is given the power to contribute directly to the achievement of the objectives. When it
comes to financial stability, however, the ECB is tasked with contributing to the smooth conduct
of policies pursued by the competent authorities. There is a critical difference here.
 If the ECB
were tasked with contributing to the attainment of financial stability, it would – like the EU in the
field of networks – have leeway to identify policies that better serve the achievement of this aim.
However, the ECB’s role in contributing to financial stability would instead seem to be equivalent
to the category of Union competences with the narrowest possible scope, namely supplementary
or supporting competences.
 In these fields, the EU can only support actions of the Member
States  “without thereby superseding their competence in these areas”.
11
12
13
14
Thus it is clear that the ECB has neither exclusive powers in the field of financial stability nor
competence to act on its own. “Contribution” does not establish a competence for independent
and  stand-alone  action.  To  contribute  to  the  attainment  of  an  aim  is  to support it;  the  basic
identification of how the aim of financial stability is to be achieved thus lies with other “competent”
institutions. And so does the primary responsibility.
Exactly how the ECB should carry out this contributory role is not specified in either the Treaty or
the Statute of the ESCB – unlike monetary policy, for which the ECB’s functions and operations
are set out in detail. The ECB can use its usual tools, to the extent that they are suitable, to
contribute  to  financial  stability.  The  ECB’s advisory  functions  are  of  great  relevance  in  this
context.  Article  127(4)  of  the  TFEU  calls  for  consultation  on  the  basic  tasks  listed  in  the
preceding paragraph. Only then does paragraph (5) mention financial stability, but the Council
decision implementing this part of the Treaty also included the obligation to consult on national
acts that influence the stability of financial institutions and markets. Regarding Union legislation,
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
in the chapter on prudential supervision, Article 25 of the Statute of the ESCB states that the
ECB “may offer advice to and be consulted by the Council and the Commission on the scope
and implementation of Union legislation” relating to the stability of financial system. According to
Article  141(2)  of  the  TFEU,  for  Member  States  with  a  derogation  the  ECB  “shall  …  hold
consultations concerning issues falling within the competence of the national central banks and
affecting the stability of financial institutions and markets”.
In any case, the contributory role of the ECB needs to support its monetary policy tasks or the
tasks  conferred  upon  it  relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  other
financial institutions.
Monetary policy and financial stability
As Article 25 of the Statute of the ESCB refers to prudential supervision, Article 127(5) is the only
reference  to  the  ECB/ESCB.  It  is  also  interesting  to  note  that  the  advisory  functions  are
mentioned in the Treaty after the basic tasks and before financial stability, while in the Statute
they follow Article 3.3.
This leads to the following considerations:
First, it should be noted that the ECB, when pursuing the objective of maintaining price stability,
follows a two-pillar strategy that takes account of monetary and economic analysis, and includes
financial stability considerations. The ECB’s two-pillar strategy forms the basis for the Governing
Council's overall assessment of the risks to price stability and its monetary policy decisions.
15
Moreover, the ECB may use its ancillary policy tools to address financial stability to the extent
that this is necessary to carry out its basic tasks.
 Under such circumstances, financial stability
is not the ultimate aim of ECB policy but a means to fulfil its basic tasks. In principle, this applies
to all the basic tasks of the ECB listed in Article 127(2) of the TFEU, but it is most important for
monetary  policy.  Financial  stability,  namely  the  proper  functioning  of  the  financial  system,  is
necessary  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.
  In Gauweiler,  the  Court  accepted  that
measures  intended  to  preserve  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  may  be  regarded  as
pertaining  to  the  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability,  thus  falling  within  the  mandate  of  the
ECB.
 Addressing  issues  of  financial  stability  in  order  to  promote  price  stability  is  therefore
possible with two caveats:
16
17
First,  price  stability  enjoys  primacy.  Within  the  current  legal  framework,  and  by  contrast  with
other jurisdictions, price stability is the ECB’s only primary objective. If there is a conflict between
price stability, which is primarily concerned with the business cycle, and financial stability, which
is more concerned with the financial cycle, and some trade-off between the two is required, the
Treaties require primacy to be given to price stability. Financial stability cannot take precedence
over price stability.
Second,  financial  stability-related  policies  need  to  comply  with  the  principle  of  proportionality.
According  to  Article  5(4)  of  the  TEU,  Union  institutions  shall  observe  the  principle  of
proportionality  when  exercising  the  competences  conferred  on  them.  The  principle  of
proportionality was also used by the Court of Justice to assess the legality of the ECB’s Outright
Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme as a means to achieve price stability. According to the
principle  of  proportionality,  the  content  and  form  of  Union  action  shall  not  exceed  what  is
necessary to achieve the objectives of the Treaties.
 This means that ECB policies regarding
financial stability that serve monetary policy need to be appropriate for maintaining price stability
and should not go beyond what is necessary to achieve this objective.
18
19
In principle, therefore, financial stability-oriented instruments can be used if necessary to carry
out  the  basic  tasks,  but  subject  to  serving  the  primary  objective  of  price  stability  and  within
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
proportionality limitations.
Financial stability and the prudential supervision of credit institutions
The  other  aspect  of  ECB  involvement  in  financial  stability  is  through  the  ECB’s  prudential
supervisory  role. Article  127(6)  of  the  TFEU  (also  reflected  in Article  25  of  the  Statute  of  the
ESCB)  permits  the  Council  to  confer  specific  tasks  upon  the  ECB  concerning  the  prudential
supervision of credit institutions and other financial institutions with the exception of insurance
undertakings. This provision was activated through the establishment of the Single Supervisory
Mechanism (SSM) under the SSM Regulation. As made explicit in the SSM Regulation, the Union
legislator  conferred  prudential  supervisory  tasks  on  the  ECB  with  a  view  to  contributing  to
financial stability within the Union and each Member State.
20
Article 5 of the SSM Regulation also makes provision for certain macroprudential tasks and tools.
These competences to require capital buffers to be held by credit institutions in addition to own
funds  requirements,  including  countercyclical  buffer  rates  and  other  measures  aimed  at
addressing systemic or macroprudential risks, are conferred on national authorities. This reflects
the  fact  that  primary  responsibility  for  macroprudential  policies  lies  with  national  authorities.  If
deemed necessary, the ECB, instead of national authorities, may apply higher requirements for
capital buffers than those applied by the national authorities and more stringent measures aimed
at addressing systemic or macroprudential risks. The procedure for adopting these top-up ECB
measures  may  be  triggered  only  at  the  initiative  of  the  national  authorities,  emphasising  the
national character of macroprudential competences.
The microprudential and macroprudential tools contained in the SSM Regulation are thus specific
aspects  of  the  financial  stability  mandate  of  the  ECB,  which  is  based  on  the  specific
authorisation in Article 127(6) of the TFEU. Neither the SSM Regulation in general, however, nor
Article 5 in particular confers a general competence on the ECB in the fields of financial stability
and macroprudential policy.
Democracy, independence and financial stability
When we interpret the competences of public institutions we are essentially discussing the limits
of their powers. As with any discussion on public powers, the aspect of legitimacy also needs to
be  considered.  In  the  field  of  financial  stability  and  macroprudential  policies,  a  multitude  of
institutions are involved, such as parliaments, EU political institutions, national governments, and
expert  bodies  at  both  the  European  and  the  national  level.  Some  of  these  actors  derive  their
legitimacy from their independent expertise, others from their democratic accountability. What
role  each  of  them  should  play  in  achieving  financial  stability  is  intimately  connected  with  the
source of their legitimacy.
This brings me back to the first point of my speech: financial stability might be an objective less
well suited to independent expertise-based bodies than a price stability objective. Even though
the Treaty does not give a definition of price stability, it is an objective that is quantifiable. The
ECB Governing Council aims to maintain inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term. Putting a figure on price stability makes monetary policy more transparent and provides a
clear and measurable yardstick against which European citizens can hold the ECB accountable.
For financial stability no such clear yardstick exists. Without clear objectives, however, it is much
more difficult to measure the performance of independent, expertise-based institutions and hold
them  to  account.
  Beyond  that,  the  pursuit  of  financial  stability  often  involves  choices  with
stronger  distributional  implications.  This  is  an  additional  argument  in  favour  of  the  ultimate
responsibility  remaining  in  the  political  sphere.  Financial  stability  is  thus  a  policy  area  where
expert  bodies  and  politically  accountable  institutions  are  called  on  to  cooperate,  with  no  one
having  exclusive  responsibility.  In  this  field,  expert  bodies  with  strong  guarantees  of
independence, such as the ECB, might be better suited to “contributing” in an advisory capacity
21
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
while  the  “ultimate  responsibility”  is  rather  borne  by  institutions  embedded  in  political
accountability arrangements at the national level. Otherwise political pressures to adopt one or
the other stance in questions of financial stability might also threaten central bank independence.
Conclusions
At  the  time  the  Treaties  were  drafted,  financial  stability  and  the  potential  differences  between
financial and business cycles were not a primary consideration. The Treaty provisions do not
point towards a clear, unambiguous role for the ECB. Certain economic approaches may now
suggest  different  ways  of  coping  with  financial  stability  challenges  that,  on  some  occasions,
would involve a wider role for central banks. But the ECB, as an institution bound by the rule of
law, has to operate within the limits set by the Treaties.
Article 127(5) of the Treaty implies that the ECB has only a contributory and supporting role with
regard  to  financial  stability.  This  role  is  partly  discharged  through  its  advisory  role  in  the
preparation of EU or national acts.
Beyond  that,  the  ECB’s  financial  stability  role  is  embedded  within  the  ECB’s  basic  monetary
policy task and the ECB’s microprudential supervisory tasks. The specific macroprudential tasks
contained  in  the  SSM  Regulation  are  supplementary  in  nature,  and  do not  confer  any  general
competence on the ECB in the field of macroprudential policy.
These are primarily legal conclusions that also reflect the relative positions of public institutions in
terms  of  independence  and  accountability.  Beyond  these  considerations,  however,  there  are
political and economic considerations that have not been addressed here.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
See Central bank governance and financial stability: A report by a Study Group chaired by Stefan Ingves, Bank
for International Settlements, 2011.
Article 2 of theTEU.
Article 5(2) of the TEU.
Article 5(3) and (4) of the TEU.
Garry J. Schinasi, “Defining Financial Stability”, IMF Working Paper WP/04/187, 2004, 3; William A. Allen and
Geoffrey Wood, “Defining and achieving financial stability”, Journal of Financial Stability, Vol. 2, 2006, 152.
The notion of financial stability is often discussed in terms of the concept of systemic risk. Galati and Moessner,
“Macroprudential policy – a literature review", DNB Working Paper, No 267 (2010), 13.
So that individuals can still access their accounts, businesses can still operate payments, and banks can
refinance themselves by borrowing from each other or the central bank. Some of the definitions of financial
stability include the notion that economic actors can operate without fear of disruption, of financial instability,
being a material factor in their decisions, William A. Allen and Geoffrey Wood, “Defining and achieving financial
stability”, Journal of Financial Stability, Vol. 2, 2006, 152, 160.
Although internationally the definitions of price stability may differ, they are close enough for there to be plenty of
common ground. See William A. Allen and Geoffrey Wood, “Defining and achieving financial stability”, Journal of
Financial Stability, Vol. 2, 2006, 152, 153.
Paul Tucker, The objectives of financial stability policy, voxeu.org/article/objectives-financial-stability-policy.
E.g. conduct open market and credit operations, and impose minimum reserve requirements under Articles 18
and 19 of the Statute of the ESCB.
This is not to say that the Union competence in the field is also coordinating—this is a question of vertical
competence allocation.
See also Article 165(1) of the TFEU “The Union shall contribute to the flowering of the culture in the Member
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
States […]”and Article 173(3) of the TFEU “[t]he Union shall contribute to the development of quality education
[…]”.
Article 6 of the TFEU.
Article 2(5) of the TFEU. Moreover, “legally binding acts of the Union” relating to these areas “shall not entail
harmonisation of Member States’ laws or regulations”.
Implied powers regarding activities that are corollary to the Union’s main fields of competence and flow from the
powers expressly conferred on it in the Treaties.
Psaroudakis,  G.,  “The  Scope  for  Financial  Stability  Considerations  in  the  Fulfilment  of  the  Mandate  of  the
ECB/Eurosystem”, Journal of Financial Regulation, Vol. 4(1), 2018, pp. 119–144.
Gauweiler, para. 50.
Article 5(4) of the TEU.
See Gauweiler para. 67.
See Article 1, first para.; see also recitals (2), (5), (15), (16), (24), (27), and (55).
See Paul Tucker, The objectives of financial stability policy.
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
