Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Kathimerini
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in Kathimerini, conducted by Ms Eirini Chrysolora and published on 5 September 2018.
 Does  the  completion  of  the  programme  mark  a  new  era  for  Greece  in  your  view?  Is
enhanced surveillance not just a continuation of the programme?
Let me start by saying that it would be all too easy to take the opportunity of Greece graduating
from the programme to turn the page and say “mission accomplished”. The programme years
have been very difficult for the Greek people. Policymakers across Europe have a duty to learn
the lessons of this painful journey and improve policy, at both European and national levels.
With hindsight, one can argue that the design of the programmes could have been more effective
in  supporting  social  safety  nets  and  combating  rent-seeking,  that  the  pace  of  reform  of  the
financial sector could have been faster, and that the need for debt reduction was overlooked by
creditors.  All  this  has  gradually  improved  over  time.  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  Greek
government for its remarkable work in recent years, implementing key reforms in the economy
and the society in general and in the financial sector in particular. For example, social solidarity
income helps direct scarce resources to those who need them most, and opening up industries
or  sectors,  such  as  pharmacies,  benefits  households  which  have  borne  the  brunt  of  crisis
adjustment.  Regarding  the  financial  sector  more  specifically,  the  new  legislative  framework
provides  much  better  support  for  reducing  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  compared  with  the
situation a couple of years ago. This will help banks support economic growth and job creation
more effectively.
But let’s not forget where it all started. Never again should a euro area country end up in such an
unsustainable position as Greece’s in 2010. We need responsible national fiscal and economic
policies, and a better euro area governance framework.
As  for  enhanced  surveillance,  it  is  not  a  new  programme  but  rather  a  strengthened  form  of
cooperation between Greece, the European institutions and the euro area countries to support
the transition towards full market access. Make no mistake, the burden of gaining the trust of
markets  and  depositors  has  now  fully  shifted  to  the  Greek  government.  Don’t  expect  building
trust among investors to be easier than convincing the institutions.
What will be the ECB’s role in the context of enhanced surveillance? Will you provide
your contribution as in the past?
We will remain involved in the enhanced surveillance, as mandated by the European regulations
underlying  this  framework  (the  so-called  two-pack).  But  the  end  of  the  programme  is  also  an
opportunity for us to refocus our activities, as already indicated in the opinion we published in
April 2018. Looking ahead, our work in Greece will now be focused on financial and macro-critical
issues.  More  specifically,  this  includes  financial  sector  stability,  macroeconomic  projections,
headline fiscal targets, and sustainability and financial needs.
What do you see as the main priorities for the post-programme period? What are the
areas  that  Greece  should  focus  on  in  the  years  ahead  so  as  to  achieve  sustainable
growth? And what are the main risks?
In line with what I have just said, allow me to focus on the financial sector. Reducing NPLs is
certainly top of the list from our point of view. On the one hand, only stronger and healthier banks
can  provide  the  necessary  basis  for  an  increase  in  the  supply  of  credit  that  can  support
economic  growth.  On  the  other  hand,  the  restructuring  of  private  and  tax  debt  that  could
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
accompany  the  reduction  of  NPLs  is  also  expected  to  help  healthy  companies  restart  their
activities  and  thus  reinforce  the  demand  for  credit.  A  lot  has  been  achieved  under  the
programme.  The  legislative  framework  is  in  place,  but  continued  implementation  will  be  key.
Improving the effectiveness of the judicial system is also essential to guarantee a well-functioning
financial sector. We also still envisage improvements in banks’ governance frameworks, which
will  be  essential  to  establish  the  conditions  necessary  to  attract  both  domestic  and  foreign
investors and allow the divestment of Hellenic Financial Stability Fund (HFSF) holdings over time.
In any case, it will be very important that the authorities refrain from trying to influence banks’
credit decisions and focus instead on improving the framework within which they operate.
Are Greek banks now safe in terms of their capital position? Will they manage to reach
the NPL targets as agreed? Should the targets be tightened for the years after 2019?
The capital position of Greek banks has strengthened substantially during the programme and is
now  quantitatively  at  higher  levels  than  in  other  countries  affected  by  the  crisis.  However,  the
quality of Greek banks’ capital is lower than elsewhere in Europe, consisting partly of deferred tax
assets, and there is still a large amount of non-performing exposures (NPE) as a legacy of the
crisis. There is a need to be prudent and to set ambitious targets in order to significantly reduce
the NPE ratio by the end of 2019. The performance of Greek banks has so far been broadly in
line with their approved NPL targets, as shown in the Bank of Greece’s quarterly NPL monitoring
reports. However, the targets to be achieved by the end of 2019 are back-loaded. Beyond 2019,
continued efforts are needed to further reduce the NPE ratio in Greece in the years ahead, until it
is closer to the euro area average.
Swift  progress  in  resolving  NPLs  is  crucial  not  only  for  economic  recovery,  but  also  for  the
forward-looking capital adequacy of Greek banks. This depends on the economic environment
stabilising  and,  importantly,  on  the  continued  and  improved  effectiveness  of  the  relevant  legal
frameworks  (household  and  corporate  insolvency,  out-of-court  workout,  NPL  sales  and  e-
auctions). For example, it will be easier to reduce the amount of NPLs if there is a reduction in
the backlog of cases related to the household insolvency framework (the so-called Katseli law)
that are still pending before the courts. In June the government presented an ambitious action
plan that will be closely monitored in the context of the enhanced surveillance framework.
Are you satisfied with the pace of e-auctions?
A comprehensive approach involving all stakeholders must remain in place at all times to ensure
that the e-auction system continues to be successful. We have seen a clear improvement here
in recent months, but further progress in raising the number of auctions is needed, especially for
properties  located  outside  Attica.  So  we  will  continue  to  monitor  the  situation  closely,  in
cooperation with the authorities. It is also important to recognise that e-auctions have incentivised
borrowers  (including  strategic  defaulters)  and  banks  to  work  towards  a  mutually  beneficial
solution. There are indications of increased restructurings and settlements of loans now that e-
auctions have started.
The  ECB  lifted  the  waiver  for  Greek  government  bonds.  Wasn’t  the  enhanced
surveillance sufficient to keep it? How much liquidity did banks have to get from ELA as
a result of lifting the waiver?
The minimum credit rating rule for ECB collateral eligibility pre-dates the Greek crisis. In 2010,
we acknowledged that the rule could be procyclical and granted a waiver to countries under an
EU/IMF  programme,  because  policy  conditionality  and  access  to  comprehensive  information
gave  us  confidence  about  the  sovereign’s  creditworthiness.  The  framework  has  been  applied
unchanged to all countries since 2010. But enhanced surveillance is not a programme and does
not entail conditionality – I assume this is exactly why the government accepted it! It therefore
does not comply with our framework.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
That being said, the lifting of the waiver was a “non-event” for banks, as one Greek bank CEO
recently  pointed  out.  Greek  banks  have  broadened  their  market  financing  and  successfully
shifted parts of their financing from monetary policy operations onto the interbank repo market.
The significant increase in  deposits  during  the  summer  months  helped  as  well.  Overall,  bank
liquidity has been continuously improving. It is important that this trend is further supported in the
period ahead.
Is  the  Greek  debt  sustainable  according  to  the  ECB?  We  were  wondering,  if  you
consider it sustainable, why you couldn’t have included the Greek bonds in the public
sector purchase programme (PSPP – also known as QE) for at least a few weeks after
the Eurogroup decision on debt measures, when the waiver was still in force. Are you
going to publish the ECB’s debt sustainability analysis?
The agreement reached by the Eurogroup on 22 June was a significant step towards restoring
debt sustainability, especially over the medium term (that is, until the end of the deferral period).
In the long term, we welcome the Eurogroup’s readiness to consider further debt measures if
there  are  adverse  developments.  Indeed,  downside  risks  to  both  macroeconomic  and  fiscal
assumptions remain sizeable.
As for the PSPP, Greek government bonds lost their eligibility on 21 August when the programme
ended. At  that  point,  the  Eurogroup’s  debt  measures  had  still  not  been  ratified.  In  any  case,
purchases would have been very limited over such a short period.
Is there any chance that Greek bonds could be included at some point in the future in
the reinvestment phase of the PSPP? How many years do you think the reinvestment of
maturing securities will last?
Without a programme, Greek government bonds are now treated like any other bonds for the
purpose of ECB eligibility. Once they regain investment grade status they could be included in all
ECB programmes, subject to a Governing Council decision.
As you know, we intend to reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities purchased
under the asset purchase programme (APP) for an extended period of time after the end of our
net asset purchases, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity
conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
The government seems to have put on hold, for the time being, plans to return to the
markets. Do you think that Greece has now regained full access to international capital
markets? Do you think it should wait until after the elections to go back to the markets?
Greece’s market access conditions have clearly improved compared with one year ago. Bond
market liquidity has also improved after the swap operation conducted in November 2017, which
contributed to the normalisation of the Greek government bond yield curve and also supported
increased foreign participation in the bond market. Over the past few months, however, Greek
bond yields have remained elevated and volatile, reacting to international and European stress,
even after the approval of debt measures by the Eurogroup in June and the upgrade of Greece’s
credit rating by the rating agencies. So we should be patient and prudent when assessing market
access. Crucially, investor confidence will rely on the continued implementation of reforms and
on avoiding backtracking on past improvements.
Are you concerned that a crisis, for example in Italy, could jeopardise Greece’s market
access?  Wouldn’t  a  precautionary  credit  line,  as  Mr  Stournaras  had  suggested,  have
been useful in this respect?
Indeed, a precautionary credit line would have helped to cushion negative spillover effects from
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the international markets and to reinforce the credibility of the Greek sovereign as an issuer. It
was therefore a less risky path from a purely financial standpoint. That being said, it would have
entailed  continued  policy  conditionality.  I  respect  the  government’s  judgement  that,  after  eight
years under various programmes, it was time for Greece to regain ownership of its policies.
Is the ECB concerned about a hostile spirit often expressed by the government toward
the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  Mr  Stournaras,  and  recently  even  indirectly
towards the former Vice-President of the ECB, Mr Papademos?
We  do  not  intervene  in  internal  political  discussions,  whether  in  Greece  or  elsewhere.  It  is
important that the independence of the Bank of Greece and its governor is preserved. Personally,
I  have  the  highest  appreciation  for  Mr  Papademos  and  Mr  Stournaras  as  economists  and
policymakers.  I  must  stress  that  an  independent  statistical  system  is  also  crucial.  I  won’t
comment on Greek judicial decisions, but one should not underestimate the damage inflicted on
Greece’s  credibility  by  never-ending  legal  action  against  the  former  president  of  Elstat.  Mr
Georgiou  discharged  his  duty  in  compliance  with  the  European  framework  and  his  findings
remain unchallenged today, including by the government.
Do you think that the planned pension cuts for 2019 should be suspended or postponed,
as the government wants? Has the government made any concrete proposals ahead of
the mission and in view of the 2019 draft budget? The government also plans tax cuts in
2019  using  the  expected  excess  primary  surplus,  affecting  ENFIA  and  social  security
contributions, among others. Do you agree with these measures?
In line with what I said on the refocusing of our contribution to the programme, we do not want to
discuss specific fiscal policy measures. What is essential for us is that fiscal targets for 2019
are  met  and  that  the  budget  composition  is  growth-friendly.  As  is  the  case  in  a  number  of
countries  in  the  euro  area,  it  is  important  that  the  level  of  direct  income  taxation  supports
economic growth while ensuring that fiscal targets are met.
What about a reversal of labour market reforms (minimum wage, collective bargaining)?
Do the institutions have to consent? And do you think the markets will react, interpreting
it as a sign of backtracking?
Again, I don’t want to discuss specific measures.
When do you think capital controls should be fully removed?
The pace and composition of capital controls are in the hands of the Greek authorities. Many of
the  restrictions  imposed  in  mid-2015  have  already  been  lifted;  the  government  published  a
roadmap for relaxing capital controls in May 2017, which it is closely following. This steady and
responsible  approach  has  been  successful  so  far.  Only  once  capital  controls  have  been
completely removed will the Greek economy and Greek banks be able to function normally inside
the euro area. To achieve this, it is crucial to build an environment which strengthens depositors’
confidence and makes the Greek financial system resilient to outside stress.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
