   03.04.2018 
Spain: From Recovery to Resilience 
Banco de España-IMF High-Level Seminar 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let  me  welcome  you  to  this  Banco  de  España  and  International  Monetary  Fund  joint 
conference devoted to the recent evolution of the Spanish economy in the Euro-Zone and 
European Union context. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  represented  here  today  by  David 
Lipton,  First  Deputy  Managing  Director,  Poul  Thomsen,  Director  of  the  European 
Department and Andrea Schaechter, Mission Chief for Spain, for their proposal to organise 
this conference. The Banco de España was more than pleased to accept, considering it to 
be very timely and of great interest. 
As to the title of the conference: “Spain: From Recovery to Resilience”, allow me, before 
going forward, a candid clarification: I can assure you that it is far from our intent to suggest 
any pessimistic forecast or premonition. The title refers to our economy’s resilience in the 
face of a hypothetical cyclical downturn which, needless to say, we hope will be later rather 
than sooner.  
In 2017 Spain’s economic recovery maintained the strong growth path of previous years, 
exceeding  expectations  for  the  fourth  year  in  a  row.  In  particular,  GDP  grew  by  3.1%, 
meaning  that  the  economy  has  grown  above  3%  for  the  third  consecutive  year.  Strong 
domestic and external demand pushed GDP up, and the economy has proved quite resilient 
to uncertainty shocks. The positive behaviour of the economy contributed to and, in turn, 
was stimulated by the correction of the macro-financial imbalances accumulated during the 
pre-crisis  and  crisis  periods.  Such  corrections  were  particularly  significant  as  regards 
private sector deleveraging, the reduction of unemployment, the progressive absorption of 
disequilibria in the housing market, and the balancing of the external accounts, not least 
due to significant gains in competitiveness. 
Looking  forward,  nonetheless,  a  number  of  questions  remain  open.  Will  this  process 
continue  at  such  a  strong  pace?  Under  which  conditions  would  the  recovery  turn  into  a 
sustained and prolonged expansion? Which are the main vulnerabilities and weaknesses 
that policy-makers should tackle in order to raise potential growth and the well-being of the 
population? Is the Spanish economy, within the EU framework, well equipped to cope with 
the next cyclical downturn? Is the euro area as a whole well prepared? 
The  programme  of  this  conference  approaches  these  questions,  trying  to  identify  some 
answers.  The  discussion  is  organised  around  four  main  topics:  how  to  lower  fiscal 
vulnerabilities;  which  are  the  main  challenges  for  the  Spanish  labour  market  to  function 
properly; how to raise medium-term growth; how to advance in the euro area architecture. 
Lowering fiscal vulnerabilities 
The first session of this conference deals with the policy priorities for addressing medium-
term fiscal challenges in Spain. The panellists are going to explore options to bring down 
the high level of public debt and to handle rising pressures from ageing population. The 
session will also discuss how to improve the fiscal governance framework to support the 
achievement  of  fiscal  objectives  in  the  medium  term,  both  at  the  national  and  European 
 3/9 
 Union  levels.  These  are  crucial  issues,  and  their  discussion  in  this  Conference  is  fully 
warranted.  
Let me briefly share with you some thoughts on how we see at the Banco de España the 
key challenges for the Spanish economy that arise from the domain of public finances. 
The economic and social impact of the recent crisis has been deep and painful in many 
aspects, including in the case of public finances. During the past decade, public authorities 
in Spain had to deal with the challenge of keeping welfare state services functioning, while, 
at the same time, delivering the necessary fiscal adjustment that could ensure the long-term 
sustainability of public finances. Between 2011 and 2017, the public deficit-to-GDP ratio 
was significantly cut, from a peak of 9% in 2011, excluding financial sector assistance, to 
3.1% last year. In that process, public expenditure was reduced, as a proportion of output, 
by more than 3.5 percentage points (pp). 
Notwithstanding  this  effort,  the  historically  very  high  debt-to-GDP  ratio  of  the  Spanish 
General  Government  sector,  currently  around  98%  of  GDP,  poses  specific  risks  for 
economic growth. Economic literature finds evidence that maintaining a very high public 
debt-to-GDP ratio over a prolonged period tends to hamper economic growth, becoming a 
source of economic vulnerability, which, in addition, reduces the stabilising capacity of the 
public  budget.  Simulations  by  Banco  de  España  staff  show  that,  under  plausible 
assumptions, the deleveraging process of the public sector towards levels considered safer 
will be very gradual in Spain, and in developed economies in general, possibly taking up to 
several decades to reach the reference value of the 60% debt-to-GDP ratio. 
Therefore, continuing with the ongoing fiscal consolidation process to ensure exit from the 
Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) must be a priority. The Spanish Public Administration has 
been subject to this procedure since 2009, under the corrective arm of the Stability and 
Growth Pact (SGP). In 2016, the EU Council updated the conditions under which the EDP 
exit would take place, and set 2018 as a deadline. In particular, the Council requires the 
public deficit to reach 2.2% of GDP this year and to achieve an accumulated structural effort 
over  the  period  2016-2018  of  0.6  pp  of  GDP.  While  it  is  very  likely  that  the  General 
Government deficit will be below 3% in 2018, achieving the required structural effort will call 
for further fiscal adjustments. In fact, according to the European Commission, the structural 
component of the public deficit in Spain is still very high, at around 3 % of GDP this year, in 
fact, the largest of the euro area members.  
In addition, public finances will have to face the challenge posed by ageing population.  
In the Spanish case, the pension system reforms introduced in recent years have addressed 
this challenge by, among other measures, putting back the retirement age, introducing a 
sustainability factor linking the initial pension to the increase in life expectancy and setting 
in place a new mechanism making the annual rise in pensions conditional upon the system’s 
revenue  and  expenditure  being  balanced,  with  ceilings  and  floors  duly  in  place.  On  the 
estimates  available,  in  benign  macroeconomic  scenarios,  these  reforms  would  be 
successful in countering the effect of the expected increase in the so called dependency 
ratio, the ratio of the population aged over 65 to the working-age population, on pension 
spending and, therefore, would contribute to restoring the system’s long-term sustainability.  
4/9 
  But, without further increases in the system’s revenue the adjustment mechanism would 
operate chiefly through reductions in average pensions relative to the average wage, i.e. via 
a  reduction  in  the  public  pension  replacement  rate,  thus,  raising  the  issue of  the  “social 
sustainability” of the adjustment mechanism.  
Beyond  specific  proposals,  what  remains  crucial  is  that  any  reform  strategy  should  be 
transparent,  increases  the  link  between  intertemporal  contributions  and  benefits  of  the 
system and is anchored in an adjustment mechanism that guarantees its financial balance. 
In this context, a medium-term fiscal programme is needed to complete successfully the 
fiscal consolidation process. This programme should detail the legislative initiatives needed 
to  achieve  the  targets  and  include  a  prudent  medium-term  macroeconomic  and  fiscal 
revenues forecast. To achieve this goal without hampering long-term economic growth, the 
composition  of  the  fiscal  adjustment  is  very  relevant.  Moreover,  the  combination  of  this 
consolidation efforts with other structural reforms on which I will focus later might be crucial 
in order to smooth and reduce the public finances adjustment needs. 
In  addition,  given  the  high  degree  of  decentralisation  of  public  spending  in  Spain,  all 
government  decision  centres  must  contribute  to  this  effort.  To  this  end,  it  is  crucial  to 
provide efficient mechanisms to finance the different competences, permitting citizens to 
identify the bodies responsible for implementing the different public policies.  
On  a  related  matter,  let  me  mention  that  the  adequate  access  to  external  financing  by 
regional governments – be it by credit provided by financial institutions or through the capital 
markets – is of particular importance to avoid a pro-cyclical stance in the provision of the 
public services, and guarantee market pressure geared towards fiscal discipline. Currently, 
an  exceptional  mechanism  is  in  place,  namely  the  “Fondo  de  Liquidez  Autonómica”, 
whereby  the  central  government  provides  funds  to  most  regions,  in  the  form  of  bilateral 
loans, in exchange for a heightened control over their fiscal policies. However, in the current 
favourable macroeconomic and financial context, regions should regain market access.  
Challenges of the Spanish labour market 
The  second  session  of  the  Conference  is  devoted  to  the  challenges  facing  the  Spanish 
labour market.  
During the last three years, the annual growth rate of employment has been 3.0%. In the 
last five years, the unemployment rate decreased to 16.5% at the end of 2017, more than 
10 pp below its peak at the beginning of 2013.  
Despite these positive developments, unemployment is still at unacceptably high levels, in 
fact,  the  second  highest  in  the  euro  area  after  Greece.  The  high  incidence  of  long-term 
unemployment, which now stands above 50%, is signalling the risks of hysteresis in the 
labour  market,  which  would  make  the  reduction  of  the  unemployment  rate  to  pre-crisis 
levels more difficult. 
From a longer perspective, the Spanish economy also faces three important challenges.  
First, even at the height of the last expansion in 2006, Spain had an unemployment rate of 
8.2% which was far off the best performers at that time. Second, during recent decades, 
 5/9 
 the segmentation of the Spanish labour market has been very marked, with a temporary 
rate exceeding 25%, 10 pp above euro area averages, which contributes to exacerbating 
the volatility of employment and reducing productivity growth. Third, the Spanish economy 
should be ready to accommodate the worldwide process of automation of certain tasks, 
especially in a context in which the incidence of low-skills unemployment is high and the 
labour market is not flexible enough. 
The analysis of the Banco de España suggests that the higher possibilities for firms,  in the 
presence of adverse shocks,  to adjust wages and, in particular, hours worked, which were 
introduced  through  the  2012  labour  market  reform,  led  to  a  significant  slowdown  in  job 
destruction flows, despite the adverse economic situation in 2012 and 2013. Apparently, 
however,  the  reform  has  not  been  able  to  change  either  the  structure  of  the  collective 
bargaining system or the acute segmentation of the working population. These two features 
of the Spanish labour market have been at the core of the high volatility of employment and 
the high level of unemployment and, therefore, should be at the core of the reform agenda 
in this area.  
Raising medium-term growth prospects 
The third session will be devoted to the general question of how to improve medium-term 
growth prospects. Spain’s potential output growth is estimated to be somewhat below 1.5% 
over the following decade, a level much lower than that of 3% before the crisis.  
Among the most important structural factors limiting Spanish growth prospects are ageing 
of the population, a lower contribution of the participation rate now that many women have 
already been incorporated into the labour force, and a lower contribution of the stock of 
capital following the high growth recorded in the previous upturn. These factors are common 
to most developed countries.  
Hence, the growth of the Spanish economy will essentially rely on its capacity to raise low 
productivity growth.  
Spain has a significant productivity gap with the euro area and recent research has related 
this gap to an inefficient reallocation of resources towards less productive firms during the 
expansionary  period.  However,  since  2008  there  has  been  an  improvement  in  the 
reallocation of resources, especially due to the disappearance of many unproductive firms. 
But  business  mark-ups  stand  at  relatively  high  and  rising  levels.  This  could  indicate  a 
persistent  lack  of  competition  in  some  markets,  with  adverse  implications  in  terms  of 
competitiveness, for instance, those regulations that distort the cost of production among 
firms  or  affect  incentives  to  grow,  such  as  market  barriers  due  to  the  heterogeneity  of 
regulations across regions. 
More generally, the Spanish economy continues to exhibit a low productivity level in terms 
of  the  average  firm,  something  that  can  be  perhaps  explained  through  different 
combinations of  inadequate  managerial skills and educational attainment of workers, as 
well as a  relatively low a degree of technological capitalisation. Hence, it is important to 
pass  reforms  aiming  at  reducing  the  rate  of  early  school  dropouts  and  to  foster  the 
relationship between firms and both the vocational training and university systems. These, 
together with a new well-designed and effective system of incentives to suppport innovation 
6/9 
  in  the  private  sector  are  prerequisites  for  enhancing  the  Spanish  economy’s  stock  of 
technological capital and its capacity to innovate. 
So  far,  I  have  addressed  a  number  of  issues  mostly  from  a  national  point  of  view.  But, 
indeed,  solving  Spain’s  problems  cannot  be  done in  isolation  from  the  euro  area.  At  the 
same time, Spain can certainly contribute to move ahead some of the reforms needed in 
the euro zone. 
Euro area economic situation and avenues for reform 
A decade after the recession that followed the global financial crisis, the economic recovery 
is  well  underway.  The  euro  area  is  experiencing  robust  and  widespread  growth,  and  a 
number  of  risks  have  receded.  Economic  sentiment  has  reached  levels  close  to  all-time 
highs. 
However, the robust economic recovery has not yet translated into stronger price dynamics. 
Several arguments have been put forward to explain that.  
Firstly,  there  is  evidence  that  labour  market  slack  may  be  larger  than  standard 
unemployment indicators suggest, owing to the existence of under-employment (i.e. those 
working fewer hours than they would like) and of a sector of the population classified as 
inactive  because  they  are  only  marginally  attached  to  the  labour  force.  Secondly,  the 
growing importance of global factors may come into play here, including spare capacity in 
other  regions  of  the  world,  the  prevalence  of  global  value  chains,  and  technological 
changes. And thirdly, and potentially more worrisome, the prolonged period of  low inflation 
might  have  upset  the  way  price  expectations  are  formed,  giving  rise  to  persistent  de-
anchoring of medium and long-run expectations of inflation from central banks’ targets. 
In any event, the strong economic recovery underway in the euro area together with the 
ambitious package of expansionary policies put in place by the ECB provides for growing 
confidence that inflation will eventually converge to levels closer to our 2% reference.  
Growth  in  the  euro  area  has  relied  heavily  on  the  ECB’s  very  accommodative  monetary 
policy.  While  the  area’s  aggregate  fiscal  stance  has  ceased  to  be  a  drag  on  growth,  we 
could  benefit  –  in  full  respect  of  our  rule-based  fiscal  framework  –  from  a  more  growth-
friendly  composition  of  public  finances,  which  would  also  support  the  necessary 
consolidation in Member states with higher debt levels. 
But it is also essential to try to regain momentum in the structural reform agenda, in order 
to increase the resilience of national economies and foster productivity and potential growth.  
The  euro  area  governance  reform  agenda  should  not  be  let  aside  either.  Progress  in 
renewing the institutional architecture of EMU has been substantial, especially since 2012. 
At  the  height  of  the  sovereign  crisis,  awareness  of  the  vulnerabilities  that  were  causing 
severe financial fragmentation and increasing risks of a break-up of the euro area generated 
the  political  consensus  needed  to  establish  permanent  crisis-management  mechanisms, 
strengthen fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance, and start developing a Banking Union.   
 7/9 
 Initially,  reforms  proceeded  at  a  relatively  rapid  pace.  At  the  beginning  of  2012,  two 
important  treaties  were  signed:  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  Treaty  and  the 
Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance.  
The agreement in mid-2012 to move towards the Banking Union led to the setting-up of two 
of its pillars: the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), in 2014, and the Single Resolution 
Mechanism  (SRM),  in  2016.  From  those  years  we  also  saw:  the  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution  Directive,  which  finally  came  into  force  in  2016,  providing  a  comprehensive 
framework to deal with failing banks outside common mercantile insolvency proceedings; 
and the 2014 directive harmonising national deposit guarantee schemes.  
Despite  these  improvements  in  the  euro  area’s  institutional  framework,  significant 
vulnerabilities  still  persist,  both  at  the  area  level  and  in  Member  States.  Additional  steps 
would be required to ensure a more stable and stronger Monetary Union.  
In order to overcome the current complacency arising from the more favourable economic 
and financial environment, the European Commission has put forward a number of initiatives 
aimed at advancing towards further economic integration.  
Completing the Banking Union was, rightly, given top priority, and included the creation of 
a  common  backstop  for  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  and  a  common  European  Deposit 
Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS),  although,  in  this  latter  case,  in  my  opinion,  to  deactivate  the 
perverse  loop  between  sovereigns  and  banks  a  more  ambitious  approach  than  the  one 
pursued by the Commission would perhaps be needed. 
Also, a consensus is needed to move, in parallel, towards increasing private and public risk-
sharing and reducing risks in bank balance sheets, stepping up efforts to lower the still-high 
levels of NPLs and diversify sovereign risk exposures. Current proposals to create Sovereign 
Bond-Backed Securities, by structuring asset pools into tranches with different risk levels, 
could potentially contribute to such diversification.   
There  are  Commission´s  proposals  in  other  areas.  Among  them:  the  setting-up  of  an 
European  Monetary  Fund,  which  would  take  over  the  current  functions  of  the  European 
Stabilization  Mechanism, eventually adding the role of common backstop for the Single 
Resolution Fund; the establishment of an European Minister of Finance, who would also be 
Vice-President  of  the  European  Commission  and  Chairman  of  the  Eurogroup;  and  the 
creation of a common stabilisation tool for investment, which should not preclude the future 
development  of  a  genuine  European  budgetary  capacity  for  economic  stabilisation 
purposes. Those are proposals that deserve careful consideration. 
Moreover,  the  crisis  has  made  it  clear  that  the  European  budgetary  framework  is  very 
complex, which highlights the need to simplify it. Recent proposals, which seek to reduce 
the current excessive number of rules, by focusing on the public debt to GDP ratio, as a 
medium-term anchor, and to the expenditure rule, as an operational tool, seem promising. 
In any event, reinforcing the oversight and control of fiscal rules is necessary to ensure their 
fulfilment. The aim should be that the budgetary governance framework is able to encourage 
countries  to  generate  room  for  manoeuvre  during  expansionary  phases,  so  that  the 
stabilising capacity of fiscal policy may increase in the euro area, as a whole, at times of 
crisis. 
8/9 
 Summing up: much work remains to be done in the coming months and years.  We should 
make good use of the current benign environment to progress in our European integration 
agenda.  Much  is  at  stake,  most  notably  keeping  our  achievements  alive,  preserving  our 
political, economic and social model, and ensuring a pivotal role for a united Europe in an 
increasingly globalised world.  
   9/9 
