    Paris Europlace International Financial Forum – Paris, 11 July 2018 
Europe in a disruptive world 
 Opening address by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
            Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr). 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Page 1 sur 5 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  open  this  International  Financial  Forum  on 
“Europe  in  a  disruptive  world”.  We  are  in  2018,  in  Paris.  But  let  me  first  go  back 
several millennia, and to Mesopotamia. The invention of writing was certainly one of 
the  most  stunning  breakthroughs  in  the  history  of  humanity,  and  in  terms  of 
accessing  and  spreading  knowledge.  This  was  precisely  what  we  can  call  a  real 
disruption.  So,  the  French  philosopher  Michel  Serres  often  compares  our  time  of 
digital revolution to the invention of writing. In my remarks today, I wish to stress that 
we are now at a turning point: we are living the end of a cycle of restoring order after 
the  financial  crisis;  and  we  are  witnessing  the  emergence  of  another  cycle  of 
disruption in Europe. 
I. 
The end of a cycle 
 The  issues  that  have  dominated  the  post-crisis  era  –  strengthening  financial 
regulation  and 
implementing  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  –  are 
progressively  coming  to  an  end.  The  very  welcome  finalisation  of  Basel  III  –  to  be 
integrated  in  the  European  legislation  in  a  timely  manner  –  concludes  a  decade  of 
regulatory efforts on the banking system. We are obviously not done yet.  Above all, 
two  priorities  remain  on  the  agenda:  first,  the  European  review  of  the  Solvency  II 
directive  on  insurance;  the  main  challenge  will  be  to  better  reconcile  prudential 
requirements  with  increased  investment  in  equity  and  infrastructure.  Let  me  say  it 
clearly: revision cannot mean the status quo. The second priority is the regulation of 
shadow banking, and first and foremost its liquidity.  Indeed, the regulatory priority is 
no longer the solvency of banks, but the liquidity of non-banks. 
In the euro area, economic growth and inflation have been successfully supported by 
our  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures.  GDP  per  capita  and  employment 
have  overtaken  their  levels  of  2007.  The  ECB  Governing  Council 
is  now 
implementing  its  strategy  of  gradual  and  predictable  normalisation.  Net  asset 
purchases should end in December; the first interest rate rise could take place at the 
earliest  through  the  summer  of  2019  depending  on  the  inflation  outlook.  That  said, 
monetary  policy  shouldn’t  remain  the  only  game  in  town,  and  the  euro  area  should 
equip  itself  with  other  economic  instruments.  A  stronger  economic  Union  is  an 
 
efficient  combination  of  private  risk-sharing  –  Banking  Union  plus  Capital  Markets 
Union – and public risk-sharing – strengthened ESM plus Budget.  
Page 2 sur 5 
The  progressive  end  of  this  “restoring”  cycle  means  that  the  focus  of  our  dialogue 
between the financial industry and the public authorities will shift. It will be less on our 
well-known  mantras:  are  capital  requirements  too  high?  Are  interest  rates  too  low? 
And we will hopefully focus more on the issues of   tomorrow. Let me, at the start of 
this  new  cycle  of  disruption,  elaborate  on  three  challenges:  a  new  financial 
constellation  in  Europe;  new  needs  and  new  players;  new  technologies  and  hence 
new regulations.  
 II. 
The beginning of another cycle? 
The  first  challenge  is  the  emergence  of  a  new  financial  constellation  in  Europe. 
Brexit is, and remains, bad news not only for the United Kingdom but also for Europe. 
Achieving an agreement is highly desirable to protect prosperity on both sides of the 
Channel: The latest efforts seem to be moving in that direction.  Brexit will, however, 
lead  to  a  restructuring  of  the  European  financial  system.  There  will  not  be  a  single 
City  for  the  continent,  but  rather  an  integrated  polycentric  network  of  financial 
centres,  with  specialisations  based  on  areas  of  expertise.  This  structure  needs  to 
help to improve the circulation of the abundant savings  in the euro area – a surplus 
of over  EUR  400  billion  –  channelling  them  more  towards  equity  financing  and 
innovation.  The  Capital  Markets  Union  in  Europe  –  and  what  I  more  broadly  call  a 
“Financing Union for Investment and Innovation in Europe” –  is even more essential 
given the prospect of Brexit.  
In this new environment, the euro area must keep control of the risks regarding euro-
based transactions. Some financial market infrastructure located in London will soon 
become  off-shore 
to 
the  EU.  Reducing 
the  dependencies  vis-à-vis  such 
infrastructures  is  vital  for  the  EU  both  in  terms  of  financial  stability  and  the 
transmission of monetary policy. This is the reason why the Commission proposed a 
location policy for CCPs, as part of the revision of the European Market Infrastructure 
Regulation (EMIR). We – like Germany and most Member States – strongly support 
this. It is under discussion at the European Parliament and Council. We also need to 
ensure  that  critical  actors  do  not  become  too  big  to  fail:  a  monopoly  for  clearing 
 
activities serving the European financial market should be excluded. The example  – 
and  success  –  of  the  development  of  a  competing  CDS  clearing  offer  in  Paris 
demonstrates that it is possible to break a monopoly if there is a convergence of wills 
Page 3 sur 5 
between players. 
In  this  respect,  Paris  has  numerous  advantages  to  become  a  major  hub  for 
innovation  financing  in  Europe.  France  has  four  of  the  euro  area's  eight  systemic 
banks.  Besides,  with  EUR  4  Trillion  under  management  in  the  country,  France's 
asset  management  sector  includes  Europe's  leading  asset  manager.  The  French 
insurance sector represents more than one third of the insurance sector of the euro 
area.  I observe that beyond the legal decisions concerning European structures, an 
ever-growing  number  of  international  banks  are  choosing  to  transfer  the  majority  of 
their  market  activities  to  Paris.  Paris  has  all  the  qualities  necessary  to  become  the 
market hub of this new constellation in the euro area.  
 2/ Second challenge: new needs and new players. Banking activity, as we know it, 
with  deposits,  savings  and  loans,  will  remain  key.  But  the  payment  industry,  for 
instance,  is  constantly  evolving,  notably  with  Fintechs.  In  the  past,  payments  were 
looked at as a technical, back office matter. No longer. We can identify three major 
trends:  first,  instantaneity  of  payments  “anytime  anywhere”;  dematerialisation;  and 
finally dissemination  –  a host of players  entering  the  market. Against this backdrop, 
there  is  a  need  to  develop  a  genuine  European  industrial  strategy,  and  European 
players,  within  a  harmonised  and  competitive  framework.  And  the  related  business 
model  here  is  obviously  different,  based  no  longer  on  intermediation  margins  or 
services fees, but on the value of data, to which I’ll return later.  
Another  growing  need  is  equity  financing  in  Europe:  this  is  crucial  in  innovative 
economies. Equity financing is better suited than debt financing to the uncertain and 
often  long-term  returns  associated  with  innovative  projects.  Corporate  equity  in  the 
euro area only represents 74% of GDP, against 125% in the United States.  The EU 
venture  capital  ecosystem  is  still  lagging  behind  that  of  the  US.  In  2017,  venture 
capitalists invested about EUR 9 billioni in the euro area, compared to EUR 60 billionii 
in the US. Moreover, capital funds in the US are on average three times bigger than 
European  onesiii.  As  a  result,  above  a  certain  amount,  European  start-ups  have  to 
find  their  financing  abroad,  mostly  in  the  United  States.  In  this  respect,  France  is 
 
closing  the  gap.  In  2017,  the  French  VC  ecosystem  overtook  that  of  the  UK  by 
number of VC-backed rounds and is expected to thrive in 2018.  
Page 4 sur 5 
Last, we also have to promote the financing of green and low carbon investments, 
while  taking  into  account  climate-related  risks.  To  this  end,  the  Banque  de  France 
has successfully initiated the Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening 
the  Financial  System  (NGFS)  that  is  already  bringing  together  21  central  banks, 
supervisors and international organizations.  
 3/ Let me now turn to the third challenge of this new era: new technologies implying 
new  regulations.  It  goes  without  saying  that  French  Tech  is  a  strategic  priority  for 
Paris: take for example the recent opening of the Station F start-up campus. But it is 
not only – not mainly even – a question of Fintechs: it is potentially one of Big Techs 
– the huge data platforms based in the US or in China –; and it is certainly a question 
for  the  existing  large  financial  institutions.  These  incumbents  now  all  agree  that  the 
digital  revolution  is  their  overriding  and  even  existential  challenge.  The  ability  of 
financial institutions to retain customers, from branches to the smartphone, has been 
particularly  put  to  the  test.  The  response  must  come  first  of  all  from  the  institutions 
themselves.  But  regulations  must  also  adapt:  "same  activity,  same  regulation"  of 
course, and the Big Techs will have to apply the same rules as banks and insurance 
companies if they start to perform the same regulated financial activities.  
That  said,  the  challenge  for  supervisors  extends  beyond  financial  regulation  alone; 
the challenge is how to apply to all players, in a fair and proper manner, regulations 
in  three  broader  areas:  data  protection,  monitoring  competition  and  concentration, 
and  cyber-security.  Data  protection  is  strengthened  by  the  entry  into  force  of  the 
General  Data  Protection  Regulation  on  25  May.  Competition  is  increasingly 
challenged  by  “the  winner  takes  all”  situations.  Cyber-security  will  be  one  of  the 
priorities of the French presidency of the G7 next year. The only way to meet these 
three  challenges  –  data  protection,  antitrust,  cybersecurity  –  is  through  a  much 
stronger international cooperation. However, when adapting to the digital revolution, 
no one should expect that these necessary regulations will protect existing situations. 
Innovation is naturally the only effective response. 
 Page 5 sur 5 
 
To conclude, let me quote a sentence often attributed to Albert Einstein: “Creativity is 
contagious. Pass it on.” We, at the Banque de France and at the ACPR, do not claim 
to  have  the  genius  of  Albert  Einstein,  but  we  have  a  strong  desire  to  foster 
innovation.  The  ACPR  Fintech  Innovation  Unit  and  its  task  force  on  artificial 
intelligence  are  a  good  illustration  of  these  efforts.  But  it  goes  far  beyond  this:  the 
Banque  de  France  is  committed  to  be  one  of  the  best  central  banks  for  markets 
within the Eurosystem. Our expertise is recognised, and supports the Paris financial 
centre. We will continue to supervise you – it's our duty – but equally, we are and will 
continue to be your partner, and even more than that, one of your strengths. Thank 
you for your attention. 
                                                           
i https://blog.dealroom.co/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Dealroom-2017-vFINAL.pdf 
ii https://www.statista.com/statistics/277501/venture-capital-amount-invested-in-the-united-states-since-
1995/ 
iii http://europa.eu/rapid/attachment/MEMO-18-2764/en/Factsheet%20VentureEU.pdf 
