Thomas  Jordan:  Innovation  and  entrepreneurship  -  key  success
factors in a changing business environment
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss
National Bank, at the Award ceremony 2018, De Vigier Foundation, Solothurn, 30 May 2018.
 The  complete  speech  can  be  found  in  German  on  the  Swiss  National  Bank’s  website
(www.snb.ch). 
For many decades, Switzerland has been among the world’s most successful economies. If it is
to maintain this position in future, openness to new technology will be essential. In addition to
taking  over  technologies  created  elsewhere,  Switzerland  will  need  to  ensure  that  domestic
companies are able to develop their own market-ready innovations.
Various factors can facilitate success on this front, whether in established companies or start-
ups. Above-average operating conditions – including low bureaucratic hurdles for the set-up and
day-to-day running of companies, reliable patent law and ready access to financing, for example
–  are  crucial.  Another  important  parameter  is  open  market  access,  not  least  for  foreign
competitors; barriers to entry for new firms are extremely harmful to economic wellbeing.
The  education  system  is  also  a  significant  determinant  of  a  country’s  innovative  potential.
Switzerland invests heavily in high-quality education, both at university level and in the form of
specialist  vocational  training  schemes,  which  helps  explain  its  status  as  a  global  leader  in
research and development.
And finally, it is vital to promote a culture of entrepreneurship. The will to pursue a given business
activity and succeed is critical if promising ideas are ultimately to evolve into marketable products
or  processes.  Switzerland  cannot  be  truly  ambitious  without  ambitious  entrepreneurs,  and
surveys  suggest  that  the  country  still  has  room  for  improvement  here. Against  this  backdrop,
steps  should  be  taken  to  cultivate  innovative  drive  and  entrepreneurial  thinking  early  on,  for
instance by encouraging high school students to do projects in which they found their own small
companies. Various universities already run programmes designed to assist young researchers
in bringing innovative products and services to market. Private initiatives also play a significant
role in nurturing entrepreneurship in Switzerland, helping young people learn how to transform an
idea into an innovation and operate a business.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
