Philip R Lane: The African Continental Free Trade Area - creating
fiscal space for jobs and economic diversification
Remarks  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Conference  of
African  Ministers  of  Finance,  Planning  and  Economic  Development,  United  Nations  Economic
Commission for Africa Addis Ababa, Addis Ababa, 14 May 2018.
 I am delighted to be here today to address the Fifty First Session of the Conference of African
Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you Dr Songwe for extending
this invitation to me.
The  theme  for  this  year’s  session  –  the African  Continental  Free  Trade Area:  creating  fiscal
space for jobs and economic diversification – comes in the wake of the historic decision in Kigali
earlier  this  year,  when  forty-four African  Heads  of  State  and  Government  signed  up  to  a  new
Continental Free Trade Area (CFTA).
To  quote  Dr  Songwe,  the  effective  implementation  of  the  CFTA  may  have  “a  game-changing
impact on African economies”. Africa can potentially create a single market of 1.2 billion people
with over US$3 trillion in continental GDP. Already, intra-African trade is much more focused on
value-added products than Africa’s trade with the rest of world. Manufactured goods account for
almost 42 percent of intra-African trade but only 15 percent of exports from Africa to countries
outside the continent, with extra-African trade dominated by commodities.
Africa is projected to see the largest increase in population of any continent in the coming thirty
years:  this presents both great opportunities and great challenges. In this context, an efficient,
continent-wide  single  market  can  make  a  fundamental  contribution  in  promoting  inclusive
economic growth across a more integrated continent.
Against  this  background,  I  want  to  share  with  you  some  of  Ireland’s  experiences  as  a  small
country and member of a much larger regional single market and trading bloc – the European
Union (EU). Membership of the EU has been a primary driver of our economic transformation
over the last forty five years.
Of course, our experience is not directly applicable to the African context and the EU is much
more  than  a  free  trade  area,  with  extensive  economic,  social  and  political  inter-linkages.
Nevertheless, I think some lessons from Ireland can be useful in informing policy making in some
of your countries and in maximising the benefit of the new Continental Free Trade Area.
First, some history. Ireland joined what was then called the European Economic Community in
1973. It was a much smaller Community than it is now – there were six member states with 167
million people, rather than the 28 member states and 512 million people in the EU today. The
accession  of  Ireland  (together  with  Denmark  and  the  United  Kingdom)  in  1973  expanded  the
number of members to nine.
Ireland was by far the poorest country in the Community at that time; GDP per capita was just 53
per cent of the EU average. Ireland was a peripheral economy on the edge of Europe and quite
dependent  on  exports  of  basic  agricultural  products.  Ireland  was  also  heavily  economically
dependent on our former colonial power, the United Kingdom: in the early 1970s, over 60 per
cent of exports went to the UK market. A quarter of the Irish workforce was in the agricultural
sector  and  Ireland  experienced  high  levels  of  unemployment,  high  emigration  rates  and  low
productivity in key economic sectors.
Forty-five years later, the picture is very different. Ireland has a population of just 4.7 million but
firms in Ireland now have access to a single market of over 500 million consumers across the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
EU. In turn, a large EU market provides a key foundation for global trading activity, both through
scale  effects  and  the  assurance  that  EU  membership  provides  to  international  customers  in
relation to regulatory and product standards.
Living  standards  in  Ireland  are  now  comparable  to  those  prevailing  elsewhere  in  the  EU.
Exporters – both local enterprises and the large- scale multinational sector – are a key driver of
overall productivity sector and, being less exposed to domestic demand conditions, provide an
important source of economic and financial stability.
The traditional agri-food sector has been transformed, with a shift towards higher value-added
activities,  while  Ireland  is  an  important  location  for  international  manufacturing,  international
business services and international financial intermediation. EU membership has also allowed
Ireland to foster trade linkages with a broader range of countries (both inside the EU and outside
the EU) than had previously been the case: Ireland has gone from exporting more than 60 per
cent of our goods and services to the UK in the early 1970s to just 13 per cent today.
Multinational firms play a significant role in Ireland’s export sector. As a small country, the scale
and composition of foreign direct investment (FDI) is fully inter-linked with the international trading
opportunities provided by EU membership, since the local market is too small to justify significant
inward investment. Rather, these firms are typically looking for an EU base to serve customers
across Europe, the Middle East and North Africa (the EMEA regions). Equally, domestic firms are
able to scale up in the context of the EU-wide single market, enabling better growth opportunities.
So how did we do it and what lessons have been learned?
One primary lesson is that, for a small country, gaining access to a large market is an enormous
opportunity:  it  has  transformed  the  outlook  of  our  domestic  enterprise  sector  and  has  been  a
fundamental building block of our success in attracting FDI.
A  second  lesson  is  that  EU  membership  by  itself  was  not  sufficient:  domestic  policies  and
domestic institutions must provide the environment conducive to a flourishing enterprise sector.
Despite  EU  membership,  Ireland’s  economic  success  was  not  overnight.  An  unsustainable
growth  spurt  in  the  late  1970s  was  followed  by  prolonged  stagnation  during  the  1980s,  with
Ireland caught in a trap of low growth, significant emigration and high debt. This period came to
an end in the late 1980s, when a combination of improving external conditions and resolute fiscal
actions  stabilised  the  Irish  macro-financial  situation.    In  turn,  this  allowed  Ireland  to  take
advantage of structural changes in the world economy in the 1990s that supported expansion in
international trade in high-tech goods and business services.
Especially  during  the  1994–2001  period,  Ireland  grew  at  a  remarkable  pace  while  maintaining
macro-financial stability, with strong increases in output, employment and living standards. The
unemployment rate fell from almost 17 per cent in 1987 to just over 4 per cent by the turn of the
millennium; the fiscal balance moved from a deficit of over 8 per cent of GDP to a surplus of 2.7
per cent; the debt-to GDP ratio declined from in excess of 110 per cent to under 40 per cent over
the same period; and the current account was in surplus. This period up to 2001 was termed the
‘Celtic Tiger’ era, by analogy to the fast-growing group of emerging Asian economies that had
enjoyed rapid expansion in the 1970s and 1980s.
It is important to emphasise that sustainable growth was only possible due to a long period of
public investment in the education sector that provided an important local supply of high-skilled
workers.  In  addition,  strong  employment  growth  was  also  supported  by  a  broadening  of
participation in the labour market, especially with a sharp increase in female participation in the
workforce.    There  was  also  a  reversal  in  the  traditional  pattern  of  net  emigration,  with  many
overseas-based  Irish  people  returning  home  and  foreign  nationals  moving  in  response  to  the
economic opportunities available in Ireland.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  addition,  rapid  growth  also  required  ongoing  improvements  in  the  public  capital  stock
(especially  transportation  infrastructure  and  education)  through  an  effective  infrastructural
investment programme, which was in part financially supported by the EU system of cohesion
and structural funds. It also depended on improvements in locally-supplied business inputs, such
as telecoms and energy.
Taken together, it is evident that a wide range of supportive domestic institutional policies had to
be in place in order for Ireland to take advantage of the opportunities provided by the international
trading system. For foreign investors, the stability of the Irish institutional environment was also
vital: long-term, large-scale investments are not likely if the domestic institutional framework is
vulnerable  to  unpredictable  shifts  in  terms  of  key  policy  choices.    This  certainly  includes  the
predictability of the corporation tax regime but also extends to ensuring that “doing business” is
facilitated  by  reasonable  regulatory  requirements,  an  efficient  legal  system,  an  agile  labour
market and reliable public and business infrastructures.
An important feature of Ireland’s experience has been that international economic integration is
not uniform: the strength of Ireland’s international linkages varies across countries and sectors. 
This is quite natural:  there are fixed costs and scale effects in developing individual industries
and entering different export markets. It follows that, especially for a small country, international
trade  can  lead  to  specialisation  in  a  small  number  of  sectors  and  a  high  dependence  on  a
particular set of export destinations.
While specialisation is beneficial in terms of maximising productivity, resilience and flexibility is
required  in  adapting  to  shocks  in  specific  industries  and  export  markets.  This  includes
maintaining the fiscal space to cope with a sudden downturn in tax revenues, making sure the
financial system is well capitalised, developing a sufficiently strong social safety net to support
displaced  workers  and  ensuring  that  educational  and  training  systems  can  adapt  to  shifts  in
demand for different occupational skills.
So far, I have emphasised the impact of trade openness on exporting opportunities. Of course, it
is  just  as  important  to  recognise  the  role  of  imports  in  driving  economic  performance  and
improving living standards. At a basic level, modern production typically involves extensive use of
intermediate  and  capital  goods:  access  to  the  global  supply  of  such  goods  is  vital  for  the
functioning of many industries.  Access to imports also is necessary if the gains to specialisation
are to be obtained – a country can focus on production in a select number of industries while
maintaining a full range of consumption and investment opportunities through importing all that is
required. Of course, this is just a restatement of the classic arguments in favour of international
trade, in terms of potential to deliver gains to all countries through two-way flows of exports and
imports.
Let me now turn to the implications for the financial system and the balance of payments of an
increase in trade openness. Through movements in gross and net international financial flows,
the domestic financial system will be affected by changes in the external financial environment.
Rather than relying exclusively on external debt, foreign direct investment and equity inflows can
help  to  fund  the  expansion  of  both  exporters  and  domestically-orientated  firms.  Clearly,  some
scope for foreign-currency funding is feasible for exporters that receive foreign-currency earnings
from  export  markets  but  regulators  need  to  keep  a  careful  eye  on  the  risks  associated  with
currency mismatches in the financial system. In similar fashion, current account deficits that are
financed by equity flows or are directed at productivity-enhancing investment projects pose fewer
risks  than  external  deficits  that  are  financed  by  debt  or  directed  at  adding  to  domestic
consumption.
Taking account of all of these considerations brings me to the final lesson that our experience
has taught us – the importance of robust policy frameworks, underpinned by strong governance
institutions.   As I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, EU membership in 1973 did not
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
immediately deliver prosperity: the gains from economic and trade integration are long-term in
nature and accrue only gradually. Moreover, as I have emphasised in this speech, sustainable
gains  can  only  be  obtained  if  the  domestic  policy  framework  provides  the  necessary
infrastructural supports, establishes a pro-business environment for both domestic and foreign
firms  and  secures  macro-financial  stability.  In  turn,  a  durable  and  successful  domestic  policy
framework will only prove resilient in the face of external or domestic shocks if there is a shared
social commitment to maintaining a robust set of institutions that underpin its foundations.
From a Central Bank perspective, monetary and financial stability also contributed to the creation
of more favourable domestic environment during the late 1980s and 1990s. We have seen from
the financial crisis at the end of the last decade that a stable and functioning banking system is
integral to the performance of the real economy and research on the lessons learned from that
period inform current policy at the Central Bank. Today, we have increased powers to supervise
and regulate bad practice in Irish financial institutions, and this is done in conjunction with our
European partners under the Single Supervisory Mechanism. In relation to the banking system,
the European system builds resilience by requiring banks to maintain sufficiently-high capital and
liquidity ratios. At the national level, we can add an extra capital buffer if we assess that there is a
risk of excessive credit growth. The Central Bank of Ireland has also introduced borrower-based
measures  in  the  form  of  ceilings  on  loan-to-income  and  loan-to-value  ratios  in  the  mortgage
market. These mortgage measures make the banks safer, while also protecting consumers from
over-indebtedness.
The real estate and credit boom that so distorted our economy during 2003–2008 and led to so
much suffering during the post-2008 crisis was a timely reminder that creating the right policy
environment is not a journey with an end point; it is a continual process that demands constant
commitment and adaptability. The 2003–2008 boom phase showed the dangers of insufficient
risk management, with optimistic projections about future economic prospects spilling over into
excessive construction activity and financial speculation. This was amplified by a surge in foreign
debt inflows into the domestic banking system. Triggered by the 2008 global financial crisis, the
post-boom  crash  had  a  devastating  impact,  especially  on  those  who  suffered  income  and
employment losses and those who had incurred unsustainable debts. The clear lesson is that
strong  economic  fundamentals  can  unleash  undesirable  side  effects  in  terms  of  financial
speculation central banks and financial regulators have a heavy responsibility to build resilience
in the financial system and take counter-cyclical measures to offset the risks associated with
domestic credit booms.
To sum up, membership of the EU has been transformational for Ireland’s prosperity and growth.
Our economy and society are unrecognisable today in comparison to the Ireland that the joined
the  EU  in  the  1970s.  Access  to  a  large  market  alone  was  a  necessary  (but  not  sufficient)
condition for transformation. It also required an enabling business environment for domestic and
foreign  companies  alike,  effective  policy  frameworks  and  public  investment  in  physical  and
human capital.
In  terms  of  the  current  economic  agenda  facing  Ireland,  we  need  to  focus  on  maintaining  an
environment that is attractive for business activity in an ever-changing global economy in support
of  domestic  prosperity,  while  ensuring  the  ancillary  policies  are  in  place  to  safeguard  macro-
financial stability. Furthermore, we need to continue to use our voice within the EU and on the
global  stage  to  ensure  the  development  of  stable,  inclusive,  sustainable  and  integrated
economies and societies.
I  hope  my  remarks  this  morning  will  assist  you  as  you  start  to  plan,  both  at  regional  and  at
national level, for the entry into force of the Continental Free Trade Area. We in Ireland are ready
and  willing  to  continue  to  share  our  experiences  with  you  as  you  take  forward  this  ambitious
task. I look forward to learning more about your plans during the rest of today’s event.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
