SPEECH 
   DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
 
 13/04/2018 
Martin Flodén 
Swedish House of Finance 
 SVERIGES RIKSBANK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
The Riksbank's balance sheet: How large 
should it be in the future?* 
Prior to the financial crisis, the Riksbank had a balance sheet of about SEK 200 bil-
lion. It now amounts to SEK 870 billion. The balance sheet has thus risen from 6 
per cent to 20 per cent of GDP (see figure 1). This recent growth in the balance 
sheet is an experience we share with many other central banks. It is primarily a re-
sult of central banks having complemented low interest rate policy with asset pur-
chases in order to make monetary policy even more expansionary.  
This expansionary monetary policy has had an impact and helped strengthen the 
economy as well as push up inflation to levels that are compatible with the infla-
tion target. In Sweden, we are therefore approaching a situation where the mone-
tary policy expansion can start to be tapered and the interest rate and balance 
sheet can start to be normalised. But what will monetary policy actually look like 
in a future “normal situation”? This is currently a subject of intense discussion 
among many central banks and other agents. Analyses by the Riksbank and others 
indicate that average interest rates in the future will be lower than what was 
deemed normal in the decades before the financial crisis.1 But what are we to ex-
pect from the Riksbank’s balance sheet in the future? This is the question I would 
like to discuss today. 
My discussion will be based on a monetary policy perspective, which means that 
the focus is on the holdings of Swedish government bonds built up by the Riks-
bank in recent years and on the monetary base and the liquidity surplus that is 
now on the liability side of the balance sheet. There are other components that 
also have a major impact on the Riksbank’s balance sheet but I will not discuss 
these in any particular detail. Here, I am thinking mainly about the foreign ex-
change reserve. 
I will also refer to the international discussion, in which arguments have been put 
forward both for and against “large” central bank balance sheets.  The arguments 
                                                            
* I thank Henrik Erikson, Jesper Hansson, Björn Lagerwall, Marianne Sterner, and Anders Vredin for discussions 
and comments on previous versions of the text. 
  1 [16] 
   concern two related questions: Should the purchase and sale of bonds be an ac-
tive monetary policy tool even in the future? Do large bond holdings strengthen 
the transmission of central bank policy rates to market rates?  
Before I analyse these questions in more detail, I would like provide some back-
ground by describing both what central bank balance sheets looked like before 
the crisis and how they have developed since, and how the design of monetary 
policy interacts with the balance sheet. This background is important in order to 
be able to assess how the Riksbank’s balance sheet should develop over the 
longer term and be able to relate to the discussion in other countries. Central 
bank balance sheets were quite different prior to the financial crisis, both in com-
position and size. We can expect countries in which monetary policy steers to-
wards similar future inflation targets to have comparable interest rate levels. The 
balance sheets may, however, look quite different. 
My main message today is that the monetary policy arguments for a large balance 
sheet are, in my opinion, not particularly strong in the Swedish context. Indeed, 
there are also risks associated with maintaining a large balance sheet. The most 
likely scenario is therefore that the Riksbank’s balance sheet will, in a future nor-
mal situation, be substantially smaller than it is today. 
There is no “normal” balance sheet 
Figure 2 shows what various central bank balance sheets looked like just over a 
decade ago, prior to the global financial crisis. The most striking feature of the fig-
ure is that balance sheets looked different in different countries. 
In some countries, for example the United States and Canada, the central bank 
had a lean balance sheet, the size of which was determined in practice by the de-
mand for banknotes in the economy. The asset side was dominated by domestic 
government bonds while the liability side was dominated by issued banknotes. 
These lean balance sheets meant that they had an almost entirely risk-free finan-
cial position as the central bank receives interest payments on the assets while 
the liabilities are cost-free. In this way and if the interest rate is sufficiently high 
and the banknote demand sufficiently large, the central bank can fund its own op-
erations and deliver a surplus to the state. 
The Riksbank and the Swiss National Bank also had relatively minimalistic balance 
sheets where the liability side was dominated by cost-free capital, but, apart from 
banknotes, these central banks had accumulated equity on the liability side. The 
asset side was dominated by gold and foreign exchange reserves, and the Riks-
bank held no government bonds at all. Despite these similarities, the Swiss Na-
tional Bank had a significantly larger balance sheet than the Riksbank. This was 
due to both a substantially higher demand for cash in Switzerland and the fact 
that the Swiss National Bank had more equity.  
In other countries, such as Japan and New Zealand, central banks had balance 
sheets that were larger than was justified by the cost-free capital. The Bank of Ja-
pan had already implemented quantitative easing before to the financial crisis in 
order to bring up inflation. As a consequence of this, Japanese banks had liquidity 
reserves on the central bank balance sheet. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand had 
  2 [16] 
   a balance sheet with several large items on the liability side. There were deposits 
from both banks and the state, as well as currency loans which funded some of 
the country’s foreign exchange reserve. 
There are several explanations why the balance sheets looked different in differ-
ent countries. To a certain extent, it depends on the monetary policy regime. For 
example, the need to maintain a foreign exchange reserve may depend on 
whether the country has a fixed or floating exchange rate. To a certain extent, it 
depends on history and previous monetary policy regimes. The size of the gold re-
serve can often be explained by previous links between the currency and the gold, 
and the currency reserve can be a remnant from previous regimes with a fixed ex-
change rate. The way the balance sheet looks is also influenced by what tasks the 
central bank has and how profits and risks are distributed between the bank and 
its owners.2 
Figure 3 shows that many central bank balance sheets, including the Riksbank’s, 
have grown rapidly after the financial crisis. But how will the balance sheet de-
velop when monetary policy is normalised? Should central banks strive for a lean 
balance sheet or is there reason to let balance sheets remain large? This review 
shows that there is no “normal” balance sheet that can be seen as an obvious 
benchmark. The development will instead be determined by central banks’ analy-
sis of, for example, how the size and composition of the balance sheet interact 
with interest rate policy in normal times.  
The interest rate level does not affect the Riksbank’s 
balance sheet 
According to traditional textbook models, the central bank steers the short-term 
interest rate by buying and selling securities in order to expand or contract the 
money supply, known as “open market operations”. The basic premise is that 
commercial banks that receive deposits from households must keep a certain 
amount of liquid funds to be able to serve customers wishing to withdraw money 
from their accounts. These liquid funds constitute the monetary base of the econ-
omy and can consist of either banknotes in the banks’ cash vaults or reserves held 
by the banks in non-remunerated accounts at the central bank. 
When the market rate is positive, the banks lose money as they are obliged to 
maintain liquidity reserves, and the higher the interest rate is, the less willing the 
banks are to maintain reserves. According to this textbook model, there is there-
fore a directly negative correlation between the size of the monetary base and the 
level of the interest rate. The central bank can conduct monetary policy either by 
setting an interest rate and letting the monetary base adapt to it, or by determin-
ing the size of the monetary base and thereby let the interest rate adjust itself. 
Up until the outbreak of the financial crisis, the textbook model was quite an ap-
plicable description of monetary policy in the United States. The Federal Reserve 
took a decision on a policy rate and then implemented it in the form of open mar-
ket operations that increased or decreased the volume of reserves the banks held 
in accounts at the central bank until the market rate coincided with the decided 
interest rate level. 
  3 [16] 
   It is a long time, however, since the textbook model was an applicable description 
of monetary policy in Sweden.3  There is little cash use and the cash reserves of 
commercial banks are therefore only negligible. Furthermore, there is no require-
ment in Sweden for commercial banks to hold liquidity at the Riksbank in propor-
tion to their deposits.4 Put simply, one can say that there is no monetary base in 
Sweden.5 In other words, the Riksbank does not conduct monetary policy by 
changing “the amount of money” in the economy. Instead, the Riksbank deter-
mines “the price of money” by directly setting the interest rate on certain finan-
cial assets.6 These assets are either deposits or lending from the Riksbank to com-
mercial banks depending on how much liquidity there is in the system.  
If there is a surplus of liquidity in the economy, banks will have credit balances on 
the Riksbank’s balance sheet in the same way as when they are forced to hold li-
quidity reserves in accordance with the textbook model. The major difference 
from the textbook model is that the Riksbank pays the market rate on the re-
serves.7 Accordingly, the link between monetary base and size of the central bank 
balance sheet and the interest rate has also been broken; bank reserves are remu-
nerated at the market rate and the Riksbank can thereby determine the interest 
rate irrespective of how large the liquidity reserves in the economy are.8 
The repo rate is the main monetary policy tool ... 
When, in the initial stages of the financial crisis 2008–2009, policy rates had been 
lowered to levels close to zero, there was a need for further monetary policy ex-
pansion in several parts of the world. Central banks like the Federal Reserve and 
the Bank of England bought large quantities of bonds. The aim of these purchases 
was both to push down the general level of interest rates and to support some 
sub-markets that functioned poorly during the crisis, for example the market for 
mortgage bonds in the United States. In the euro area and in Sweden, central 
banks began similar purchasing programmes a few years later.  
The theoretical support for the claim that bond purchases make monetary policy 
more expansionary is quite weak and controversial. In spite of the weak theoreti-
cal support, many argue that the experiences of bond purchases are good.9 Some 
even say that the bond purchases have worked so well that they should remain 
part of the monetary policy toolbox even in normal times.10 This is a conclusion I 
find rash, at least as far as the Riksbank is concerned. 
The fact that bond purchases seem to have worked well in certain situations and 
countries does not mean that they will work well in normal times. To draw that 
conclusion, one needs to consider how bond purchases may have contributed to 
making monetary policy more expansionary. There are at least four different ways 
that are usually mentioned. First, the purchases may have functioned as a market 
stabiliser during the most acute phases of the financial crisis when the markets 
functioned poorly.  The asset purchases then helped to keep the pricing of bonds 
going and to push down interest rates. 
Second, it may have been a question of risk transfer. This is when the central bank 
purchases private assets (e.g. mortgage bonds) so that the market risk for these 
assets is transferred to the public balance sheet, or similarly when a central bank 
in a currency union purchases government bonds from countries with different 
  4 [16] 
   credit risks. Even in this case, market prices can be maintained so that some mar-
ket rates are pushed down despite the monetary policy interest rate not being 
lowered.  
Third, bond purchases can be a way of influencing expectations of future policy 
rates. The central bank loses money if it raises the policy rate after it has pur-
chased bonds with long maturities. Bond purchases can therefore make it more 
credible that the central bank will keep the policy rate low going forward. This 
would cause the market rates for bonds with long maturities to fall.  
Fourth, bond purchases can affect yields at different maturities through a so-
called portfolio balance channel. This occurs if market participants don’t see 
short-term deposits at the central bank as a perfect substitute for the government 
bonds they have sold to the central bank. The purchasing of long-term govern-
ment bonds by central banks reduces the supply of safe assets with long maturi-
ties, which drives up the price and drives down yields on long-term government 
bonds.11    
I find it difficult to believe, however, that these channels will be particularly effec-
tive in the Swedish economy in a future environment of more normal monetary 
policy. 
As I have said previously (Flodén, 2015), I also suspect that the effects via these 
channels have not been particularly strong in recent years, as the Riksbank has 
purchased large volumes of bonds. The Riksbank’s purchases have taken place in 
an environment where the markets are well-functioning. Furthermore, the pur-
chases have only been of government bonds, which have the same risk profile as 
the certificates issued by the Riksbank to fund the purchases. In addition, the 
portfolio balance channel has been partly rendered inoperative as a result of the 
Swedish National Debt Office’s repo facility, where market participants can bor-
row an unlimited amount of government bonds with the desired maturity. 
I think that the positive effects of the Riksbank’s bond purchases have instead 
been mainly achieved in another way. When the Debt Office’s dealers make use of 
the repo facility and borrow bonds, it is done at an overnight interest rate that is 
0.40 percentage points below the Riksbank’s repo rate. As the Riksbank’s holdings 
of government bonds have increased, the short-term market rates for govern-
ment securities have therefore been pushed down towards –0.90 per cent, i.e. the 
repo rate minus the cost for the facility (see Figure 4). Via expectations, the low 
level of these short-term rates has then also pushed down yields on long-term 
government bonds.12 
In practice, there are hence two levels on the money market in Sweden, one 
around the repo rate and one around the cost for the National Debt Office's facil-
ity. My assessment is that an equally expansionary monetary policy could in prin-
ciple have been achieved without quantitative easing but with a repo rate some-
where between these two interest rate levels. In recent years, setting a lower 
repo rate could have been problematic but in a future scenario with more normal 
interest rate levels, I see no need to try to affect short-term market rates with 
tools other than the repo rate. 
  5 [16] 
   And as regards the formation of expectations and the transmission from short-
term rates to rates on longer maturities, the Riksbank has a long tradition of using 
transparent communication to signal future monetary policy plans, for example by 
publishing forecasts of the repo rate’s development.13 If it is considered important 
to influence market expectations in a certain way, I believe that it is normally eas-
ier to achieve this using well-considered communication, for example in the form 
of more or less forceful statements from the Executive Board about future inter-
est rate policy, rather than in the form of bond purchases. 
… but increased likelihood of unconventional monetary 
policy in times of economic slowdown 
When the acute phases of the financial crisis began in the autumn of 2008, the 
Riksbank owned no domestic bonds. As a result, the Riksbank found it difficult to 
quickly intervene on the market with appropriate support measures. A lesson 
learnt from this episode was that the Riksbank needed to have preparedness in 
order to be able to act on the bond market in special situations. Such prepared-
ness presupposes that the Riksbank maintains at least a small portfolio of govern-
ment bonds in order to have the necessary systems, agreements and knowledge 
in place. The Riksbank therefore built up a government bond portfolio in 2012–
2013.14 
This justification for maintaining a bond portfolio is still relevant. A future reduc-
tion of the Riksbank’s bond holdings will therefore most likely not result in a com-
plete phasing out of the portfolio. But the bond portfolio built up in 2012–2013 
was small in relation to the one built up for monetary policy purposes. Bond pur-
chases in 2012–2013 totalled SEK 10 billion, compared with purchases for mone-
tary policy purposes since 2015 totalling more than SEK 300 billion. 
The support measures that may become relevant in special situations can either 
relate to market stabilisation, as was the case in the autumn of 2008, or to bond 
purchases as a complement to monetary policy when the policy rate is restricted 
by its lower bound. 
There is a great deal to suggest that real interest rates in Sweden and abroad will 
be lower in the future than they were during the decades preceding the financial 
crisis, partly as a result of demographic changes and a new saving pattern in the 
global economy.15 As a consequence, several central banks, including the Riks-
bank, have revised down their assessments of what is a normal level for the policy 
rate. The likelihood is therefore greater than we will touch the lower bound for 
the repo rate in the event of economic slowdown. This means that we in the fu-
ture more often may need to use bond purchases as a complement to the repo 
rate and repo rate forecast.  
So, even if I have argued that a portfolio of government bonds has a limited role 
to play in monetary policy in normal conditions, I nevertheless expect that the 
Riksbank, along with other central banks, will find itself in situations where bond 
purchases are justified as a complement to interest rate policy.  
  6 [16] 
   Other arguments for a large bond holding 
The arguments for large bond holdings in normal circumstances that I have so far 
discussed seem not to be particularly relevant to the Riksbank’s monetary policy in 
a future normal situation. 
Another argument put forward by some is that a large bond holding, and thereby a 
larger liquidity surplus in the economy, may strengthen the monetary policy trans-
mission mechanism.16 The arguments basically say that a liquidity surplus – when 
the banking system has plenty of central bank reserves – can mitigate the risk of 
frictions on the money market. During the financial crisis, the interbank market 
functioned poorly, causing market rates to become more volatile and making it 
more difficult for financial institutions with no direct access to central bank facilities 
to get access to liquidity. With a large liquidity surplus, the economy becomes less 
dependent on a well-functioning interbank market. 
Regardless of the soundness of these arguments, they have no implications for the 
Riksbank’s bond holdings. The fact is that the liquidity surplus in Sweden will, in all 
likelihood, be large irrespective of how the bond portfolio develops in the future. 
We already had a structural liquidity surplus in the economy before the Riksbank 
began its bond purchases in 2015, and the surplus has increased since then as a 
result of reduced cash use and the Riksbank’s dividend payments. The Riksbank’s 
bond holdings now amount to SEK 363 billion while the liquidity surplus, i.e. com-
mercial banks’ claims on the Riksbank, amounts to SEK 435 billion. The liquidity sur-
plus would therefore be about SEK 70 billion even if the entire bond portfolio was 
sold.17 
Another argument sometimes put forward in favour of large bond holdings is that 
the central bank’s purchases would increase the supply of safe assets in the econ-
omy, and that there is otherwise a shortage of such assets.18 The Riksbank’s bond 
purchases result in that government bonds with a specific maturity disappear from 
the market and are replaced by Riksbank certificates with a maturity of one week.19 
The Riksbank then takes over some of the maturity transformation that the market 
otherwise tries to achieve on its own, and helps to reduce the interest rate risk in 
the outstanding portfolio of government securities. This argument isn’t particularly 
convincing either. If it is considered important to have short maturity on the na-
tional debt in normal times, this should be dealt with when the government bonds 
are issued, and it is then a question for the National Debt Office. 
Furthermore, the conversion from government securities to Riksbank assets does 
not  seem  to  increase  the  supply  of  safe  assets  in  Sweden;  the  interest  rate  on 
(short-term) government securities is lower than the repo rate which means that 
the market price of government bonds is higher than the price of Riksbank certifi-
cates with the same maturity. This pricing indicates, if anything, that the market 
prefers to hold government bonds rather than central bank reserves and hence that 
the Riksbank’s bond purchases are reducing the supply of the safest assets.  An-
other indication of this is that the term premiums on government bonds have been 
very low, and probably negative, in recent years.20 This suggests that government 
bonds with long maturities are not being priced with risk premiums in relation to 
Riksbank certificates or government securities with short maturities. 
  7 [16] 
   I have now discussed arguments that could indicate that the Riksbank should con-
tinue to maintain a large portfolio even in the future, and I don’t consider these 
arguments to be particularly strong.  But does this mean that the size of the balance 
sheet has no significance or are there strong arguments indicating that the Riks-
bank’s balance sheet should be small? 
Arguments against substantial bond holdings in normal 
times 
Maintaining a large balance sheet can be associated with risks, but the nature of 
these risks depends both on the assets held by the central banks and how these 
are funded on the liability side. The risks may relate to the central bank’s financial 
position and ability to conduct monetary policy and simultaneously fund its own 
operations, as well as to its reputation and possibility to safeguard its independ-
ence in monetary policy issues. 
Plosser (2018) discusses risks to reputation and argues that the central bank must 
have a narrow mandate to be able to justify continued independence from the 
political sphere. The risks he discusses are mainly linked to central banks that buy 
assets other than government bonds. The more the central bank involves itself in 
risk and capital allocation in the economy, the greater the risk of it being exposed 
to political pressure with respect to how it should conduct its policy. And more 
generally, the larger the central bank’s balance sheet, the greater the risk of politi-
cians wishing to utilise the resources in a specific way. 
Plosser’s arguments are important, but they are not particularly applicable to the 
Riksbank’s current situation. The Riksbank has only purchased government bonds, 
and we have spread our purchases fairly evenly on the outstanding bond stock in 
order to affect the general level of interest rates rather than specific bond prices. 
And despite the Riksbank’s balance sheet having grown rapidly in recent years, it 
is significantly smaller in relation to GDP than in many other countries. 
As far as the Riksbank is concerned, I consider the financial risks to be more prob-
lematic. The large bond portfolio means that the interest rate risk on the balance 
sheet has increased. The bonds we have purchased have an average maturity of 5 
years, but are funded with Riksbank certificates with a maturity of one week. If 
the interest rate rises, the funding costs will therefore increase while the return 
on the bonds already purchases remains unchanged. In addition, the expected re-
turn on the Riksbank’s bond portfolio is low. This is due partly to term premiums 
being generally depressed in recent years, and partly to the return on government 
bonds being, so to speak, based on the interest rate in the National Debt Office’s 
facility (i.e. 0.40 percentage points below the repo rate) while the funding costs 
are based on the repo rate.  
Central banks can normally fund their own operations and conduct an independ-
ent monetary policy using the return on their cost-free capital, i.e. the assets they 
hold that correspond to the cost-free liabilities. These liabilities consist of the vol-
ume of banknotes in the economy and the central bank’s equity. 
Compared with other central banks, the conditions for the Riksbank to bear risk 
are less favourable. This is because cash use is limited and, as a result, the volume 
  8 [16] 
   of banknotes only amounts to about one per cent of GDP, compared with around 
10 per cent in the euro area, the United States and Switzerland, and almost 20 per 
cent in Japan. Admittedly, the Riksbank’s equity is greater than that of central 
banks in certain other, mostly Anglo-Saxon, countries. But the overall picture is 
nevertheless that the Riksbank has less cost-free capital than other central banks 
and hence the conditions for holding financial risk on its balance sheet are less fa-
vourable (see Figure 5). This picture has been reinforced in recent years as the 
volume of banknotes has rapidly declined.  Furthermore, the earning capacity of 
all central banks has weakened as underlying interest rates have fallen.21  
I have previously discussed the financial risks that occur on the Riksbank’s balance 
sheet when we have large bond holdings.22 These risks in combination with the 
Riksbank’s weak earning capacity constitute an argument in favour of a smaller 
balance sheet in the long run. This is the best way of safeguarding the Riksbank’s 
future capacity to fund its own operations and conduct an independent monetary 
policy.23  
Reasonable for the Riksbank’s balance sheet to shrink 
in the long run  
The Riksbank’s balance sheet has grown rapidly in recent years, partly because we 
have purchased government bonds for monetary policy purposes, and partly be-
cause the foreign exchange reserve has been strengthened.   
In other countries, arguments have been put forward indicating that central banks 
should perhaps continue to hold large bond holdings even in the future when 
monetary policy has been normalised. In my opinion, these arguments are of lim-
ited relevance to Sweden and the Riksbank. 
On the other hand, there are arguments indicating that the Riksbank should miti-
gate its financial risk by winding down most of its bond holdings when monetary 
policy is normalized. My assessment is that the best way of winding down the 
bond holdings with as little market influence as possible is to hold the bonds in 
the portfolio until they mature. Over the next decade, the Riksbank’s bond hold-
ings will then develop approximately as shown in Figure 6. 
The repo rate and the rate path will thus be the main monetary policy tools when 
monetary policy has been normalized. But normal interest rates appear to be 
lower than previously thought. It is therefore more likely that we touch the lower 
bound for the repo rate in times of economic recessions, and we may then again 
need to use bond purchases as a complement in monetary policy. 
References 
Alsterlind Jan, Henrik Erikson, Maria Sandström and David Vestin (2015), “How 
can government bond purchases make monetary policy more expansionary?”, 
Economic Commentaries No. 12, Sveriges Riksbank 
Altavilla, Carlo, Giacomo Carboni and Roberto Motto (2015), “Asset purchase pro-
grammes and financial markets: lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper 
Series No 1864, European Central Bank 
  9 [16] 
   Archer, David and Paul Moser-Boehm (2013), “Central bank finances”, BIS Papers 
No 71, Bank for International Settlement 
Bernanke, Ben (2016), “Should the Fed keep its balance sheet large?”, Brookings, 
2 september 
Blinder, Alan, Michael Ehrmann, Jakob de Haan and David-Jan Jansen (2017), “Ne-
cessity as the mother of invention: monetary policy after the crisis”, Economic Pol-
icy 32, 707-755 
Costancio, Vitor (2017), “The future of monetary policy frameworks”, speech, 25 
May, European Central Bank 
De Rezende, Rafael B., David Kjellberg and Oskar Tysklind (2015), “Effects of the 
Riksbank's government bond purchases on financial prices”, Economic Commen-
taries No. 13, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Duffie, Darrell and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2016) “Passthrough efficiency in the 
Fed’s new policy setting”, Jackson Hole Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kan-
sas City 
Flodén, Martin (2015), contribution at the monetary policy meeting in February 
2015, in Sveriges Riksbank (2015), Minutes of the monetary policy meeting, Feb-
ruary 2015 
Flodén, Martin (2016), “The Riksbank’s bond purchases affect government fi-
nances”, speech, 9 November, Sveriges Riksbank 
Goodfriend, Marvin (2011), “Central banking in the credit turmoil: an assessment 
of Federal Reserve practice”, Journal of Monetary Economics 58, 1-12. 
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson and Jeremy Stein (2016), “The Federal Re-
serves balance sheet as a financial-stability tool”, Jackson Hole Symposium, Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2017), “Measuring the Nat-
ural Rate of Interest: International trends and determinants”, Journal of Interna-
tional Economics, 108, pp 59-75 
af Jochnick, Kerstin (2015), “Does the Riksbank have to make a profit?”, speech, 
23 January, Sveriges Riksbank 
Krishnamurthy, Arvind (2018), “The size of the Fed’s balance sheet”, in M. Bordo, 
J. Cochrane, and A. Seru: The Structural Foundations of Monetary Policy, Hoover 
Institution 
Nessén, Marianne, Sellin, Peter and Åsberg Sommar, Per, (2011), “The framework 
for the implementation of monetary policy, the Riksbank’s balance sheet and the 
financial crisis”, , Economic Commentary No. 1, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Plosser, Charles (2018), “The risks of a Fed balance sheet unconstrained by mone-
tary policy”, in M. Bordo, J. Cochrane, and A. Seru: The Structural Foundations of 
Monetary Policy, Hoover Institution 
  10 [16] 
   Rachel, Lukasz and Thomas Smith (2015), “Secular drivers of the global real inter-
est rate”, Bank of England Working Paper No 571 
Sims, Christopher (2016), “Fiscal policy, monetary policy and central bank inde-
pendence”, Jackson Hole Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Sveriges Riksbank (2009), “The monetary base – the Riksbank changes statistical 
definition”, memorandum, 16 April 
Sveriges Riksbank (2012), “Securities portfolio in Swedish kronor”, press release, 
10 May 
Sveriges Riksbank (2014), “The Riksbank’s operational framework for the imple-
mentation of Monetary Policy – a review”, Riksbank Studies 
Sveriges Riksbank (2017a), “The long-term repo rate”, article in Monetary Policy 
Report, February 
Sveriges Riksbank (2017b), “The Riksbank’s experiences of publishing repo rate 
forecasts”, Riksbank studies, June 
Walsh, Carl (2017), Monetary Theory and Policy, fourth edition, MIT Press 
Woodford, Mark (2000), “Monetary policy in a world without money”, Interna-
tional Finance 3, 229-260. 
Yu, Edison (2016), “Did quantitative easing work?”, Economic Insights, First Quar-
ter 2016, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
 
   11 [16] 
  Figures 
Figure 1. The Riksbank balance sheet, 2006 and 2017 
20
16
12
8
4
0
Other
Government bonds
Gold
FX Reserve
Other
Equity
Bank reserves
Coins and notes
FX Debt
Lending to banks
Gold
Other
Other
Equity
FX Reserve
Coins and notes
FX Debt
Assets
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
2006
2017
 20
16
12
8
4
0
 Note. Per cent of GDP 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
Figure 2. Central bank balance sheets before the financial crisis 
Note. Per cent of GDP. Refers to 2006. The breakdown into asset and liability classes should be seen 
as indicative  
Sources: Respective central bank and national statistics sources 
   12 [16] 
  Figure 3. Central bank balance sheet totals, 2006 and 2017 
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2006
2017
RB
Fed
ECB
SNB
Note. Per cent of GDP 
Sources: Respective central bank and national statistics sources 
Figure 4. Two levels of short-term interest rates 
1.0
Average interest rates in the repo market for government bonds
Treasury bill, 3 months
Forward rate, 3 months
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
14
15
16
17
18
  140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
 Note.  Per cent. The forward rate reflects the expected level of the repo rate over the next three 
months. 
Sources: Macrobond and the Riksbank 
  13 [16] 
  Figure 5. Central banks’ cost-free capital 
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Equity
Coins and notes
RB
Fed
ECB
SNB
Note. Per cent of GDP 
Sources: Respective central bank and national statistics sources 
Figure 6. The Riksbank’s government bond holdings 
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
 35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
  Note. Nominal amounts, SEK billions. Forecast up until June 2019, then a technical projection with 
the assumption that no further reinvestments are made. The development of the holdings is also 
affected to a certain extent by the market prices of the bonds and which bonds the Riksbank 
chooses to reinvest in. The vertical line marks the shift between forecast and technical projection. 
Source: The Riksbank 
  14 [16] 
    
                                                            
1 See Sveriges Riksbank (2017a). 
2 See Archer and Moser-Boehm (2013). 
3 The major features of the Swedish operational framework are not unique, but common 
to monetary policy in most countries. 
4 Regulatory frameworks set other liquidity requirements for banks, but the liquidity need 
not consist of central bank money. 
5 Up until 2009, banks’ remunerated liquidity surplus was not part of the monetary base in 
Sweden, but in 2009 the definition was changed to include the liquidity surplus (see Sveri-
ges Riksbank, 2009). The new definition is more in line with international recommenda-
tions and practice, but, in my opinion, is a poor measure of what the literature refers to as 
the “monetary base”. 
6 This is a simplified description of the Riksbank’s operational framework for the imple-
mentation of monetary policy. More detailed descriptions can be found in Nessén, Sellin 
and Åsberg Sommar (2011) and Sveriges Riksbank (2014). 
7 Goodfriend (2011) calls this way of conducting monetary policy “interest on reserves pol-
icy” which he differentiates from the textbook model’s “monetary policy”. See also Wood-
ford (2000) for an analysis of how monetary policy works in a world without a monetary 
base. 
8 There was a liquidity deficit in Sweden before the financial crisis. At that time, the Riks-
bank supplied liquidity to the market by lending to banks via repos (hence the “repo” 
rate). Using today’s definition, one could say that we in a sense had a negative monetary 
base in Sweden. This illustrates that the currently used definition of “monetary base” is 
actually rather strange. The liquidity deficit has thereafter shifted to a surplus. The Riks-
bank is now draining the surplus liquidity by issuing certificates (and sometimes via fine-
tuning transactions) with one-week maturity at an interest rate which we still call the repo 
rate. A better term would be the “certificate rate”.  
9 See Yu (2016) and Chapter 1 in Walsh (2017) for summaries of studies based on US data. 
These studies usually investigate the immediate impact on asset prices when news of as-
set purchases is made public. It is more difficult to study whether the price effects are per-
manent and here the empirical support is therefore weaker. Altavilla et al. (2015) find that 
the ECB’s purchasing programme has pushed down interest rates across quite a broad 
spectrum of European assets, and particularly as regards government bonds in countries 
with high interest rates (such as Italy and Spain). De Rezende et al. (2015) find that the ini-
tial stages of the Riksbank’s purchasing programme contributed to rate falls in about the 
same way as purchasing programmes in other countries. 
10 In a survey of central bank governors and leading researchers, a high percentage in both 
groups say that the purchasing of government bonds and/or other assets is a tool that 
should continue to be part of the central bank toolbox even after the crisis (Blinder et al., 
2017). 
11 Alsterlind et al. (2015) describe the signalling and portfolio balance channels in more de-
tail. 
12 In Sweden, the effect on rates with short maturities is probably more important than 
the effect on rates with long maturities. This is because most lending to household and 
  15 [16] 
                                                                                                                                                          
companies is done at variable interest rates. According to Statistics Sweden’s Financial 
Market Statistics, 73 per cent of lending to households and non-financial corporations had 
a remaining interest-rate fixation period of 3 months or less in February 2018. 
13 The primary purpose of repo rate forecasts has so far been to influence market rates, 
and periodically there have been major differences between the Riksbank’s forecasts and 
market expectations (see Sveriges Riksbank 2017b). 
14 See Sveriges Riksbank (2012). 
15 See Rachel and Smith (2015) and Holston et al. (2017). 
16 See, for instance, Duffie and Krishnamurthy (2016), Bernanke (2016) and Constancio 
(2017). 
17 The Riksbank could reduce the liquidity surplus further by selling other assets, i.e. gold 
and foreign exchange reserves. But such a change of its asset holdings is not likely; the 
Riksbank has in the last decade instead enhanced its foreign exchange reserves by more 
than SEK 200 billion financed by loans in foreign currency. 
18 See Greenwood et al. (2016), Constancio (2017) and Krishnamurthy (2018). 
19 This is still a simplified description of the Riksbank’s operational framework. See the ref-
erences in footnote 6 for a more complete description. 
20 See Figure 3 in Flodén (2016). 
21 See af Jochnick (2015). 
22 Flodén (2016). Sims (2016) discusses more generally how large balance sheets risk 
weakening the financial independence of central banks. 
23 This conclusion is not self-evident, however. One could also argue the opposite and say 
that the Riksbank, as a result of low interest rates and small amount of cost-free capital, 
should seek higher returns. And in normal times, government bonds with long maturities 
can be expected to give a return that is higher than the anticipated funding costs via the 
repo rate.  Such a search for yield is associated with risks and will sometimes succeed, 
sometimes fail. It is therefore hardly a sustainable strategy for an institution like the Riks-
bank, which is now celebrating its 350th anniversary and is striving for an equally long fu-
ture existence.  
  16 [16] 
