Maja  Kadievska-Vojnovik:  Fintech  and  digital  transformation  -
"Regulating an anonymous world"
Platform for discussion by Ms Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of
the Republic of Macedonia, at the xCEEd Conference on Fintex, Belgrade, 22-23 May 2018.
 FinTech Sector – General trends, current state in Macedonia, main challenges and risks
and impact on central banks’ activity
FinTech is one of the fastest-growing sectors in the global financial services industry nowadays
with  total  global  venture  investment  in  FinTech  companies  reaching  high  of  $13.6  billion  in
2016(KPMG,  2016).The  highest  number  of  FinTech  service  providers  is  in  the  payments,
clearing and settlement category, followed by credit, deposit and capital-raising services (Basel
Committee on the Banking Supervision Survey, 2016).
Research in the area (ATKearney & EFMA, 2013) points to several factors that define readiness
for digitization in the banking sector such as: 1) the capacity of banks for innovation; 2) the stage
of  technological  development  where  the  country  is  located;  3)  the  level  of  competition  in  the
sector;  4)  culture  of  consumption;  5)  demographic  structure  of  the  population;    6)  degree  of
concentration  in  the  banking  sector;  and  7)  the  existing  regulation,  which  can  promote  or
constrain emergence of new technological solutions.
On the other hand, there are some constraining factors that hamper digitalization in South East
Europe, including Macedonia, such as: the negative effects that the financial crisis had on the
ability of banks to innovate, and the local mentality of the population which still does not show a
sufficient level of confidence in online activities.
Financial services industry in Macedonia is in essence still traditional, conservative industry, but
is evolving. Banks strive to keep pace and fit in the new digital era by investing more and more
funds in new products and financial innovations, as well as sponsoring software development
conferences and new technologies.
This is supported by relatively solid infrastructure for digitization in Macedonia which is readily
available  at  satisfactory  level.  For  example,  76%  of  households  in  Macedonia  had  access  to
internet  in  2017  vis-à-vis  85%  in  the  EU.  On  average,  bank  deponents  have  two  payment
accounts in Macedonia. However, only 7% of payment accounts held by the households can be
used for electronic payments, while this share is relatively higher in case of legal entities (29%).
The latter initiated 51% of the credit transfer in an electronic way, while the households initiated
electronically  only  20%  of  their  credit  transfers  in  2017.  The  companies  usually  initiate  their
payments by using computers, while households rely mainly on computers (92% of electronic
credit transfers), mobile phones (7% of electronic credit transfers) and ATM (1% of electronic
credit transfers). In comparative context with the EU members, we are lagging behind given that
91% of credit transfers were electronically initiated in the old EU members and 86% in the new
EU member countries in 2016. Regarding digital channels used for ordering goods and services,
internet shoppers in Macedonia increased by 5 p.p. during the last five years and reached 15% of
the population that used internet in 2017. This is quite below the 57% of internet shoppers in the
EU  in  2017,  according  to  the  Eurostat.  Internet  shopping  is  becoming  popular  among  all  age
groups, but the young internet users have the highest share of online shoppers among internet
users.
In  addition,  the  development  of  FinTech  companies  is  expected  in  the  coming  period  through
further liberalization of payment transactions and the further trend of opening of the information
systems of the banks towards this type of companies.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The absence of liberalization in payments industry can be treated as a factor that in a sense
constrained digitalization in Macedonia in the past. This is expected to change with the new Law
on payment services and systems which isunder procedure implementing PSD2, PAD, E-money
2,  Settlement  Finality  Directive,  IFR  provisions  and  some  provisions  of  Regulation  on  credit
transfers and direct debit. The new law is expected to provide more stimulating environment for
financial innovations allowing for new entrants to the market with innovative payments solutions,
while establishing standards that will enhance the security and consumer protection.
Financial regulation – How to promote safe and secure financial innovations
A sound legal framework is important for private service providers to develop secure and efficient
payment services and for authorities to keep the confidence of users in the regular functioning of
the payment system.
The  development  of  payment  services  is  a  continuously  evolving  dynamic  process,  driven  by
technological advances. Market players design new services that better adapt to users’ needs in
order to expand their business. In doing so, they try to balance the new opportunities the market
opens up with the financial regulation they have to comply with. However, private players want to
maximize their profits and may not have the right incentives to reach a socially viable equilibrium.
In this sense the regulator monitors the development of the market and technological advances
to be able:
to foster innovation (and better customer experience);
strike the right balance between security and efficiency;
adapt the regulation to new services;
put in place effective consumer protection measures;
ensure fair competition among market players;
avoid regulatory arbitrage.
The new regulatory framework in Macedonia which is in an advanced stage of drafting, aims at
balancing safety and creativity. In order to protect consumers and maintain financial stability, the
new framework envisages licensing regime for the non-banking payment service providers as
well as an appropriate safeguarding measures for client’s funds. However, it supports the grow
of start-ups in the Fintech sector by easing some of the regulatory requirements related to the
initial  capital,  BCP,  external  audit  etc.  Moreover,  it  intends  to  allow  already  established
companies or start-ups that aim to provide payment services to be involved in other business
activities allowing them to diversify the business risk and freedom to grow. 
Open Banking – Benefits, challenges and risks
Digital  disruption  is  the  driver  that  enables  banks  to  keep  pace  with  customer  demands.  By
adopting the right digital business model, banks can take advantage of open banking to unleash
new  business  value.  Being  an  open  bank  means  operating  like  a  platform  company,  with  a
business model that connects people and processes with assets and a technology infrastructure
to manage internal and external users’ interactions. Open banking—a platform-based business
approach— is a new way of how banks generate value, born out of the increasing pressures
from  regulations  and  competitors.  Outside  the  banking  domain,  industry  leaders  like  Google,
Apple,  Facebook,  Amazon  and  Alibaba  are  unleashing  technology’s  power  by  developing
platform-based business models and taking advantage of the strategies they enable. Since the
beginning of 2018, sharing proprietary data with third parties is not an option for European banks,
with PSD2 in the European Union. Investments are being made to make this a reality; almost $1
billion was invested in PSD2 enabled services in 2016 (up to 200 percent from 2015) .1
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the core of Open banking are the application programming interfaces (APIs), which has also
been used and facilitated by eBay starting in early 2000s, and also by technological giants like
Google, Apple, Uber, and so on. Thus, banks could have similar benefits by adopting the APIs or
the  Open  Banking  concept.  The  emerging  ecosystem  of  Bank  &  FinTech  partnerships  and
collaborations i.e. Open Bank has paved the way for the data sharing economy, and a way banks
to monetize their digital assets and data. Many open initiatives and government regulations open
up access to the customer data banks hold on other businesses. Regulations such as Access-
to-Accounts as part of PSD II and Open API (application programming interface) standards are
paving  the  way  for  an  open  API  ecosystem.  Regulators  in  many  other  countries  are  also
evaluating  feasibility  of  open  APIs  with  the  aim  to  provide  consumers  with  secure,  less
expensive, and easy-to-use financial services.
PSD2, as the most significant regulation, will arguably make the greatest impact in opening up
bank-held customer account data to Account Information Service Providers. The ecosystem of
open  banking  would  be  influenced  by  PSD2.  Firstly,  PSD2  does  not  mandate  the  creation  of
common API standards. This means that individual banks may make their data available through
different technical standards. Secondly, PSD2 only opens up access to customer transactional
data for specific institutions, which must also be regulated PSPs. Furthermore, the concept of
platform  is  a  crucial  factor  for  open  banking,  whereas  regarding  financial  industry,  the
phenomenon of platforms has to be further developed. For payments and personal information
this  is  expected  to  gain  traction  through  the  PSD2,  as  third  parties  can  engage  in  service
provisioning  without  actually  owning  bank  assets.  Open  Banking  extends  this  concept  further.
From the customer’s point of view it means increased choice and control over financial assets,
data and the service providers having access to this.
2
The big aim of Open Banking is to increase competition in the market by driving innovation in the
quality  of  products  and  services  that  customers  receive.  The  current  account  market  has
complex pricing, low customer switching, difficulties in comparing products and high charges on
overdrafts. The outcome is that people are paying more for lower quality services than they need
to. In 2016, Accenture conducted a research with consumers which showed that 85% of 18–24
year olds would trust third parties to aggregate their financial data. In contrast, 48% of 55–64 year
olds were neutral or positive.  These figures already suggest that we will witness a battle for the
customer relationship and data between banks and FinTech. The outcome of this battle will be
crucial  in  determining  the  future  of  the  bank  models  which  will  likely  face  several  transition
stages. At the current stage, the existing banks are under pressure by the FinTech to improve
cost efficiency and the customer relationship. Given their market knowledge and good market
positions,  the  existing  banks  may  adapt  relatively  fast  by  adopting  new  technologies  in  close
cooperation with the FinTech. In the future, banks and FinTech companies may strengthen their
cooperation as joint ventures, partners or other type of structures where delivery of services to
the clients is shared between them. However, it is not excluded that some of the existing banks
will not survive the wave of technology-enabled disruption and are replaced by new technology-
driven banks founded by FinTech and BigTech companies. In a more extreme scenario, which is
not likely nowadays but may be viable in the very long run, banks are displaced by FinTech and
BigTech companies and are no longer significant players on the market. In order to establish
Open  Banking  in  Macedonia,  it  is  necessary  to  implement  the  best  practices  and  regulations
from European countries. Although our regulation is still in drafting process, our Banks are not
passive in this field and are already undertaking activities for opening their IT systems with new
interfaces and modules for interacting with customers and external companies.
The biggest challenge that can endanger this process are digital space attacks (cyberattacks) in
this domain, which are a relevant threat with a high probability of happening.
The National Bank as a regulator is in charge of defining the framework for information security in
our  financial  system.  The  task  of  our  banks  is  to  implement  concrete  safeguards  on  the
technical,  administrative  and  physical  level  based  on  performed  analysis  of  risks  from
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
introduction and use of new services, which includes the risks of digital attacks.
In 2016, the National Bank conducted thematic control through the development of a tool whereby
banks  made  their  own  assessments  of  the  inherent  risk  and  appropriately  determined  the
activities that they needed to fulfill on different levels of readiness from attacks from the digital
space (primary, secondary and advanced level of readiness).
Blockchain technology and impact on central banks’ activity
The potential of blockchain is immense and is an issue for the central banks as well. At retail
level blockchain from Central bank perspective in regards to cryptocurrencies or Central bank
cryptocurrencies  (CBCCs)  does  not  exist.  However,  the  concept  of  a  retail  CBCC  has  been
widely discussed by bloggers, central bankers and academics.
While  CBCCs  for  retail  payments  remain  at  the  conceptual  stage,  some  central  banks  have
completed proofs of concept for DLT-based applications. One of the reasons for the interest in
DLT  is  that  many  central  bank-operated  wholesale  payment  systems  are  at  the  end  of  their
technological life cycles. The systems are programmed in obsolete languages or use database
designs that are no longer fit for purpose and are costly to maintain.
Project Jasper at the Bank of Canada (Chapman et al (2017)) and Project Ubin at the Monetary
Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS  (2017))  and  STELLA  –  a  joint  research  project  of  the  European
Central Bank and the Bank of Japan simulate real-time gross settlement systems (RTGS) on a
DLT platform.
The  two  projects  Jasper  and  Ubin  show  that  central  bank  money  can  be  transferred  on  a
distributed ledger in real time, in realistic volumes. Nevertheless, none of the current initiatives to
update or replace existing wholesale payment systems are considering the adoption of DLT.
The ECB and the BOJ, in their role as operators of important market infrastructures services,
decided to conduct in-depth experiments to determine whether specific existing functionalities of
their  respective  payment  systems  could  run  in  a  DLT  environment.  Findings  in  relation  to
efficiency show that, with regard to the specific aspects of RTGS services tested to date, a DLT-
based solution could meet the performance needs of current large value payment systems.
In conclusion, this joint effort of ECB and the BOJ has produced a thorough set of results that
provide reasons to be optimistic with respect to the capabilities of DLT within payment systems.
It is, however, important to bear in mind that this work has been conducted in a test environment;
therefore, any assumptions regarding the capacity for DLT to be used in production should not
be made from this report.
Both, the Bank of England (2017) and Bank of Canada (Ho, 2017)) conclude that DLT is not yet
mature enough for current adoption. Yet most central banks that are considering modernizing
their  core  payment  infrastructure  stress  the  need  to  make  new  systems  inter-operable  with
future DLT platforms.
Looking beyond the immediate horizon, many industry participants see significant potential for
DLT to increase efficiency and reduce reconciliation costs in securities clearing and settlement.
One potential benefit of DLT-based structures is immediate clearing and settlement of securities,
in contrast to the multiple-day lags that currently exist when exchanging cash for securities (and
vice  versa).  Progress  in  this  direction  was  recently  achieved  by  a  joint  venture  between  the
Deutsche Bundesbank and Deutsche Börse, which developed a functional prototype of a DLT
based securities settlement platform that achieves delivery-versus-payment settlement of digital
coins and securities (Deutsche Bundesbank (2016)).
Whether or not a central bank should provide a digital alternative to cash is most pressing in
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries, such as Sweden, where cash usage is rapidly declining. But all central banks may
eventually have to decide whether issuing CBCCs makes sense in their own context.
In making this decision, central banks will have to consider not only consumer preferences for
privacy and possible efficiency gains – in terms of payments, clearing and settlement – but also
the risks it may entail for the financial system and the wider economy, as well as any implications
for monetary policy. Some of the risks are currently hard to assess. For instance, at present very
little can be said about the cyber-resilience of CBCCs, something not touched upon in this short
feature.
In this context, the current regulatory framework predate the emergence of FinTech companies.
Therefore, it will certainly be changed and as a matter of fact it is already an evolving process in
many  countries,  including  Macedonia.  This  means  that  in  the  light  of  new  FinTech  risks,  the
current  supervisory  frameworks  will  evolve  in  a  manner  that  ensures  appropriate  oversight  of
banking and non-banking service provider’s activity as well as new payment systems based on
DLT  solutions  while  avoiding  innovation  hindering.  Different  countries  may  follow  different
supervisory  regimes,  which  includes  direct  oversight  of  the  new  market  players,  then
establishing innovation hubs, accelerators and regulatory sandboxes.
The role of Regtech in enhancing regulatory and compliance challenges
Digital finance raises new risks and new areas of vulnerability might develop because of new
financial products (virtual cryptocurrencies) and new technologies (distributed ledger based on
anonymous users and on decentralized governance without accountability). Digital finance gives
rise  to  an  increasing  number  of  financial  players  and  eases  cross-border  transactions,  which
makes  the  monitoring  of  transactions  more  complex  for  financial  institutions  and  public
authorities. Finally, while new financial players are reshaping the financial sector, they may be
outside the scope of banking sector regulation and subject to less stringent AML/CFT rules than
are banks.
New technologies may support greater efficiency for staying compliant. Regtech companies are
especially keen to provide banks with more effective ways to improve their compliance and risk
management, through outsourcing or insourcing processes. They may open up opportunities for
digital  transformation  of  control  and  support  functions  within  banks  (risk,  compliance,  legal,
finance, IT). Regtech could address a wide array of requirements related to regulatory reporting,
financial  crime,  operational  risk  (including  cyber-security  and  fraud  detection),  consumer
protection and data protection regulation. Although there are many Regtech companies operating
in developed countries, there are no examples of Regtech operating in Macedonia. Nevertheless,
Macedonian  banks  and  non-bank  players  are  allowed  to  use  services  offered  by  Regtech
companies operating globally in order to stay compliant with the rising regulatory requirements.
1
2
“Open for Business – CHOOSING DIGITAL BUSINESS MODELS FOR BANKS TO DRIVE NEW GROWTH” –
Accenture strategy
Accenture Payments, Consumers’ initial reactions to the new services enabled by PSD2, 2016
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
