Simon M Potter: The Federal Reserve and central bank cooperation
over the past 100 years
Remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, for the Commemoration of the Centennial of the Federal Reserve's
US Dollar Account Services to the Global Official Sector, New York City, 20 December 2017.
Introduction
 Distinguished representatives of the global central banking community and official sector, current
and  former  central  bank  account  operations  staff  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,
Federal Reserve System colleagues, I am honored to speak at this commemoration of the 100th
anniversary of the opening of the first dollar accounts for central banks around the world on the
books of the Federal Reserve.  And it is, of course, very apt that we gather here in a room whose
namesake, Benjamin Strong, was more than anyone else responsible for their establishment.
1
On May 3, 1917, the Federal Reserve signed its first reciprocal account agreement with a foreign
central bank, the Bank of England, entailing the establishment of nostro  and custody accounts
on each other’s books. This was soon followed by agreements with several other central banks,
including the Banque de France, Bank of Italy, and Bank of Japan.
2
These  early  agreements  were  instrumental  in  helping  the  newly-established  Federal  Reserve
forge a global role for itself as an institution and for the U.S. dollar as a reserve currency. So as
much as the account openings themselves, today we commemorate the symbolism, principles,
and values they represent.
Today’s  event  commemorates  the  start  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  international  operations  and
involvement in the international arena. It honors the Federal Reserve’s past and ongoing support
for  the  principle  of  the  major  central  banks  to  provide  safe,  confidential,  and  reliable  account
services  in  their  currencies  to  the  global  central  banking  community  in  support  of  financial
stability  and  other  central  banking  mandates.  And  it  acknowledges  the  value  of  cooperation
among the world’s central banks and the role that these initial operational ties played in paving
the way for broader and deeper cooperation among central banks.
In doing so, we also recognize the individuals past and present who have played a role, often
behind the scenes, in managing the Federal Reserve’s dollar account operations for the global
official sector.
The early years: war, ambition, and cooperation
The story of the early years of the Federal Reserve’s dollar accounts for foreign central banks is
one of war, ambition, and cooperation.
It is no coincidence that the first agreement was signed less than a month after the United States
entered  the  First  World  War  on April  6,  1917.  Since  the  Federal  Reserve  leaders’  very  first
meeting in 1914, in addition to the weighty task of standing up from scratch a fully functioning
central bank, they had to prepare for any eventuality concerning the impact of the Great War on
the U.S. and the Federal Reserve’s responsibilities. Against this backdrop, Fed leaders foresaw
that  it  would  be  useful  to  establish  close  banking  relationships  with  foreign  central  banks  to
facilitate transactions arising from wartime needs and conditions, including payments for war-
related  U.S.  exports,  financing  of  wartime  government  debt,  and  gold  transfers.  It  was  left  to
Governor Benjamin Strong of the New York Fed to journey to Europe in the spring of 1916 to
personally  negotiate  the  early  account  agreements,  allowing  him  to  forge  close  personal
3
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
relationships with European central bankers, most famously with the Bank of England’s Montagu
Norman, or as Strong would come to call him: “my dear Monty.”  While these initial discussions
in 1916 did not lead immediately to agreements, partly owing to U.S. observance of neutrality, the
groundwork  had  been  laid  such  that  by  the  time  the  U.S.  entered  the  War  in April  1917  the
arrangement with the Bank of England could be executed rapidly.
4
The historical records show that the establishment of this first account agreement with the Bank
of England involved a minor diplomatic faux pas, known as the British Treasury bills episode.
President Wilson, having won reelection in 1916 on the claim of having kept the U.S. out of the
Great War and observing strict neutrality, had directed the Federal Reserve Board in Washington
to issue a clear-cut warning to U.S. banks not to invest in a pending large placement of British
Treasury bills in the U.S. market. The immediate and worldwide effect of the statement was to
give the impression that the U.S. had “broken with Britain,” an impression which officials were
soon scrambling for ways to counteract.  The result was the Federal Reserve Board’s decision,
contrary to the terms of the account negotiations and to the consternation of the New York Fed,
to  unilaterally  announce  to  the  public  the  account  agreement  with  the  Bank  of  England.  The
whole  episode  spoke  perhaps  to  the  Fed’s  inexperience  in  matters  of  delicate  international
financial  diplomacy.  In  any  event,  the  Bank  of  England  magnanimously  let  the  matter  slide—
noting that mistakes “may arise even in the best regulated families”—and the account agreement
was  executed  on  May  3,  1917  and  operationalized  on  June  20,  1917.
 Andrew  Hauser  will
provide more insight into this fascinating period in his remarks in a few minutes.
6,7
5
As expedient as the accounts were for wartime needs, the historical records show they were
also  motivated  by  ambitions  of  the  Fed’s  first  leaders  to  establish  the  dollar  as  a  major
international currency and, for Benjamin Strong, to establish New York as a great international
financial center to rival London. They had their work cut out for them. By 1914, while the U.S. was
already the world’s largest economy and trading nation, its banking system remained curiously
parochial  and  the  dollar  was  not  a  major  international  currency.   In  fact,  American  firms
continued  to  finance  their  trade  almost  entirely  with  credits  from  foreign  banks,  a  source  of
resentment, with Paul Warburg, the first Federal Reserve vice chairman, referring to the annual
acceptance fees paid to London banks as a form of “tribute.”  With the passage of the Federal
Reserve Act in 1913, some of the constraints on the emergence of a robust dollar trade financing
market were removed and the newly established U.S. central bank could take a more active role
in nurturing and backstopping a nascent dollar acceptance market, which it did. These efforts
included  buying  dollar  acceptances  for  foreign  central  bank  accounts  at  competitive  discount
rates and providing guarantees, for a small fee, on payments at maturity of acceptances bought
for  these  accounts.
  These  actions  helped  to  spur  the  dollar’s  emergence  as  an  important
international  currency,  with  dollar  acceptances  viewed  as  an  attractive  reserve  asset  by  the
1920s.
10
8
9
The early accounts also represented tangible links of cooperation among major central banks,
with much of this cooperation centered on efforts to maintain or restore the international gold
standard in the aftermath of the First World War.
 The reciprocal relationships enabled central
banks to buy and sell foreign exchange to influence credit conditions in each other’s markets with
the  aim  of  regulating  cross-border  gold  movements.  In  this,  central  banks  of  the  time  viewed
acting  through  foreign  central  bank  correspondent  accounts  as  preferable  to  acting  through
private intermediaries.
Central banks’ mutual need for safe, confidential, and reliable account services
11
The  need  for  reciprocal  relationships  continues  to  resonate  with  central  banks  today  even
following  the  demise  of  the  international  gold  standard  and  major  changes  in  the  international
monetary system over the past one hundred years.
Why do central banks value these relationships so highly?
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Safety, confidentiality, and reliability are strong motivations for the reciprocal provision of banking
and custody services among the world’s central banks. In particular, central banks around the
world have a mutual need for correspondent banking  and custody services to execute on core
central banking functions in which the safety, confidentiality, and reliability of service provision is
essential. This befits the character and role of central banks as highly risk-averse stewards of
national wealth. It reflects the imperative for central banks to maintain untarnished credibility in
the  formulation  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  and  an  unblemished  reputation  in  the
operation  and  oversight  of  domestic  and  cross-border  payment  systems. And  it  is  driven  by
central banks’ responsibility to safeguard financial stability.
12
This  results  in  central  banks  often  preferring,  and  sometimes  requiring,  foreign  reserve
managers to use the account services of fellow central banks. This is especially true for liquidity
tranches of reserve portfolios where safety and accessibility are critical for the execution of core
central  banking  functions,  including  FX  reserve  management,  FX  intervention,  time-sensitive
official payments, macro-prudential policy, lender of last resort responsibilities, and other central
bank operations that may require the use of foreign assets and currencies.
As stewards of national wealth in their capacity as managers of official foreign reserves, central
banks seek to minimize custodial risk in the safekeeping of their foreign reserves.
 By using a
central bank custodian, the risk of loss stemming from insolvency, negligence, or unauthorized
disclosure is either removed or significantly reduced. Central banks do not pose counterparty risk
and  reserve  managers’  use  of  fellow  central  bank  account  services  reduces  the  risk  of
disclosure  of  central  banks’  trading  strategies.  Relatedly,  the  confidentiality  of  holdings  and
activities  in  central  bank  accounts  supports  the  execution  of  sensitive  operations  that  may
require  utmost  discretion  to  avoid  setting  off  market  panics  or  privileging  one  set  of  market
participants over another. Finally, central banks’ use of a fellow central bank’s account services
allows  them  to  settle  in  central  bank  money,  with  attendant  benefits  from  the  standpoint  of
smooth and reliable settlement.
Central bank account services and global financial stability
13
In addition to the reciprocal benefits central banks derive from providing each other with account
services in support of their mutual needs and common missions, many central banks have long
recognized that their provision of account services to the global central banking community is
important for supporting global financial stability. For these central banks, the rationale for offering
account  services  to  other  central  banks  is  grounded  in  the  importance  of  their  currencies  for
international  transactions,  cross-border  funding,  and  in  official  reserve  holdings.  If  a  given
currency is important internationally, the central bank of issue has a special responsibility to offer
account  services  commensurate  with  this  role  to  the  global  central  banking  community.  For
reserve currency-issuing central banks, this has typically meant a range of payment, investment
and securities custody services for reserve assets in their currencies.
For  the  world’s  major  central  banks,  the  maintenance  of  operational  links  through  reciprocal
account relationships is integral to their ability to engage in global financial stability operations.
Having  accounts,  settlement  instructions,  tested  and  secure  lines  of  communication,  and
business  processes  already  in  place  at  the  time  of  or  leading  up  to  a  crisis  enhances  major
central banks’ ability to respond to crises efficiently and flexibly. There are numerous historical
examples, both known and unknown to the public, of these account relationships being used to
support the stability of the global financial system, perhaps best exemplified historically by the
Bretton  Woods  network  of  central  bank  swap  lines.
  More  recently,  in  nearly  every  major
international incident over the past twenty years that has prompted a coordinated response by
the world’s major central banks—be it coordinated FX interventions by the major central banks in
the wake of the 2011 Fukushima disaster, the swap lines established during the 2008 financial
crisis, or swap lines in the wake of 9/11—the reciprocal accounts among major central banks
formed the backbone for the actual or potential execution of stabilization policies. Without these
14
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
accounts,  coordinated  central  bank  action  in  pursuit  of  financial  stability  objectives  would  be
either  severely  handicapped  or  entail  high  risks  in  terms  of  the  safety,  confidentiality,  and
reliability of these operations.
15
The practical reality is that in exigent situations characterized by fast-moving events, incomplete
information, and intense pressure, even the best of policies can fall short unless a level of trust,
experience,  and  internal  muscle  memory  exists  for  operations  to  be  executed  effectively.
Operational  readiness  is  developed  and  conditioned  through  the  daily  interactions  between
central  bank  staffs  in  the  course  of  managing  each  other’s  cash  and  custody  accounts,
generating valuable in-house expertise in cross-border central banking operations and a network
of inter-personal and institutional relationships in the global central banking community that may
otherwise not exist. This knowledge and network of relationships may be leveraged by central
banks to better understand the policy context behind global central bank actions, as well as the
operating environments and constraints faced by central bank colleagues around the world.
The Federal Reserve’s dollar account services
For the Federal Reserve, the dollar’s predominant international role confers on it an especially
strong interest in providing safe and efficient account infrastructure for the reserve management
and cross-border payment needs of the global official sector.
 The Federal Reserve’s account
infrastructure  for  foreign  official  institutions  performs  a  utility-like  function  for  those  institutions
wishing to access U.S. fixed income markets and correspondent banking services in order to
execute  core  central  banking  and  official  functions  in  which  the  safety,  confidentiality,  and
reliability of service provision is essential.
16
Through  the  Central  Bank  and  International Account  Services  area  of  the  New  York  Fed,  the
Federal Reserve today offers banking and custody services in dollars to just under 180 foreign
central  banks  and  monetary  authorities,  approximately  18  international  multilateral  financial
institutions, and a number of ministries of finance or national governments. The suite of services
offered to these account holders is a basic package of dollar-denominated and gold services in
three general areas: transfer and custody services for gold and fixed income securities; dollar-
based payment services; and dollar-based cash management and investment services. Every
day,  New  York  Fed  staff  process  on  average  hundreds  of  billions  in  transaction  volumes  on
behalf of foreign official account holders. In total, approximately $3.6 trillion of dollar-denominated
securities and cash deposits are held by foreign official account holders at the New York Fed,
representing about half of the world’s official U.S. dollar reserves and one-third of the world’s total
official FX reserves.
Reflecting  the  breadth  of  its  foreign  official  customer  base  and  dollar  holdings,  the  Federal
Reserve’s  account  platform  is  a  centralized  infrastructure  through  which  dollar-denominated
financial transactions between official institutions can occur under a single roof using the same
clearing  and  settlement  staff.  This  provides  an  important  public  benefit  in  terms  of  control  of
transactions,  efficiency  of  execution,  and  confidentiality  in  two  specific  ways.  First,  this
centralized account platform has played a critical role in the resolution of international debt crises
throughout  the  20th  and  early  21st  centuries,  such  as  the  Latin American  debt  crises  of  the
1980s. Second, the centralized platform sustains a high level of operational readiness for cross-
border  dollar  operations  in  support  of  global  financial  stability.  By  allowing  direct  payments
between or among account holders on a shared platform, or between the Federal Reserve and
account  holders,  the  speed  and  efficiency  of  often  time-critical  official  payments  is  greatly
shortened  and  simplified.  Combined  with  the  Federal  Reserve’s  ownership  and  operation  of
critical  payment  systems  such  as  the  Fedwire  Funds  Service  and  the  Fedwire  Securities
Service, this centralized platform supports the Federal Reserve’s crisis response capabilities in
a highly dollar-based international financial system.
It should also be noted that the New York Fed’s long experience as the FOMC’s selected bank for
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
open market operations on behalf of the Federal Reserve System confers on it a trusted level of
competence, experience, and reliability with foreign official account holders. The same New York
Fed  front  office  personnel  that  purchase  and  sell  Treasuries  for  the  Federal  Reserve’s  own
portfolio also execute trades on behalf of foreign official account holders. Moreover, the same
New  York  Fed  personnel  that  perform  back  office  operations  for  the  Federal  Reserve’s  own
portfolio  also  perform  back  office  operations  for  the  transactions  of  foreign  official  account
holders.  This  consolidated  transactional  platform  used  by  both  the  Federal  Reserve  and  its
foreign official account holders means that the global official community can be assured that the
quality of the services it receives from the Federal Reserve meets the same standards as the
Federal Reserve sets for the servicing of its own portfolio.
Choreographers of central bank operations
Let me now spend a moment discussing the people behind our account services. In doing so, I
wish to recognize staff past and present who have played and continue to play a vital role every
day in processing critical transactions on behalf of the global official community.
Your  experience  in  the  daily  management  of  the  accounts  of  other  central  banks  produces
unique operational knowledge and expertise. Whether for time-sensitive transactions as part of
the often intricate choreography of global financial stability operations or for more routine official
payments,  the  insights  developed  and  experiences  with  the  policies,  environments,  and
constraints  of  other  central  banks  provide  the  Federal  Reserve  with  enhanced  capabilities  to
formulate and execute policies. The dedication, skill, and expertise of this staff transform on a
daily  basis  the  abstract  principle  of  safe,  confidential,  and  reliable  service  provision  into  an
operational reality.
So, to the current and former staff here today, I pay tribute to your service to the global official
community,  to  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  to  the  U.S.  You  are  worthy  heirs  to  the  legacy  of
Benjamin Strong, Montagu Norman, and other early giants of central bank cooperation.
The evolving risk environment in cross-border payment operations
Even as we hold this commemoration and celebrate the legacy of central bank cooperation in
this most tangible of forms, the evolving risk environment in cross-border payment operations
requires  us  as  central  bankers  to  continually  rededicate  ourselves,  in  word  and  deed,  to  the
mission of providing safe, confidential, and reliable services to each other.
As we are all no doubt aware, risks in cross-border payment operations have undergone major
shifts  in  recent  years,  with  cyber  threats  in  particular  emerging  as  one  of  the  most  critical
security  issues  facing  our  community.  For  financial  institutions,  while  cyber  threats  may  have
been regarded as a cost of doing business at one point, it is not an exaggeration to say that they
are now viewed as potential existential threats, not just for individual firms but also for the broader
financial system and critical infrastructures that support it. As central banks with broad mandates
for financial stability, this is certainly a concern for us all.
We  recognize  the  challenges  and  complexities  in  strengthening  prevention,  detection,  and
incident response regimes around fraudulent payment instructions. Users of financial messaging
services such as SWIFT span the full range of IT sophistication and capacity, and remediating
deficiencies in prevention and detection may require a substantial re-orientation of priorities and
resources for some institutions. Overcoming these obstacles will be no easy task, but so long as
there is a weak link in the cybersecurity chain criminals will seek to exploit it. As we face the
common  challenges  of  strengthening  our  cybersecurity  defenses  and  payment  controls,  the
need for cooperation is greater now than ever. The Federal Reserve stands ready to engage in
further dialogue and cooperation with both its foreign official accountholders and fellow central
bank service providers in addressing these challenges.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
In doing so, we as a community can ensure that the provision of account services among central
banks continues to bear the hallmarks of safety, confidentiality, and reliability which are essential
to the execution of our public mandates.
Let me conclude with some imagery from rural America.
In the traditionalist Amish communities of Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Indiana known for simple living
and for shunning modern technology, whenever there is a need for a new barn to be built, the
Amish organize what are called barn raisings. In a barn raising, the community comes together
to  assist  in  building  their  neighbors’  barns,  with  the  understanding  that  the  favor  is  eventually
returned to other members of the community. The barn raising is a showcase of Amish planning,
organization,  and  manual  labor  and  serves  as  a  practical  linchpin  of  the  agriculturally-rooted
Amish society. However, while the barn raising fulfills a practical need, it also serves to tie the
Amish community together by reinforcing Amish society through a very visible expression of the
principle of mutual aid.
17
In this 100th anniversary year of the first dollar account openings for foreign central banks by the
Federal Reserve System of the United States, I can think of no more moving metaphor than this
for  the  benefits  that  flow  from  central  bank  cooperation  through  the  reciprocal  provision  of
account services. Let us work together to preserve it.
Thank you for listening.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I would like to thank Mark Choi for his assistance in the preparation of these remarks and colleagues in the
Federal Reserve System for their insightful comments and suggestions.
A cash account that a bank holds with another bank in a foreign currency.
The first Federal Reserve Board was sworn in on August 10, 1914. The First World War lasted from July 28,
1914 to November 11, 1918. The United States entered the First World War on April 6, 1917.
See Correspondence with Great Britain: Montagu Norman, Governor, Bank of England, Pt. 1, 1927.
President Wilson worried that relations with both Great Britain and Germany were “delicate, and, seeking to
avoid further complication from “unnecessary financial transactions,” he therefore directed the Board to issue
the  warning  to  U.S.  banks.  See  Henry  Willis, The  Federal  Reserve  System:  Legislation,  Organization,  and
Operation (New York: The Ronald Press Company, 1923), 1096. This episode is also described in Lester V.
Chandler, Benjamin Strong, Central Banker (Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1958) and Lawrence
E. Clarke, Central Banking under the Federal Reserve System (New York: The MacMillan Company, 1935).
See Correspondence with Great Britain: Letters from Montagu Norman, Deputy Governor, Bank of England,
1916–1920: “There is no occasion to say any more about the announcement of the Federal Reserve Board . . .
We  quite  realise  your  position  and  its  happening,  and,  knowing  that  mistakes  may  arise  even  in  the  best
regulated families, the incident must be looked upon as closed.”
This account opening was made possible in part by a 1916 amendment to Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve
Act, which permitted Federal Reserve Banks to open and maintain accounts on their own books for their own
foreign correspondents and agencies, with the consent of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. In 1933,
Section 14(g) was added to the Federal Reserve Act to empower the Board to prescribe specific regulations
regarding a Federal Reserve Bank’s foreign relationships, and in that same year the Board issued Regulation N
– Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers – which specifically addresses the Board’s “special supervision”
over this area that is required by the Act. As originally drafted in 1933, Regulation N required, among other
things, the consent of the Board prior to entering into any negotiation or agreement with any “foreign bank or
banker.” In 1941, Congress expanded the Reserve Banks’ 14(e) authority to include holding foreign accounts for
institutions other than its own foreign correspondents and agencies; this was done by adding “foreign banks or
bankers, or foreign states” to the account eligibility list. The Board subsequently amended Regulation N to cover
relationships  with  “foreign  states”  as  well.  Overall,  the  regulation  provides  a  basis  for  the  Board’s  role  in
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
overseeing the New York Fed’s foreign official account activities.   
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Economic historians have cited several factors for this situation, including regulatory restrictions on foreign
branching by U.S. banks, prohibitions on U.S. banks from offering dollar trade financing, and until 1914 the
absence of a central bank with market making authority. Inertia from the long-standing dominance of London
banks and the pound sterling under the gold standard is also cited. See Barry Eichengreen and Marc Flandreau,
“The Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, and the Rise of the Dollar as an International Currency, 1914–
1939,” Open Economies Review 23, no. 1 (2012): 57–87.
In his report on the discount system in Europe, Paul Warburg wrote that the “annual tribute to Europe resulting
from our primitive financial system is not merely a waste of money, but reflects upon the dignity of a nation and
economic importance of the United States.” See Paul Warburg, The Discount System in Europe (Washington:
Government Printing Office, 61st Congress, 2nd Session, Senate Doc 402, 1910), 9.
For the guarantee, from 1921 until 1974 when the New York Fed discontinued the guarantee option on banker’s
acceptances, the New York Fed charged 1/8th of 1% on the face amount of banker’s acceptances purchased on
behalf  of  foreign  central  bank  accountholders.  Dollar  banker’s  acceptances  became  a  favored  investment
instrument by foreign central banks in the days before the introduction of the first regularly issued U.S. Treasury
bill in 1929.
The maintenance of gold vaults and reciprocal gold custody accounts among major central banks provided
significant operational advantages for the functioning of the international gold standard. In addition to the safety
of storing gold with another central bank, through the practice of earmarking central banks could settle accounts
with one another without the need to physically deliver gold bullion. This was especially useful in periods, such
as wartime, when navigation of sea lanes could be impeded. The New York Fed has maintained a gold vault
used to store the gold reserves of foreign central banks since 1924 when construction of its main building was
completed. Prior to 1924, the New York Fed held gold in custody for foreign central banks in other nearby vaults,
such as the one maintained by the New York Clearing House.
Defined in general terms as “an arrangement under which one bank (correspondent)  holds  deposits  owned 
by  other  banks  (respondents)  and  provides  payment  and  other services to those respondent banks.” See
the glossary of terms used in payments and settlements, published by the Committee on Payments and Market
Infrastructures of the Bank for International Settlements.
Perhaps the most vivid historical example of this involved large-scale flight-to-safety flows of European central
bank gold reserves to the vaults of the New York Fed during the Second World War. In addition to safeguarding
their gold reserves from the Axis powers, inflows of gold were used by Allied nations to finance their purchases
of war supplies from the U.S.
The Federal Reserve’s Bretton Woods swap lines with foreign central banks were first established in 1962 and
used extensively until the collapse of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate system in the early 1970s.
The mechanics of currency swap operations among central banks is a case in point. With respect to the Federal
Reserve’s current dollar swap lines, for example, when a foreign central bank draws on its swap line with the
Federal Reserve, the foreign central bank sells a specified amount of its currency to the Federal Reserve in
exchange for dollars at the prevailing market exchange rate. The Federal Reserve holds the foreign currency in
an account at the foreign central bank. The dollars that the Federal Reserve provides are deposited in an
account that the foreign central bank maintains at the New York Fed. When the foreign central bank lends to
institutions in its jurisdiction the dollars it obtains by drawing on its swap line, the dollars are transferred from
the foreign central bank’s account at the Federal Reserve to the account of the bank that the borrowing institution
uses to clear its dollar transactions. By using its account on the books of the Fed to receive swap proceeds and
distribute them, rather than accounts at private-sector bank, the central bank avoids much of the risk of public
identification of its borrowers and itself avoids the credit risk, and other risks (operational, reputational, etc.) of a
private sector bank account. Moreover, the overall size and ramping up of potential liquidity operations can be
virtually unlimited, subject only to the policy limitations set by the central bank counterparties themselves.
For example, approximately two-thirds of the world’s FX reserves are in U.S. dollars (See International Monetary
Fund Currency Allocation  of  Foreign  Exchange  Reserves  (COFER)  database),  and  the  dollar  also  plays  a
preponderant role in international debt issuance and FX turnover. The Federal Reserve’s provision of safe,
confidential, and reliable services in dollars helps to support and promote the international role of the dollar and
of  foreign  official  holdings  of  U.S.  Treasury  securities.  The  provision  of  basic  custodial  services  in  U.S.
government  debt  securities  is  consistent  with  broader  U.S.  official  sector  encouragement  of  foreign  official
investment  in  U.S.  capital  markets.  Foreign  official  investments  in  U.S.  capital  markets  and  the  broader
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
international  roles  of  the  dollar  are  generally  believed  to  be  a  net  positive  for  the  U.S.  economy  through
seignorage revenue and reduced funding costs for the U.S. government, households, and corporations. To the
extent that these services help foreign official investors to access U.S. capital markets, they support the dollar’s
continued international role and are beneficial for the U.S. economy.
17
See Gene Logsdon, “The Barn Raising”, in Amish Roots: A Treasury of History, Wisdom, and Lore, ed. John A.
Hostetler (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989), 78.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
