Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Launch of FSPB Professional Code for
the Financial Services Industry
Welcome address by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Launch of FSPB Professional Code for the Financial
Services Industry, Kuala Lumpur, 24 May 2018.
 I  am  delighted  to  be  here  to  witness  the  launch  of  the  Financial  Services  Professional  Board
(FSPB)  Professional  Code  for  the  Financial  Services  Industry.  Thank  you  for  allowing  me  an
opportunity to offer some brief remarks this morning on the importance of this initiative from Bank
Negara Malaysia’s perspective.   
Let me begin by saying that the launch of the Code comes at a time when issues of culture and
conduct in the financial industry have become an important focal point for financial regulators.
After a hive of activity largely focused on strengthening prudential rules and standards, there is an
acknowledgement  that  behaviour  is  ultimately  regulated  by  something  that  runs  deeper  than
rulebooks. It is not an easy thing to put your finger on. Regulators have talked about “the way
things get done” in an institution, or “the human element in everyday decisions”. We like to think
of it as how one behaves when no one is watching. 
On  this  score,  the  financial  industry  could  do  better.  Despite  much  publicity  and  widespread
efforts  to  tackle  the  issue,  incidents  of  misconduct  continue  to  cast  a  dark  shadow  over  the
financial services industry across the world. This is worrying, because misconduct erodes trust
in the system. If investors, depositors and policy holders stop believing that their interests are
being  safeguarded,  the  entire  system  quickly  comes  unraveled  at  significant  costs  to  society.
These  costs  can  arise  from  failures  of  financial  institutions,  a  misallocation  of  economic
resources, or simply steep fines that destroy shareholder value and employment prospects for
affected workers. 
Since the global financial crisis, banks have paid more than USD320 billion in fines and legal
costs and have been the subject of numerous Government financial inquiries due to misconduct.
In Malaysia, in the last 5 years, Bank Negara Malaysia has imposed fines on financial services
providers to the tune of RM116 million. A survey conducted by the Bank revealed that almost two-
thirds of reported losses by banks in 2016 were associated with internal fraud, regulatory non-
compliance and operational lapses. 
We have examined these incidents in some depth. Our observations lead us to conclude that
behaviour is very much influenced bycontextual factors such as organisational values, incentives
and management responses to misconduct or non-compliance. The rightcontextual setting can
exert a powerful influence on individual behaviour. We believe this begins with setting and clearly
communicating expectations of desired behaviour. Without clarity on what is acceptable in the
first place, it would not be possible to encourage, much less enforce, these expectations.
The FSPB serves an important role in this regard through its work in defining and developing
codes of behaviour for financial institutions.
Given the stronger focus of financial regulators on conduct and culture, such professional codes
will matter greatly going forward as an important complement to regulatory standards.
The FSPB is well placed to lead and support initiatives to establish standards of conduct for the
financial industry. Its standards not only serve as useful frameworks for financial institutions and
professional bodies to develop specific guidance for their own employees and members; they
also serve to embody the industry’s collective commitment to socially responsible values and
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
ethics. 
For example, I noted with interest that the Professional Code being launched today commits to
dealing  with  counterparties,  including  suppliers  and  agents  that  “subscribe  to  sound  ethical
principles”.  Matters  such  as  the  environmental  footprint  or  human  rights  record  of  third  party
providers  are  not  typical  obligations  currently  found  in  regulatory  standards,  yet,  these  are
matters of great importance. They are a reflection of the values of the industry, and they matter to
many conscientious consumers in this age of increasingly accessible information.
Given the central role of financial services in any economy, these are issues likely to move from
the  periphery  to  increasingly  important  business  considerations.  At  the  global  level,  we  are
already seeing greater attention given to sustainable and responsible finance. In many cases, it
will require the industry to draw on experience beyond the traditional core competencies of most
financial  services  providers.  The  industry,  through  FSBP,  can  demonstrate  much  needed
business leadership in addressing broader ethical questions that will increasingly confront us as
a society and as global citizens.
Apart from what ends up in written codes, there is also important value in simply having frank
conversations  about  shared  ethical  challenges.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  senior  bankers  got
together  to  discuss  ways  to  reform  organisational  culture  following  the  widespread  PPI  mis-
selling  scandals,  but  some  would  consider  this  “too  little  too  late”.  We  need  to  bring  such
discussions forward and actively encourage a process that would allow the industry to get in front
of emerging issues around professional conduct and ethics. These include examining issues like
how  institutions  might  go  about  gaining  a  pulse  on  culture  at  various  levels  within  the
organisation, and the effects of incentive structures on behaviour.
With the digital revolution, there will be an increasing need for the industry to come together to
set  standards  for  novel  areas  of  practice. Already  now  there  is  much  buzz  about  the  use  of
artificial intelligence and big data in finance. This creates opportunities for innovation, efficiency
and growth, but also new risks, challenges and – without a doubt – difficult ethical questions on
lines that should be drawn to prevent unfair, systematic, discrimination against specific groups,
(for  instance  as  a  result  of  algorithmic  programs)  the  inappropriate  use  of  personal  data  and
excessive volatilities from high-frequency trading.
As the industry navigates these issues, a shared commitment to a common set of values has
never  been  more  critical  to  build  trust  –  with  customers,  with  employees,  with  other  financial
institutions, and with the public at large.  There are compelling economic, not just social or moral,
reasons to do so. It encourages healthy competition, more efficient and sustainable markets, and
consistently high levels of performance over the long term.
The FSPB, however, cannot achieve this alone. Deliberate and sustained efforts by the industry
will be needed to engage, to communicate, to educate and to internalise these shared values. 
By pooling inputs across the industry, richer worked examples can be developed to shed light on
how ethical principles should apply in practice. The consequences of misconduct should also be
clear  and  unambiguous  to  firmly  entrench  behavioural  norms  –  both  within  individual  financial
institutions and at an industry level. As you are aware, moves in this direction are already being
taken with the requirement financial institutions to capture and share information on employee
misconduct to inform hiring decisions beginning from July this year.  
The  Bank  on  its  part  will  continue  to  provide  a  credible  deterrent  against  misconduct  through
enforcement actions.  With the enactment of the Financial Services Act 2013, the Bank has not
hesitated  to  use  wider  enforcement  powers  that  include  stiff  administrative  penalties  provided
under the Financial Services Act to bring institutions to book for serious conduct breaches, and
barring individuals from holding senior roles in financial institutions. We will continue to pursue
investigations and enforcement actions into serious conduct breaches to the full extent of powers
provided under laws administered by the Bank.  Beyond the limits of the Bank’s powers, the Bank
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
maintains  close  cooperation  with  other  authorities  to  facilitate  investigations  and  enforcement
actions. 
Conclusion
Building trust is not easy. It takes hard work, a determination to do the right thing and confidence
to make judgements in situations that are not always well-defined. Taken in this context, the work
of the FSPB serves as an important anchor for decisions and actions that will engender trust in
the financial industry.  In a fast moving world, a strong commitment to a professional code of
conduct provides the assurance that the public seeks – that financial institutions and employees
are  held  to  and  will  consistently  demonstrate  high  standards  of  professional  and  ethical
conduct.  
I hope that the industry will continue to lend its strong support to the FSPB’s work. Following
today’s  launch  of  the  Professional  Code,  the  Bank  would  urge  financial  institutions  and
professional bodies to reflect the standards set out in the Code in the values and conduct that
you demand of your staff, agents and members. This needs to move beyond symbolic gestures,
to  the  diligent  implementation  of  policies  and  programs  that  promote  the  desired  culture.  The
Bank is confident that the FSPB will continue to play an important role in supporting these efforts
–  including  through  its  work  to  identify  implementation  challenges,  develop  solutions  and
introduce improvements to reflect emerging issues.
The financial industry has demonstrated leadership in so many areas – surely none can be as
important as leadership in something as fundamental as professional and ethical conduct. On
that  note,  let  me  once  again  commend  and  congratulate  the  FSPB  on  this  important,  and
certainly most relevant initiative. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
