  An  address by  Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African  Reserve Bank, 
at the Nelson Mandela commemorative  banknotes  
and R5 circulation  coin launch 
 Freedom Park, Pretoria 
13 July  2018 
 Honourable  Ministers 
Esteemed guests 
My  fellow  South Africans 
 It is both a pleasure and a privilege  to welcome all of you to Freedom Park on this very 
special day.  
 For  the  first  time  in  its history  of  nearly  100  years,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank 
(SARB)  is  launching  commemorative  banknotes,  besides  a  third  commemorative 
R5 circulation  coin,  in  honour  of  our  first  democratically  elected  President,  the  late 
Nelson Rolihlahla  Mandela,  fondly  known to many South Africans as ‘Madiba  or simply 
Tata’.    
 While  many  of us are  familiar  with commemorative  items  such as stamps and  other 
memorabilia,  it  has  become  tradition  among  central  banks  to  issue commemorative 
banknotes  and/or  coins on a significant  date to honour  a place, an event,  a person or 
an object. 
 As the first President of our democratic era, Nelson  Mandela  promoted reconciliation, 
led  our  reintegration 
into  the  global  economy,  strengthened  the  framework  for 
macroeconomic  management,  and  ushered  in  our  new  constitution.  One  of  the 
 Page 1 of 4 
founding  principles  of the  constitution  is the  establishment  of an  independent  central 
bank,  whose objective  it  is to protect  the  value  of the  local  currency in the  interest  of 
balanced  and sustainable  economic growth. 
 Why capture the memory of Madiba  on money? 
 One of the main functions of the SARB is to ensure there is a sufficient supply of high-
quality  banknotes  and coin. This is the function of the SARB that puts it in the pockets, 
wallets and hearts of all South Africans.   
 For many of us in this room, cash is only a secondary form of payment and exchange, 
but physical money remains the foundation  of the local economy. Every South African, 
young  and  old,  uses  money.  For  all  the  talk  about  a  ‘cashless  society’,  digital 
transactions, mobile money and so-called cryptocurrencies, millions of South Africans  
still  depend  on  cash  for  daily  transactions.  The  value  of  banknotes  and  coin  in 
circulation  amounts to more than R140 billion,  and the public’s demand for banknotes  
continues  to  grow.  But  not  everyone  has  a  phone  with  Internet  access or  a  digital 
wallet.  In  a  ‘cashless society’,  people  who  do  not  have  access to  banking  services 
could end up being  excluded  from the economy.   
 It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  SARB  to  ensure  the  integrity  of  banknotes  and  coin  in 
circulation.  The  central  bank  has to ensure that  banknotes  and coin  remain a secure 
method of payment,  unit of account, and store of wealth.  A banknote  is but a piece of 
paper, a coin but a piece of metal. Both derive their worth from the trust that the citizens 
of a country  have in the country’s currency.  
 South  African  banknotes  and  coin  are  among  the  most secure internationally.  Over 
the  past  five  years,  the  number  of  counterfeited  South  African  banknotes  has 
continued  to  decline.  The  security  features  embedded  in  our  banknotes  and  coin 
represent  the  most  innovative  advances  in  global  design  and  technology. 
It  is 
important  that South  Africans know  these security features of our banknotes,  and the 
SARB is making  a special effort to educate  the public in this regard. Please take  note 
of our  ‘look,  feel,  tilt’  approach  to checking  for the  security  features  and  verifying  the 
authenticity  of your money.  
 Page 2 of 4 
 Today, the SARB is also launching a mobile application  as a platform to create greater 
public awareness of the security, technical and design features of our banknotes.  The 
app  features  interesting  details  on  the  life  and times of  Tata Madiba  –  aligned  to the 
commemorative banknotes.   
 The confidence that South Africans have  in their banknotes  and coin is based on trust 
that the banknotes and coin are authentic  – and trust in the institution that issues them. 
Therefore,  the SARB must, without fear or favour,  ensure that the buying  power of the 
currency  is  protected.  We  therefore  strive  to  ensure  that  the  public  trust  in  our 
banknotes  and  coin,  as  well  as in  the  SARB,  as  the  institution  that  issues them,  is 
maintained.   
 Preserving  the  value  of  our  money  contributes  to  stronger  economic  growth  and 
employment  creation  over  time. Furthermore,  a low  and stable  inflation  rate  protects 
the  purchasing  power  of  all  South  Africans  and  contributes  to  a  lower  cost of  living . 
South  Africans  should  be  proud  that,  despite  all  the  challenges  that  we  face  as  a 
country,  we do not live  in an  economy with very  high  inflation.  Imagine  having  to cart 
your cash in a wheelbarrow to buy a loaf of bread, or the effort it would take to withdraw 
that much cash from an ATM. 
 As  I  have  mentioned  in  the  past:  the  history  of  money  globally  shows  that  when 
inflation  walks through  the  door, public  trust in the currency jumps out  of the window. 
Banknotes  and  coin  become  nothing  but  worthless  pieces  of  paper  and  metal.  Our 
banknotes,  however,  are representative  of an economy with sound fundamentals  and 
prudent  monetary  policy. 
 So, how does one celebrate the life of a globally  respected and celebrated  statesman? 
There  is such a rich history  to the  story of Nelson  Mandela,  as told  in his own words 
in his bestselling  book  Long Walk to Freedom,  that  the SARB  has had  to use our full 
range  of  banknotes  as well  as a commemorative R5 circulation  coin. The  banknotes  
highlight  President  Mandela’s  historical  journey  from  the  rolling  hills  of  the  Eastern 
Cape,  to  Soweto,  to  Howick,  to  Robben  Island,  to  the  Union  Buildings.  The 
 Page 3 of 4 
commemorative  R5 circulation  coin features  a portrait  of  Tata  Madiba,  smiling  at the 
nation  he helped  to build. 
 Nelson  Mandela’s  life  has touched  all of us: South Africans  from all walks of life, rural 
and  urban.  What  could  be  more  fitting  than  to  commemorate  his  life  through  an 
instrument  that  we all  use every  day?  Money  touches  all  of  us, young  and  old.  Tata 
represents  the  best  version  of  ourselves  as  South  Africans,  and  there  is  no  more 
appropriate  an occasion than  his birthday  centenary  to  honour  all  that  he represents  
with these commemorative banknotes  and R5 circulation  coin.   
 When a young  girl in Mvezo  or a pensioner  in Soweto carry a R10 or R20 note to buy 
a loaf  of  bread,  they  should  know  that  those  two  banknotes  will  change  hands  more 
often  than  all  the  other  banknotes  in  South  Africa  and  in  some of  our  neighbouring 
countries. One banknote  touches many lives.   
 By drawing  strength  from our fellow  South  Africans  and  identifying  those  traits which 
best  reflect  The  Madiba  In  Me,  we  will  remind  ourselves  in  the  words  of  Nelson 
Mandela  that, :  
  “We are together  in this. Our human compassion binds us, the one to the other  
– not in pity  or patronisingly,  but as human beings  who have  learnt  how to turn 
our common suffering into  hope for the future.” 
Finally,  if  you  have  not  already  done  so, I  would  really  like  to encourage  you  to walk 
around  the exhibit  outside,  which reflects on the images on the banknotes  and coin. I 
also hope that you will take  the time to download  the currency mobile app from any  of 
the  mainstream  app  stores  and  that  you  will  use  this  app  to  empower  yourself  by 
learning  about the interesting  facts and details of our banknotes.   
 Thank  you very  much. 
  Page 4 of 4 
