Benoît  Cœuré:  The  future  of  financial  market  infrastructures  -
spearheading progress without renouncing safety
Speech Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
Central Bank Payments Conference, Singapore, 26 June 2018.
1
I wish to thank the organisers for inviting me to speak here today.
 It’s great to see so many familiar faces and to be back in Singapore, which as an undeniably
cosmopolitan city is a particularly suitable backdrop for talks on the multifaceted nature of today’s
global market infrastructures.
The  message  I  would  like  to  convey  in  my  remarks  this  morning  is  simple:  while  I  share  the
excitement  around  distributed  ledgers,  blockchain  and  digitalisation  more  broadly,  and  while  I
believe  that,  like  in  the  past,  central  banks  should  not  shy  away  from  potentially  disruptive
technological innovations, we should be mindful of the potential financial stability consequences
and  we  should  start  by  first  picking  the  low  hanging  fruit  and  upgrading  our  current  payment
systems.
In fact, I believe that an incremental modernisation of our existing retail and wholesale payment
systems may well succeed in bringing about many of the benefits promised by the current crop
of immature technologies.
The challenges of digital innovation
Let me start with the challenges first.
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  fourth  industrial  revolution  is  dramatically  changing  the  way  we
communicate, the way we shop, the way we learn and, quite frankly, great parts of the way we
live  our  lives. Artificial  intelligence  and  exponential  increases  in  computing  power  are  forcing
firms to re-examine how they do business.
The  financial  services  industry  is  no  exception.  Digitalisation  has  already  left  bustling  stock
exchange floors in demise. High-frequency trading is increasingly shaping market dynamics. And
in the future, thousands of financial analysts may be replaced with robo-advisors.
The financial industry is often the industry spearheading technological change. Distributed ledger
technologies  (DLT)  are  a  case  in  point.  They  have  applications  well  beyond  finance.  The
diamond industry, for example, is using digital ledgers to track and record their assets. But it is
the financial sector, and payments in particular, where progress is arguably moving fastest.
Financial institutions and market infrastructures worldwide are exploring DLT for payments and
2
post-trading.
The World Food Program uses a blockchain-based system to handle payments for food aid in
3
Jordan.
Central banks, as both overseers and operators of payment systems, and as sole issuers of
banknotes, cannot afford to ignore these disruptive trends.
The  central  banking  community,  and  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements’  Committee  on
Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI), which I chair, and the Markets Committee chaired
by Jacqueline Loh, are keeping a close eye on how promising technologies, such as DLT, may
4
serve the wider public.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is not just a philosophical discussion. Although cash still reigns supreme in the vast majority
of countries, it may be sidelined sooner rather than later.
If cash were to disappear, trust in the currency, a key public good, would be dependent on the
creditworthiness of private entities. With bitcoin and other crypto assets we have seen large and
unpredictable price swings and outright cyber heists that may expose people to the risk of losing
their savings; this demands that central banks take these risks seriously.
Were central banks to issue their own digital currencies, people would be able to hold a central
bank liability comparable to cash, without the risks associated with commercial money.
However, as things stand today, the possible adverse financial stability implications of introducing
central bank digital currencies call for the greatest caution , while the underlying DLT that would
enable these digital tokens to be introduced are still immature, costly to maintain and possibly
prone to vulnerabilities.
5
6
For example, current crypto assets still fail to ensure clear and legally certain settlement finality ,
which is a necessary condition for a safe and efficient payment system, as emphasised by the
Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMI) issued by the CPMI and the International
Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO).
In fact, the predecessors of the CPMI under the chairmanships of Hans Meyer and Wayne Angell
7
spent the better part of a decade getting finality right for interbank payment systems.
Up until the 1990s, the risk that net settlement positions could be unwound meant that the failure
8
of a single bank could lead to a cascade of failures.
This systemic risk was one of the main motivations for introducing real-time gross settlement
(RTGS) systems around the world. In other words, one has to wonder if uncertainty of finality is a
price worth paying for any payment system.
Given these prevailing flaws, I believe central banks should pursue a two-track strategy.
First, they should continue to study new technologies closely and experiment and engage with
the industry, whether fintech or techfin.
In the case of the ECB, we have already established a DLT infrastructure within the EU central
bank community, which currently serves, first and foremost, as a learning tool. We have also
teamed up with the Bank of Japan on the Stella project – a series of studies on the potential use
9
of DLT for financial market infrastructures.
Remaining  on  top  of  technological  developments  also  means  that,  in  the  CPMI,  we  need  to
constantly take the pulse of our existing international standards. But so far, it is fair to say that the
PFMI  have  proven  flexible  enough  to  accommodate  technological  change,  be  it  through
complementary guidance – on cyber for example – or through high-level strategies, such as on
wholesale payments fraud, as I will explain later.
The second part of the strategy central banks should pursue entails drawing on less-disruptive
existing  technologies  to  make  our  current  payment  systems,  which  are  convenient  and  have
earned public trust, more efficient and safer.
At the current juncture, this essentially means doing three things:
1.  making retail payment systems instant and available 24/7;
2.  modernising our RTGS systems; and
3.  enhancing cyber resilience.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me briefly touch upon each of these three issues, starting with retail payment systems.
Making retail payment systems instant and available 24/7
Today an increasing number of non-bank payment service providers are entering the domestic
payments  business,  sometimes  offering  faster  payments  than  the  banks  they  are  competing
with.
Instant payment solutions can significantly increase the speed of retail payments.
10
With instant payments, funds are settled with finality and are available for use by the recipient
within seconds, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year.
Since  bitcoin  transactions  take,  on  average,  about  15  minutes  to  validate,  and  even  bitcoin
enthusiasts  acknowledge  that  this  type  of  settlement  cannot  be  considered  reasonably
irrevocable before at least one hour has passed, instant payments may render large parts of the
alleged benefits of crypto assets redundant.
Instant payment solutions have been implemented, or are in the process of being developed, in
many  countries  across  the  world.  Here  in  Singapore,  the  launch  of  FAST  (“Fast  and  Secure
Transfers”) has resulted in a fundamental renewal of the payments infrastructure, with significant
benefits for both merchants and customers.
11
Later this year, the ECB will launch the TARGET Instant Payment Settlement (TIPS) service. In a
currency union, instant payment solutions are not just about fostering innovation and improving
customer  convenience.  They  are  also  about  promoting  further  financial  integration  among
Member States.
Indeed, in the euro area, where different legal frameworks and customer habits prevail, there is
always  a  risk  of  new  fragmentation  arising  from  the  development  of  national  or  closed-loop
solutions which are not interoperable. To counter this risk, the European payments industry is
now launching a truly pan-European instant payments scheme.
TIPS therefore not only has the potential to help better prepare incumbents for the challenges
arising  from  digital  giants,  such  as Alibaba, Apple  and  Google,  who  are  integrating  payment
services into their ecosystems, it also has the potential to be a catalyst for spurring progress in
two old failings of our current system: cross-border retail payments and financial inclusion.
12
Cross-border payments not only allow shoppers to easily buy goods online from overseas, but
also allow foreign workers to send money home, supporting financial inclusion and development.
However,  these  payment  channels  are  generally  much  slower,  less  transparent  and  far  more
expensive than domestic ones.
Improvements here are the best way of rising to the challenges arising from currently unsafe
crypto assets. I believe this should be a key priority for international action.
Modernising real-time gross settlement systems
This brings me to my second point, the modernisation of our RTGS systems. Their names imply
that  these  systems  are  already  fast.  They  settle  transactions  between  financial  market
infrastructures, central banks and credit institutions in real time.
But these systems are often built on legacy technologies, sometimes dating back to the 1980s,
and have been created to meet local needs for participants.
Since  then,  however,  the  financial  system  has  become  truly  global,  with  banks  increasingly
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
operating across borders and time zones through participation in multiple payment systems. A
key  element  of  many  RTGS  system  modernisation  projects  is  therefore  implementing  a
messaging standard that works across the globe.
Of  course,  migrating  from  a  legacy  payment  standard  incurs  costs.  So,  as  with  any  other
technological upgrade, it is important that a critical mass moves towards the new standard.
The Eurosystem is leading by example here.
We are implementing the ISO 20022 standard and offering multi-currency functionalities in our
infrastructures.  In  the  near  future,  both  payment  and  securities  settlement  services  will  also
undergo  a  technical  and  functional  consolidation.  Specifically,  we  will  roll  out  a  new  RTGS
system  with  enhanced  functionalities  and  optimised  liquidity  management  for  the  participants.
The new service is scheduled to go live in November 2021.
Cross-border interoperability is just one area where progress can be made. Extending access to
our  RTGS  system  to  regulated  non-bank  payment  service  providers  is  another  avenue  that
promises to make our current systems fit for the future.
Fintechs are challenging the traditional way payments are made. Some of them offer valuable
and  safe  services  to  customers.  Wider  access  by  these  new  non-bank  payment  service
providers  to  central  bank  payment  systems  can  spur  further  digital  innovation  and  enhance
financial stability by increasing the amount of final settlements conducted in risk-free central bank
money.  And  it  would  once  more  reduce  the  appeal  of  crypto  assets  that,  if  not  adequately
regulated, may endanger financial stability should they become more widely used over time.
So,  overall,  there  are  good  reasons  to  continue  to  work  on  improving  our  current  market
infrastructures. By embracing innovation and modern technologies, and by promoting inclusion
and common standards, I am confident that we will be able to meet the growing expectations that
consumers and stakeholders have of the evolving role of today’s payment systems.
Enhancing cyber resilience
One of these expectations also relates to safety. As we are extending operating hours, allowing
for  more  access  and  increasing  interoperability,  there  will  be  larger  “attack  surface”  in  the
system. The most efficient and fastest systems are useless if they are not bulletproof, if they can
be hacked easily or if they expose consumers to disproportionate risks.
This brings me to the third point I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks – the need to make
our current systems safer against the rising number of cyberattacks.
Cyber incidents are becoming much more frequent and increasingly sophisticated – to the point
that they now pose a critical threat to market infrastructures and the entire financial ecosystem.
This is why the modernisation of our systems must go hand-in-hand with increasing their cyber
resilience.
Failure to adequately protect against cyberattacks may have far-reaching repercussions. Take
wholesale  payment  systems  as  an  example.  A  breakdown  of  these  systems,  even  if  only
temporarily, would threaten financial stability, endanger the provision of liquidity by central banks
and jeopardise the implementation of monetary policy.
This  is  also  why  G7  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  recently  took  part  in  a
simulation of the day after a major cyber incident in the financial sector. This exercise showed
that a major cyber incident would require an internationally coordinated response, and highlighted
areas  where  the  G7  Cyber  Expert  Group  could  help  address  potential  coordination  issues,
including areas beyond the traditional reach of regulators, such as third-party providers.13
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In short, wholesale payment systems are for financial markets what electricity is for households.
Anyone who has read Ted Koppel’s illuminating Lights Out will understand what I mean.
14
To help protect our systems, the CPMI and IOSCO published guidance on cyber resilience for
financial market infrastructures (FMIs) already back in June 2016.
15
The  guidance  offers  recommendations  for  measures  that  FMIs  should  take  to  anticipate,
withstand, contain and rapidly recover from cyberattacks.
On top of this, last month the CPMI issued a strategy for reducing the risk of wholesale payments
fraud.
16
The  strategy  aims  to  galvanise  wholesale  payment  systems,  network  messaging  providers,
banks, overseers and supervisors to work together in strengthening the security of the financial
ecosystem and its endpoints, all of which are being increasingly exploited by adversaries.
CPMI member central banks are committed to acting as a catalyst for effective and coherent
operationalisation of the strategy within and across jurisdictions and systems. We will monitor
progress throughout this year and next to determine the need for further action.
At the ECB, we have recently accelerated our efforts to put these initiatives into practice and to
strengthen  our  cyber  resilience  more  broadly.  More  specifically,  earlier  this  year  we  did  four
things:
the  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board 
We  introduced  the  cyber  resilience  oversight  expectations,  which  set  out  detailed  best
practices to operationalise the CPMI-IOSCO guidance. These expectations are now being
finalised following a public consultation.
We  established 
for  pan-European  Financial
Infrastructures, a forum that brings together high-level FMI representatives, service providers
and authorities with the aim of raising awareness of common cyber challenges and acting
as a catalyst for joint initiatives and solutions.
Our  third  initiative  was  introducing  a  European  Framework  for  Threat  Intelligence-Based
Ethical  Red  Teaming  (TIBER-EU),  which  supports  FMIs  and  other  financial  entities  in
conducting  the  highest  level  of  cyber  resilience  testing  in  a  multi-jurisdiction  and  multi-
authority context.
And finally, we adopted the aforementioned CPMI wholesale payments security strategy as
the competent authority for two wholesale payment systems in the euro area – TARGET2
and EURO1.
17
18
All of these efforts are multilateral and predicated on strong cross-country collaboration. Some of
our  initiatives  are  pan-European,  but  others,  such  as  TIBER-EU,  are  entity-agnostic,  meaning
that they can – and will – be used to harmonise processes not only for FMIs and other financial
entities within Europe but also beyond.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The  multilateral  efforts  I  have  just  described  reflect  the  growing  recognition  by  both  industry
participants and regulators that we should see the global payment system for what it really is: an
essential  global  public  good  whose  integrity  is  increasingly  being  challenged  by  malicious
cyberattacks  and  fraud  attempts  by  individuals.  In  the  future,  it  may  also  be  challenged  by
adverse spillovers of otherwise well-intended government actions meant to protect data privacy
and national security. Such spillovers may create new fault lines across the system.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
To  better  understand  these  spillovers  and  to  guard  against  fragmentation,  we  need  strong
multilateral  cooperation  more  than  ever.  Let’s  work  together  to  make  our  payment  systems
faster, cheaper and safer – and let’s shield them from the sound and fury of politics.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
I would like to thank Elin Amundsen, Takeshi Shirakami and Morten Bech for their contributions to this speech. I
remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.
See  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (2017), Distributed  ledger  technology  in  payment,
clearing and settlement. An analytical framework, Bank for International Settlements, February.
See Bank for International Settlements (2018), Cryptocurrencies: looking beyond the hype, Annual Economic
Report, Chapter V, June.
See Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and Markets Committee (2018), Central bank digital
currencies, Bank for International Settlements, March; and Cœuré, B. and Loh, J. (2018), “Bitcoin not the answer
to a cashless society”, op-ed published in the Financial Times, 13 March.
See Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and Markets Committee (2018), op. cit.
See also Bank for International Settlements (2018), op. cit.
See, for example, Group of Experts on Payment Systems of the central banks of the Group of Ten countries
(1989), Report  on  netting  schemes  (Angell  Report),  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  February;  and
Committee on Interbank Netting Schemes of the central banks of the Group of Ten countries (1990), Report of
the Committee on Interbank Netting Schemes of the central banks of the Group of Ten countries (Lamfalussy
Report), Bank for International Settlements, November.
This could happen, for example, due to “zero hour rules”, a provision in the insolvency law of some countries
whereby  the  transactions  conducted  by  an  insolvent  institution  after  midnight  on  the  date  the  institution  is
declared insolvent are automatically ineffective by operation of law.
See ECB and Bank of Japan (2017), “Payment systems: liquidity saving mechanisms in a distributed ledger
environment”,  a  joint  research  project  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  –  STELLA,
September.
See also Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (2016), Fast payments – Enhancing the speed
and availability of retail payments, November.
See  Menon,  R.  (2016),  “An  Electronic  Payments  Society”,  keynote  address  at  the  Sim  Kee  Boon  Institute
Conference on FinTech and Financial Inclusion, 19 August.
See Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (2018), Cross-border retail payments, February. The
report sets out a holistic view of cross-border retail payments to analyse the market and identify issues and
challenges. Also see Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and the World Bank Group (2016),
Payment aspects of financial inclusion, April. This report outlines guiding principles to help central banks and
other stakeholders achieve effective financial access and broader financial inclusion.
See G7 Cyber Expert Group (2017), “Fundamental elements for effective assessment of cybersecurity in the
financial sector”, 20 October.
Koppel, T. (2015), Lights Out: A Cyberattack, A Nation Unprepared, Surviving the Aftermath, Broadway Books.
See  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  and  Board  of  the  International  Organization  of
Securities Commissions (2016), Guidance on cyber resilience for financial market infrastructures, June.
See Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (2018), Reducing the risk of wholesale payments fraud
related to endpoint security, May.
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “A Euro Cyber Resilience Board for pan-European Financial Infrastructures”, introductory
remarks at the first meeting of the Euro Cyber Resilience Board for pan-European Financial Infrastructures,
Frankfurt, 9 March.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
18
See ECB (2018), TIBER-EU FRAMEWORK – How to implement the European framework for Threat Intelligence-
based Ethical Red Teaming, May.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
