DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE 
(Joint Ministerial Committee 
Boards of Governors of the Bank and the Fund 
of the  
on the 
Transfer of Real Resources to Developing Countries) 
NINETY-SEVENTH MEETING 
WASHINGTON, D.C. – APRIL 21, 2018 
 
DC/S/2018-0022 
April 21, 2018 
Statement by 
Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Constituency of Albania, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, 
San Marino and Timor-Leste 
        Constituency of Albania, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, San Marino and Timor-Leste 
Statement by 
Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy 
97th Meeting of the Development Committee 
April 21, 2018 
Washington, D.C. 
    Introduction 
 
The global economy is enjoying a moment of robust, synchronized growth. However, trade restrictions may 
cause an adverse global supply shock, which may be amplified by the pervasiveness of global value chains. 
This could be compounded by an adverse demand shock, given that the associated uncertainty could have 
a  negative  impact  on  decisions  to  invest  and  to  consume.  Overall,  this  would  lead  to  a  global  output 
contraction.  
 
Global  public  debt  as  a  share  of  GDP  has  expanded  substantially  since  the  2008  financial  crisis, 
notwithstanding  the  debate  about  deleveraging.  The  increase  has  been  particularly  acute  in  emerging 
economies,  including  those  vulnerable  to  interest  rate  increases.  The  World  Bank  should  help  these 
countries to use their budgetary lever to counteract the business cycle, focusing on the quality of public 
finance while protecting the poorest. 
 
Despite  all  the  relief  efforts  made  by  official  creditors  and  traditional  donors,  debt  sustainability  is 
becoming a serious concern in many low-income countries that face higher liabilities and an increasingly 
complex creditor composition. This should prompt the WBG and the IMF to develop a comprehensive joint 
action plan which carefully considers limits in IDA countries’ absorptive capacity, in order to avoid a 
further increase in debt vulnerabilities.  
 
Strategic framework and reform agenda 
 
Eradicating poverty and boosting shared prosperity requires differentiated approaches to specific categories 
of  clients  and  a  willingness  to  rebalance  resource  allocation.  Low  income  and  fragile  countries’ 
vulnerabilities call for adequate safety nets and for institutions which can expand access to basic services. 
Middle income countries need a more targeted poverty alleviation strategy, one that tackles institutional 
and policy constraints through higher value-added knowledge products, and which addresses the remaining 
infrastructure gap.  
 
A  clearer  IBRD  graduation  strategy  must  be  pursued,  building  on  the  country  partnership  frameworks 
agreed  upon  with  borrowers.  It  should  more  directly  link  access  to  WBG  resources  to  indicators  of 
economic development, access to external finance, and the possibility of leveraging the private sector. 
Because many of its clients have regular access to capital markets, IBRD lending programs must become 
more selective and target operations that ensure the highest development impact. The capital increase under 
consideration should enable the IBRD to finance long-term investments that lie beyond markets’ reach. 
 
Improving  clients’  capacities  to  assess  risks  and  strengthening  their  financial  resilience  is  crucial  to 
enhancing preparedness and readiness for natural disasters. Disseminating knowledge and lessons learned 
   is also important to helping countries enhance their resilience. We remain convinced that these are the areas 
where the WBG’s comparative advantages lie.  
 
The IDA18 replenishment’s renewed focus on fragile and conflict situations adds more challenges and calls 
for a more effective and integrated approach. To this end, working in partnership with other multilateral 
financial  institutions  and  mobilizing  the  private  sector  is  vital  to  meeting  development  and  resilience 
challenges. 
 
We reiterate our call for the WBG to deploy its skills and to convene public and private actors in pursuit of 
vigorous, environment-friendly growth in client countries. We view the climate change agenda, and that of 
global public goods in general, as effectively reinforcing and complementing goals for social inclusion and 
for private sector development. The Group is making significant efforts in supporting the development of 
infrastructure needed for private sector growth. It is time to make an additional, targeted effort on the human 
capital agenda. To this end, improving incentives to foster effective investments in health, education, and 
social development is essential.  
 
The WBG’s financing should continue to focus on long-term development goals, rather than short-term 
responses to temporary imbalances. This does not mean that the Bank and the IFC have no role to play in 
economic crises, but good division of labor requires avoiding overlap with IMF instruments. The creation 
of a new capital buffer for the IBRD should not undermine an efficient use of Bank resources, including 
those coming from the capital increase. It should not imply a de facto upward revision of the sufficiently 
prudent minimum Equity-to-Loan threshold of 20%. 
 
Current reforms must link strategic priorities to corporate planning, ensuring accountability and laying the 
foundation for results-informed budgeting. Improving the governance of the Bank’s lending projections, 
budget, and net income is crucial. 
 
Financial sustainability  
 
We are pleased that the IBRD’s capital is no longer deployed to cover administrative expenses in excess of 
revenues. Its business model is now financially sustainable, as it ensures solid income generation to bear 
future needs. Coverage of direct and indirect costs of lending, including expected loan losses, is achieved 
while maintaining loan terms well below market rates.   
 
Higher rates on loans that tie up the Bank’s capital for longer periods of time will help prevent scarce long-
term funds from being diverted to operations that are better served by shorter term loans.  
 
The needs of the poorest and most vulnerable are the principal claim on IBRD resources. Accordingly, we 
favor the establishment of a framework that explicitly takes it into account, with adequate consideration of 
preservation of the real value of the IBRD’s capital over time. Higher terms for clients with larger capacity 
will help accomplish the mission of supporting the neediest.  
 
Financial sustainability does not ensure efficiency in resource utilization. We encourage Management to 
continue fostering efficiency and monitoring it by means of sound indicators.   
 
The “voice” of the global economy 
 
We remain committed to a shareholding review that fully reflects the changing reality of the global economy 
and strengthens the Bank’s development mission, as agreed to at the 2015 Annual Meetings. The dynamic 
formula provides a necessary anchor to ensure, over time, adjustment towards an equitable voting power in 
 2 
the IBRD. We also look forward to a review of the IDA voting rights arrangements, which IDA Deputies 
agreed to discuss at the upcoming Mid-Term Review of IDA18. 
 
Concerning  the  share allocation  rule for  the  IBRD  selective  capital  increase  (SCI),  we  believe  ad  hoc 
solutions and arbitrary thresholds should be avoided as much as possible. We agree on the use of unallocated 
shares – as a one-off measure – to limit extreme cases of under-representation. This will reduce the need 
for additional SCIs in the future. 
 
Today’s proposed arrangement for the IBRD is far from optimal, as we will presumably need several SCIs 
to bring shareholding closer to the dynamic formula’s outcome. As for the IFC, we recommend moving its 
shareholding towards that of the IBRD. Hence, we support the proposed SCI, in which shares are allocated 
to countries with IFC shareholding below their IBRD shareholding, after converting retained earnings into 
shares.  
 
Although some concerns remain regarding the size of the capital package and its bias toward the general 
capital  increase,  we  recognize  that  the  overall  outcome  will  further  strengthen  both  the  financial 
sustainability and the operational capacity of the IBRD and IFC. This will bring the discussions that have 
taken place since our Meeting in Lima to fruition. 
 
With these goals in mind, we recognize that negotiations have been intense and complex, and represent a 
valuable effort by all parties, including Management. In the spirit of compromise, we are prepared to join 
the emerging consensus and to ensure the World Bank Group remain fully legitimate vis-à-vis its diverse 
stakeholders.  
 3 
