Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Caixin Global
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in Caixin Global, conducted by Mr Liwei Wang on 17 December and published on 30 December
2017.
I. Europe
Mr Cœuré, how is Europe’s recovery progressing?
 We don’t see it as a recovery anymore, but as an expansion. The annual growth rate in the euro
area is the strongest for ten years. We expect a GDP growth rate of 2.4% for 2017, which by
European standards is quite high. Business and consumer confidence are at their highest levels
for over 17 years, according to the November reading of the European Commission’s Economic
Sentiment Indicator. Seven million jobs have been created in the euro area since mid-2013.
Growth today is not only very strong, but also very broad-based. The breadth of the expansion in
terms of countries and sectors is greater than at any point over the last 20 years. The expansion
is also more sustainable as it is driven by domestic demand and an improving labour market,
and it is less reliant on credit. 
We have definitely left the crisis behind us. Europe is back!
How does it compare to the United States?
In 2016, the euro area grew faster than the United States. For 2017 and 2018, it is too early to tell,
but the growth rates should be about the same. For example, the euro area flash manufacturing
and composite output PMIs for December are at 60.6 (the highest since the series began in June
1997) and 58.0 (a 82-month high) respectively, comparable or somewhat higher than the level in
the United States, Japan or the United Kingdom.  
Is unemployment still a major issue?
Unemployment  is  still  an  issue. At  8.8%  in  October,  the  euro  area  unemployment  rate  is  the
lowest since early 2009, but the rate still varies considerably across the euro area. Countries
such as Germany or the Netherlands have practically full employment, but others, e.g. France
and Italy, still have some catching-up to do.
In  several  Member  States,  such  as  Spain  and  Ireland,  there  have  been  bold  labour  market
reforms,  which  are  now  yielding  tangible  benefits.  This  sends  an  important  message:  when
European countries use a period of growth to implement further reforms, it works.
While Europe needs to rebuild fiscal buffers now, as Mario Draghi recently mentioned,
the United States is embarking on a major tax reform, involving major tax cuts. How do
Europeans see tasks on the fiscal side?
In Europe, there are two different discussions. One is on the level of the deficit, or “fiscal stance”,
the other on the composition, i.e. the quality of public finances.
In all countries, there is scope to make public finances friendlier to growth, in particular to reduce
non-productive public spending and cut distortionary taxes.
But not many countries have fiscal space, because their public debt is too high. Their priority
should be to use the current economic expansion to rebuild fiscal buffers, so that when the next
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
crisis hits, they can use fiscal policy to react to it. In the meantime, they can still improve the
composition of their public finances.
There are a few countries, including Germany, that do have fiscal space. These countries should
use that space to prepare for the future, although it is not for the ECB to tell them how to do it.
So Europeans need to carry out their own fiscal agenda, not follow the US?
It’s not for the ECB to comment, but I don’t see a great appetite among European leaders to
follow the US example at the current juncture.
What are the risks to Europe’s economy?
Risks  are  broadly  balanced  in  our  view,  with  positive  risks  coming  from  the  euro  area  and
negative risks coming from outside. The latter include geopolitical risks and risks stemming from
emerging market economies.
At  a  deeper  level,  we  see  risks  to  global  growth  resulting  from  the  erosion  of  support  for
international  trade  and  openness.  Europe  clearly  remains  committed  to  openness  and
international cooperation. We are open for business. We don’t agree with those countries which
want to curb international trade.
And let me add a more political remark. In a world which is more uncertain and volatile than ever,
Europe can project itself on the world stage and work jointly with China to provide stability.
What are the positive risks from Europe?
History  tells  us  that  people  tend  to  underestimate  economic  downturns  and,  likewise,  in  an
upturn, there is a risk of underestimating the strength of the economy. For instance, we see very
positive dynamics stemming from investment and domestic demand, and this creates positive
multiplier effects.
II. Central banking
With  the  recovery  turning  into  an  expansion,  it  seems  we  are  still  not  quite  seeing
monetary policy normalisation (QExit and rate rises)?
Indeed, our monetary policy will remain very accommodative. It has a single objective, which is to
bring euro area inflation back to a level below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Because
inflation is still not at 2%, we will maintain an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
The strength of the recovery gives us increasing confidence that inflation will return towards 2%
in a sustainable manner. That led to our decision to recalibrate our monetary policy support. We
decided in October to reduce our monthly net asset purchases from €60 billion to €30 billion from
January  until  at  least  September  2018,  and  longer  if  needed.  By  halving  the  monthly  asset
purchases we are recognising both the strength of the recovery and our greater confidence in the
inflation outlook.
The euro area is not alone among major economies in having inflation that is kind of
muted. Any fundamental reasons for this?
I think that we need a degree of humility here. There are many things we don’t understand very
well,  for  example  the  impact  of  technology  on  industrial  organisation,  wages  and  prices.
Technological  change  certainly  is  a  common  explanation  for  low  inflation  in  all  advanced
economies.
Low productivity gains are  also  one  explanation  for  the  sustained  weakness  in  wages  across
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
advanced economies, which in turn also have an impact on inflation.
There are factors specific to Europe as well, in particular high unemployment. Both the United
States and Japan are close to full employment, while Europe is not. Europe is lagging behind the
United  States  and  Japan  in  the  business  cycle  and  still  has  some  slack  to  absorb  before
reaching full employment. Many of the newly created jobs are based on part-time or fixed-term
contracts, which dampen the prospect of rapid wage increases. That helps explain why inflation
will only slowly move back towards 2% and why we still need ample monetary accommodation.
European financial markets already show a lot of frothiness, just like in the US.
In Europe, we see frothiness in some market segments or asset classes, but nothing that would
be a concern at euro area level and would call for a monetary policy reaction.
Local  issues  call  for  local  solutions,  separate  from  monetary  policy,  or  what  we  call
macroprudential  measures. A  very  recent  example  is  the  decision  last  Friday  [15  December
2017] by the French macroprudential authority, the High Council for Financial Stability, to propose
a measure to limit the exposure of large French banks to the most indebted companies, given
concerns related to corporate debt growth in France. The macroprudential toolbox is being used.
It has been used in several euro area countries, such as in Ireland in the case of mortgages.
The  ECB  is  monitoring  this  closely.  In  principle  we  have  the  possibility  to  top  up  national
measures, although we haven’t done so yet.
Your colleague, Yves Mersch, said earlier this month: “Nourishing a market belief that
the exit might be permanently postponed could exacerbate the potential cliff effects”. An
official  from  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBOC)  made  remarks  along  the  same  lines
recently, warning of the risk of markets gaming monetary policy while rates remain low.
How do you see central banks’ interaction with markets?
There is always a risk of central banks being led by financial markets instead of leading them.
We  can’t  ignore  market  reactions,  because  markets  are  important  transmitters  of  monetary
policy.  This  is  also  why  we  place  importance  on  communication  and  lay  out  as  clearly  as
possible  our  reaction  function  in  our  forward  guidance.  But  we  have  to  keep  in  mind  that  the
ultimate yardstick for our action is inflation. We are not targeting financial asset prices.
Given the strength of the expansion, we are increasingly confident that inflation will rise towards
2% over the medium term. This justifies a gradual and cautious recalibration of monetary policy.
Markets have to understand that QE will not last forever.
Could it be a bit behind the curve?
We have flexibility to react both ways. Given what we see in the economy, I believe that there is a
reasonable chance that the extension of our asset purchase programme decided in October can
be the last. But the Governing Council of the ECB has also made it clear that the programme can
be kept in place for longer, should inflation disappoint on the downside. And if inflation turned out
to be higher than currently expected, we would have plenty of instruments with which to react.
The generation of central bank governors who handled the crisis has now either retired
or is close to retiring. How do you regard what they’ve done?
The main lesson from this crisis is that you have to think outside the box, be innovative, while at
the same time staying within your political mandate. It’s a very delicate balance, but the Federal
Reserve, the Bank of England and the ECB have all done it and succeeded.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Central bankers in some circumstances have to be bold and fast, but they also have to do things
in  a  politically  and  legally  acceptable  manner.  That’s  what  they’ve  done,  and  that  is  also
something to remember for the future.
Can central bankers push politicians to act if they are slow to act or make reforms?
Central bankers have no mandate and no legitimacy to push politicians. At the same time, they
have a duty to speak their mind and publicly state what they think is necessary for economic
policy.
III. China
Governor Zhou of the PBOC is also to retire (soon)? Looking from the outside, how do
you see him?
What I particularly notice is Governor Zhou’s international role. I’ve listened to him many times in
Basel,  Washington  and  other  places.  He’s  one  of  the  most  respected  governors  around  the
table. When he takes the floor, everyone stops to listen to him, which is not always the case in
international meetings.
What has always struck me is that he expresses China’s position in a very clear way but he also
aims  to  move  the  discussion  on,  seeking  a  consensus.  That’s  extremely  valuable  in  an
international discussion.
For me, the very thoughtful and analytical way he has of addressing issues is a very important
contribution. He always takes the time to explain complex issues, including for instance recent
developments  in  China’s  financial  system,  which  can  be  quite  complex  for  outsiders  to
understand. He has a very clear and concise way of explaining things, making discussions more
constructive.
How does the global central banking community view the PBOC’s role in recent years?
Over the last ten years or so, there has been a clear evolution. The PBOC has been engaging
more and more with the international community and its central bank counterparts, in line with
the changing role of China in the global economy.
From an ECB perspective, I can say that we now have a relationship with the PBOC that is as
broad and deep as it is with a core group of other central banks, such as the Federal Reserve,
the Bank of Japan, the Bank of England and maybe a few others. This includes discussions on
financial markets, monetary policy, payment systems, to name just a few. The PBOC is part of
that core group.
The ECB in June invested a small amount of foreign reserves in the renminbi. Why? Any
plans ahead?
The amount is equivalent to €500 million, roughly 1% of the ECB’s foreign currency reserves. We
sold US dollar reserves to do this. At the end of 2016, the ECB’s reserves consisted of 83% US
dollars  and  17%  Japanese  yen.  We  also  have  a  €45  billion/RMB  350  billion  bilateral  currency
swap agreement with the PBOC.
Both initiatives are an acknowledgement of the growing international role of the renminbi and a
first step towards a better understanding of how the Chinese monetary and foreign exchange
markets work.
I’m quite sure that there will be further steps in the future. But central banks are conservative by
nature. This is a long-term process.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
How do you see the prospect of RMB internationalisation?
To  understand  the  international  monetary  system,  one  needs  to  take  a  very  long-term
perspective, even if the rise of China on the global economic stage has been much faster than
anything we’ve seen before.
It’s quite evident to me that the renminbi will eventually become a major international currency,
and I personally believe that a multi-polar monetary system is good for the stability of the global
economy. For the renminbi to achieve that status, further steps will need to be taken, including a
further  opening  of  the  capital  account,  the  pace  and  modalities  of  which  are  for  the  Chinese
authorities to decide.
IV. Digital currency and fintech
What do you think of Bitcoin?
What we are witnessing today is clearly a bubble, made possible by scarcity and by an expected
sequence of gains which investors believe will be sustained, irrespective of the fundamentals.
That is the definition of a bubble.
Bitcoin is not a currency. Investors should not believe that they will be able to use it as a means
of payment. It is a speculative investment. There is a risk of large capital losses which investors
should be aware of.
So the main concern related to Bitcoin is not a monetary one but one that relates to investor
protection, and possibly also to tax evasion, money laundering and criminal finance.
With two American exchanges (CBOE and CME) introducing Bitcoin futures, how do you
see the policy for it going forward?
The  ECB  is  not  a  securities  regulator.  Regulators  worldwide  have  recently  warned  investors
repeatedly  about  possible  losses.  In  Europe,  the  Fourth  Anti-Money  Laundering  Directive,
adopted by the European Council and the European Parliament last Friday [15 December 2017]
requires exchange platforms and wallet providers to report suspicious transactions and identify
owners of digital currencies. I’m quite sure that further steps will be taken to regulate this market.
How do you see the prospect of central bank digital currencies?
This is an area where central banks tread with great caution, because different jurisdictions face
different trends in the demand for cash, and because we have to assess the full impact of any
change  in  the  way  we  operate,  both  for  the  citizens  of  our  countries  and  for  the  structure  of
financial intermediation. In that respect, I would make a clear distinction between wholesale and
retail applications.
Starting with wholesale markets, we see that distributed ledger technology (DLT) has a lot of
potential for market infrastructures. All major central banks are looking into it. The Committee on
Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) of the Bank for International Settlements, which I
chair, published a report on it in February 2017.
The ECB has undertaken a pilot project with the Bank of Japan in this area. We concluded that
the technology is not yet mature enough to migrate large-value payment systems – in our case,
TARGET2 – to a DLT-based infrastructure, but we’ll continue to study it carefully.
The  question  will  arise  as  to  whether  central  banks  could  at  some  point  provide  central  bank
money to financial market infrastructures in a digital form. We are still in the early stages of that
discussion, but it is a relevant one.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Is this similar to the real-time gross settlement (RTGS) renewal programme under way in
the United Kingdom?
Indeed,  the  Bank  of  England  sees  potential  benefits  from  DLT  for  future  RTGS  systems,
although,  like  us,  it  believes  that  this  technology  it  is  not  yet  sufficiently  mature.  But  we  will
continue to look into it.
As for the retail side, that is, central bank digital currencies replacing banknotes and coins, we
are much more prudent. First, there are only a limited number of countries where demand for
cash is clearly on a downward trend.
Sweden is faced with such a situation, but in the euro area we are not. We are therefore not
being pushed to go in that direction.
Second, we also have to consider the implications for security and trust in the currency. Today,
we invest a lot of resources in fighting the counterfeiting of banknotes. What would fraud, and
fraud combat, look like in an environment with a digital currency?
And third, we want to make sure that we fully understand the long-term consequences for the
financial  system.  Today,  most  of  the  money  used  in  the  economy  is  created  by  banks.  How
would digital money affect the role of banks as financial intermediaries, and would it make the
financial  system  more,  or  less,  stable?  These  are  issues  on  which  much  more  reflection  is
required, hence our great caution.
How  does  the  ECB’s  new  TARGET  instant  payment  settlement  (TIPS)  initiative  factor
into this?
This is actually my last point. A lot of the current interest in central bank digital currencies, or
private digital currencies, stems from the fact that people expect them to be faster and cheaper
than existing means of payment. These expectations can be easily met by upgrading existing
payment systems.
That’s true for domestic payments, and it is exactly what we’re doing in Europe with TIPS, an
infrastructure allowing for 24/7, 365-day instant payments. TIPS will go live in November 2018.
It’s  also  true  for  cross-border  payments.  But  here  we  are  less  advanced.  One  reason  why
Bitcoin is popular is because it allows for cross-border payments that are cheaper and faster
than with existing infrastructures. The international community has a duty to get together and act
to  improve  the  speed  and  cost  of  cross-border  payments,  to  avoid  being  taken  over  by
technologies such as Bitcoin, which entail risks for their users, not to mention possible fraud and
crime.
In China, private sector non-banks are also becoming disruptive players in the payment
space.
In Europe, we have a new legal framework for payments entering into force in January 2018,
called the Second Payment Services Directive (PSD2).
Under  this  revised  framework,  payment  service  providers  (PSPs)  can  be  non-banks  and  will
have  access  to  the  bank  accounts  of  their  customers,  but  at  the  same  time  they  will  be
regulated,  not  only  in  terms  of  financial  stability  but  also  in  terms  of  data  use  and  privacy.
Opening up the payments market is good for consumers and it will spur innovation, but it should
not come at the expense of privacy and security.
How do you see technology and tech firms’ impact on banks and the financial structure?
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In a nutshell, fintech creates opportunities for non-bank actors to become players in the financial
services sector. It has the potential to significantly destabilise the banking system or at least to
erode its profitability.
Bear in mind that PSD2 is designed to introduce more competition by requiring banks to share
data  that  they  today  use  to  cross-sell  financial  services.  With  access  to  such  data,  fintech
companies could for instance increasingly capture the value formerly retained by banks.
I see two broad scenarios. In the first one, banks rise to the challenge, cut costs, internalise new
technology, including by purchasing fintech companies, and gain new sources of revenue. This
scenario  crucially  assumes  that  banks  are  profitable  enough  to  carry  out  the  necessary
technological investments.
In  the  other  scenario,  banks  fail  to  internalise  fintech  and  run  the  risk  of  becoming  mere
platforms, with all the value being created outside. This could happen in particular if digital giants,
who already have access to large amounts of customer data, start targeting parts of the banking
value chain, ultimately crowding banks out of large swathe of financial services. 
Firms  and  households  may  then  benefit  from  new  financial  services  and  products,  but  the
stability  of  the  banking  system  would  be  at  stake,  and  regulation  would  need  to  be  carefully
reviewed to close any loopholes.
What role can central banks or regulators play in this?
We  need  to  stick  to  a  very  simple  principle:  equivalent  activities  should  be  regulated  in  an
equivalent way. For instance, if we see non-bank players starting to provide credit, they will need
to  be  regulated  in  an  equivalent  way,  although  not  necessarily  the  same  way,  giving  different
deposit-taking restrictions.
And  since  all  these  activities  are  cross-border,  we  need  international  coordination.  The  right
forum for this discussion is the Financial Stability Board, where Chinese authorities are active
participants.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
