Carlo Azeglio Ciampi 
Writings in the Nuova Antologia
Speech by Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
Luigi Federico Signorini
Florence Regional Branch
12 March 2018
  Introduction 
1.  On the day Carlo Azeglio Ciampi was born in Livorno, on 9 December 1920, the Italian 
daily  Corriere  della  Sera  featured,  among  other  things,  a  political  and  institutional 
maelstrom  and  two  important  economic  questions.  The  former  was  related  to  the 
Government’s ‘resolution to apply the Treaty of Rapallo’. Under the treaty, the city of 
Fiume (hotly contested by Italy and Yugoslavia in the wave of nationalist sentiment that 
followed the end of the European war and the dissolution of the Hapsburg Empire) was 
to become an independent state. Gabriele d’Annunzio’s self-proclaimed Italian Regency 
of Carnaro was opposed to this solution, and called instead for Fiume’s annexation by 
Italy. A few weeks later, the ‘Bloody Christmas’ clashes signalled the end of the Regency 
under the guns of the Italian navy and army, sent by the last Giolitti government. As for 
the two economic questions, one regarded the regulated price of bread: this had been 
set during the war but by 1920 had become unrealistic owing to wartime inflation and 
had to be heavily subsidized, creating a gaping hole in the public accounts. The abolition 
of  the  subsidy  was  entrusted  by  Giolitti  to  Marcello  Soleri,  Under  Secretary  for  Food 
Provisioning  and  Consumption,  and  was  approved  in  February  1921.  Although  it  met 
with  strong  opposition  at  the  time  from  several  political  parties  (as  reported  in  the 
Corriere), the measure made a substantial contribution to rebalancing the budget. The 
second  question  was  the  subject  of  a  second-page  article  written  by  Luigi  Luzzatti, 
entitled ‘Nuova carta moneta?’ (‘New paper money?’), which allowed the newspaper to 
highlight the ‘deep concern about an increase in money in circulation which is having 
noticeable effects on prices and exchange rates’. ‘If prices and exchange rates go up, 
the money press is to blame’, observed the columnist. 
2.  Back then these issues recurred so frequently that perhaps traces could be found on 
any  given  date.  I  quote  them  nevertheless,  because  it  is  still  somewhat  amusing  to 
think that if one picks up the Corriere published on the day Ciampi was born, one finds 
references  to  the  three  lodestars  (if  I  may  call  them  that)  that  guided  his  personal, 
professional and institutional life, from the outset of his career to the highest offices 
he held: the stability of the currency, balanced public finances, the ideal of a united 
Europe. The latter, however, should not be read in opposition to love for the smaller, 
national  homelands;  rather,  Europe  was  to  be  founded  on  a  healthy  sense  of 
patriotism – to stand as a bastion against the fratricidal destruction seen repeatedly in 
the  course  of  history.  In  the two  volumes of his  contributions to the  journal  Nuova 
Antologia, all three stars are very clearly visible. 
Europe 
3.
4.
5.
I shall begin with the third star, the European ideal, to which Ciampi’s writings return
again and again. This aspect, perhaps, strikes me more than anything else.
In 1966, recalling his time spent in Scanno in Abruzzo, from 1943 to 1944, while waiting
to try and get beyond the front of the Italian Co-Belligerent forces (the regular army,
which  after  the  1943  armistice  started  fighting  alongside  the  Allied  forces),  Ciampi
wrote: ‘During that time, we became convinced – and it is a conviction that still drives
and  sustains  us  –  that  the  European  Union  must  be  created  for  reasons  that  go  far
beyond economic considerations. We must remain fully aware of the tragedies that can
be  triggered  by  the  rekindling  of  nationalism,  creating  a  risk  of  moral  and  political
decline that has certainly not diminished in our time, as witnessed by the tragedy of the
former Yugoslavia. Europe must either move towards a Union solidly based on common
institutions,  or  risk  going  backwards.  We  must  not  forget  the  dramas  we  have  lived
through, to spare our children and our grandchildren a similar fate.’1
For  the  success  of  the  European  project,  however,  the  knowledge  that  ‘for  the
civilization  to  which  we  belong,  [political  union  is]  the  only  way  to  avoid  losing  the
thread  that  was  broken  by  two  world  wars  and  retied  by  those  with  the  vision  to
imagine Europe as a community’2 is only a necessary, not a sufficient condition. What is
also needed is ‘the creation of institutions that are appropriate for the new size of the
European  Union,  which  allow  us  to  face  up  to  our  responsibilities  towards  European
citizens’.3
6. Allow  me  to  underline  the  previous  sentence, which  is  taken  from  a  speech  in  2002,
when  Ciampi  was  called  on  to  give  the  laudatio  at  the  awarding  of  the  International
Charlemagne Prize of Aachen to ‘the euro – our money’. These words are still pertinent
today. Compared to one generation ago, today’s Europe is indeed ‘a new size’, not only
because the number of member countries has increased, but also – and really above all
I would say – because the areas in which we have pooled sovereignty have increased
greatly. In the last twenty years there has been a formidable transfer of sovereignty in
the economic, monetary and financial fields. Ciampi was one of its driving forces. The
European institutions have adjusted in part, at times making unexpected progress, at
others  falling  behind.  Today,  while  the  debate  on  the  completion  of  economic  union
continues, other questions have returned to the fore, and are once again among those
1  
'Quei giorni a Scanno fra ’43 e ’44’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, p. 103. See also in the 
same  collection,  ‘Diario  marzo-aprile  1944’,  vol.  2,  pp.  31-52,  ‘La  tragedia  di  Cassino’,  vol.  2, 
pp. 141-46 and ‘L’amicizia italo-tedesca al servizio dell’integrazione europea’, vol. 2, pp. 115-116. 
2   The  Governor’s  Concluding  Remarks 
for  1987,  Banca  d’Italia,  1988,  p.  33, 
(http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/relazioneannuale/1987/en_cf87_considerazioni_finali. 
pdf?language_id=1).  
‘Culture nazionali e civiltà europea’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, p. 74. 
3  
closest  to  the  heart  of  sovereignty:  security,  border  controls.  These  are  challenging 
areas which are of intrinsic common interest and are difficult to deal with at a national 
level. But they cannot be properly managed together without ‘appropriate institutions’.  
7.  We can draw some lessons from the experience of Europe’s economic institutions. The 
incompleteness of Economic and Monetary Union, as we know, returned dramatically 
to the fore, propelled first by the financial crisis and then by the sovereign debt crisis. 
The  year  2012  saw  the  publication  of  the  so-called  ‘Four  Presidents’  Report’4  which 
proposed  taking,  in  the  course  of  a  decade,  concrete  steps  towards  banking  and 
budgetary  union,  and  supplementing  or  replacing  national  intervention  tools  with 
similar  supranational  instruments.  The  Report  also  suggested  accompanying  this 
gradual transfer of sovereignty with a strengthening of the democratic legitimization of 
common institutions.  
8.  Most  of  the  proposals  in  the  Report  have  been  included  in  later  and  more  detailed 
documents and certainly not all of them have remained a dead letter. Indeed, the steps 
taken over the last few years have been extraordinary in some respects: at a time when 
the  economic  situation  has  been  particularly  challenging,  the  EU  and  the  euro  area’s 
institutional and regulatory framework has been broadly redesigned, filling glaring gaps. 
And yet the progress made has been uneven. Notably, while restrictions were rapidly 
placed  on  the  use  of  national  levers,  the  introduction  and  complete  pooling  of 
supranational instruments have lagged behind.  
9.  This is not the place to mull over issues that Governor Visco and the rest of us have 
dealt with on many occasions. Namely, the incompleteness of the banking union, the 
fact that the capital markets union is still in its infancy, and the marked asymmetry – the 
‘lameness’,  as  Ciampi  would  have  called  it5  –  of  an  institutional  architecture  that, 
despite having a single monetary policy, continues to have a fiscal policy that remains 
largely fragmented along national lines, albeit in the context of an increasingly intricate 
regulatory network. Instead I should like to make a more general comment, to which 
many other observations can be directly or indirectly linked. 6  
10.  Though  differing  in  many  ways  from  the  traditional  sovereign  state,  the  European 
Union  has  a  framework  whose  legislative  and  judicial  branches  resemble  those  of 
many  normal  constitutional  democracies.  Nowadays  the  Union  has  a  Parliament 
 4   Towards  a  genuine  economic  and  monetary  union.  Report  by  the  President  of  the  European 
Council, in close cooperation with the Presidents of the European Commission, the Eurogroup and 
the  European  Central  bank. 
(http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-120-2012-
INIT/en/pdf).  
‘Il futuro dell’Europa’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, p. 96; and passim. 
I covered this topic in more detail just over a year ago at the Collegio Carlo Alberto: ‘Economic 
Challenges Facing Europe and the World’, (https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/ interventi-
direttorio/int-dir-2016/Signorini_Moncalieri_19122016.pdf).  
5  
6  
  which,  according  to  the  Treaties,  has  a  status,  make-up  and  powers  comparable  to 
those  of  a  national  parliament;  it  has  courts  of  justice  that  ensure  the  uniform 
application of European law in very conventional ways. In contrast, executive power 
works in a rather peculiar way. There are two institutions that share power of political 
direction,  namely  the  Council  and  the  Commission,  with  a  division  of  roles  that  I 
believe  to  be  unique,  and  with  different  forms  and  sources  of  legitimacy.  Both,7 
moreover,  perform  non-governmental  functions:  the  Council  shares  the  legislative 
role  with  the  Parliament,  while  the  Commission  has  some  tasks  typically  associated 
with  independent  authorities,  which  are  hard  to  reconcile  with  its  political  role  –  a 
combination which is a perennial source of controversy.  
11.  The  distinctive  nature  of  the  Union’s 
institutional  framework 
is  not  without 
consequences. The absence of a single governing body results in a lack of certain tools 
typically used by the executive branch, which greatly hampers the discretionary action 
of  the  European  ‘government’.  The  Union’s  economic  governance 
is  therefore 
essentially based on defining the rules and checking that national governments comply 
with them. It is this imbalance between rules and discretionary governance, far more 
than the oft-discussed lack of democratic representativeness, which is the most unusual 
feature  of  the  European  constitutional  framework.  This  situation  is  not  accidental:  it 
arises  from  the  reluctance  of  member  states  to  confer  what  they  see  as  excessive 
powers  on  a  central  government.  Yet  what  is  sometimes  forgotten  is  that,  since  a 
considerable  portion  of  sovereignty  has  already  been  pooled  at  European  level  in 
various sectors (and for good reason), these arrangements create a paradox: with little 
discretionary  power  at  European  level  and  little  at  national  level,  the  entire  system 
appears inflexible. 
12.  A  far-sighted  view  would  be  required  to  solve  this  paradox.  I  do  not  know  if  this  is 
possible today; certainly, it will not be unless a climate of trust, which seems to have 
been lacking recently, is rebuilt between countries and between European citizens and 
institutions. In his ‘Concluding Remarks’ at the annual meeting of shareholders in 1988 
Ciampi recalled the progress made in creating a ‘genuine, united Community that can 
stand  alongside  the  United  States  and  Japan  as  a  point  of  reference  in  the  world 
economy’,  and  concluded,  ‘The  major  disputes  about  minor  issues  appear  to  have 
subsided:  though  the  road  ahead  is  still  arduous,  the  way  is  now  clear  for  progress 
towards the completion of economic union, which will prepare the ground for political 
union’.  It  is  to be  hoped  that  the  current  European debate  also dismisses  the  ‘minor 
issues’ and regains a sense of direction that will allow us – to quote Mario Draghi, one 
of Ciampi’s successors at the Bank of Italy – to ‘avoid remaining prisoners of incomplete 
 7   Strictly  speaking,  the  European  Council,  consisting  of  the  Heads  of  State  or  Government,  which 
‘sets  out  political  priorities’  and  has  no  legislative  functions,  is  constitutionally  a  separate  body 
from the Council of the European Union, and performs legislative functions in various assemblages 
at ministerial level. Both, however, are in essence the expression of national governments. 
  projects’.8  It  is  not,  or  at  least  it  is  not  only  a  question  of  an  ideal  vision:  the 
incompleteness  of  the  project  can  seriously  undermine  its  actual  effectiveness  and 
social acceptability. We see examples of this every day. 
13.  Ciampi belonged to that generation and that school of thought which, in the spirit of 
Jean  Monnet,  saw  every  step  towards  building  Europe  as  the  forerunner  of  the  next 
inevitable steps. In 1998, on the eve of the birth of the euro, he said he was convinced 
that ‘when eleven countries begin to jointly manage this common currency, they will 
realize […] that other things will need to be jointly managed too […] This is the slope 
along  which the  single  currency  will  roll […]  a  slope  which,  with the  same  inexorable 
strength  as  gravity,  will  force  the  main  policy  domains,  and  not  just  the  domain  of 
economic policy, into a framework of cooperation’. And yet while he described the euro 
as ‘an example of imagination in power’, and underlined that ‘putting the cart of the 
single  currency  in  front  of  the  horse  of  political  union  had  been  a  unique  historical 
initiative’, Ciampi also warned us about the need for unflagging commitment: ‘We now 
need  even  more  imagination  and  creativity  to  blend  elements  of  sovereignty  and 
supranationality,  States  and  federation,  and  unity  and  diversity  into  an  efficient 
institutional framework’.9  
Money  
14.   ‘The  independence  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  its  primary  objective  of 
maintaining price stability are solemnly enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty: there can be 
no divergences, no doubts of interpretation.’10 But the autonomy of central banks, as 
the articles printed in the Corriere della Sera on 9 December 1920 remind us, is not part 
of the natural condition of mankind; quite the opposite.  
15.  How much power or discretion the Sovereign can exert in printing money is an age-old 
question. In the West, the idea that sovereigns could not exercise this prerogative in a 
discretionary manner without endangering the well-being of their subjects or even their 
own, dates at least as far back as Nicole Oresme and his Treatise on the origin, nature, 
law,  and  alterations  of  money,  written  six  and  a  half  centuries  ago.  But  the  task  of 
translating these principles into institutional rules that would sanction the separation of 
the State Treasury and the ‘money press’ took a long time and varied from country to 
country.  In  Italy  the  matter  was  settled  between  1981  and  1993  with  Ciampi  the 
undisputed protagonist of that process.  
8  
                                                           
‘The Monnet method: its relevance for Europe then and now’, Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, 
Award  of  the  Gold  Medal  of  the Fondation Jean Monnet  pour l’Europe,  Lausanne,  4  May  2017, 
(https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/ecb.sp170504.it.html). 
‘L’esaltante avventura dell’euro’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, pp. 182-183.  
9  
10   ‘Il governo dell’economia in Italia e in Europa’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, p. 148.  
  16.  In one of the essays in the Nuova Antologia, Ciampi recalls the first, crucial step in this 
direction  in  a  conversation  with  Giovanni  Spadolini,  who  on  15  June  1981  –  as  the 
newly-appointed President of the Council of Ministers – asked the governor to ‘describe 
the economic situation to him as clearly as possible’. ‘This I did’ – Ciampi recalls – ‘by 
largely  repeating  what  I  had  said  two  weeks  earlier  on  30  May  at  the Bank  of  Italy’s 
annual meeting of shareholders, in the governor’s traditional ‘Concluding Remarks’. The 
situation  was  complicated.  Driven  by  the  second  oil  shock,  annual  inflation  had  risen 
above 20 per cent […] To defeat it, I had called for a series of structural and behavioural 
changes, a kind of monetary constitution, indicating three pillars’. The first two pillars 
were incomes policies and new rules and strict constraints on public expenditure; the 
third  was  the  ‘full  autonomy  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  to  prevent  any  interference  in  the 
creation of money by government expenditure centres’.11 
17.  When  he  outlined  his  government  programme on  7  July  1981,  Spadolini  said  nothing 
about  the  third  pillar,  but  he  ‘de  facto  approved  the  new  arrangements  for  financial 
transactions  between  the  Treasury  and  the  Bank  of  Italy,  which  Andreatta,  already 
Treasury Minister in the previous government, had agreed with me in April 1981 and 
which  took  effect in  July  that  same  year.  This ended  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  obligation to 
purchase Treasury bills not sold at auctions.’12 
18.  That  ‘divorce’  marked  the  beginning  of  a process  which  would  ultimately  lead  to the 
Governor of the Bank of Italy being made responsible for setting official interest rates in 
1992 and to the end of the Treasury’s permission to borrow up to 14 per cent of its 
budgetary  expenses  from  the  central  bank  in  1993,  for  a  token  interest  rate.  ‘In  this 
way’,  Ciampi  again  recalls,  ‘the  independence  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  was  given  full 
recognition’.13 
19.  To those who believed in those days that excessive attention was being paid to price 
stability, in his ‘Concluding Remarks’ in 1981 Ciampi responded that in previous years 
high inflation had ‘not only caused vast and unintended transfers of wealth and created 
the forms of inefficiency that are due to unpredictable and volatile relative prices’ but 
had ‘also changed the very essence of the currency by largely stripping it of its function 
as a store of value and leaving it only a humble role as a unit of account and medium of 
exchange. A complex trading economy cannot function without a unit of value that is 
reliable both in the present and with regard to the future.’14  
20.  The  return  to  monetary  stability  was  a  success.  After  reaching  21  per  cent  in  1980, 
inflation fell to 6 per cent in 1986 and to 3 per cent in the mid-1990s. However, while 
 11   ‘Ricordo di Giovanni Spadolini’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, pp. 152-153. 
12   ‘Ricordo di Giovanni Spadolini’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, p- 160. 
13   ‘Ricordo di Giovanni Spadolini’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, p- 160. 
14   Concluding Remarks, Banca d’Italia, 1981, p. 37, (http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/relazione-
annuale/1980/en_cf80_considerazioni_finali.pdf?language_id=1).  
  the monetary ‘pillar’ was built without delay, the other two, incomes policies and public 
expenditure,  were  only  partially  completed.  This,  wrote  Ciampi,  ‘cost  the  country 
dearly. It slowed economic development; it weakened the currency.’15 
21.  No longer Governor, it was again Ciampi acting as Minister of the Treasury in Prodi’s 
government,  who  steered  Italy’s  participation  in  the  single  currency  from  its 
inception.  The  end  of  the  long  ‘return  to  stability’,  which  began  in  1981  and  was 
pursued  with  determination  in  subsequent  years,  coincided  symbolically  with  the 
completion of a fundamental step in European integration. To Ciampi’s mind the two 
elements were indissolubly linked: ‘If […] we look again at the patterns of events in 
our economy in the 1980s and 1990s we can see a defining dual motif: the return to 
stability and the creation of Europe. Stability, which until the mid-1960s our country 
had proved capable of delivering together with strong development; Europe, which 
had  been  uppermost  in  our  hearts  and  minds  since  the  end  of  the  Second  World 
War’.16  
22.  It  may  be  worth  recalling  here  as  an  aside  a  perhaps  little-known  fact,  which  Ciampi 
alludes to in another essay: ‘As Minister of the Treasury, I wanted the image of Castel 
del Monte [on the one cent euro coin] as a tribute to Frederick II, an Emperor who was 
at once German and Roman, the embodiment of a supranational ideal.’17 
The public finances  
23.  To talk about the third of Ciampi’s lodestars, public finance, we need to return to the 
three pillars of stability, more specifically to the non-monetary ones. In recalling, years 
later, the events of the Spadolini administration, Ciampi underlined their importance: 
‘the  government  programme  that  the  Prime  Minister  […]  presented  to  Parliament 
indicated that the reining in of public spending, together with the cost of labour, would 
be  a  fundamental  part  of  the  fight  against  inflation’.  He  said  that  ‘regrettably,  in 
finalizing  the  budget,  its  contents  were  first  affected  by  the  conflicts  that  emerged 
within  the  Government  and  among  the  economic  Ministers,  and  then  by  the 
modifications  made  during  the  Parliamentary  debates  which,  in  large  part,  tended 
towards  easing  the  budget’,  adding  ‘the  gap  between  the  budget’s  results  and  its 
objectives was particularly wide. The deficit-to-GDP ratio, which had already increased 
from 9.3 per cent in 1980 to 10.7 per cent in 1981, jumped to over 13 per cent in 1982’. 
Lastly, he recalled that ‘at the end of May 1982 […] I deemed it necessary to make a 
 15   ‘1981: emergenza economica e nuove vie per il risanamento’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, 
p. 68. 
16   ‘Per la riconquista della stabilità e la creazione dell’Europa’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, 
p. 121. 
17   ‘Italia e Germania: un comune impegno europeista’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, p. 252. 
  public  comment  on  the  gap  between  the  acknowledgment  of  the  problems  and  the 
inadequacy  of  the  proposed  solutions,  expressing  with  great  clarity  the  risks  and 
concerns deriving therefrom’.18 
24.  In  his  writings  Ciampi  expressed  his  constant  concern  that  ‘growth  [could  be] 
disrupted by fiscal disorder’.19 Nearly 15 years later, at the end of 1995, speaking from 
a  medium-term  perspective  he  complained  again  about  ‘the  prolonged  lack  of 
consistency  between  the  consolidation  and  convergence  objectives  set  out  by 
Parliament  and  the  Government 
in  connection  with  the  process  of  European 
integration, and the manner in which the public finances and wage negotiations were 
actually managed’.20  
25.  Shortly afterwards, however, it fell upon Ciampi to reorganize the accounts, a requisite 
for  Italy’s  entry  into  the  European  Monetary  Union.  The  success  of  this  endeavour 
hinged upon three characteristics which marked Ciampi’s entire career: his insistence 
on an accurate diagnosis of problems; his urging of clear objectives; and his awareness 
of  his  personal  responsibilities,  an  indispensable  precondition  for  mobilizing  the 
energies of all.  
26.  In his speech before the Chamber of Deputies where he presented the Economic and 
Financial  Document  (EFD)  for  the  three  years  1997-99,  Ciampi  clearly  described  the 
diagnosis, objectives, and responsibilities. The diagnosis is clear: ‘the new Government 
was forced to acknowledge the changes that had taken place […] in the macroeconomic 
context.  In  addition,  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  public  accounts  demonstrated  […]  a 
worsening  with  respect  to  the  projections’.  The  objective,  however,  remains 
unequivocal:  ‘Italy’s  participation  as  of  1  January  1999  in  the  third  phase  of  the 
Economic and Monetary Union’. Lastly, on responsibilities, he emphatically and clearly 
stated that the EFD outlined the future of Italy’s economy and public finances and that 
‘this future is still in our hands. Nothing is inevitable or predetermined, there is no room 
for  fatalism’.21  The  importance  given  to  technical  diagnosis  aligns  Ciampi  with  the 
tradition of the Bank of Italy, where he himself once said he received his ‘Masters in 
Economics’.22  In  an  essay  dedicated  to  Einaudi,  Ciampi  recalled  the  origins  of  that 
tradition in the important analytical work carried out by Menichella and the Bank, which 
contributed to the success of the 1947 stabilization measures. 
18   ‘1981: emergenza economica e nuove vie per il risanamento’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, 
 pp. 69-73. 
19   ‘Operare Europa, pensare Europa, sognare Europa’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, p. 167. 
20   ‘1981: emergenza economica e nuove vie per il risanamento’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, 
p. 68. 
21   ‘Quale futuro per l’economia e per la finanza pubblica’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, 
pp. 79-83. 
22   ‘I ministri del Tesoro raccontano’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, p. 214. 
  27.  He had the chance to underline concisely and effectively the importance of an impartial 
diagnosis  in  the 1981  meeting  with President  Spadolini  mentioned  above.  Indeed,  he 
recalled  that,  after  having  ‘invited  him  to  describe  the  economic  situation  to  him  as 
clearly as possible […] Spadolini listened very closely, took several pages of notes in his 
own  handwriting  and  when  he  had  finished,  commented  that  the  outlook  he  had 
described was even bleaker than he had thought. We agreed’ – said Ciampi – ‘that one 
can construct something on worries but not on illusions’.23  
28.  That he was very clear on the motivations underlying his actions in his successive roles 
as  Governor,  Prime  Minister,  Minister,  and  President  of  the  Republic,  I  believe  is 
sufficiently apparent from all that I have said so far. What I would still like to underline 
is Ciampi’s habit of taking full responsibility for each role he held while simultaneously 
including others and encouraging them to take on their own responsibilities. It’s that 
idea  of  ‘it  is  up  to  us’  –  a  phrase  used  by  his  predecessor  Donato  Menichella  –  that 
appears  in  all  of  his  written  work  and,  even  more  importantly,  in  his  actions.  Again, 
while presenting the EFD for 1997-99, Ciampi said, ‘it has taken Italy four years to step 
away from the abyss, halve its deficit, and virtually wipe out its foreign debt. A country 
such as this does not deserve to be excluded from the fundamental transition towards 
Europe’s  new  political  and  economic  framework’.  And  he  warned  that  ‘failure  would 
only be due to a lack of faith in ourselves, in our doubting our strengths during the final 
leg of the journey […] We have twenty months ahead of us. Not a single week must be 
lost’.24 
29.  Today, we have no such tight deadlines, but the challenge is hardly different from the 
one we faced in the 1990s. We have to complete the task of consolidating the public 
finances, as was done so determinedly in those years, deploying structural measures to 
curb  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio’s  tendency  to  escalate  and  bringing  about  a  rapid 
contraction. Last year, when the Bank of Italy was called on to testify before Parliament 
during  the  debate  on  the  2017  Update  of  the  Economic  and  Financial  Document,  I 
stressed  the  ‘need  to  seize  the  opportunity  offered  by  the  current  situation  […]  to 
strengthen the public finances and visibly reduce the debt, our perennial weak point, 
and  to  lay  the  foundations  for  long-term  growth’.  I  again  stressed  that  a  ‘credible 
commitment  to  ensure  orderly  public  finances  is  essential  if  we  are  to  ensure  that  a 
gradual  return  to  normality  in  eurozone  monetary  and  financial  conditions  does  not 
widen the gap between the cost of the public debt and economic growth, as this would, 
in  turn,  set  off  a  vicious  circle,  causing  the  debt  to  expand’.25  As  Ciampi  would  have 
remarked, and in fact did in 1996, ‘it is a matter of regaining a degree of freedom in the 
23   ‘1981: emergenza economica e nuove vie per il risanamento’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, 
 vol. 1, p. 66. 
24   ‘Quale futuro per l’economa e per la finanza pubblica’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, p. 92. 
25   Preliminary  hearing  on  the  2017  Update  of  the  Economic  and  Financial  Document,  pp.  10-11, 
(https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/interventi-direttorio/int-dir-2017/en-Signorini-031017.pdf). 
  adoption of budget policies that has been lost, or at least greatly curtailed, owing to the 
structural imbalance of our public finances. This freedom is particularly important in a 
system such as ours, which has to turn economic policy around and redirect it towards 
growth and employment’.26 
Conclusions 
30.  Carlo  Azeglio  Ciampi’s  qualities  cannot  be  fully  appreciated  without  considering  his 
cultural  roots.  The  writings  collected  in  these  two  volumes  clearly  illustrate  his 
intellectual heritage; though never explicitly named, this heritage is apparent from the 
citations:  Mazzini,  Cavour,  Einaudi,  De  Gasperi,  and  onwards  to  Giovanni  Spadolini, 
Paolo  Baffi  and  Tommaso  Padoa  Schioppa.  In  an  article  written  in  2009,  he  is  more 
explicit and precise about this heritage: ‘My advanced age,’ Ciampi wrote at the time, 
‘leads me increasingly to seek out people and voices from the past; whether this is to 
recapture the spirit of youth or to lighten the burden of my present weakness, I do not 
know. Sometimes, I will pick up, at random, an old piece of writing: books of literature, 
history or politics that were my companions years ago. Many of them are the voices of 
writers  that  I,  too,  consider  to  be  among  ‘my  elders’:  from  Ruffini  to  Calogero,  from 
Salvatorelli  to  De  Ruggiero,  from  Omodeo  to  Calamandrei,  right  up  to  my  near 
contemporary  Galante  Garrone.  Whatever  the  specific  subject  of  their  writing,  I  am 
always surprised to discover that single, unbroken thread that runs through our history, 
from the Risorgimento to the Republic via the Liberation’.27 
31.  Ciampi  was  known  to  be  fascinated  with  the  Italian  Risorgimento.  His  passionate 
interest in this period of history, so far removed from the rampant Chauvinism of the 
Fascist years, led him to view the European Union not as a threat to national identity 
and  culture  but  as  a  means  of  ensuring  their  survival  and  expansion  within  a  global 
framework because, as he said, ‘no one alone can nurture their invaluable cultural, civic 
and religious heritage, which is an integral part of our European identity’.28  
32.  From the same cultural roots sprang Ciampi’s vocation to ‘serve the general interest’. 
The  Italian  patriots  were  not only  fighters,  ‘they  were  an  honest, disinterested  ruling 
class present in every town and every region of Italy’.29 To serve the general interest, ‘in 
his own words, … “you do not – indeed should not – have to be an exceptional human 
being, a saint, a hero or an anchorite, [but] you do need to believe firmly in the basic 
values of democracy; importantly, you should set realistic goals for the development of 
26   ‘Quale futuro per l’economa e per la finanza pubblica’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, 
 pp. 82-83. 
27   ‘Per i giovani e la patria europea’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, p. 266. 
28   ‘Culture nazionali e civiltà europea’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, pp. 74 and 79.  
29   ‘I giovani, il Risorgimento, il sogno dell’Italia unita’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 2, p. 62.  
  society; you only need to be an honest, capable man or woman, practising the values 
and beliefs that you preach, and ... look on the task you have undertaken above all as a 
civic duty”’.30 This is why, when Ciampi took responsibility for tasks with which he was 
entrusted at difficult times, ‘tasks [I quote another of his successors, Ignazio Visco] that 
he sometimes imagined would, as he put it, prove beyond his power’,31 he managed to 
set aside all his doubts and hesitations.  
33.  It has been said that we owe Ciampi more than just his contribution to the economy: we 
owe  him  ‘a  great  and  enduring  belief  in  the  capabilities  of  Italians’.32  During  the 
inception of the euro, in May 1998 Ciampi told the Chamber of Deputies that ‘Italy has 
given Europe what the European Union most needs: proof of how much a country and a 
people can do when they are given a great purpose and put all their best efforts into 
achieving  it’.33  Now  that  we  have  come  through  a  ruinous  economic  crisis  and  find 
ourselves  half  way  along  a  path  of  reform  which  has  already  greatly  changed  the 
functioning of our economy and will continue to change it even more; now that we are 
called  on  once  again  to  make  our  voice  heard  clearly  in  the  European  debate,  Carlo 
Azeglio Ciampi would exhort us to prove that we can do again what we did in the past: 
when  faced  with  momentous  choices,  we  have  always  taken  the  course  that  was 
difficult but right. 
                                                           
30   Ignazio Visco, Ciampi a Via Venti Settembre, p. 5, (https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/ 
interventi-governatore/integov2016/visco-141120126.pdf). 
31   Ignazio Visco, Ciampi a Via Venti Settembre, p. 5, (https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/ 
interventi-governatore/integov2016/visco-141120126.pdf). 
32   G. Nardozzi, ‘Il governatorato di Carlo Azeglio Ciampi (1979-1993)’, in Governare la moneta – 
La Banca d’Italia da Einaudi a Ciampi, Biblioteca della Nuova Antologia, Edizioni Polistampa, 
Florence 2004, p. 168. 
33   ‘Operare Europa, pensare Europa, sognare Europa’, in Scritti nella Nuova Antologia, vol. 1, 
p. 177. 
  the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed by 
