Philip R Lane: Publication of the Annual Report 2017
Introductory statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the media
briefing on Bank of Ireland’s 2017 Annual Report, Dublin, 9 May 2018.
 Welcome to the Central Bank’s Dockland Campus for this media briefing on our Annual Report.
I am joined by Deputy Governor Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor Ed Sibley, Director General
Derville Rowland and Chief Operations Officer Gerry Quinn.
2017  was  a  busy  year  for  us.  The  Annual  Report,  Statement  of  Accounts  and  our  Annual
Performance Statement, which will be published later, all reflect this high level of activity.
These reports are a central part of our accountability framework:
Our Annual Report sets out what we did in 2017 – and how we fulfilled our responsibilities;
Our Annual Performance Statement details our regulatory actions in 2017 – and our goals
for 2018; and
The Statement of Accounts – incorporated in our annual report – provide an overview of our
financial operations.
Our accounts show the Central Bank is reporting a financial profit of €2.6 billion for 2017. This
means, net of retained earnings, approximately €2.1 billion will be transferred to the Exchequer.
Over the medium term, our headline profits will normalise, in line with the ongoing disposal of the
special portfolio.
Looking  to  the  future,  we  expect  that  the  ongoing  economic  recovery  at  Irish,  European  and
global levels -  supported across the eurosystem by the accommodative monetary strategy of
the European Central Bank – will be a significant driver of monetary and financial conditions in
Ireland. Stronger economic performance is very welcome in terms of its positive impact on living
standards and financial stability. However small, highly globalised countries like Ireland are more
volatile than larger economies, which means that we can grow strongly for extended periods but
are especially vulnerable to tail risks. High stocks of both public and private debt and the inherent
volatility of the Irish macro-financial system requires ongoing vigilance in terms of limiting pro-
cyclical tendencies in the operation of the financial system and the wider economy. To this end,
in our role as the macroprudential authority, we are committed to improving the resilience of the
Irish financial system in the event of adverse shocks.
The implementation of the eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes has been a major priority
in recent years.  In addition to the acquisition of assets, this has required extensive activity in
relation to risk management and our policies in relation to setting the appropriate level of reserves
in our balance sheet.  The ongoing disposal of the special portfolio of floating rate notes remains
an additional priority in our financial operations.
Considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  the  Tracker  Mortgage  Examination.  Our end-March
report shows that the redress and compensation figure is now €459 million– with 37,100 cases
identified.  The  supervisory  phase  will  conclude  this  year.  Enforcement  activity  also  remains
ongoing, with investigations initiated against six banks. We are also undertaking a wide-ranging
assessment of the underlying organisational culture of the five main banks.
In  2017,  we  moved  to  ensure  we  were  appropriately  set  up  to  meet  the  demands  of  our
expanded regulatory mandate by establishing prudential regulation and financial conduct pillars. 
Across the four pillars (central banking, prudential regulation, financial conduct, operations), we
work as an integrated organisation in fulfilling our mandate.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
In terms of our regulatory priorities for 2018,  in addition to the Tracker Mortgage Examination,
managing the impact of Brexit is a major task. We expect to see an increased number of firms
that want to establish a presence in Ireland. We also required regulated firms already here to
have  robust  plans  to  deal  with  Brexit  in  whatever  shape  it  materialises,  especially  those
companies with exposure to the United Kingdom. In this regard, the level of preparation by some
firms is a concern. We also continue to highlight the potential Brexit-related risks to the economy,
the financial sector and individual firms.
We closely monitor developments in the mortgage market. Our macroprudential toolkit – and in
particular  the mortgage  measures  –  are  central  to  increasing  the  resilience  of  banks  and
borrowers and avoid the risks of credit-house price spirals emerging.  A high priority remains
tackling the outstanding stock of non-performing loans in the banking system.
We are also currently working to develop our strategic plan for 2019–2021. To help inform the
plan  we  are  inviting  submissions  from  the  public  to  help  shape  our  future  priorities.    The
submission phase runs until early June and  we encourage comments and suggestions from all
interested parties.
Finally, on behalf of the senior management team, let me express our gratitude to the members
of the Central Bank Commission for their support throughout the year. I would also like to thank
all staff members for their continued hard work in delivering the mandate of the Central Bank.
I am happy to take your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
