François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Beyond  Brexit,  our  common
challenges and our common answers
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the City Week
2018, London, 24 April 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a pleasure to be in London again and allow me to thank you for inviting me to speak
at  City  Week  2018. As  is  to  be  expected,  Brexit  is  omnipresent  on  the  agenda.  But,  as  the
Belgian friar Dominique Pire said when he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1958, “men build
too many walls and not enough bridges”. That is why I am not going to speak about what divides
us, but rather about what unites us. We are and will always remain close friends and partners,
even if we will no longer be in the same European club. Today I will elaborate on two challenges
that should unite us in the near future: the utmost need for active multilateralism and the finance
of tomorrow in an interconnected world.
1. The need for active multilateralism
International cooperation between countries is more important than ever to preserve
the  current  improvement  in  the  global  economic  environment:  according  to  the  latest  IMF
forecast, global growth should stand at 3.9% in 2018, after 3.8% in 2017. And we should together
resist two temptations: financial complacency, and protectionist escalation.
On the financial sector, beyond the European Union’s borders, and with all our partners, we have
to strive to maintain the collective rules of the game that we have put in place since the G20
summit  of  London  in  2009.  Nine  years  later,  some  actors  may  be  tempted  to  have  short
memories and forget the lessons of the crisis. But diluting financial regulation would pave the
way  for  the  next  financial  crisis.  So  we  must  now  be  firmly  committed  to  the  “full,  timely  and
consistent implementation” of Basel III, as successfully agreed last December and stated in the
last G20’s Buenos Aires communiqué. Neither the United States today, nor the United Kingdom
tomorrow, should take the path of unilateral deregulation, and we welcome their commitment.
Evaluation  and  simplifications  are  obviously  possible,  under  the  common  FSB  umbrella:  but
regulatory  competition  would  be  nothing  less  than  a  lose-lose  scenario  with  disastrous
consequences.
However, we are not done with financial regulation yet. We still have to finalise ongoing initiatives,
especially on shadow banking. Indeed, the regulatory priority is no longer the solvency of banks,
but  the  liquidity  of  non-banks:  we  stressed  these  financial  stability  risks  in  our  Washington
meetings  last  week.  Tomorrow,  we  at  the  Banque  de  France  will  publish  the  2018  Financial
Stability Review that is focused on fast-growing market-based finance.
I stress that we have to better monitor it, test it – through liquidity stress-tests –, and regulate it
when necessary.
Financial stability is our common good, and we should also face a more subtle threat to it: debt
complacency on a global level, in the context of accommodative monetary policies which will be
less warranted in the near future. Global debt was already about 200% of world GDP before the
crisis (2007), but is up to 220% today. Sound fiscal policies for public debt, responsible lending
by financial actors for private debt and – if needed – macroprudential measures, should react
against this debt complacency.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
More  broadly  on  multilateralism,  we  should  continue  to  work  together  to  preserve  the  world
economic and trade order. We Europeans, shoulder-to-shoulder with Canada, Japan and others,
must resolutely defend international economic relations based on commonly respected rules and
multilateral institutions: we are all aware that an escalation of protectionist threats from the United
States  would  dampen  growth  everywhere.  The  recent  uncertainty  is  probably  already  having
some negative effects on investment: you saw it in the British economy since the Brexit vote in
2016. And  real  tariffs  would  hurt  more:  according  to  most  calculations  including  ours,  a  10%
increase in tariffs would diminish world trade by double digit figures, and decrease global GDP by
more than 2%, starting in the United States.
2. The finance of tomorrow
Let me now turn to my second point: the finance of tomorrow in an interconnected world.
Let me first remind you that France and the United Kingdom have already developed a similar –
and I believe promising – approach to regulating innovation. Call it “proportionality” in Paris or
“sandbox” in London. But it is the way of solving an apparent paradox: for many, regulation is the
enemy of innovation. In fact, regulation has a role to play in order to boost and secure innovation
at the same time. To give an example, by allowing third parties to safely access payment data,
the revised European Directive on payment services (PSD2) is a significant driver of innovation.
More  broadly,  since  its  creation  in  2016,  around  300  Fintechs  have  been  guided  by  France’s
ACPR Fintech Innovation Hub. 
There are so many promising innovations which will increase customers’ satisfaction, enhance
competition and reduce costs. And clearly each of them – from big data to payment services –
requires a specific monitoring and response by regulators, with an open and evolutive view. “One
size fits all”, and “one time seizes all” would be two bad answers to financial innovation. Let me
however  share  some  thoughts  on  four  common  challenges  and  opportunities:  cyber  risks,
crypto-assets, artificial intelligence and climate change.
Cyber  risks  are  a  major  threat,  and  so  investing  in  cybersecurity  is  the  first  booster  to
innovation. It is clear that the current level of coordination of cyber-attacks can only be mitigated
by a similarly coordinated response. We should strengthen the G7 Cyber expert group, and the
“Bari principles” adopted last May. Therefore I welcome the creation of a G7 group dedicated to
cross-border cyber exercises, and I confirm today that the Banque de France will coordinate the
G7  test  in  2019.  Cybersecurity  will  indeed  be  one  of  the  priorities  of  the  forthcoming  French
presidency of the G7 next year. 
Besides cyber risks, we need to seriously deal with the emergence of crypto-assets.
The underlying technology clearly promises sustainable innovation. The Banque de France was
the first central bank to offer a service to the market based on blockchain and we intend to carry
on experimenting with this technology. But support for blockchain doesn’t mean blind support for
bitcoin and the like speculative assets. We were clear in the G20 last month, and let me be clear
today. First, the frequent use of the term “digital or virtual currency” misleads the general public
on what those assets really are: they are not currencies, with none of a currency’s key functions
– store of value, medium of exchange, unit of account. Moreover, crypto-assets carry obvious
risks in terms of consumer and investor protection, as well as money laundering and terrorist
financing.  Therefore  they  require  internationally  harmonised  answers:  the  Financial  Stability
Board,  in  consultation  with  other  standard-setting  bodies  and  the  Financial Action  Task  Force
(FATF), should make recommendations by next July. In particular, we should work on exchanges
and  platforms  which  provide  services  at  the  interface  between  crypto-assets  and  the  real
economy.
From  a  more  prospective  point  of  view, artificial  intelligence  (AI)  will  be  among  the  most
 2 / 3
1
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
impactful  technologies  in  the  financial  industry  for  the  upcoming  years:   up  to  30%  of  major
French banks’ projects in current development are heavily focused on AI and the potential for
insurers is equally huge both for the traditional damages insurance as for life insurance products.
The expected benefits of AI in customer relationship and risk management are numerous: we
don’t know the limits, and we shouldn’t be frightened of AI. To allow its wider use in a secured
way, we have set up a Task Force on AI, led by the ACPR and gathering all relevant industry
representatives. And I already stress that we have to collectively implement at least three core
principles: (i) promoting a greater understanding of algorithms to avoid the ‘black box effect’; (ii)
ensuring a sound governance of AI-based systems; (iii) fostering an ethical use of data so that
bias-free AI applications promote inclusiveness.
Last but not least, green finance represents a new frontier for the 21  century for us as central
bankers  and  supervisors.  One  of  our  priorities  is  to  better  measure  the  long-term  risks
associated  with  climate  change:  we  need  both  a  “snapshot  of  the  risks”  –  namely  the
identification and disclosure of exposures – and a “video of the risks” provided by forward-looking
carbon stress tests. But we also intend to develop the huge opportunities related to the financing
of the transition towards a low-carbon economy – up to USD 90 trillion are needed till 2030 –,
while  preventing  the  risk  of  “green  washing”.  It  would  certainly  make  sense  to  promote  a
convergence  towards  a  harmonised  European  standard  for  green  bonds  –  including  UK  –,
leveraging the Green Bond Principles approach in terms of processes and transparency, and
building on the Climate Bond Initiative approach with regard to taxonomy. Much has to be done in
the  coming  years.  In  that  regard,  I  am  very  happy  to  count  the  Bank  of  England  among  the
founding  members  of  the  Central  Banks  and  Supervisors  Network  for  Greening  the  Financial
System  (NGFS)  that  was  launched  by  the  Banque  de  France  last  December.  This  is  an
enthusiastic and rapidly developing “coalition of the willing”: the nine founding members should
shortly be joined by three new members and two observers: the BIS and the OECD. Several
other major central banks and supervisors are on the verge of applying.
st
Stephen  Hawking  once  famously  said  about  the  Internet:  “We  are  all  now  connected  […]  like
neurons in a giant brain”. This could also apply to the finance of tomorrow in an interconnected
world. Each of us – whether regulators or professionals – is at least a neuron; we need to be
connected  to  other  neurons  to  produce  innovative  ideas.  Similarly,  no  country  or  financial
institution can adequately respond to the challenges of this changing world on its own: we must
definitely join our efforts to build our future. Thank you for your attention.
1
ACPR study on the digital revolution in the French banking and insurance sector, March 2018.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
