Jan Smets: Monetary policy normalization – where do we stand?
Speech by Mr Jan Smets, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the 7th Annual Research
Conference "Around a Decade After the Crisis: Heading to the New Global Cycle and Monetary
Policy Normalization", National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, Ohrid, 13 April 2018.
Accompanying slides of this speech.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 It’s a pleasure and honour to be here with you today. Many thanks to the National Bank of the
Republic of Macedonia for the invitation.
The last decade has been a challenging one for policymakers, not the least for central bankers.
Confronted with a severe economic downturn but determined to deliver on our mandates, we
were forced to expand our monetary policy toolkit with negative interest rates, asset purchases
and  forward  guidance.  Overall,  these  measures  have  been  very  effective  and  helped  set  in
motion the current synchronized global upturn.
Notwithstanding the economic recovery, central bankers cannot (yet) rest at ease. First, weak
inflationary pressures remain a lingering concern. Second, monetary policy normalization itself
poses a new challenge which requires our attention.
My talk today will focus on these topics – low inflation and its implications for monetary policy
normalisation –, primarily viewed from a euro area perspective. But let me first take a broader
view,  as  also  central  banks  from  other  advanced  economies  are  confronted  with  the  same
challenges.
Indeed,  for  some  time,  advanced  economies  have  been  characterized  by  robust  economic
growth but puzzlingly weak or inexistent inflationary pressures.
The United States economy recovered relatively quickly from the 2008 financial crisis with real
GDP catching up again with its pre-crisis peak level in 2011. The economic expansion has been
ongoing since then and may be on its way to register as the longest on record. The improvement
in the labour market has been impressive with the unemployment rate falling from its peak at
10  %  in  October  2009  to  4.1  %  currently,  a  level  below  most  estimates  of  the  natural
unemployment  rate.  Tightness  in  the  labour  market  has,  however,  not  translated  into  strong
wage and price pressures. From a historical perspective, wage increases have been muted and
core PCE inflation has overall remained below the central bank’s 2 % target. Looking forward, the
inflation outlook is more upbeat, though: wages have accelerated a little of late and temporary
factors that have held down core inflation are disappearing. Consequently, US monetary policy
makers  project  core  inflation  to  pick  up,  running  slightly  above  2  %  in  2019  and  2020.  This
suggests that the growth-inflation disconnect in the US is temporary.
For the euro area, available data call for more caution. The sovereign debt crisis meant that the
cyclical recovery took much longer to manifest itself: real GDP only returned to its pre-crisis peak
level in 2015 but the economic expansion has been robust and broad-based since and looks set
to continue. The unemployment rate is on a downward path, although it has not yet reached its
pre-crisis  level.  Despite  these  favourable  developments,  inflationary  pressures  remain  weak.
Underlying inflation has been basically flat at 1 % over the last 5 years – far from our objective of
below but close to 2 % -  and wage growth does not yet show convincing upward momentum.
Looking forward, underlying inflation is projected to only gradually rise to 1.8 % in 2020.
In contrast to the euro area and the Unites States, nominal weakness has been a permanent
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
feature of the Japanese economy over the last 2 decades. While recently, economic growth has
strengthened a bit and the unemployment rate fell to record lows, wage growth has remained
weak and inflation stubbornly low. The Bank of Japan appears confident in reaching its inflation
target, however, projecting CPI inflation excluding fresh food to accelerate to above 2 % in 2019.
As the three economies find themselves at different points in the business cycle and confidence
in inflation getting back to target varies, the respective monetary policy stances differ as well.
On the one hand, the Federal Reserve is well underway with normalization. It ended its net asset
purchases in October 2014, started raising the federal funds rate in December 2015 and has
recently started to gradually reduce its balance sheet. Consequently, the federal funds rate has
again  become  the  primary  tool  for  signalling  the  monetary  policy  stance.  In  March  the  rate’s
target range was hiked to 1.5 % to 1.75 %; currently markets expect 3 more rate hikes this year
while Fed officials pencil in 2 more.
On the other hand, the Eurosystem and the Bank of Japan remain more cautious, keeping their
monetary policy stimulus in place. In 2016, the Bank of Japan even revamped its monetary policy
framework  introducing  negative  rates,  yield  curve  control  and  an  inflation-overshooting
commitment. In the euro area, the strengthening recovery and improved confidence in inflation
converging  to  our  aim  have  allowed  us  to  gradually  start  recalibrating  our  monetary  policy
package over the past months. We reduced the pace of our monthly net asset purchases and
removed some so-called “easing biases” in our communication. This notwithstanding, our overall
stance continues to be very accommodative.
The cautious approach taken by the Eurosystem is inspired by the multitude of uncertainties that
remain present in the economy and that are complicating our understanding of how the economy
exactly works.
I already mentioned one such uncertainty: the link between inflation and economic growth.
Recent research has come up with a number of possible explanations accounting for the slower
reaction of underlying inflation to a strengthening economy. One entails that despite the robust
recovery, labour market slack might be larger than presumed.
For  instance,  in  the  euro  area  the  “broad”  unemployment  rate  –  which  includes  discouraged
work-seekers  and  employees  working  part-time  but  who  would  want  to  work  full-time  –  rose
considerably more strongly during the crisis than the conventional unemployment rate. And the
gap  between  the  two  remains  wider  than  before  the  crisis.  This  suggests  that  the  untapped
supply of labour remains possibly more significant than suggested by the simple unemployment
rate.
The  recent  downward  revisions  in  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  –  here  the  European
Commission’s NAWRU (non-accelerating wage rate of unemployment) estimates are shown –
also make us suspect that slack in the euro area is bigger than we thought. They imply that the
economy  could  converge  towards  a  lower  level  of  unemployment  without  creating  inflationary
pressures.
Past and ongoing structural reforms, for one, could account for the boost to labour supply, and
therefore to the economy’s potential as a whole. On the one hand, this entails good news as we
have  more  margin  to  grow.  How  much  precisely  remains,  however,  an  open  question  as  the
exact  magnitude  of  slack  and  the  pace  at  which  it  is  eroding  remain  uncertain.  On  the  other
hand, higher slack implies a slower convergence of inflation towards our aim and such a long
period of too low inflation can also pose specific challenges, even beyond its underlying cause –
the excess capacity.
Let  me  now  try  to  shed  some  light  on  how  important  this  slack  story  is  in  explaining  the  low
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
inflation or whether also other factors play a role here.
A Phillips curve analysis – allowing for time-variation in the parameters – can give us an idea. It
caters for many potential sources of low inflation, including idle resources but also lower trend
inflation and external price pressures.
1
In house NBB estimates  find that since 2013 the negative output gap and weaker import prices
have been the most important factors in lowering headline inflation in the euro area. While import
prices are now pulling up inflation – reflecting the impact of the recent recovery in oil prices –
slack still remains a bit of a drag.
Nominal factors – related to how firms and households set prices and wages – seem to have
played a more limited role. As of 2013, trend inflation seems to have fallen a bit below 2 %, but
only slightly so. In addition, inflation persistence – which is captured by the ρ in the Phillips curve
equation – appears to have increased somewhat. This implies that shocks have a longer-lasting
impact on inflation as a result of which inflation converges more slowly to its trend. In this regard,
the  long  period  of  low  inflation  could  have  led  firms  and  unions  to  become  more  backward-
looking when setting prices and wages, making inflation more persistent. Or it could also reflect
that the lower bound has somewhat affected monetary policy’s effectiveness in dealing with the
shocks hitting the euro area economy.
As the euro area expansion proceeds, most of these disinflationary forces should disappear. As
a result, inflation should recover to our target of close to but below 2 %, albeit perhaps a little
more slowly given the higher inflation persistence.
Another uncertainty that warrants a cautious monetary policy approach concerns the level of the
natural rate of interest. Of course, our estimates about its level are always a bit of a guess as the
natural  rate  is  unobservable.  What  several  studies  suggest,  however,  is  that  it  has  fallen  in
several advanced economies since  the  crisis.  That  puts  an  even  higher  premium  on  bringing
inflation back towards our inflation aim – even if the absorption of slack that accompanies it is of
course already a very good reason to do so.
In  a  low  real  rate  world,  the  frequency  of  lower  bound  periods  is  likely  higher.  In  such  an
environment,  avoiding  inflation  to  settle  at  too  low  levels  is  of  utmost  importance  as  it  helps
preserve  the  macroeconomic  stabilization  capacity  of  the  central  bank’s  nominal  policy  rate
instrument. Were we to allow trend inflation to settle below pre-crisis levels and hence below our
price  stability  definition,  it  would  imply  even  lower  nominal  interest  rates  in  steady  state.  This
means that, faced with negative shocks, the central bank would have a smaller margin to reduce
rates, so recessions might last longer and inflation would recover more slowly.
True,  faced  with  the  lower  bound,  the  central  bank  could  use  non-standard  measures  more
often.  Yet,  such  unconventional  measures  –  asset  purchases  and  negative  interest  rates,  for
instance –, while effective, are typically seen to have more side effects, including on financial
stability, and they also have limits.
Because of the firm commitment to bring inflation back in line with our inflation aim, I thus believe
that  the  prudent,  persistent  and  patient  monetary  policy  approach  followed  by  the  Governing
Council so far is fully justified.
The different environment that we are operating in since the crisis should make us more wary of
past relationships guiding our decisions today and tomorrow. These will continue to be supported
by a cautious monitoring of actual data, in particular wage growth and underlying inflation.
The conditionality is embedded in our reaction function in the form of the concept of “Sustained
Adjustment in the Path of Inflation” (SAPI). It entails that inflation has to move in line with our aim
of  below  but  close  to  2  %  in  a  sustainable  way.  This  requires  that  three  criteria,  namely
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
convergence,  confidence  and  resilience,  have  to  be  fulfilled.  At  present,  we  are  increasingly
confident that inflation is on a rising path and converging to our objective in the medium term. But
it lacks some resilience, though, as it still relies on our monetary policy support.
Therefore our monetary policy package remains in place for now. This is fully consistent with our
primary objective of realizing price stability. In doing so, we give the economy the time to tap its
full potential.
This steady-hand approach of monetary policy should also pay off in the future. For one, it helps
ensure that when we start normalizing we will be able to do so in a durable way, meaning in an
economy  where  the  nominal  and  real  side  are  sufficiently  strong.  Again  having  mandate-
consistent inflation readings will allow the central bank to perform its stabilising role at all times,
including during future recessions.
This brings me to my next topic, namely: what would the ECB’s monetary policy normalization
look like? Even if it is early days to talk in detail about this, our forward guidance gives already
some guiding principles that I would like to share with you.
The  first  decision  we  will  make  concerns  our  asset  purchase  programme.  Its  horizon  is
conditional on SAPI, so once we decide that sufficient progress on this front has been made, net
asset purchases will gradually come to an end.
By reinvesting maturing assets for as long as necessary, we ensure that the stock of assets on
our balance sheet will remain stable for a good while, and that the downward pressure on long-
term  interest  rates  will  persist.  In  other  speeches,  Peter  Praet  has  already  shown  that  the
2
reinvestment policy indeed has a very persistent impact on term premia .
Likewise, our continued pledge to keep key policy rates at their current levels well past the end of
net  purchases  has  assured  in  the  past  and  will  assure  in  the  future  that  the  short-end  of  the
curve remains firmly anchored at low levels. As we move further in time, the main instrument for
shaping the stance will again become the key policy rates, including forward guidance about their
likely  evolution. As  such,  our  communication  will  likely  be  further  specified  and  calibrated  to
ensure that inflation continues to evolve in line with our objective.
We will continue to inform markets to the best of our ability about the state of our thinking about
the way forward, making adjustments to our policy as predictable as possible.
Predictability  and  gradualism  should  also  limit  the  spillovers  to  Central,  Eastern  and
Southeastern European (CESEE) countries when we decide on normalizing our monetary policy.
Indeed, the Federal Reserve “taper tantrum” of May 2013 did lead to sizeable capital outflows
from  catching-up  economies,  including  in  the  CESEE  region.  However,  the  monetary  policy
tightening alluded to in Ben Bernanke’s tapering speech came as a surprise to financial markets;
as  said  before,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  normalization  aims  to  be  gradual  and  predictable.
Moreover, since then, CESEE countries have taken steps to reduce their vulnerabilities: most of
them now have deeper local currency debt markets, smaller macro imbalances, and stronger
macroeconomic frameworks.
Nevertheless,  CESEE  countries  are  still  exposed  to  a  tightening  in  global  financial  conditions,
due to their generally elevated external liabilities; at 56 % of GDP on average (in 2017), most
CESEE countries have a relatively high external debt ratio. Vulnerability to a rise in global rates
varies greatly across the region, however, reflecting not only differences in debt levels but also in
the structure of countries’ external liabilities, including the role of FDI versus more volatile capital
inflows in those liabilities and the shares of foreign currency and short-term debt.
Hence,  CESEE  countries  should  take  advantage  of  the  current  stronger  global  economy  to
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
continue to build resilience to changes in external financial conditions. Structural policies to foster
higher productivity and sound fiscal and financial policies remain key. Ensuring efficient corporate
insolvency  and  restructuring  frameworks  would  also  help  achieve  faster  and  less  costly
resolution of repayment difficulties should they arise when global financing conditions gradually
become less accommodative.
Summing up, the robust non-inflationary growth that we are experiencing now in the euro area
should make us, central bankers, neither satisfied nor anxious but rather patient. Uncertainty, for
instance about the underlying strength of real variables, calls for a steady-hand monetary policy,
finding  first  confirmation  from  the  nominal  side  of  the  economy  that  price  pressures  are
sufficiently strengthening. But I am confident that inflation will sustainably converge to our aim.
I thank you for your attention.
1
2
See  Cordemans  N.  and  J.  Wauters  (2018)  “What  explains  the  disconnect  between  real  and  nominal
developments?” forthcoming in the June issue of the NBB Economic Review.
    See for instance the speech “Assessment of quantitative easing and challenges of policy normalization” given
by P. Praet at The ECB and Its Watchers XIX Conference in Frankfurt am Main on 14 March 2018.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
