Vítor  Constâncio:  Presentation  of  the  European  Central  Bank
Annual Report 2017 to the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, to the
Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,  Brussels,  9 April
2018.
 Mr Chairman,
Honourable Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I  am  honoured  to  be  here  today  for  the  last  time  before  this  Committee,  to  present  the  ECB
Annual Report for 2017 in my capacity as ECB Vice-President. I would like to personally thank
you for the fruitful dialogue we have had over these past eight years. The world has changed
greatly over this period, and so has the ECB. The crisis, and in particular the need to deal with
the risks of very low inflation or even deflation, required us to broaden our monetary policy toolkit
to fulfil our mandate. Without those bold policies, within our legal mandate, monetary union may
have collapsed. As an active participant in the ECB Governing Council for 18 years, including
eight years as Vice-President, I am proud to have contributed to such policies. However, I wish to
remind you that the extraordinary set of institutional reforms added to the initial minimalist design
of monetary union is not yet complete and that existential threats still remain. As legislators, you
have also contributed to those reforms and I hope you will continue to do what is necessary to
complete a solid and successful economic and monetary union.
Over the years, you have entrusted the ECB with additional responsibilities. Your role in holding
us to account has reflected this evolution, and this dialogue will continue to be a top priority for
us. It is now a well-established practice that we provide written feedback on your resolution on
our previous Annual Report. We published this feedback on our website today.
In my remarks, I will discuss the impact of our decisions on the euro area economy in 2017.
Subsequently, I will stress the crucial role of the financial sector for the effective transmission of
our monetary policy, and the conditions under which it can support growth.
The ECB’s monetary policy and its impact on the euro area economy
In 2017, the euro area growth momentum became increasingly strong and broad-based. Inflation,
on the other hand, remained subdued overall. It was – and still is – expected to rise only gradually
over the medium term. Against this background, and reflecting the need to exercise patience,
persistence  and  prudence  in  designing  our  monetary  policy  course,  we  recalibrated  our
monetary  policy  measures.  This  recalibration  preserved  the  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation required to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards our aim.
In early 2017, the recovery of the euro area economy was steadily firming, but risks to our outlook
were still tilted to the downside. By mid-year, the growth momentum had strengthened further,
and  output  was  expanding  somewhat  faster  than  previously  expected.  The  probability  of  very
adverse  scenarios,  such  as  those  related  to  deflationary  risks,  had  largely  vanished.  We
therefore adjusted our forward guidance and removed the reference to possible further interest
rate cuts.
Later  in  the  year,  the  unabated  growth  momentum  offered  reassurance  that  inflation  was
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
gradually  converging  towards  our  aim.  Nevertheless,  price  developments  continued  to  be
subdued  and  underlying  inflation  measures  had  yet  to  show  convincing  signs  of  a  sustained
upward trend. This was the context for our decisions in October. In particular, we announced that
we would scale down the intensity of our net asset purchases to a monthly pace of €30 billion,
starting in January this year. At the same time, we extended the intended horizon of our asset
purchases until the end of September 2018, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the
Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation
aim. Moreover, we decided to extend the fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment, at least
until the end of 2019 and reiterated our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates and on
our reinvestment policy.
Throughout 2017, our monetary policy measures continued to support borrowing conditions for
firms and households, thereby strengthening credit flows across the euro area. Considering all
the  measures  taken  between  mid-2014  and  those  decided  upon  in  October  2017,  the  overall
impact on euro area real GDP growth and inflation is estimated, in both cases, to be around 1.9
percentage points cumulatively for the period between 2016 and 2020.
The importance of the financial sector for the transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy
Let me now turn to the role of the financial sector in the transmission of our monetary policy.
The funding structure of the non-financial private sector has significantly changed in the past ten
years. It clearly plays a central role in the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy
and  in  the  degree  of  resilience  to  shocks.  Unlike  in  the  United  States,  where  market-based
financing prevails, euro area non-financial corporations have traditionally relied mostly on banks
to  finance  their  activities.  This  has  undertaken  a  dramatic  change,  as  non-bank  financing
sources have become much more important since the onset of the financial crisis. Total assets
of investment funds in percentage of total bank assets increased from 16% in 2007 to 44% last
year. The percentage of bank loans in the total stock of firms’ external financing in 2017 was just
above  12%  (or  15%,  if  intra-company  loans  and  trade  credit  are  excluded  from  total  external
financing).  For  the  same  year,  if  only  the  stock  of  debt  instruments  is  considered  (excluding
equity sources), bank loans represented only 28% of total debt financing (or 45%, if net of intra-
sectoral financing). Before the crisis, back in 2007, bank loans represented 37% of total debt
1
financing (or 60%, if net of intra-sectoral financing).
See the Annual Report, Box n. 4, page 36
The monetary policy measures taken since mid-2014 have had a decisive impact on bank-based
transmission: our estimates suggest that the annual growth in loans to non-financial corporations
would have been roughly half as strong today without our measures. They have notably freed up
balance sheet capacity, enabling banks to step up their lending to firms with limited access to
bond-based financing. Moreover, our measures have increased the share of non-bank financing
sources  in  the  funding  of  euro  area  companies,  particularly  through  the  corporate  sector
purchase  programme.  This  programme  has  encouraged  corporate  issuance  volumes  and
contributed  to  lowering  corporate  bond  yields.  Reduced  funding  costs  and  better  access  to
finance, for both small and large companies, are crucial for more investment. And more diverse
sources of funding for the private sector can boost economic resilience.
My second point is that the transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy benefits from a safe and
sound  financial  sector.  Let  me  therefore  turn  to  current  financial  stability  risks  and
macroprudential policies in the euro area before elaborating on the necessary regulatory reforms.
The  financial  stability  situation  in  the  euro  area  evolved  positively  during  2017,  supported  by
improving  economic  conditions.  Nevertheless,  four  main  risks  persisted  which  continue  to  be
closely monitored at present. First, the risk of a sudden and sizeable reversal in risk premia in
global financial markets remained pronounced as the search for yield continued in 2017. Second,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
euro  area  banks  continued  to  face  challenging  profitability  prospects  on  account  of  cost
inefficiencies and the legacy stock of non-performing loans. Third, the still high debt levels could
give rise to concerns about public and private sector debt sustainability. Fourth, the euro area
investment  fund  sector  continued  to  expand  and  increase  its  risk-taking  while  facing  liquidity
mismatches.
Some of these risks depend strongly on global developments, whereas others – including real
estate  risks  –  are  more  specific  and  should  be  addressed  through  macroprudential  policies.
While we do not see misalignments in euro area real estate markets as a whole, price increases
in some countries require the correct response by means of employing macroprudential policy
measures. Given the uncertainty about the impact of individual measures, there is a need for an
appropriate mix of tools, which can include both borrower-based measures, such as limits on
loan-to-value or debt-to-income ratios, and tighter risk weights for bank exposures and capital
requirements.
Most  of  these  instruments  are  not  foreseen  in  the  CRD  IV/CRR.  We  therefore  hope  that  the
ongoing  review  of  the  two  documents  will  enlarge  the  set  of  macroprudential  policy  tools  and
simplify the activation procedure for the use of these tools provided for in Article 458 of the CRR.
This would allow macroprudential authorities to act in an efficient, effective and timely manner.
Early  detection  of  the  build-up  of  systemic  risks  and  the  timely  employment  of  measures,
including  macroprudential  ones,  is  of  paramount  importance  to  maintain  financial  stability.  A
robust financial system can however, only be ensured if we have strong and appropriate financial
regulation  in  place.  Since  the  crisis,  the  international  financial  regulations  have  been
comprehensively overhauled and have now finalised the Basel III framework. But the work is not
yet complete.
Looking  ahead,  a  fully-fledged  banking  union  should  be  our  key  priority  in  order  to  enhance
stability and increase the soundness of the system. And the European Parliament has a crucial
role  here.  Significant  risk  reduction  has  been  achieved:  bank  capital  ratios  stand  now  at
comfortable  levels,  MREL  is  being  implemented,  bail-in  as  foreseen  in  the  BRRD  must  take
place before any possible ESM intervention, private sector debt and leverage has declined. This
should, in our view, unlock the negotiations on a European deposit insurance scheme. As part of
these negotiations, further qualitative risk reduction can be envisaged in three areas. First, by
harmonising  and  improving  insolvency  frameworks.  Second,  by  conducting  regular  reviews  of
progress  towards  reducing  non-performing  loans.  Third,  by  suppressing  unwarranted  national
options and discretions, as the ECB has been calling for since the inception of European banking
supervision. I also think that the conditions for agreeing on the European Stability Mechanism as
the solvency and liquidity backstop for the Single Resolution Fund are now within reach. It should
be operationalised as soon as possible in order to increase the overall credibility of the resolution
framework.
Turning  to  the  non-banking  sector,  it  is  essential  that  its  prudential  framework  be  adapted  to
reflect its increasing role in financial stability and in the real economy. In this regard, I welcome
the  Commission’s  proposal  that  large  investment  firms  carrying  out  bank-like  activities  be
considered credit institutions and be subject to European banking supervision.
Ensuring a growth-supporting financial sector
While  the  financial  sector  needs  to  be  regulated  to  prevent  it  from  causing  instability  and
hampering the transmission of our monetary policy, it can also support growth.
Since the late 1990s, we have seen a marked slowdown in the growth of labour productivity and
a  corresponding  reduction  in  estimates  of  potential  growth  amounting  to  approximately  one
percentage point. Some evidence attributes the slowdown to greater dispersion of productivity
between frontier and laggard firms, capital misallocation and lower business dynamism.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Similarly,  in  addition  to  a  healthy  banking  sector,  well-functioning,  diversified  and  deeply
integrated EU capital markets can contribute to boost growth. This is why the ECB has been a
strong  supporter  of  the  capital  markets  union  project  since  its  inception.  By  diversifying  the
funding  sources  of  European  non-financial  corporations,  thereby  enhancing  the  smooth
transmission of monetary policy, the capital markets union is an essential complement to the
banking union. I thus call on all stakeholders to step up their efforts towards achieving a genuine
capital markets union.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
One of the key lessons from the crisis was that the ECB’s monetary policy measures and the
policies needed to address challenges in the financial sector were complementary. More efficient
and stable banking and financial markets will further improve the efficiency of monetary policy
transmission channels and thus support the ECB’s policies in the coming years. It is therefore
essential that we make further progress on the banking union and capital markets union. In order
to  achieve  this,  I  trust  that  the  strong  relationship  between  the  European  Parliament  and  the
ECB, to which I can attest after my eight years’ experience, will continue to play a positive role.
Thank you for your attention.
1
See the Annual Report, Box n. 4, page 36
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
