Harnessing Big Data & Machine Learning 
Technologies for Central Banks
Closing Remarks by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
Luigi Federico Signorini
Rome, 27 March 2018
  Ladies and gentlemen, 
This 
two-day  workshop  on  ‘Harnessing  Big  Data  &  Machine  Learning 
Technologies for Central Banks’ is now drawing to a close. Let me begin by thanking all 
the  speakers,  discussants  and  participants  who  have  contributed  to  the  success  of  this 
initiative. I have the pleasure of sharing with you some thoughts on the main issues. 
The  papers  presented  during  this  two-day  workshop  have  left  no  doubt  as  to  the 
actual  and  potential  value  of  big  data  and  their  importance  for  economic  analysis.  The 
present  wave  of  data  warehousing  and  business  analytics  confirms  this,  with  big  data 
poised to deliver topline research and statistical applications in a cost-effective way.  
Huge  amounts  of  data  can  provide  substantial  insights  for  the  private  and  public 
sectors,  enabling  them  to  transform  these  data  into  new  products  and  services  for 
customers  and  citizens.  Big  data  are  already  changing  some  aspects  of  business  in  the 
financial industry with regard to banks, hedge funds, broker-dealers, and other firms.  
Central banks and supervisors are also interested.  
The widespread adoption of digital technology has increased the number and depth 
of information sources of interest to economic analysis and financial stability, two of the 
core concerns of financial authorities. We are not only voracious data users, we are also 
big  data  producers.  We  collect  terabytes  of  granular  data  in  the  fields  of  banking 
supervision, oversight of financial markets and payment systems. 
Central banks can and should harvest the benefits of new technologies.  We should 
select the best technology and exploit its power in turning ideas into actual applications and 
improved statistical and computing efficiency. 
The  potential  is  huge,  but  there  are,  as  usual,  pros  and  cons.  There  are  important 
trade-offs that must be kept in mind. I see two main issues, or rather groups of issues. 
One is technical, and some papers in this workshop have pointed to it. We need to 
keep analysing and experimenting in order to be able to assess the real information value of 
big data bases.  
 ‘N  =  All’,  as  in  the  popular  definition  by  Mayer-Schönberger  and  Cukier1,  may 
sometimes be illusory. Sometimes big data turn out not to be representative of the whole 
population. For example, Groves (2016)2 argues that big data often contain few variables 
and  extracting  their  value  requires  linkages  to  other  data;  furthermore,  they  lack 
representativeness. Social media or any other internet-based sources of big data also usually 
lack full coverage of the population of interest.  
The  availability  of  massive  amounts  of  data  increases  the  chances  of  finding  an 
exceptionally  good  fit  in  sample  when  one  estimates  any  model,  but  a  very  poor 
performance  out  of  sample.  Big  data  are  harvested  from  different  technical  sources  and 
change with consumers’ preferences. Therefore, the parameters estimated using these data 
can be subject to different forms of instability. This, however, is not unique to big data.  
Large  volumes,  variety,  and  the  short-lived  nature  of  data  available  on  web  pages 
make  it  difficult  to  accumulate  and  preserve  historical  big  data;  their  preservation  is 
hampered  by  changes  in  physical  storage  devices,  IT  platforms  and  software.  This  point 
deserves attention. Poor preservation or the loss of data could jeopardise the accountability 
of decisions and research reproducibility.  
The other key issue with big data is the protection of integrity, confidentiality and 
privacy  of  data.  Exploitation  of  data  must  be  respectful  of  this  principle,  in  legal  and 
ethical terms. 
The  effective  application  of  the  relevant  laws  and  international  coordination  are 
essential in this field. 
Let me now conclude by touching on some principles that we follow in the Bank of 
Italy as large producers, consumers and providers of data. 
We adopt an integrated approach to collecting and processing banking and financial 
data.  As  I  have  said  on  other  occasions,  we  have  always  gathered  information  from 
reporting  agents  following  a  single  protocol  and  have  then  used  this  information  for 
                                                           
1   V. Mayer-Schönberger, and K. Cukier, Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work, and Think, 
2   R.  M.  Groves,  ‘Nonresponse  Rates  and  Nonresponse  Bias  in  Household  Surveys’, Public  Opinion  Quarterly, 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013. 
Vol. 70(5): 646-675. 
 multiple purposes.3 This ensures consistency across datasets and intermediaries and reduces 
the need for burdensome ex-post data reconciliation. We have followed this approach since 
the 1980s. 
The Bank of Italy has developed a shared corporate statistical data dictionary and a 
corporate  statistical  data  warehouse  to  ensure  the  uniqueness  of  reporting  models.  Both 
were  planned  with  a  view  to  managing  the  different  areas  of  statistical  and  supervisory 
information as parts of a single system.  
Although the supervision and central banking functions require their own analytical 
approaches,  their  decision-making  processes  draw  on  the  aforementioned  data  dictionary 
and warehouse. The same holds for other uses of the data, such as for research and official 
statistics.  
Some of the data we manage are confidential and/or sensitive. The protection of the 
integrity and confidentiality of data is therefore a key concern. Access to data is suitably 
restricted  within  the  Bank,  and  data  management  follows  clear  rules  on  procedures  and 
responsibility. 
Central banks must also be ready to cope with the increasing demand by the public 
for access to granular data. As a data producer, the Bank of Italy has always strived to make 
its  statistics  available  to  the  widest  possible  audience.  We  already  share  some  data  with 
researchers  and  other 
institutions,  with  appropriate  and  adequate  protection  of 
confidentiality,  of  course.  Within  the  Eurosystem’s  Household  Finance  and  Consumption 
Survey  (HFCS),  Italian  data  are  available  on  request  alongside  those  of  other  euro-area 
countries.  For  firms’  data,  which  are  much  more  difficult  to  anonymize,  the  Bank  has 
developed  a  remote  access  system  called  BIRD  (Bank  of  Italy  Remote  Access  to  Data), 
which  enables  users 
thereby  preserving  data 
confidentiality. Particularly confidential data might require on-site access. The Bank of Italy 
has  started  to  design  a  Research  Data  Centre  which  will  have  a  suitable  taxonomy  of 
confidentiality areas.  
their  analyses  online, 
to  perform 
                                                           
3   Cfr. comment by L.F. Signorini to the paper “Ways to improve the use of banking statistics by policy-makers: what is 
reasonable, what is feasible and what the SSM and the banking union are calling for” by Fernando Restoy. Seventh 
ECB conference on statistics ‘Towards the banking union –opportunities and challenges for statistics’ ECB (2015). 
 Other European countries have already  started to work on this (the Centre d’accès 
sécurisé aux données in France, the Administrative Data Research Network in the UK and 
the Deutsche Bundesbank Research Data and Service Centre). In addition, we need to find 
solutions  to  allow  us  to  link  microdata  belonging  to  different  institutions  without 
compromising individual confidentiality.  
 
The explosion of granular data provides many new research opportunities. For all the 
issues  I  have  highlighted,  big  data  have  big  potential.  In  the  past  two  days  we  have  just 
scratched the surface. More research is surely needed. 
I  wish  to  thank  you  all  very  much  for  your  participation.  Special  thanks  to  all  the 
speakers,  discussants,  chairs  and  participants  for  making  the  sessions  lively  and  thought-
provoking. Finally, I would also like to take this opportunity to thank all those involved in 
preparing this event. 
  the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed by 
