   NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Speech at the presentation of the Inflation Report – 
February 2018  
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
          Belgrade, 14 February 2018 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear media representatives, esteemed colleagues, 
 Welcome  to  the  presentation  of  the  February  Inflation  Report.  We  will  present  to  you  the  current 
macroeconomic developments, our new projections and monetary policy decisions.  
Inflation is on target, credit rating was upgraded, the country risk premium declined, the government 
budget  is  in  a  surplus,  the  cost  of  dinar  lending  is  going  down,  and  non-performing  loans  are  on  a 
sharp downward trajectory 
At the start, I wish to give a brief overview of last year, i.e. I will present the domestic macroeconomic 
developments  that we believe marked 2017 and that are important from the aspect  of the  corporate 
sector, citizens, the government, all of us.  
I would like to open this conference by reminding us of an important decision from late 2016 – to lower 
the inflation target by 1 percentage point, to 3±1.5%, starting from January 2017. That we were realistic 
in setting the target and consistent in its implementation is confirmed by the fact that inflation moved 
within the bounds of the lower target corridor throughout the year, and stood at the 3% target both on 
average and in December. In 2017, three rating agencies upgraded Serbia’s credit rating and the country 
risk  premium  fell  below  100  basis  points,  to  its  lowest  level.  Concretely,  for  all  of  us,  this  means  the 
possibility  of  using  both  domestic  and  external  sources  of  funding  under  more  favourable  conditions. 
The government budget recorded a surplus of 1.2% of GDP, for the first time since 2005. The share of 
public debt in GDP fell by 10.4 percentage points, thus speedily getting closer to the 60% boundary. The 
eighth  review  of  the  arrangement  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  was  successfully  concluded, 
with  the  assessment  that  progress  achieved  in  numerous  fields  outperformed  the  defined  criteria. 
Interest rates on dinar corporate and household borrowing declined further in 2017, as did the rates on 
government  borrowing.  Lower  interest  expenses  certainly  contributed,  among  other  factors,  to  an 
improved  fiscal  performance,  which continues  into  this  year  as  well.  I  wish  to remind you  that  at the 
auction of ten-year dinar securities of the Republic of Serbia held on 6 February, demand outstripped 
supply  almost  five  and  a  half  times.  Securities  were  sold  at  a  5.35%  rate,  down  by  7.64  percentage 
points  relative  to  the  same-maturity  auction  of  October  2014.  These  data  speak  volumes  about 
investors’  perception  of  our  economy’s  prospects.  What  makes  us  particularly  happy  is  that  the 
government  borrows  in  dinars,  over  a  ten-year  period,  at  rates  that  are  much  lower  today.  This  is 
another  concrete  example  of  savings  made  based  on  everything  done  in  the  past  period,  with  full 
coordination of monetary and fiscal policy measures. Last but not least, we have lowered the share of 
non-performing  loans,  which  was  particularly  high,  below  the  pre-crisis  levels.  Their  stock  has  been 
more than halved in the previous two years.  
A good year is behind us, and we expect positive trends to continue into this year  as well. This is also 
confirmed by our new projections, under which inflation will move within the bounds of the new, lower 
target band in the next two years as well. In regard to the economic growth projection, we believe that 
economic policy measures are well-calibrated, and have created the basis for sustainable acceleration of 
GDP growth of around 3.5% in 2018 and 2019. 
1 
     
International environment – outlook and risks  
 
Last year saw volatile trends in the international market, which will continue, by all odds, into this year 
as well. Given the openness  of our economy, we  carefully monitored and analysed movements in the 
international environment. 
The  period  from  the  previous  Report  was  marked  by  a  brighter  global  growth  outlook.  Particularly 
important for us is the improvement of the growth outlook of the euro area and countries in the region, 
which  are  our  important  foreign  trade  partners.  On  this  basis  as  well,  we  expect  positive  effects  on 
further  growth  in  our  exports,  which  was  robust  last  year  as  well,  recording  a  two-digit  rate  and 
maintaining a broad dispersion by product and geographical area. 
While global growth prospects are favourable, trends in some markets are still marked with uncertainty. 
In commodity markets, oil prices increased further compared to the previous Inflation Report, reflecting 
  both  supply-side  factors  and  expectations  that  demand  will  rise  more  rapidly  with  global  growth 
acceleration. In January, the Brent oil price exceeded USD 70 per barrel, which is its highest level since 
December 2014. Owing to higher energy prices, global inflation is somewhat higher than in the earlier 
period, but still no stronger inflationary pressures are expected in the majority of countries. In addition, 
based on oil futures that we use in our projection, we do not expect further growth in global oil prices. 
Of course, deviations are possible both for oil prices and prices of other primary commodities.  
 2 
    Also,  the  leading  central  banks  continue  to  pursue  diverging  monetary  policies  due  to  different 
economic  cycle  phases  of  their  economies,  while  financial  conditions  remain  favourable.  Thus,  the 
international  environment  is  still  marked  with  uncertainty  as  to  the  speed  of  Fed’s  monetary  policy 
normalisation.  Another  question  concerns  the  duration  of  monetary  accommodation  of  the  European 
Central Bank due to faster than expected growth in the euro area.  
 
Strengthening of domestic fundamentals – as a response to external challenges 
It is indisputable that external challenges have existed and will exist. However, what is important in the 
context of analysing overall developments is the fact that our economy’s resilience to shocks increased 
in the past period, including the readiness to respond to these shocks in a timely and adequate manner.  
A  contribution  certainly  also  came  from  fiscal  performance,  which  was  more  favourable  than  initially 
expected – the surplus of 1.2% of GDP at the consolidated level was achieved in 2017 for the first time 
since 2005. Positive fiscal trends continued largely on account of rising domestic demand and corporate 
profitability,  labour  market  recovery  and  enhanced  efficiency  of  tax  collection.  Indubitably,  a  better 
fiscal result was achieved also on account of lower interest expenses  both owing to the government’s 
diminished  needs  to  borrow  and  monetary  policy  easing  by  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia.  Lesser 
government needs for funding were one of the factors leading to the sharp decline in the share of public 
debt in GDP of 10.4 percentage points in 2017. The end of the year also saw the repayment of the due 
eurobond, issued in the international market in 2012, in the amount of USD 750 million, which reduced 
the level of debt and its dollar component. 
In the course of 2017, the country risk premium measured by EMBI declined considerably. Given that 
EMBI Global fell by 54 basis points last year and that EMBI for Serbia fell by 147 basis points, it is clear 
that a portion of the decline in our risk premium was due to global factors, though to a larger degree it 
was  determined  by  domestic  factors  as  well.  The  preservation  of  macroeconomic  stability, 
strengthening  of  domestic  fundamentals  and  Serbia’s  more  favourable  growth  outlook  resulted  in 
Serbia’s  risk  premium  falling  below  100  basis  points,  for  the  first  time  on  record.  Late  last  year,  two 
rating agencies – Standard & Poor’s and Fitch, upgraded Serbia’s credit rating, with a stable outlook. The 
eighth  review  of  the  arrangement  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  was  also  successfully 
concluded. In January, Serbia’s risk premium fell to its lowest level on record (85 basis points).  
A fall in the risk premium and upgraded credit rating of the country contribute to rising foreign investor 
confidence as to long-term investment in Serbia. The opposite is also true. In 2017, this also resulted in a 
considerably higher net external capital inflow, notably  foreign direct investment, which exceeded the 
3 
 
previous projection and reached EUR 2.4  billion, i.e. 6.6% of GDP.  Thus, for the third year in a row,  it 
ensured full coverage of the current account deficit. In gross terms, the foreign direct investment inflow 
to Serbia came at EUR 2.55 billion. On these grounds as well, in 2017 appreciation pressures prevailed in 
the foreign exchange market and the dinar gained 4.2% against the euro. To ease excessive short-term 
strengthening  of  the  dinar,  in  2017  we  intervened  in  the  interbank  foreign  exchange  market  by 
purchasing foreign currency worth EUR 725.0 million net, which further bolstered the country’s foreign 
exchange reserves.  
   A further decline in interest rates on dinar corporate loans and acceleration of lending in the function 
of  supporting  economic  activity,  with  the share  of non-performing  loans  falling  below the  pre-crisis 
level 
In  an  environment  of  low  inflationary  pressures,  past  monetary  policy  easing  by  the  National  Bank  of 
Serbia led to a further decline in the costs of dinar borrowing, while interest rates on all types of dinar 
corporate  loans  fell  to  new  lows  in  December.  This,  together  with  a  falling  country  risk  premium, 
enhanced interbank competition, economic growth and labour market recovery, as well as low interest 
rates in the euro area, contributed to acceleration of lending activity. A rise in total loans (excluding the 
exchange  rate  effect)  equalled  7.4%  in  2017,  with  corporate  lending  rising  by  4.3%  year-on-year. 
Excluding the effect of the write-off of non-performing loans in the past year, the recovery of lending 
activity is even more evident – it rose by 10.2% year-on-year, with corporate loans up by 7.4%.  
In  addition,  the  resolution  of  the  issue  of  non-performing  loans  was  stepped  up.  Their  share  in  total 
loans fell below  the  pre-crisis level and their stock  in the past two years more than halved (a  drop of 
53%). This provides additional support to lending activity and economic growth going forward. 
 4 
     Consistent with our estimates, GDP growth has gained ground with the gradual waning of supply-side 
shocks.  In  the  fourth  quarter,  it  accelerated  to  2.5%  year-on-year,  underpinned  by  faster  growth  in 
construction  and  the  majority  of  service  sectors.  Manufacturing  continued  to  provide  a  positive 
contribution, while agriculture,  due  to a bad agricultural season, recorded an expected slump. On the 
expenditure  side,  growth  accelerated  the  most  on  the  back  of  private  investment,  supported,  among 
other things, by the high inflow of foreign direct investment.  
Our  new  projection  also  confirms  that  in  2018  and  2019  GDP  growth  will  accelerate  to  around  3.5%. 
Investment  is  expected  to  remain  one  of  the  drivers  of  economic  growth,  bearing  in  mind  further 
improvement in the business ambience, a high foreign direct investment inflow, infrastructure projects 
and past monetary policy easing. An increasing positive contribution should also come from household 
consumption amid a further recovery in the labour market. We also expect further growth in exports, 
particularly  in  manufacturing,  whose  exports  continued  up  in  2017,  reaching  13.6%,  thanks  to 
investment  in  the  past  period  and  expansion  of  external  demand.  Imports  are  also  likely  to  increase, 
particularly imports of equipment, with the continuation of the investment cycle.  
   5 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
 
Allow me to conclude the first part of the conference by presenting the data on inflation movements. 
Owing to well-calibrated monetary policy measures and full coordination with fiscal policy, in the course 
of 2017 inflation moved within the target (3±1.5%) and in December, as well as at the level of the annual 
average, it measured the targeted 3.0%. That inflation pressures remained low is indicated also by core 
   inflation, which in December hit the lowest level since the introduction of consumer price measurement 
(1.3%  year-on-year),  as well  as  by  inflation  expectations  of  the  financial  and  corporate  sectors,  which 
have been anchored within the target.  
As of the beginning of this year, inflation is expected to slow down and move closer to the lower bound 
of the target tolerance band. In an environment of low inflationary pressures, this will also be supported 
by the drop-out of last year’s one-off price hikes of certain products and services from the year-on-year 
calculation.  
In the medium-term, according to our new central projection, year-on-year inflation will continue to 
move within the target tolerance band of 3.0±1.5% until the end of the projection horizon, that is in 
the following two years, which will also be supported by the gradual recovery of domestic demand.  
 Taking  into  account  primarily  the  expected  movement  of  inflation  and  its  key  factors  in  the  period 
ahead, as well as the effects of past monetary policy easing in the period since the last Inflation Report, 
we kept the key policy rate at 3.5%. 
In the coming period as well, monetary  policy decisions will depend on our estimate of the impact of 
domestic factors and factors from the  international environment on inflation movements in Serbia. In 
our judgement, the major risks come from the international environment, and thus we will continue to 
closely monitor and analyse movements in the international financial market and the market of primary 
commodities, and to assess their impact on economic movements in Serbia.  
6 
   Of course, same as before, the National Bank of Serbia will use all available instruments in order to keep 
inflation  in  Serbia  low  and  stable  in  the  medium  term.  I  believe  that  this,  together  with  preserving 
financial stability, is the best way for a central bank to contribute to sustainable economic growth and to 
strengthen resilience to challenges from the environment.    
I  will  finish  my  introductory  address  with  these  words  and  give  the  floor  to  my  colleagues  from  the 
Directorate for Economic Research and Statistics, who will briefly present the latest projections and text 
boxes  from  the  Report.  What  you  will  also  hear  from  them  is  that  our  projections  of  inflation 
movements  indicate  that  in the  coming period we will continue to fulfil our primary legal mandate  of 
keeping  inflation  within  the  target,  while  well-calibrated  measures  of  economic  policy  set  the 
groundwork for sustainable acceleration of GDP growth, which we estimate at around 3.5% in 2018 and 
2019, and at around 4% in the medium term.  
 7 
