Philip  R  Lane:  The  macroeconomic  outlook,  the  housing  and
mortgage markets and tracker mortgage-related issues
Introductory statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Joint
Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach, Dublin, 10 May 2018.
 Chairman, Committee members, I welcome the opportunity to meet with you this morning for our
regular engagement. I am joined today by Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor for Prudential Regulation;
Derville  Rowland,  Director  General  for  Financial  Conduct;  and  Helena  Mitchell,  Head  of
Consumer Protection Supervision.
I will first give an overview of the current economic environment and then address some of the
specific issues you raised in my invitation.  This will include the Tracker Mortgage Examination:
we published our latest update on 25 April.
1
The  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  serving  the  public  by  safeguarding  stability  and  protecting
consumers. We operate as ‘One Bank,’ recognising the operational effectiveness of deploying
Bank-wide  resources  in  meeting  our  goals.  For  instance,  our  macroprudential  mortgage
measures contribute to both financial stability and consumer protection by guarding against over-
lending  and  over-borrowing.  Equally,  our  work  to  ensure  that  financial  firms  are  prudentially
sound  is  essential  if  these  firms  are  to  meet  their  obligations  to  consumers  and  investors.  In
these  ways,  consumer  protection  is  embedded  in  all  key  aspects  of  our  work,  through  close
cooperation between our central banking, prudential regulation and financial conduct pillars.
The macroeconomic outlook
The Irish economy is currently experiencing buoyant domestic activity and a strong international
economy, which is driving a broad-based expansion in employment and an increase in earnings.
Our projections for the labour market indicate that Ireland is heading towards full employment,
although some extra capacity is possible through broader participation in the labour market.
While the near-term outlook is positive, Ireland faces substantial tail risks. These include “hard
Brexit”  scenarios,  protectionist  pressures  and  shifts  in  the  international  tax  regime  that  would
effectively penalise small economies as a location for multinational production activity. In addition,
a sudden shift towards tighter conditions in international financial markets is widely cited as a
possible trigger of a contraction in international economic activity.
It is important that policymakers are mindful of such vulnerabilities in order to ensure that Ireland
is resilient if any of these tail risks is triggered.
Irish housing market
Let me turn to the Irish housing market. The increase in house prices in recent years in part
reflects the strong increase in employment and aggregate household incomes, together with the
low  interest  rate  environment.  However,  a  primary  influence  has  been  the  limited  supply
response, even if there is some evidence of increasing levels of construction activity. Overall, the
number  of  residential  properties  listed  for  sale  is  at  its  lowest  since  early  2007.   ntral  Bank
research points to house completions of approximately 23,500 units in 2018 and 28,500 in 2019,
however, these projections are below current estimated housing demand of 30,000–35,000 per
3
annum outlined in Project Ireland 2040.
2
On  the  composition  of  housing  demand,  second-and-subsequent  buyers  remain  the  largest
cohort of purchasers with 45 percent of market activity. In 2017, non-household buyers, including
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
foreign private equity firms and real estate investment trusts (REITs) that tend to operate mainly
in  urban  markets,  increased  their  share  of  transactions  to  14.3  percent.  The  role  of  non-
mortgaged transactions in the housing market currently is important and particularly relevant to
the Central Bank as the macroprudential authority: while the share of non-mortgaged buyers has
4
declined slightly between 2016 and 2017, it stands currently at 55 percent.
Analysis published as part of our 2017 review of the mortgage measures, which put ceilings on
loan to value (LTV) and loan to income (LTI) ratios on new mortgage lending, suggests that the
growth  in  house  prices  is  not  linked  to  unsustainable  increases  in  mortgage  credit  allocation.
 The mortgage measures provide an appropriate framework in which to mitigate against the risk
of credit-house price spirals, while ensuring the resilience of borrowers and lenders to adverse
shocks.  We  monitor  credit  developments  on  a  quarterly  basis  and  stand  ready  to  respond  to
shifts in the credit cycle. These goals are at the heart of our entire approach to determining the
appropriate level of bank capital, both from a microprudential supervision and a macroprudential
standpoint. These are also at the heart of ensuring mortgage holders are better equipped to deal
with any future shock.
Commercial real estate
Turning to the Commercial Real Estate (CRE) market, Irish commercial property returns have
moderated in recent quarters, bringing them back in line with many other international markets.
Dublin  remains  the  focus  of  investor  activity  with  over  80  percent  of  commercial  property
transactions last year; however, transactions outside of Dublin are also rising. Business growth
and continued economic expansion has driven the vacancy rate in this market to a record low.
While the stock of office space is continuing to increase, Brexit-related firm relocations could add
to demand levels in the near term.
There are advantages to the increased levels of international investment in the domestic CRE
market.  International  investors  aid  recovery  in  distressed  markets,  provide  increased  levels  of
market  liquidity,  provide  credit  where  there  is  a  gap  in  bank  lending,  and  facilitate  a  greater
degree of international risk diversification throughout the financial system.
That  said,  foreign  capital  flows  into  the  commercial  property  market  that  are  the  result  of  the
global search for yield in the current low interest rate environment are vulnerable to a sudden
stop or even a sharp reversal should there be an adverse shift in global financing conditions. In
turn, this could generate disorderly property market price reversals. Overall, however, the CRE
sector  does  not  pose  the  same  magnitude  of  risk  as  it  did  before  the  last  crisis:  substantial
deleveraging, loan write-offs and on-going amortisations have seen a substantial decline in the
stock of outstanding commercial property lending at Irish retail banks.
Irish banks have outstanding CRE lending of €18.8 billion, a little over one-fifth of which is non-
performing. It is important that domestic banks have sufficient resilience to withstand drops in
collateral values that may arise if there is a significant reversal in foreign investment flows. While
we  have  not  taken  direct  macroprudential  actions  in  this  sector,  our  ongoing  supervisory
approach  to  domestic  bank  capital  adequacy  –  as  part  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism
(SSM)  –  is  focused  on  ensuring  that  such  resilience  is  embedded  into  the  structure  of  bank
balance sheets.
Tracker mortgage examination
Despite the buoyancy in the economy, we are still dealing with the legacies of the financial crisis,
which have required extensive Central Bank intervention in line with our mandate. This can be
seen  in  our  continued  work  on  the  Tracker  Mortgage  Examination  and  our  persistent
interventions to press banks to tackle the high levels of non-performing loans (NPLs).
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
On 25 April, the Central Bank published an update on the Tracker Mortgage Examination that
outlines  the  progress  made  by  banks  in  meeting  their  commitments  to  pay  redress  and
compensation for their unacceptable failings on tracker mortgage-related issues.
The  Tracker  Mortgage  Examination  is  the  largest,  most  complex  and  significant  consumer
protection review the Central Bank has undertaken to date, probing all lenders who ever offered
tracker products in Ireland.
We  noted  in  December  that,  although  lenders  had  identified  the  vast  majority  of  affected
customers, the Bank would continue to review and challenge the work undertaken by the lenders
and complete an intrusive on-site inspection programme. This work has been critically important
in  ensuring  that  lenders  identify  any  remaining  cases  and  accept  cases  for  redress  and
compensation which they had previously excluded.
As  of  end-March  2018,  approximately  37,100  customers  have  been  accepted  by  lenders  as
having  been  affected  by  tracker  mortgage  failings.  This  was  an  increase  of  3,400  customers
since December.
The redress and compensation phases of the Examination are significantly advanced. To end-
March,  €459  million  has  been  paid  out  to  consumers,  an  increase  of  €162  million  since
December. Some 88 percent of affected customer accounts identified and verified have received
offers of redress and compensation. We expect further offers of redress and compensation to be
made to the remaining 12 percent by the end of June.  
Provisions by lenders in respect of the Tracker Mortgage Examination increased to €969 million
by  the  end  of  March  –  of  which  approximately  €626  million  is  attributable  to  redress  and
compensation and €343 million to costs. In short, the cost to lenders is fast approaching the €1
billion mark.
I would note that payments may extend beyond that date for those customers who are newly
identified and verified in the coming weeks. However, as redress and compensation schemes
are underway across all lenders, the Central Bank expects that any such additional accounts
identified will be swiftly remediated.
Our review and supervisory challenge work is ongoing but, while this work is well advanced, it will
not  be  completed  until  we  are  satisfied  that  all  affected  customers  have  been  identified,
redressed and compensated. This work is extensive and complex: while we are confident that
most of the affected customers have been identified, we expect that there will be some further
increase in the numbers affected before the Examination is concluded.
We have initiated enforcement proceedings against six lenders: permanent tsb plc; Ulster Bank
Ireland DAC; Bank of Ireland Group; KBC Bank Ireland plc; Allied Irish Banks, plc; and EBS DAC.
In  these  investigations,  the  Central  Bank  is  considering  all  possible  angles,  including  potential
individual culpability.
It is important to stress that numbers alone cannot give the full picture of the detrimental, and in
some  cases,  devastating  effects  that  the  failures  of  lenders  have  had  on  tracker  mortgage
customers, up to and including the loss of homes and properties.
In  that  regard,  the  Examination  has  exposed  a  clear  lack  of  a  consumer-centred  culture  in
lenders. The culture of these institutions flows from the top, it is therefore a matter for boards,
and senior management, in the first instance, to set a positive culture within a financial services
firm that places the best interests of consumers first. Where they fail to do so, regulators such
as  ourselves  must  have  an  effective  toolkit  with  which  we  can  intervene,  and  the  Tracker
Examination  is  one  such  example  of  how,  as  a  systemic  regulator,  we  are  driving  results  for
consumers in cases where lenders failed them.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
We are conducting a separate assessment of the current behaviour and culture within banks,
which  will  be  completed  in  mid-year  and  provided  to  the  Minister.  The  findings  from  those
assessments  will  further  inform  our  ongoing  supervisory  work  aimed  at  ensuring  that,  at  a
systemic level, consumers are treated fairly in their dealings with financial services firms and that
their best interests are protected.
Non-performing loans
NPLs  cause  considerable  distress  to  borrowers,  while  also  putting  at  risk  the  prudential
soundness of banks with excessive NPL burdens. Over the last decade, the Central Bank took
intrusive policy actions to ensure the framework for appropriate restructures was put in place.
This, in addition to changes in the legal system, has meant that mortgage NPL reduction has
been  primarily  achieved  through  the  restructuring  of  loans,  rather  than  loss  of  ownership.
Protection of consumers in arrears continues to be a key Central Bank priority in dealing with
non-performing loans.
The Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA), in particular, has played a critical role in
ensuring  that  borrowers  are  protected.  This  is  evident  in  the  data,  with  almost  120,000
restructured  primary  dwelling  home  (PDH)  mortgages  as  of  Q3  2017,  and  87  percent  of  the
accounts involved meeting the terms of the restructuring arrangement, showing the willingness
and ability of both borrowers and lenders to address mortgage arrears in many cases. Since Q3
2009, there was loss of ownership in 8,195 cases:  5,473 properties were surrendered voluntarily
and 2,722 were repossessed through court order. The CCMA requires a lender to make every
reasonable  effort  to  come  to  a  restructuring  arrangement  with  borrowers.  Without  this  key
element of the code, the number of properties lost would have been considerably higher.
Elevated levels of NPLs on bank balance sheets pose a substantial financial stability risk. For
example, uncertainty around the adequacy of provision levels against these loans may also lead
to  uncertainty  about  the  true  levels  of  bank  capital  available  to  support  future  lending.  It  is
important that this legacy risk is addressed: otherwise, the capacity of both banks and debtors to
weather adverse developments may be questioned in the event of a future downturn.
The  stock  of  NPLs  has  declined  considerably  since  its  peak.  However,  while  CRE  and  SME
lending  represented  the  majority  of  banking  NPLs  at  the  height  of  the  crisis,  residential
mortgages  now  account  for  close  to  two  thirds  of  the  remaining  NPL  balances.  The  Central
Bank’s  approach  to  mortgage  arrears  resolution  is  focused  on  ensuring  the  fair  treatment  of
borrowers  through  a  strong  consumer  protection  framework  and  ensuring  that  lenders  have
appropriate arrears resolution strategies and operations in place. The domestic Irish banks have
used a mixture of options, including sustainable loan restructuring, portfolio sale, voluntary sale of
properties and progressing cases through the legal system.
Regarding  the  resolution  of  the  roughly  28,000  PDH  mortgage  cases  in  arrears  of  over  two
years,  it  continues  to  be  our  view  that  borrower-lender  engagement  is  essential.  First  and
foremost,  sustainable  restructurings  which  keep  borrowers  in  their  homes  are  desirable.
However, where a restructuring arrangement is not achieved, the Insolvency Service of Ireland
helps  borrowers  who  are  struggling  to  repay  their  debt  and  offers  advice  in  reaching  debt
solutions with creditors. For non-engaging borrowers, resolution through the legal system is the
most probable outcome.
Non-bank entities (regulated retail credit firms and unregulated loan owners) held 7 percent of
PDH loans and 11 percent of buy-to-let (BTL) mortgage accounts as at the end of 2017. Within
this  aggregate  category,  unregulated  loan  owners  hold  2  percent  of  PDH  mortgages  and  5
percent of BTL mortgages. However, the unregulated loan owners hold a disproportionately high
share of accounts in arrears with 50 percent of their PDH mortgages in arrears over 90 days.
The  number  of  BTL  accounts  in  arrears  over  90  days  for  unregulated  loan  owners  was  75
percent at the end of December 2017. Non-bank entities repossessed 148 PDHs during 2017, or
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
10  percent  of  all  repossessions  in  the  year.  The  repossessions  were  divided  50:50  between
court orders and voluntary surrenders.
While it is only one option in the resolution of NPLs, loan sales can play  an  important  role  in
transferring risks from the banks to other types of investors, which reduces the vulnerability of
the domestic banking system to future adverse shocks.  It is critical to stress that our Codes of
Conduct are afforded to all borrowers. The introduction of the credit servicing regime in 2015
ensures that an unregulated loan owner cannot instruct a credit servicing firm to implement an
action that would be inconsistent with the requirements of Irish financial services legislation as it
applies  to  regulated  lenders.  In  short,  the  2015  legislation  significantly  strengthened  the
protections  of  borrowers  in  the  event  of  their  loans  being  sold  to  non-bank  entities.  Crucially,
customers  whose  loans  are  sold  to  an  unregulated  entity  continue  to  have  the  benefit  of  the
same regulatory protections they had before the sale. As you are aware, the Minister has asked
the  Central  Bank  to  provide  a  report  on  the  effectiveness  and  operation  of  the  CCMA  in  the
context of the sale of loan books: this review provides an opportunity to assess the current code
and identify any necessary adjustments.
EU developments in banking regulation
Turning to developments at a European level, on 14 March 2018, the Commission published a
Proposal for a Directive on credit servicers, credit purchasers and the recovery of collateral. The
aim of this proposal is to develop a European approach to the issue of the transfer of NPLs. A
more  integrated  financial  system  will  enhance  the  resilience  to  adverse  shocks  by  facilitating
private  risk  sharing  across  borders,  while  at  the  same  time  reducing  the  need  for  public  risk
sharing.
The first part of the proposed Directive establishes a framework for servicers and purchasers of
credit agreements issued by credit institutions. This approach is similar to the current enacted
credit servicing framework in Ireland: an unregulated loan owner must appoint a regulated credit
servicing firm, but the loan owner does not itself require authorisation. The initiative also aims to
further develop secondary markets for NPLs, with the aim of facilitating loan servicing by third
parties  and    the  transfer  of  loans  to  third  parties.  The  proposals  aim  to  reinforce  the  banking
prudential  regulatory  framework  to  address  the  longstanding  issue  of  NPLs  for  all  European
banks.
Moving  from  risk  reduction  to  risk  sharing,  the  proposal  for  a  European  Deposit  Insurance
Scheme (EDIS) represents a further step in the completion of the Banking Union whereby all
depositors  within  the  Banking  Union  would  enjoy  the  same  level  of  protection,  independent  of
their geographical location.
These measures, amongst others, are key to futureproofing the institutional architecture of EMU.
Together with progress in capital markets union, the completion of banking union would promote
a  stable  and  integrated  financial  system  in  the  EU,  strengthening  its  ability  to  deal  with  future
challenges.
Credit unions
Finally,  in  relation  to  credit  unions,  we  have  been  clear  regarding  our  vision  for  the  sector  of
“Strong Credit Unions in Safe Hands”. This vision underpins our statutory responsibility to ensure
the  protection  by  each  credit  union  of  the  funds  of  its  members  and  the  maintenance  of  the
financial stability and well-being of credit unions generally.
Over the past decade, credit unions have dealt with the effects of the financial crisis, increased
competition,  major  business  model  challenges,  significant  restructuring  and 
increased
regulation. Notwithstanding the progress made, clearly significant challenges remain reflected in
declining return on assets across the sector, driven by business factors such as depressed loan
5
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  asset  ratios,  low  investment  yields  and  rising  costs.  Informed  observers  highlight  that  the
sector has yet to transition to the future business models required to meet changing member
expectations.  Whilst  governance  standards  have  improved  across  the  sector,  governance
remains one of the key risk areas for credit unions. Sound governance and effective systems of
control are an essential foundation to underpin the development of the credit union sector.
5
As  the  regulator  of  the  sector,  we  will  support  efforts  in  undertaking  business  model
transformation, consistent with our statutory mandate and our vision of ‘Strong Credit Unions in
Safe Hands’.  To deliver on that vision and support the quest for sector sustainability, we are
introducing a number of important changes to our approach in 2018 including:
1.  a refinement of our supervisory approach to strengthen core foundations;
2.  a review of lending designed towards accommodating the future lending growth ambitions of
stronger credit unions as part of a balanced loan portfolio;
3.  a new CEO Forum to support advancement of the business model development agenda;
and
4.  Credit Union Workshops to support credit unions in addressing key risk vulnerabilities.
I hope the above has been useful in terms of the topics the Committee wishes to discuss.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
The  issues  identified  for  consideration  in  the  invitation  were:    Progress  Review  on  Examination  of  Tracker
Mortgage matters;  Matters relating to the disposal of non-performing loans (NPLs); Regulatory of unregulated
entities (private investment funds); Assessment of the Irish Mortgage and Housing Markets; Emerging risks in
relation 
regarding  Banking
Regulation/Supervision; Update on matters relating to costs associated with motor and business insurance
including  the  CBI  publication  –  “Review  of  Motor  Damage  Claims  Handling”;  Consumer  Protection
Issues; Update on preparations from Brexit; Update on developments in the Credit Union Sector.
the  Commercial  property  market;  Developments  at  EU 
to 
According to the website Daft.ie
See Box C “Leading Indicators of New Housing Output” in Quarterly Bulletin 2018Q2
The  volume  of  cash  transactions  is  calculated  from  the  rolling  annual  total  of  BPFI  mortgage  drawdowns
(excluding one-offs/self-builds from the Central Bank Monitoring Template data) and the total number of CSO
residential dwelling property transactions. The CSO housing transactions are inclusive of all market and non-
market activity by households and non-households.
The Return on Assets is an indicator of how profitable a credit union is relative to its total assets employed. It is
calculated as Net Income divided by Total Assets.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
