    Remarks  by Daniel Mminele, 
Deputy Governor of the South African  Reserve Bank, 
at the annual Financial  Markets Department cocktail  function 
Johannesburg 
10 May 2018 
 Ladies and  gentlemen,  good evening. 
 It  is with  pleasure  that  I  welcome you  to  the  annual  cocktail  function  of the  Financial 
Markets  Department  (FMD) of the South African  Reserve Bank (SARB), which is now 
in its 12th year.  We are  greatly  honoured  by your  presence tonight.  The  deal I  struck 
with  our  Financial  Markets  Department  for  moving  this  function  from  Pretoria  to 
Johannesburg  was that I  would be allowed  to speak for 90  minutes. 
 Introduction 
 Allow  me  in  welcoming  you  to  this  event,  to  make  some  brief  observations  about 
financial  market  developments  since we  last  met  and  to  touch  on  what  could  be  in 
store for us in  the period  ahead.  I would  also like  to draw  your attention  to two of our 
initiatives  that are gathering  momentum, and which  will require  your cooperation  over 
the next few months. I know that our views on domestic monetary policy are always of 
interest  to financial  market participants,  but as we are  on the  eve of  entering  into  the 
closed period  for our  next  Monetary  Policy  Committee meeting,  which starts on  22nd 
May,  I shall  refrain  from any comments today,  and  ask for your  patience  until  you get 
our most recent take  in about two weeks’ time.  
 The global financial  markets  backdrop 
 Since the last FMD cocktail function, global  financial  markets have had to ponder  over 
a  plethora  of  developments,  including  the  strengthening  synchronised  global  growth 
environment,  changing  perceptions  around  monetary  policy  normalisation,  rising 
 Page 1 of 8 
financial  market  volatility,  threats  of escalating  trade  conflicts,  and  rising  geopolitic al 
tensions.  In  many  ways,  the  period  since our  last  cocktail  function  to  now has  been 
one  of  transition;  from  markets  being  very  complacent  about  risks,  to  the  current 
environment  in which risk-sensitivity  levels appear to be rising again, even against still 
relatively  overall  supportive  financial  conditions.  The  initial  period  was characterised 
by volatility  being subdued across a broad  range of asset classes, in certain instances 
with indicators touching record lows. While US interest rate futures increased to reflect 
expectations  that the Fed would hike interest rates, and also appeared  to factor-in that 
the  US  Treasury  would  issue  more  short-term  debt,    the  anticipated  pace  of  such 
interest  rates  increases was expected  to follow  a relatively  slow and  gradual  profile.  
The other major economies were seen to be still somewhat behind  the US with regard 
to changes  to their  monetary  policy  settings.  One puzzling  issue for the  markets had 
been  the fact that  even  with expectations  for better  growth in the US, further  stimulus 
coming  from  the  implementation  of  tax  reforms,  both  of  which  pointed  to  possible 
further  hike  by  the  Fed,  the  USD  was  weakening.  During  this  period  of  a  relatively 
benign  global  environment,  capital flows to emerging markets also held up rather well. 
 We have  now moved into a period where the market  is adjusting  to the strength of the 
cyclical  growth  momentum  that  has  started  to  put  upward  pressure  on  short-term 
interest  rates  and  push  volatility  higher.  Adjustments  to  monetary  policy  by  way  of 
policy  rate  increases  and  reducing  the  pace  of  asset  purchases  are  now  featuring 
more  prominently  when  assessing  future  developments.  This  has  already  been 
witnessed with  the 10-year  US Treasury  yield  rising to the  psychologically  significant 
level  of 3% – a level  last seen, albeit  briefly,  in 2013.  Now all market-generated  paths  
for policy  rates suggest an  upward trajectory.  Concomitantly,  the US  dollar  has been 
regaining  the  ground  lost previously,  which had  seen the  USD reaching  a three-year 
low in February  2018.   
 Developments in the domestic  financial  markets 
 You  are  all very  familiar  with  developments  in the  domestic markets, which will  allow 
me  to  be  very  brief.  Prior  to  the  recent  dollar  strength,  but  subsequent  to  the  FMD 
cocktail function last year, price formulation  in the domestic financial  markets reflected 
a confluence of idiosyncratic  and global  factors. 
 Page 2 of 8 
The  rand was range-bound  during  the second  and third  quarters  of last year,  trading 
between  R12.62  and  R13.95  against  a  steadily  weakening  US  dollar.  The  benign 
global  environment  had  to  an  extent  helped  shield  domestic  financial  assets  from 
unfavourable  domestic  growth  developments  as  well  as  political  and  policy 
uncertainty.  However,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  year,  domestic  factors  were  more 
dominant and resulted in the rand depreciating  to a year’s high of R14.47 in November 
2017,  before  subsequently  rebounding  on positive  sentiment towards domestic fiscal 
and  political  developments  as well  as concomitant  views  from credit  rating  agencies  
which were positively  received by the market, which included Moody’s  Investor Service 
retaining  South Africa’s sovereign  credit rating at investment grade level and improving 
the  outlook  to  stable  from negative.  A  key  factor  in  Moody’s  assessment was  their 
reduced nervousness about South Africa’s rising economic and fiscal risks, and higher 
levels  of comfort with regard  to efforts to restore the strength of key institutions. 
 The  strengthening  rand  led  to a  sharp  decline  in  local  bond  yields,  with  the  yield  on 
the benchmark R186 declining  by 141 basis points to 7.98%  while the 30-year  R2048 
bond’s  yield  compressed  by  146  basis points  as investors  repriced  the  political  risk 
premium.  The  five-year  sovereign  credit  default  swap  spread  improved  by  60  basis 
points from its peak of just over  200 basis points in November  2017.  
 In recent weeks, the rand has been relatively  volatile  with a weakening  profile  currently 
trading  around  R12.40  to  the  USD.  In  line  with  developments  in  other  emerging 
markets,  this  development  has  been  more  reflective  of  USD  strength  rather  than 
exhibiting  rand-intrinsic  weakness.  
 What  do we need to look out for? 
 While the degree of monetary stimulus of recent years has so far had surprisingly little 
impact on inflation,  the debate  remains as to whether  this pattern  is likely  to continue, 
or  rather  at  what  speed  any  changes  will  occur,  now  that  some  economies  are 
operating  with positive  output gaps.  
 There  are  some  concerns  that  the  shift  to  higher  volatility  may  not  necessarily  be 
orderly  against the background  of fears of protectionism, increased geo-political  risks, 
 Page 3 of 8 
and  uncertainty  over  the  pace of monetary  policy  normalisation.  This may lead  to an 
abrupt  tightening  of financial  conditions,  which in turn may curtail global  growth. 
 Even  with some recent  corrections, asset valuations  remain generally  stretched, and  
currency mismatches arising  from large  amounts of USD  denominated  debt  incurred 
to  take  advantage  of  low  rates  (by  both  corporates  and  sovereigns),  could  make 
financial  markets  vulnerable  to  financial  conditions  tightening  at  a  faster  pace  than 
currently  anticipated.   
 At  the  most  recent  IMF/World  Bank  Spring  Meetings  another  issue  that  received 
particular  attention  was  the  rising  level  of  global  debt,  which  if  unchecked  has  the 
potential 
to  trigger  financial  instability 
in  the  future,  weighing  on  growth  and 
undermining  financial  assets. 
 These  developments  may harbour  some serious  implications  for  emerging  markets. 
Firstly,  risk-aversion  may  reduce  the  attractiveness  of  the  emerging  market  assets, 
including  carry-trade  related  transactions,  which may negatively  affect  portfolio  flows 
to  these  markets, as witnessed  in  the  sharp  pull-back  in  flows since mid-April  2018. 
Secondly,  export-dependent  emerging  economies  will  be  impacted  as  commodity 
prices  tend  to  fall  when  the  dollar  strengthens.  Lastly,  a  stronger  dollar  would  put 
pressure  on  emerging  markets  with  large  dollar  liabilities,  further  increasing  their 
financial  vulnerabilities.   
 We  have  already  seen  some  early  signs  of  these  risks  materialising  for  emerging 
economies,  with  a  number  of  emerging  market  currencies,  including  the  rand, 
weakening  not only to the dollar,  but also to other advanced economy currencies, such 
as  the  euro  and  the  yen.  But  admittedly  others  have  been  tested  a  lot  more  when 
compared to South Africa. 
 A  key  risk to the  outlook  on the  rand  remains the possibility  of accelerated  monetary 
policy  tightening  by central  banks in  the advanced  economies, particularly  in  the US. 
Escalating  trade  conflicts and geo-political  developments,  present  another  risk factor 
that needs to be monitored  carefully.   
 Page 4 of 8 
The  impact  of  trade  conflicts  could  result  in  decreased  demand  for  South  African 
exports and  potentially  higher  volatility  in currency markets.   
 Key initiatives to strengthen the domestic  markets  
 Let me turn to the two major initiatives  undertaken  by the SARB to strengthen domestic 
financial  markets.  
 The  first one  relates  to a consultation  paper  on selected  interest  rate  benchmarks in 
South  Africa  that  we  will  be  releasing  in  the  next  few  weeks.  This  initiative  partly 
emanates from a coordinated  response by international  regulators  and central banks , 
to  the  instances  of  attempted  and  actual  manipulation  of  key  global  interest  rate 
benchmarks  and  reference  interest  rates,  in  particular  the London  Interbank  Offered 
Rate  in 2012.  Consequently,  the  Official  Sector  Steering  Group1,  established  under 
the  auspices  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  recommended  that  interest  rate 
benchmarks  should  be  underpinned  by  transaction  data  and  that  risk-free  interest 
rates  benchmarks  should  be  developed  to  support  certain  financial  instruments, 
including  derivative  contracts.  
 This  initiative  was  also  informed  by  research  conducted  into  the  robustness, 
representativeness  and  sustainability  of  the  Johannesburg  Interbank  Average  Rate 
(JIBAR),  given  its wide  usage  as  a reference  rate  in  South  Africa,  especially  the  3-
month  JIBAR.  The  research  indicated  some  shortcomings  in  JIBAR,  which  do  not 
allow it to fully perform its role as a key indicator  of underlying  market conditions.  The 
majority  of floating  interest  rate  securities and  derivatives  contracts  are linked  to the 
three-month  JIBAR,  which underscores JIBAR’s  importance in the transmission of the 
SARB’s monetary policy stance through  the financial  market channel.  This work is not 
limited  to  the  JIBAR,  but  covers  selected  other  interest  rate  benchmarks  in  South 
Africa.  Following  the  release  of  the  consultation  paper  containing  certain  reform 
proposals,  there  will  be  a  two-month  period  for  comments, to  be  followed  by  a  final 
implementation  document in due course.  
                                                             
1 In July 2013, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) established the Official Sector Steering Group, 
which comprises senior officials from central banks and regulatory agencies, to focus on the FSB’s 
work on interest rate benchmarks given the significant role they play in the global financial system.  
 Page 5 of 8 
I would  like  to call upon  you  to please  engage  with the document and  provide  us with 
your comments. This is a very important initiative  for financial  markets development  in 
South Africa.   
 The  second  initiative  that  I  would  like  to  update  you  on  relates  to  the  work  of  the 
Financial  Markets  Review  Committee  (FMRC).  In  the  2017  national  Budget  speech, 
the  Minister  of Finance  announced  that  the SARB,  the Financial  Services Board  and 
National  Treasury  had  begun  working  on  a  comprehensive  financial  markets  review 
under  the  leadership  of  former  SARB  Senior  Deputy  Governor  James  Cross.  The 
objective 
is  to  review 
the  standards,  practices  and 
issues  of  governance, 
accountability  and  incentives  in wholesale  financial  markets. The FMRC  will consider 
the  mechanisms  that  are  necessary  to  augmenting 
the 
implementation  and 
governance  of  conduct standards  by  market  participants.  Furthermore,  it  will  identify 
areas where  changes to  legislation  are  needed  to  support a  new conduct framework 
for wholesale  financial  markets.  
 One  of  the  painful  lessons  of  the  great  financial  crisis  has  been  the  importance  of 
conduct  in  financial  markets,  and  how  poor  conduct  can  end  up  being  globally 
systemic. It is therefore  important that we strengthen domestic and global collaborative 
efforts between  the private  and  public  sector, aimed at building  trust as an  important 
contribution  to creating  effective,  fair, and resilient  markets. 
 The  review  is well  underway  and  much progress  has been  made  already.  You  may 
have  participated  in the FMRC  questionnaire  or in meetings held by the project  team. 
It is envisaged,  that a draft report will be published later in the year for public comment. 
Again,  this  will  be  an  important  document  for  you  to  interact  with  and  provide 
comments. 
 There are other important  initiatives  that the SARB has undertaken  in the past year, in 
relation  to financial  markets, many of which were  in collaboration  with you  as market 
participants,  such  as  the  launch  of  South  African  Foreign  Exchange  Committee 
(SAFXC).   
  Page 6 of 8 
The SAFXC  will be member of the Global  Foreign Exchange Committee, the body that 
has been  tasked  with the  ongoing  maintenance  of the FX  Global  Code  and  ensuring 
continuing  collaboration  between  central banks  and  the  private  sector on  developing 
principles  for  good  governance  in  the  foreign  exchange  market2.  The  SARB  has 
previously  announced  that  as  from  01  September  2018  it  will  only  transact  with 
counterparties  in the foreign  exchange  market that have committed to adhering  to the 
FX Global  Code. 
 Some  of  the  other  initiatives  are  contained  in  FMD’s  newsletter,  the  FMD  Update, 
copies of which are both available  here tonight  as well as on the SARB website3.   
 Conclusion 
 Allow  me  now  to  conclude  by  saying  that  we have  come through  another  busy  and 
challenging  year,  characterised  by  high  levels  of  volatility  and  uncertainly  in  our 
markets.  The  collaboration  between  the  SARB  and  financial  market  participants  
continued  in  a  constructive  atmosphere  and  ensured  the  orderly  functioning  of  our 
markets  in  the  wake  of  these  challenges.  Our  collaboration  extends  to  many  of  you 
being  our partners  in our monetary  policy  implementation  activities,  government  debt 
operations,  sharing  of  market  information  and  analyses,  as  well  as  participation  in 
various  market  forums.  We  look  forward  to  our  continued  cooperation  so  as  to 
enhance  the effectiveness,  integrity  and  resilience of our financial  markets.  
 Let me take this opportunity  to thank our financial  markets team, under the leadership 
of Mr  Leon Myburgh,  for their hard work and dedication  to the work of the Bank during 
the  past  year.  Many  projects  had  to  be  managed  simultaneously  while  keeping  the 
day-to-day  operations  running  smoothly.   
 I  should  also  mention  that  Mr  Callie  Hugo  will  be going  on  retirement  later  this  year, 
and  that  this  will  be  his last  attendance  of  the  annual  cocktail  function  in  his current 
capacity.  
                                                             
2 http://w w w .resbank.co.za/Markets/South_African_Foreign_Exchange_Committee/Pages/Announcements.aspx  
3 http://w w w .resbank.co.za/Pages/default.aspx 
 Page 7 of 8 
I believe  that I  can speak  for all  of us in conveying  our gratitude  to Callie  for the great 
work he has done over  many years in contributing  to the development  of our  financial 
markets,  and  being  one  of  the  key  links  between  the  SARB  and  financial  market 
participants.  Even  if  somewhat  pre-mature,  because  you  are  still  around  and  have 
some work to do, we wish you all the best for the future, Callie.   
 Last  but  not  least,  a  very  special  thank  you  must  also  go  to  Ms  Sharlay  Madalane, 
from the SARB protocol  section for her assistance in organising  this event. 
 Ladies and  gentlemen,  please enjoy  the rest of the evening.   
 Thank  you. 
  Page 8 of 8 
