 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Speech at the presentation  
of the Inflation Report – May 2018 
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
          Belgrade, 17 May 2018 
Ladies and gentlemen, representatives of the press, dear colleagues, 
Welcome to the presentation of the May Inflation Report. We will give you an overview of the current 
macroeconomic developments, our new projections and monetary policy decisions.  
Low  inflationary  pressures,  with  anchored  inflation  expectations,  a  sustained  fiscal  surplus  in 
conditions of high growth of domestic GDP, and credit growth, with  an extended fall in the share of 
non-performing loans 
To begin with, I would like to share with you our overall assessment that economic developments in the 
past months of 2018 have been favourable and that the positive trends are expected to continue for the 
remainder  of  the  year.  GDP  growth  particularly  stands  out  given  that,  according  to  the  preliminary 
estimate of the Serbian Statistical Office, it accelerated considerably in the first quarter of 2018, to 4.5% 
year-on-year. The  favourable structure of its  sources is indicated by stepped-up  growth in investment 
and activity in production sectors, primarily construction and manufacturing.  
In  accordance  with  our  expectations,  during  the  first  four  months  of  this  year,  year-on-year  inflation 
decelerated significantly, largely due to the base effect, that is, the drop-out of early-2017 one-off price 
hikes of certain products and services from the calculation. Consumer prices rose 1.1% year-on-year in 
April, with core inflation of 0.8% year-on-year, which is below our expectations stated in the February 
Inflation Report. The reasons for this are primarily lower-than-expected import prices and low costs in 
food  production.  Coupled  with  lower  inflation  expectations,  this  confirms  that  inflationary  pressures 
have additionally abated since the beginning of the year.  
Positive fiscal movements continued in the first quarter, with a fiscal surplus of 0.4% of GDP recorded in 
conditions  of  accelerated  growth,  higher  corporate  profitability,  positive  tendencies  in  the  labour 
market and more efficient tax collection. By structure, revenues increased mostly on account of excise 
taxes, allocated social insurance contributions and profit tax, while on the expenditure side, the rise in 
capital expenditures is assessed as highly positive. Also conducive to the favourable fiscal result was the 
reduction  in  interest  expenses  in  conditions  of  the  government’s  subdued  need  for  borrowing, 
monetary policy easing by the National Bank of Serbia and a low country risk premium.  
As regards external economic relations, the current account deficit has been lowered by 6.3% year-on-
year, amid two-digit growth of goods and services exports, as well as two-digit imports growth due to 
the  economy’s  increased  need  for  equipment  and  intermediate  goods.  In  terms  of  structure,  the 
financial  account  still  recorded  a  high  net  inflow  of  foreign  direct  investment,  which  was  higher  by 
around 2%  year-on-year  and boosted by the net inflow  of  portfolio investment.  We estimate that the 
net inflow of foreign direct investment for the entire year will be around EUR 2.6 billion.  
Since  the  start  of the year,  lending  also  posted  accelerated  growth  –  to  7.5%  year-on-year  in March, 
sustained by the effects of past monetary policy  easing, growing economic activity and labour market 
recovery. Coupled with the activities on the resolution of non-performing loans, this was conducive to 
the continued reduction in the share of non-performing loans in total loans to 9.2% in March. 
This is a brief overview of  developments  in the first  quarter.  In the remainder of the  year, we  expect 
positive trends to continue. This is also indicated by our latest projections, according to which we will 
maintain  low  inflation  in the  next  two years  as well,  under  current  assumptions.  As  for  the economic 
growth  forecast,  we  believe  that  economic  policy  measures  are  well-calibrated  and  that  they  have 
created the basis for sustainable acceleration of GDP growth of around 3.5% in 2018 and in 2019. We 
also believe that there are grounds for growth to be even faster this year.  
1 
  Uncertainty in the international environment emanates primarily from  the commodity and financial 
markets 
In the period since the previous Report, developments in the international environment were marked 
by  additionally  improved  prospects  of  global  economic  upturn,  maintenance  of  low  inflationary 
pressures  despite  the  hike  in  the  prices  of  primary  commodities,  notably  oil,  as  well  as  increasingly 
diverging monetary policies of leading central banks. Although the recently published data indicate that 
growth  in  the  euro  area  slowed  down  in  the  first  quarter,  dominant  estimates  suggest  that  the 
deceleration is temporary and that growth will resume this year at a similar pace as in 2017. In addition 
to  favourable  growth  prospects  of  Serbia’s  other  important  trade  partners,  this  should  contribute  to 
further growth in Serbia’s exports. 
  While  global  growth  forecasts  are  looking  up,  developments  in  certain  markets  are  still  veiled  in 
uncertainty.  The  global  commodity  market  recorded  a  continued  rise  in  the  prices  of  primary 
commodities, notably oil, whose price came  at USD 78 per barrel in May, the highest since November 
2014.  The  price  of oil  rose  on the  back  of  a  sharp  pick-up  in  demand,  triggered  by  accelerated  global 
growth,  as  well  as  supply  factors,  primarily  the  leading  oil  exporters  capping  the  production  and 
geopolitical  tension.  In  addition,  since  the  start  of  the  year,  the  prices  of  primary  agricultural 
commodities also increased, though to a lower extent. 
However, the futures and current projections by the relevant institutions indicate that, after this year’s 
growth, we can expect global prices of primary commodities to stabilise and then decline in 2019 and 
2020. Using that as a starting point, we do not expect any major inflationary pressures on this account 
2 
over the medium term. However, bearing in mind the high volatility of oil prices in the prior period, as 
well  as  the  fact  that  these  prices  are  currently  around  50%  higher  in  year-on-year  terms,  it  is  our 
estimate  that  their  movements  require  caution  in  making  monetary  policy  decisions  in  the  coming 
period as well. 
  During  the  first  quarter, uncertainty and volatility in the international financial market  also increased. 
The  character  of  monetary  policies  of  leading  central  banks  diverged  further  amid  the  still  present 
uncertainty in terms of the pace of their normalisation in the coming period and, in turn, movements in 
the dollar/euro relationship, as well as capital flows towards emerging economies. Despite this, global 
financial conditions are still favourable.  
Strengthening domestic fundamentals – a response to external challenges 
It  is  a  fact  that  there  have  been  and  there  still  will  be  external  challenges  going  forward.  We  cannot 
impact  them,  but  only  mitigate  their  effects.  Therefore  structural  improvements  of  our  economy  and 
the narrowed internal and external imbalances have been of particular importance as they boosted our 
resilience to negative effects of global factors.  
In  conditions  of  rising  corporate  profitability,  positive  tendencies  in  the  labour  market  and  higher 
efficiency  of  tax  collection,  favourable  fiscal  movements  continued  in  2018  as  well,  with  a  surplus  of 
around 0.4% of GDP in the first quarter.  
   3 
The competitiveness of the Serbian economy also increased, reflected in the rise in exports of all areas 
of manufacturing (12.4% year-on-year), except the food industry, which was adversely affected by the 
diminished agricultural production in the wake of last year’s drought. As many as 14 of the 23 areas of 
manufacturing recorded a high two-digit growth rate in exports in the first quarter. At the same time, 
the  stepped-up  pace  of  investment  growth  reflected  on  the  higher  imports  of  equipment  and 
intermediate goods, which played a key role in total imports growth (11.9% year-on-year).  
In  addition,  the  net  inflow  of  capital  in  the  first  quarter  fully  covered  the  current  account  deficit, 
contributing  to  the  continuation of  appreciation  pressures  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  As  for  the 
composition of inflows,  foreign direct  investment  maintained a high inflow,  posting growth of around 
2%  year-on-year  and  still  channelled  to  export-oriented  sectors.  The  foreign  direct  investment  inflow 
was additionally boosted by portfolio investment in conditions of non-residents’ investment in five- and 
ten-year dinar government securities.  
The net inflow of foreign direct investment, which is estimated at around EUR 2.6 billion this year, will 
ensure the full coverage of the current account deficit for the fourth year straight. In the years ahead, 
we expect to maintain the full coverage of the current account deficit by long-term external sources of 
finance,  which  would  support  dynamic  exports  growth  in  the  medium-term.  With  this  in  mind,  our 
assessment is that Serbia has remained on the path of lowering external imbalances over the medium 
run.  
Economic  activity  grew  for  the  tenth  consecutive  quarter,  exceeding  our  early-year  expectations  in 
the first quarter 
In such conditions, GDP growth accelerated in the first quarter, even more so than we expected in the 
February Inflation Report. According to our estimate, a key contribution to the pick-up in growth to 4.5% 
year-on-year  in  the  first  quarter  came  from  fixed  investment.  If  the  rise  in  total  fixed  investment 
continues at a similar pace for the remainder of the year, we estimate its share in GDP to reach around 
22%.  This  is  an  important  assumption  for  creating  a basis  for the  acceleration of  economic  growth to 
around 4% in the medium run. 
Taking  into  account  the  further  improvement  in  the  business  environment,  favourable  monetary 
conditions,  faster  implementation  of  infrastructure  projects  and  positive  labour  market  trends,  we 
estimate that growth will be driven by domestic demand, investment and household consumption. We 
also expect that exports will retain double-digit growth rates on the back of earlier investment and the 
rise  in  external  demand.  We  expect  higher  investment  to  also  push  up  imports  of  equipment  and 
intermediate goods. 
4 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
 I  would  like  to  conclude  the  first  part  of  the  conference  with  the  actual  and  expected  movement  of 
inflation and the monetary policy measures adopted. 
In  year-on-year  terms,  inflation  has  slowed  down  since  the  start  of  the  year.  The  slowdown  was 
anticipated and stated in the previous issues of the Report, though it was stronger than expected. This 
resulted  from  lower  dinar-denominated  import  prices  due  to  low  inflation  in  the  international 
environment and the dinar’s appreciation in the previous period, and from the still low food production 
costs. That inflationary pressures are still low is suggested also by core inflation, which declined to 0.8% 
year-on-year in March and April, its lowest level since changes in consumer prices have been used as a 
measure  of inflation. Compared to the previous  Inflation Report, short-term inflation expectations fell 
even more – to 2.5% for the financial and 2.8% for the corporate sector, remaining anchored within the 
target corridor. These are the main reasons why the new medium-term inflation projection is somewhat 
lower than the previous one. 
  After  reaching  this  year’s  low  in  April,  we  expect  inflation  to  gradually  approach  the  target  in  the 
coming period, though this year it will remain close to the lower bound of the target tolerance band. 
We expect inflation to approach the 3.0% midpoint in the second half of 2019, and to remain stable 
around that level until the end of the projection horizon.  
In view of this,  we expect inflation to remain low and stable in the coming period as well. In other 
words,  in  the  medium  term,  year-on-year  inflation  will  move  within  the  target  tolerance  band 
(3.0%±1.5%) until the end of the projection horizon, i.e. in the next two years, also owing to a gradual 
recovery  in  domestic  demand.  Medium-term  inflation  expectations  of  the  financial  and  corporate 
sectors are also anchored at the target midpoint of the National Bank of Serbia.  
 Monetary policy easing amid low inflationary pressures helps speed up lending and economic activity, 
which,  along  with  the  efforts  to  resolve  non-performing  loans,  made  the  share  of  these  loans  fall 
below the pre-crisis level. 
By carefully monitoring and analysing the developments in the domestic and international environment, 
we  assessed  that  the  expected  movement  in  inflation  and  its  underlying  factors  going  forward,  along 
with  the  further  strengthening  of  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  allow  for  additional  monetary  policy 
easing. Accordingly, we decided to further cut the key policy rate in both March and April by 25 basis 
points  to  3%,  its  lowest  level  in  the  inflation  targeting  regime.  Its  sharp  drop  in  the  period  since  the 
5 
monetary  easing  cycle  began  (May  2013)  had  a  strong  impact  on  the  rise  in  disposable  income,  thus 
contributing  to  a  faster  recovery  of  domestic  demand.  We  made  the  decisions  on  further  monetary 
policy easing taking into consideration not only that the February medium-term inflation projection was 
lower than the previous one, both for this and next year, but also that inflationary pressures weakened 
further  after  the  February  projection.  On  the  other  hand,  monetary  policy  caution  was  mandated  by 
pronounced uncertainty in the international commodity market, mainly regarding the movements in oil 
prices. Caution was also required due to diverging monetary policies of the Federal Reserve System and 
European Central Bank. 
Monetary policy easing in the previous period significantly drove down interest rates on dinar loans in 
the  past  several  years,  and  created  more  favourable  financing  conditions.  This  and  the  effects  of 
economic  growth,  positive  labour  market  trends,  increased  interbank  competition,  a  decline  in  the 
country risk premium, and low interest rates in the euro area – contributed to further growth in lending 
activity,  which,  excluding  the  exchange  rate  effect,  measured  7.5%  year-on-year  in  March.  Since  the 
beginning  of  the  year,  year-on-year  growth  in  loans  to  corporates  has  accelerated  further  (to  5.1%), 
while  growth in loans to households slowed down slightly (to 10.9%).  In the conditions of stepped-up 
efforts  to  resolve  non-performing  loans  and  the  rise  in  lending  activity,  the  share  of  non-performing 
loans  in  total  loans  declined  considerably  since  the  Strategy  was  implemented,  by  13.2  percentage 
points to 9.2% in March, below the pre-crisis level. Thus, the stock of these loans has been more than 
halved  since  the  start  of  implementation  of  the  Strategy  (down  by  55%),  undeniably  pointing  to 
intensified efforts made to resolve this issue.  
   
Looking  ahead,  in  the  coming  period  monetary  policy  decisions  will  continue  to  depend  on  our 
assessment  of  the  impact  of  inflation  factors  from  the  domestic  and  international  environment. 
According to our estimate, key risks emanate from the international environment, which is why we will 
continue  to  closely  monitor  and  analyse  developments  in  the  international  financial  market  and  the 
market of primary commodities, and to assess their impact on economic developments in Serbia.  
As so far, we will use all our instruments to ensure low and stable inflation in the medium term. I believe 
that this, with the preservation of financial stability, is the best way for the central bank to contribute to 
sustainable economic growth and stronger resilience to external challenges.  
6 
With this, I would like to conclude my introductory address and give the floor to my colleagues from the 
Directorate for Economic Research and Statistics, who will briefly  present the latest inflation and GDP 
growth projections. What you will also hear from them is that, according to the new projections as well, 
in the coming period we expect to fulfil our primary legal mandate  –  price  stability  –  by ensuring low 
inflation  within  the  target  tolerance  band,  against  the  backdrop  of  faster  GDP  growth,  which  we 
estimate at around 3.5% in 2018 and 2019, and at around 4% in the medium run. 
 7 
