Jacqueline  Loh:  E-payments  in  Asia  –  regulating  innovation  and
innovative regulation
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of
Singapore, at the Central Bank Payments Conference, Singapore, 26 June 2018.
 Mr Benoît Cœuré – Executive Board Member of the ECB and Chairman of the Committee on
Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI)
Jean-Michel Godeffroy, Chairman of the Central Bank Payments Conference
Fellow central bankers and regulators
Ladies and gentlemen
1.    Good morning. Welcome to Singapore. Thank you for inviting me to speak at the Central
Bank Payments Conference.
2.     I understand that this is the second conference since the event started in Amsterdam last
year,  and  the  first  time  that  the  event  is  being  held  in  Asia.  So  let  me  share  with  you  the
perspective from this part of the world.
A. E-PAYMENTS ARE FLOURISHING IN ASIA
3 .     Until  about  a  decade  ago,  payments  were  entirely  offered  by  banks.  We  wrote
cheques  that  were  issued  by  banks  and  deposited  cheques  into  accounts  that  we  held  with
banks. As electronic or e-payments flourished, we paid for shopping using debit or credit cards
that bore various brands, but were ultimately issued by banks. The banks would then find a way
of settling payments among themselves through the Automated Clearing House (ACH) (usually
run by the banking industry) and the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system (run by the
central bank). For the longest time, the central bank’s role was clear: We kept payments safe by
keeping banks safe.
4 .     In recent years, digital payment solutions such as e-wallets over mobile devices
have emerged, and nowhere is this more obvious than in Asia. From 2015 to 2016, non-
cash  transactions  in  developed  Asia-Pacific  grew  by  8.8%  while  that  in  Emerging  Asia
2
experienced 28.6% growth . Digital payments in Asia are forecasted to grow annually at 16.4%
to reach over USD 2.5 trillion per year in 2022. That is almost half of the estimated worldwide
total of USD 5.4 trillion.
1
5.     Such services are often offered by non-banks, increasing the number of payments being
handled  outside  the  traditional  banking  system.    EY  and  DBS   found  that  payments  and
remittances were the highest-adopted FinTech services among banking and financial services
customers in Asia, reaching 40% in China and 20% in India. In ASEAN, approximately one-third
of  FinTech  companies  are  in  the  payments  space,  and  this  increases  to  54%  if  you  include
4
money-transfer and remittance services .
6 .     These innovations did not come about by chance, but rather through a confluence
of three factors:
3
a. Technology has lowered the barrier to entry to run a standalone payments business, without
being a bank.
b. The high penetration of smart phones running apps has made it easier to acquire customers
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
digitally, without physical places of business; and
c. The boom of online e-commerce has necessitated the creation of solutions to help customers
to  pay  digitally  for  services  that  they  in  turn  purchase  digitally. As  they  say,  necessity  is  the
mother  of  all  invention,  and  nowhere  else  is  this  more  pressing  than  in  Asia,  where  a  high
proportion of unbanked population is concentrated. In 2017, the World Bank found that China,
5
India, Indonesia and Bangladesh alone contributed to one-third of the world’s unbanked adults .
7 .     This has resulted in a well-trodden path among digital businesses in Asia: Build a
digital  business  around  something  non-financial,  say  ride-hailing,  food  delivery,  groceries  or
gaming. Then offer your customers a seamless payment experience through an e-wallet, to pay
for the things that they buy from you. Let me offer a few examples:
a. In Singapore, Carousell offers an online marketplace for individuals like you and me to sell or
buy anything. You take a photo of what you want to sell, the app can recognise items like shoes
and  suggest  an  appropriate  category,  and  you  post  it  for  sale.  They  have  about  150  million
listings  today,  including  cars  and  property.  And  they  are  launching  CarouPay  to  help  its
customers to pay for all of them.
b. Some of you, like a couple of my colleagues, may have come here this morning using the ride-
hailing service, Grab. It is very convenient. You book the ride, the driver arrives, you reach your
destination, you thank your driver, and you are on your way. No money needs to be exchanged
with the driver. You don’t even click “pay”. Grab has taken this one step further: They’ve acquired
over 300 merchants so that you can use the Grab wallet to pay for services these merchants
offer.
6
c. But it is China that is leading the way, with e-wallets making up 13% of consumer payments by
value, compared to under 1% in markets like India and Indonesia . Alibaba combined mobile e-
money with facial recognition in their Hema chain of supermarkets. You walk into the store with
your mobile phone, find something you like, scan the QR code to find out more information about
it, and in the same app you can order the item, pay for it, and get it delivered in 30 minutes.
JD.com does something similar in their staff convenience store at their headquarters: walk in,
pick up a snack, walk out.
B. EMERGING ISSUES IN DOMESTIC PAYMENTS
8 .     The clearest benefit for consumers is greater convenience and an explosion of
choice in how you want to pay. You can use the same e-wallet to get a ride to work, then to
buy lunch at a café. You can use another e-wallet to order dinner. Merchants too, have more
choices today on how they wish to get paid. Just step into any mall, and at many shops you see
a range of QR codes representing different e-wallet schemes – some of them catering just to
tourists from specific countries.
9.     The reverse side of that same coin is that as more payments are carried out outside
of the banking system, they also start to fall outside of typical central bank oversight like
the ACH and RTGS. As it stands today, the portion of digital payments is still a small fraction of
total payments. Even in China, where mobile payments have sky rocketed, the total volume of
mobile  payment  transactions  in  2016  stood  at  CNY  208  trillion ,  a  fraction  of  the  CNY  3600
trillion   processed  by  China’s  High-Value  Payment  System.  However,  as  more  payments  go
through these e-wallets and as more consumer monies are held by non-banks, it is important for
us to consider the risks that we typically look out for:
7
8
a. As individual e-wallets, how do we keep them safe to use?
b. Collectively, how do we manage risks that e-wallets may pose to the financial system?
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
c. As a market, how do we ensure that e-payments function smoothly with each other and with
the financial system?
1 0 .     Let me run through these three questions, and share how MAS is addressing these
through the proposed Payment Services Bill (PSB) – striking a balance between innovation and
sound regulation – as well as industry collaboration. The proposed PSB also follows an activity
based  framework  which  calibrates  regulation  according  to  the  risks  that  the  specific  payment
activity poses, rather than applying a fixed set of regulations to all payment service providers.
While  we  have  expanded  the  regulatory  scope  to  address  emerging  risks  in  payment
developments, regulations are also right-sized to the risks posed.
11.     First: As individual e-wallets, how do we keep them safe to use? When we look at e-
wallets,  we  find  that  they  face  very  similar  risks  as  digital  banking  products.  Firstly,  as  online
services,  both  are  dependent  on  technology  and  face  cyber  risk  –  so  MAS  expects  them  to
manage these technology and cyber risks well. Second, they both hold retail customer monies,
so they need to safeguard these monies. The differences however, are that an e-wallet is used
for  day-to-day  payments,  and  so  needs  to  be  very  liquid  to  meet  customer  demands,  and  e-
wallet issuers don’t give loans with the float. So it’s important to right-size our regulations to their
business model, and not to stifle innovation by loading them with bank-like requirements. Taking
these  into  account,  MAS  sets  out  proportionately  simple  options  for  e-wallets  to  safeguard
customer  monies,  for  example,  holding  it  as  a  deposit  with  a  bank.  MAS  may  also  prescribe
further safeguarding measures in liquid and low-risk assets.
12.     Second: Collectively, how do we manage risks that e-wallets pose to the financial
system? Our role as central banks is to protect the stability of, and confidence in, the financial
system. To achieve this, we need to develop regulations that, while addressing key risks, do not
obstruct the industry developments. In the case of payments, that key risk is money laundering
and terrorist financing (ML/TF), and the balance that we have to strike is to allow new e-wallet
businesses to start quickly, but also ensure that ML/TF risks are managed before they get too
large. In this context, while KYC continues to be a key requirement, we allowed smaller wallets
holding funds of no more than $1,000 to carry out simplified KYC requirements. This framework
is similar to those used in other markets like Hong Kong, India, Australia and the UK.
13.     Finally, as a market, how do we ensure that e-payments function smoothly with each
other and the financial system?  Many  of  us  think  of  smooth  functioning  as  having  liquidity
providers in capital markets through volatile periods. That is because capital markets are well-
oiled systems that interoperate between banks and trading venues, and even among banks. Not
so with e-payments.
14.     E-payments have grown quickly because they have been able to develop their own
systems quickly – but this has resulted in some fragmentation. Although the vast array of
payment solutions offers more choices to consumers and merchants, too much choice is not
always a good thing:
a. Consumers may end up holding three or four different e-wallets in order to get the best deals
from each: one for transport, one for shopping, and another to split bills with friends. Those three
or four e-wallets may hold smaller amounts of money each, but in sum might add up to more
than what he/she would have otherwise held in cash in one physical wallet. He/she needs to top-
up each e-wallet separately, because each wallet has a different top-up and refund mechanism.
b.  Merchants  may  proudly  display  all  the  schemes  that  they  accept,  whether  by  card  or
contactless  or  QR  codes.  Underneath  all  that,  the  merchant  needs  to  deal  with  different
acquirers that send him settlement files in different formats, at different times, and pay him on
different days.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
9
c.  Between  the  consumer  and  merchant,  instead  of  counting  cash  and  change,  the  payment
ordeal could transform into checking which payment instrument is accepted, which card to dip
into which terminal, or which QR code to scan.
1 5 .     Fortunately, we have not reached that e-payment nightmare. While competition
from many payment providers benefits consumers with lower prices, convenience and
more innovative solutions, e-payments still need to interoperate in order for the industry
to continue growing. Let me share three areas where MAS is enhancing interoperability of e-
payments, namely point-of-sale terminals, QR codes and regulatory powers.
1 6 .     First, Unified Points of Sale (UPOS) terminals. Singapore is a highly-carded market,
with over 349 payment cards per 100 inhabitants . Many merchants, if they accept e-payments,
have a terminal, usually provided by a bank acquirer. Five years ago, we started noticing that
some  15%  of  merchants  had  more  than  one  terminal.  Why?  Because  different  banks  were
acquiring the same merchant so that they could offer the merchant lower on-us rates for their
cards dipped in their own terminals. This was good for merchants, and even for the consumer as
the merchants passed on some discounts to them. But there were hidden costs: Cashiers had
to  be  trained  on  different  terminals,  customers  at  self-checkout  lanes  fumbled  with  which
terminal to dip their card into. So we set out to study the market, see which merchants had more
than one POS terminal, prioritise them by the volume and value of transactions that they handled,
and worked closely with their acquirers one-by-one to on-board onto a single terminal that can
accept all schemes that use chip and contactless near-field communication (NFC). Today, the
process  is  still  underway,  but  you  can  already  see  these  UPOS  terminals  deployed  in
supermarkets, convenience stores and petrol stations – these are merchants that we visit daily,
if not weekly. Besides addressing the challenges I mentioned above, this has certainly made the
self check-out experience a delight.
17.     Second, Singapore Quick Response (SGQR) code.  Besides  chip  and  contactless
NFC payments, many mobile payments are optical via a Quick Response (QR) code. Just as we
started  to  tidy  up  the  POS  terminals  at  merchants,  we  started  to  observe  a  proliferation  of
payment  QR  codes  as  each  e-payment  company  deployed  its  own  QR  code  sticker  at  each
merchant’s  cashier.  We  identified  the  problem  early  and  immediately  formed  an  industry  task
force  comprising  payment  schemes  and  acquirers.  Through  intensive  meetings  with  industry
and users, we co-created the SGQR code.  While it is based on the EMVCo’s multi-tenanted QR
specifications,  Singapore  is  the  first  and  only  jurisdiction  in  the  world  to  develop  a  set  of
arrangements by the industry for the industry such that all QR schemes can reside on a single
QR  code,  instead  of  each  scheme  deploying  its  own  code  with  its  own  scheme  only.  With
SGQR, making a QR payment will be a breeze for the customer as he just looks for a single QR
for any scheme the merchant accepts, rather than having to hunt for the right QR sticker for a
particular  scheme.  For  mobile  or  small  merchants,  SGQR  allows  easy  acceptance  of  e-
payments  via  a  single,  streamlined  and  low-cost  sticker.  Businesses  are  also  exploring  QR
payments  in  bills  as  the  customer  can  quickly  pay  his  bills  through  his  mobile,  while  the
customer details embedded in the QR in turn enhances business processes.
18.     Third, Interoperability Powers. With UPOS and SGQR, MAS has been very fortunate in
being able to work with willing industry partners. But in future, just as innovative solutions may
grow  over  time,  the  number  of  interoperability  issues  may  multiply,  and  MAS  may  need  the
regulatory  powers  to  effectively  address  the  issue  of  interoperability  with  many  more  parties.
Hence,  in  the  consultation  on  the  PSB,  MAS  has  proposed  innovative  powers  to  require
interoperability among payment institutions. Today, we have existing powers to require payment
platforms  to  open  access  to  participants.  Looking  ahead,  we  recognised  that  we  needed  two
more  measures:  to  require  participants  to  use  a  common  platform  and  to  adopt  common
standards (such as SGQR).
C. GOING CROSS BORDER
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
1 9 .     As we aim for interoperability and efficiency within our domestic systems, it is
equally important to look beyond and to look outwards. A lot of commerce and e-commerce
is  carried  out  across  borders  today:  Cross  border  e-commerce  alone  is  expected  to  expand
strongly, by approximately 25% annually until 2020, nearly twice the growth rate of domestic e-
commerce . And  just  as  more  people  travel  and  work  overseas,  and  more  businesses  find
ways to deliver goods and services overseas, payments will also need to keep up.
2 0 .     Among Singapore’s list of priorities as ASEAN Chair this year is to promote the
growth of e-commerce in the region.  Google  and  Temasek  estimated  that  e-commerce  in
ASEAN could amount to USD 88 billion in 2025 . Cross border payments that are affordable,
secure, and instant, will play an important role in driving e-commerce trade flows and achieving
this vision.
2 1 .     Although  cross-border  linkages  offer  huge  benefits  in  important  areas  of  the
economy  such  as  trade  and  tourism,  implementing  them  is  an  up-hill  task  because  of
complexities  like  different  technical  interfaces,  and  legal  and  regulatory  requirements  in  each
jurisdiction.  Each  country  is  also  in  a  varying  stages  of  development.  But  we  are  making
progress:
11
a.  The  industry  has  moved  ahead:  In  March,  Singtel  announced  a  partnership  with  its  Thai
associate AIS to link their mobile wallets up, to enable 1.5 million visitors between Singapore and
Thailand to use their mobile wallets at over 20,000 physical merchant acceptance points in both
markets. Singtel plans to expand this to other regional associates later in the year.
b. More broadly, the banking associations of Singapore and Thailand are exploring the possibility
of  linking  their  faster  payment  systems,  PayNow  in  Singapore,  and  PromptPay  in  Thailand.  If
successful,  the  benefits  of  instant,  low-cost  payments  for  tourists,  migrant  workers  and
professionals will also extend to person-to-person payments and even remittances.
c. Earlier this month, when India Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited Singapore, he used his
RuPay card issued in India to pay for a Madhubani painting on a NETS terminal.
22.     In order to address the challenges of cross-border linkages, central banks need to
promote the adoption of common international standards and work with industry partners
on all sides in order to ease future integration efforts and pave the way for further partnerships.
D. CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCIES (CBDC)
2 3 .     As we talk about cross-border linkages, it would be remiss of me not to touch on
Central  Bank  Digital  Currencies  (CBDC). Benoît  Cœuré,  our  next  distinguished  keynote
speaker, and I, as co-chairs of the BIS’ CPMI and Markets Committee (MC) respectively, jointly
issued a report entitled “Central Bank Digital Currencies”
. Many of you would already have read
it. In it, we distinguished between two types of CBDC: wholesale CBDC that is limited to selected
financial institutions, and general purpose currency for use by the public. The report highlighted
the  potential  benefits  in  wholesale  CBDC  for  more  efficient  and  secure  wholesale  payment
systems, although more exploration will be required to fully understand these benefits.
2 4 .    MAS started on our wholesale CBDC journey two years ago when we introduced a
digital token representing the Singapore dollar on distributed ledger technology (DLT) to settle
interbank  debts.  Last  year,  we  delved  deeper  into  the  problem  of  decentralised  netting  while
preserving  privacy,  and  demonstrated  that  these  could  be  solved  in  the  three  major  DLT
platforms Corda, Hyperledger Fabric and Quorum.
2 5 .     This year, MAS, Bank of Canada and Bank of England embarked on a project to
explore  how  wholesale  CBDC,  underpinned  by  DLT,  can  be  used  to  address  the
12
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
inefficiency  that  correspondent  banking  faces.  It  will  identify  pain  points  that  commercial
banks experience when making standalone cross-border payments, or payments as part of trade
financing,  securities  services  and  foreign  exchange.  The  project  also  looks  at  resolving
settlement issues between commercial banks, and settlement of reserve between a central bank
and a commercial bank. After these use cases are developed, a technical proof-of-concept will
be conducted, building on the success of Jasper and Ubin, which are the DLT platforms from the
Bank  of  Canada  and  the  MAS  respectively.  If  successful,  this  will  provide  alternatives  for
cheaper, safer and faster cross border transactions.
26.     Benoit and my respective committees took a hard look at general purpose CBDC, –
and there are many implications - including cost of bank funding, credit provision, and financial
stability  with  the  risk  of  deposits  possibly  taking  flight  to  central  banks  during  stress  periods.
These are issues that will have to be addressed should a central bank be deliberating on issuing
digital currencies to its wider population. The CPMI and MC study is a reminder that even as we
push the boundaries of payments and aim to utilise the latest technologies, central banks need to
carefully  assess  each  change  and  the  larger  impact  to  financial  stability  as  well  as  monetary
policy, before jumping on the bandwagon.
E. CONCLUSION
27.     These are some of the issues that central bankers are grappling with in Asia, and
how  Singapore  thinks  about  regulating  this  innovative  area  of  payments  through
innovative  regulation.  With  the  fast-paced  and  global  nature  of  changes,  cooperation  and
dialogue between central banks are more crucial than ever before. I am glad to see many familiar
faces from various central banks here today. The conference today is a useful forum for us to
continue our dialogue, share important perspectives and keep tabs on the latest developments.
28.     Thank you, and I wish all participants here today a fruitful two days ahead.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1 Capgemini, World Payments Report 2017 (Developed/Mature APAC includes Australia, Japan, Singapore,
and South Korea. Emerging Asia includes China, Hong Kong, India, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, Philippines,
Taiwan, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Bangladesh.)
4 EY, ASEAN FinTech Census, 2018
2 Statista, Digital Payments Highlights, CAGR 2018 – 2022, 19 June 2018
3 EY and DBS, The Rise of Fintech in China, 2016
5 World Bank, Global Findex database, globalfindex.worldbank.org, 2017
6 Oliver Wyman, Winner-takes-all in battle for e-wallet supremacy, 2018
7 ResearchAndMarkets.com, Global and China Mobile Payment Industry Report, 2018
8 BIS.org, Statistics on payment, clearing and settlement systems in the CPMI countries, 2016
9 Global Data, Payment Card Analytics
10 DHL, The 21st Century Spice Trade, 2017
11 e-conomy SEA: Unlocking the $200 Billion digital opportunity in Southeast Asia, 2016.
12 BIS, Central Bank Digital Currencies, 2018
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
