Jens  Weidmann:  Opening  remarks  –  "Fourth  cash  symposium  of
the Deutsche Bundesbank"
Opening remarks by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman
of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Fourth  cash
symposium of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 14 February 2018.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Good morning and welcome to the Deutsche Bundesbank’s fourth cash symposium.
I  am  delighted  that  this  year,  too,  our  cash  symposium  has  met  with  such  keen  interest.
Admittedly, we have once again put together a very attractive programme for you, and for that I
would like to thank you, Mr Thiele, and, of course, all of my colleagues from Directorate General
Cash  Management  who  have  helped  to  organise  this  event,  not  to  mention  all  of  our  guest
speakers.
My former colleague from the Bank of England, Mervyn King, mockingly wrote in his book The
End  of  Alchemy  that,  “God  may  have  created  the  universe,  but  we  mortals  created  paper
money."
And like everything we mortals invent, one could add that paper money also has its advantages
and disadvantages. Nowadays, paper money, and cash in general, has to compete with other
means of payment. Technological advances have made cashless payments more convenient
and  efficient.  Nevertheless,  cash  still  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  today’s  payments
landscape – of that I am absolutely certain.
The euro as a physical currency is an attractive and widely used means of payment, and that will
continue to be the case in future. In Germany, approximately three out of every four payments are
still settled in cash at the point of sale. Yet despite its affinity to cash, Germany is by no means
the spearhead in terms of cash usage in the euro area. In Austria and the southern European
countries,  the  share  of  cash  payments  is  higher  still.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Governing
Council of the ECB has also expressed a clear commitment to cash.
But I am also convinced that the use of cash will change over time – in Germany, too. Other
forms of payment, such as cashless payments, will tend to gain in importance. However, these
changes are likely to be gradual and they won’t happen overnight.
Incidentally, I do not share the fear expressed by some that digital money, which is currently a
subject of growing debate, is set to become a serious competitor for cash or bank deposits in the
foreseeable future.
Nor  am  I  convinced  that  central  banks  should  begin  issuing  digital  central  bank  money  in  the
future. After all, such a step could have very far-reaching implications for the financial sector and
thus also for monetary policy.
Nonetheless, current developments in this field are fascinating and are being discussed in depth
in central bank circles and by the general public. In my welcome speech, I would therefore like to
address the question of whether digital money could potentially supplant money as we know it
today.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
2. Virtual currencies
For many people, the concept of money is still strongly characterised by their visual perception of
banknotes  and  coins.  It  is  thus  no  coincidence  that  the  best-known  virtual  currency  is  called
Bitcoin. The word coin evokes an association with physical money.
In recent times, we have experienced a real Bitcoin hype, yet ultimately, the terms money and
currency can only be applied to Bitcoin and the other approximately 1,500 "cryptocurrencies” to a
very limited extent.
"Money is as money does” or, more specifically, “money is a matter of functions". These are
common descriptions of how money can be categorised. There is broad consensus, however, is
that money plays the role of a means of payment, a store of value and a unit of account.
Cryptocurrencies only fulfil these functions to a limited extent – with that in mind, the term crypto
token is a better choice of word, which I will use from here on.
To  date,  Bitcoin  and  Co  have  rarely  been  used  as  a  means  of  payment.  The  network  effect,
which comes to bear in the case of cash, for instance, does not exist for crypto tokens. This is
due, not least, to the fact that using them to make a payment is a relatively arduous task as it
takes several minutes to make a transaction. This may still be acceptable when buying a car,
say, but not when paying for goods at the point of sale.
An important prerequisite for a monetary system to work is that its users have trust in its intrinsic
value.  In  the  case  of  banknotes,  a  central  bank  is  the  issuer  of  the  notes,  and  this  creates
confidence.  In  the  case  of  Bitcoin,  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  artificially  build  trust  in  the
currency  by  setting  an  upper  limit  on  total  Bitcoin  supply  and  requiring  miners  to  solve
complicated mathematical problems.
These  computational  tasks  are  becoming  more  and  more  complex  in  order  to  make  it
increasingly difficult to create new Bitcoin. In your recently published op-ed for the Frankfurter
Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung, you, Mr Thiele, impressively calculated that a Bitcoin transaction
consumes  –  and  I  quote  –  as  much  as  460,000  times  more  power  than  a  standard  credit
transfer. This is precisely  why  Bitcoin  mining  tends  to  gravitate  towards  countries  with  cheap
electricity.
But the increased energy consumption does nothing to increase the stability of Bitcoin. Quite the
opposite, in fact: the value of crypto tokens is highly volatile, as we have seen over the past few
weeks.  Indeed,  even  amid  the  market  turbulence  we  have  experienced  recently,  Bitcoin  is
currently around six times more volatile than the S&P 500, and 13 times more so than gold.
That naturally makes it less than ideal as a means of payment. After all, if you’ve got a payment
instrument that’s soaring in value, you’ll want to keep it for yourself, and if its value is plummeting,
you’ll  be  hard  pressed  to  find  any  takers.  Bitcoin  is  inefficient,  both  economically  and
environmentally.
The price of Bitcoin is gyrating as much as it is because there’s no value basis – unlike, say, a
gold coin, crypto tokens have no intrinsic value. Nor is there any issuer who uses its assets to
guarantee that customers can withdraw their bank deposits in cash on demand, or who stakes
its entire reputation on keeping the value of money stable, as is the case with banknotes. In short,
crypto  tokens  are  more  of  a  speculative  plaything.  Buy  them  and  you  risk  losing  some,  or
perhaps even all of your investment.
A growing chorus of voices, alarmed by the potential losses associated with digital currency, are
calling for crypto tokens to be regulated, if not banned outright.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Yet potential losses in value alone do not warrant a ban. In the interests of consumer protection,
however, I do think that more information needs to be made available for investors. That is why,
for  instance,  Germany’s  financial  watchdog  BaFin  has  already  issued  a  consumer  warning
highlighting the risks involved in what are known as initial coin offerings. ICOs, as they are also
called, are essentially crowdfunding tools which finance projects by pre-selling digital tokens, in
exchange for legal tender, to interested investors.
It is also important to ensure that the existing anti-money laundering provisions are upheld and to
prevent crypto tokens from being used to finance terrorism, hence the ongoing revision of the EU
Anti-Money Laundering Directive with a view to ensuring that currency exchange platforms and
custodian wallet providers apply the same customer due diligence standards as other financial
institutions.
That is also the reason why the acting Federal Finance Minister and I, together with our French
counterparts, have proposed that the Argentinian presidency of the G20 add this topic to the G20
agenda. Seeing as transactions of this kind are offered worldwide, there’s only so much that a
national or European regime can achieve.
Potential financial stability risks might also merit regulatory intervention, which is why we need to
keep track of the use of crypto tokens in the financial sector. As things stand, the risks are still
limited,  but  that’s  not  to  say  that  things  might  change  if  banks  begin  to  invest  more  in  crypto
tokens,  investors  recklessly  speculate  on  digital  tokens,  or  crypto  exchanges  start  granting
liquidity  facilities.  Banks  would  therefore  have  to  set  aside  sufficient  capital  to  cover  these
exposures.  Given  how  risky  they  are,  the  capital  requirements  would  undoubtedly  be
considerable.
We’re  also  a  long  way  from  a  situation  where  crypto  tokens  influence  the  monetary  policy
transmission process. One look at their value tells us that they are still a niche phenomenon –
yesterday, the value of every single crypto token worldwide came to roughly US$420 billion. That
might sound a lot, but compared to a global money supply of US$87,000 billion, it’s not much. So
there’s no need for monetary policymakers to fret about policy effectiveness just yet.
Agustín  Carstens,  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  speaking
here in Frankfurt last week, described Bitcoin as “a combination of a bubble, a Ponzi scheme
and  an  environmental  disaster".  While  I  wouldn’t  go  that  far,  I  do  not  see  crypto  tokens  as  a
compelling alternative to legal tender.
Central banks mandated to preserve price stability and effective banking regulations are what we
need for a stable monetary and financial system, not crypto tokens. And we’ve got both those
things in the euro area.
3. Central bank digital currency
One question the Bitcoin hype repeatedly throws up is whether it wouldn’t make sense for central
banks to issue digital currency of their own. And it is indeed the case that a number of central
banks  are  mulling  the  idea  of  launching  their  own  digital  currency.  One  of  them,  Sweden’s
Riksbank, is considering whether to issue an “e-krona".
You  might  be  aware  that  Sweden  ranks  among  the  countries  where  cash  usage  is  declining
rapidly,  with  demand  for  cash  having  contracted  by  40%  since  2008.  That,  of  course,
dramatically reduces cash’s network effect. At some point, cash usage might fall below a critical
threshold.
It’s  a  self-perpetuating  downward  spiral  –  as  more  and  more  businesses  refuse  outright  to
accept  payment  in  cash,  banks  respond  by  thinning  out  their  ATM  coverage,  which  in  turn
reduces the use of cash still further.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Even  churches  in  Sweden  are  increasingly  switching  to  digital  collection  plates  as  more  and
more churchgoers turn up to services without cash.
And yet cash is presently the only way for private individuals to hold central bank money. All other
types of money holdings are based on private money creation.
For Stefan Ingves, Governor of Sweden’s Riksbank, developments in the world of cash can be
interpreted in two different ways. “Is it the case that the general public no longer wants central
bank money? Or is it rather the case that it is only money made of pieces of paper (or cotton)
1
that they no longer wish to hold in an increasingly digitalised world?"
Central bank digital currency would undoubtedly satisfy that demand. It would be a substitute for
cash.
Some believe that it would even be beneficial. Unlike cash, digital central bank money could bear
interest.  It  would  even  be  possible  for  the  interest  rate  to  be  negative  if  there  was  no  way  of
turning to cash as an alternative; this would, in effect, do away with the zero lower bound. Digital
central bank money would thus increase the room for monetary policy manoeuvre.
Marvin Goodfriend, for instance, who was recently nominated for the position of Governor of the
2
Federal Reserve, spoke on this subject at the Jackson Hole conference in 2016.
As I already said at the cash symposium two years ago, I am not in favour of abolishing cash for
monetary policy reasons as that would be wrong and an entirely disproportionate response to the
monetary policy challenges close to the zero lower bound.
Of course, the same goes for introducing digital central bank money with the aim of abolishing
cash to enable central banks to enforce negative interest rates across the board.
But digital central bank money has another major catch. It can enter into direct competition with
bank  deposits  –  and  it  can  do  so  much  more  easily  than  cash.  Commercial  banks  would
possibly then have to offer interest rate mark-ups to stop their customers rolling bank deposits
over  into  digital  central  bank  money.  This  would  cause  a  further  fall  in  margins  in  the
deposit/lending business, which could have repercussions on financial stability.
However, the biggest threat in terms of financial stability is the possibility of a digital bank run. Of
course, the analogue world has seen the odd bank run – an image of long queues forming in
front of branches of the UK bank Northern Rock in 2007 springs to mind. But a digital bank run
would be different.
In  a  classic  bank  run,  customers  have  to  find  another  way  of  storing  the  money  that  they
withdraw, and this entails either risk or costs. In a digital bank run, all it takes is a few mouse
clicks  to  transfer  savings  out  of  the  private  financial  system  and  into  a  central  bank  account.
Customers are less likely to think twice about doing that. It is fairly safe to say that, had such an
option been available back then, it would not have been just Northern Rock’s customers but also
those of other UK banks that would have wanted to place their savings out of harm’s way at the
central bank just in case, and precisely this action would have completely destabilised the entire
banking system.
But perhaps you also know that some critics of our monetary system believe that its Achilles’
heel lies in commercial banks’ ability to create money, which they consider to be a major cause
of damaging credit cycles. In my opinion, however, it would be wrong to fundamentally call banks’
business model into question. I am convinced that smart regulation is the best way to deal with
risk in the financial system.
Past  experience  of  a  one-tier  banking  system  with  centralised  lending  by  the  central  bank  is
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
sobering  to  say  the  least.  Former  centrally  planned  economies  demonstrated  that  neither  the
state nor the central bank is necessarily the better banker. The introduction of digital central bank
money should therefore be carefully considered.
Incidentally,  I  am  quite  sure  that  a  need  for  crypto  tokens  in  general,  and  digital  central  bank
money  in  particular,  will  not  arise  in  the  first  place  if  we  at  the  central  bank  ensure  that  the
technology behind payment transactions is always up to date.
This  is  why  the  Eurosystem  is  working  flat  out  to  ensure  that  banks  will  be  able  to  conduct
payment transactions in central bank money in real time by the end of the year. The TARGET
instant payment system will enable payments to be transferred between individuals in a matter of
seconds, all day, every day, regardless of where their accounts are held. This would mean that
delivery-versus-payment transactions could be settled in commercial bank money, ie without the
buyer or seller having to pay or deliver upfront.
4. Conclusion
The economist John Kenneth Galbraith is credited with the following quote, which I think sums up
cash perfectly:
"Money is a singular thing. It ranks with love as man’s greatest source of joy. And with death as
his greatest source of anxiety."
We  needn’t  fear  for  the  future  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins.  However,  it  is  our  duty  as
Eurosystem central banks and your duty as a player in the cash cycle to always maintain the
public’s trust in euro cash. We can do this together by continuing to provide the public at all times
with the amount of stable-value, high-quality euro banknotes and coins that they need.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
S Ingves (2017), Do we need an e-krona?, Swedish House of Finance, 8 December 2017.
M Goodfriend (2016), The case for unencumbering interest rate policy at the zero bound, paper presented at the
Economic Policy Symposium at Jackson Hole.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
