Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Takaful industry at crossroads - a critical
examination
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia),  at  the  Takaful Annual  Dinner  and Awards  2018  "Takaful  industry  at  crossroads: A
critical examination", Kuala Lumpur, 23 March 2018.
 Just  last  year,  I  addressed  the  insurance  industry.  The  day  after,  the  newspaper  headlines
screamed “insurance models broken”. And so, I was more than a little surprised to receive an
invitation to speak. I could not resist it, and so I accepted.
This evening, I promise to be no less critical of the takaful industry. But take this well, as the path
to  success  begins  with  a  critical  examination  of  where  we  are  today.  We  need  to  work  as  a
collective. And also bear in mind that the takaful’s industry success is also our success.
Let us start by reviewing the industry’s progress. Indeed, it has come a long way since its birth
over thirty years ago. Its 1% market share in 1990 is now around 15%. Net contributions have
grown  9%  annually  since  2010.  These  are  achievements  that  we  all  should  be  proud  of.
However, before we celebrate, let us consider three issues.
First, can the industry sustain the growth momentum as we move into the 21st century world of
technology and innovation. We have set ourselves an objective but we are far away from meeting
the target. The objective of 25% family takaful penetration by 2020 is admittedly, ambitious but
achievable. However, at the rate it is growing, we will only reach 16% in 2020, from the 14.8%
today. This would be even lower if we were to correct for double counting of policies. Clearly, the
data proves that takaful is still far below its full potential, and is nowhere near where it should be.
Second,  individual  takaful  operators  have  not  reached  optimal  size.  Takaful  operators  are
dwarfed  by  their  conventional  counterparts.  Without  sufficient  scale,  takaful  operators  are
hampered in making meaningful inroads against their larger competitors. This is not just about
competition  within  the  takaful  and  insurance  industry,  but  also  of  technology.  Technology  is
reshaping the landscape of finance and lowering the barriers to entry from adjacent industries.
Takaful operators must shape up, or risk being marginalised, or worse, made irrelevant.
Third, the value proposition of takaful needs to be more apparent. As it currently stands, many
view it as being no different from insurance. Some even view it as being unnecessary.
It is disheartening to learn that 51% of respondents to a MTA survey cited these very reasons on
why they have little knowledge or interest in takaful products. The issue of misperception also
remains, with many non-Muslims deeming takaful as being only for Muslims.
Opportunity to reposition takaful for the future
This is the grim reality of the state of the industry, but it need not be so. In fact, I am positive
about the prospects and potential of takaful. However, to get out of this “predicament”, we need
an immediate and radical change.
Takaful  must  shed  its  image  as  being  an  imitator,  a  follower  or  impersonator  of  conventional
insurance.  Takaful  operators,  including  the  financial  groups  to  which  they  belong,  must  see
beyond takaful as yet another line of insurance products. In this, we need the right leadership,
shareholders  included,  to  set  the  right  tone  from  the  senior  leadership  that  takaful  must  offer
distinctive benefits highly valued by all. Its impact must be lasting and profound. This is especially
so in our system, where takaful is competing side by side with the insurance industry.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
All this considered, allow me to suggest three priorities for the industry to embark on to realise
the full potential of takaful:
First, fulfill the promise of takaful in helping protect people and businesses. Takaful is derived
from the Arabic word “kafal”, which means ‘to help’. To my mind, this calls for the industry to
reach out beyond its comfort zone of focusing on mandatory products, such as motor and fire, or
those that are easy to sell, namely mortgage related products. It must make serious inroads in
other areas where protection gaps exist, such as in agricultural risk, annuity and trade credit.
Something that is consistent with the needs of our economy. Ultimately, the industry must be
ahead of the curve to innovate and deliver solutions that are truly needed and highly valued by
customers, both individuals and businesses.
In family takaful, the industry must position itself as a trusted and valued solution provider for all
Malaysians. It must dispel the image of takaful as being an overly-complicated form of insurance
suitable only for Muslims. Market positioning should have broad appeal. Products should be easy
to  understand  and  live  up  to  public  expectations  of  fair  treatment,  transparent  and  efficient
service.
In operational terms, this means using plain and simple language and always seeking to do what
is right for the customer, rather than only what is legally required. Over 50% of insurance and
takaful  complaints  that  we  received  in  2017  were  of  mis-selling  or  misrepresentation.
Remember, when our staff or agents misinform or mistreat a customer, they harm the institution
and industry’s reputation, undoing all the hard work that went into building the system that we
have today.
As a society we need to take care of our own, specifically for the B40 group. There is a lot of
work  to  be  done.  As  at  end-2016,  insurance  and  takaful  penetration  in  the  B40  segment  of
working age stood at 30.3%, compared with the overall penetration rate of 46.8%.
The  roll  out  of  affordable,  accessible  and  easy  to  understand  products  under  Perlindungan
Tenang  is  a  start  in  meeting  the  needs  of  the  underserved.  Unfortunately,  to  date,  only  three
takaful operators have developed products under this initiative. Given the importance of financial
inclusion  for  the  nation  and  takaful  being  a  product  with  pseudo-social  leanings,  we  should
expect much more from takaful operators.
Another area that is wide open for innovation is the integration of takaful with elements of waqf,
sadaqah  and  zakat  to  fund  the  provision  of  takaful  coverage  to  the  poor.  I  understand  that  a
microtakaful  waqf  product  to  help  out  those  in  the  low  income  segment  was  launched  a  few
weeks back. I look forward to seeing more products such as these in the future. There is strong
potential for takaful to take the lead in solving development challenges facing the world, including
poverty and environmental degradation.
Takaful can also be the missing link for businesses. The potential is enormous just by looking at
the list of large infrastructure projects being undertaken. In Malaysia, just to name a few, there
are the two new MRT lines, the ECRL and the KL-Singapore High Speed Rail in the pipeline.
Internationally, there is the Belt and Road Initiative. All these entail large protection needs.
Capturing  these  opportunities  would  require  much  greater  capacity  to  underwrite  large  and
specialised  risks  than  currently  exists  in  the  industry  today.  This  calls  for  greater  retakaful
capacity.  Given  the  absence  of  such  retakaful  operators,  alternative  arrangements  for  the
industry  to  come  together  to  pool  their  capacity,  expertise  and  business  need  to  be  seriously
explored.
We already have the essential ingredients – the presence of the world’s largest global players in
our takaful market, deep Shariah knowledge within our domestic takaful and retakaful companies,
and an entire Islamic finance ecosystem that can be tapped into to really push the frontiers in
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
building retakaful capacity. We just need companies that are willing to lead the way. Building this
will take time, resources and a long term perspective, but this may be a small price to pay to
build  scale,  generate  critical  mass  and  position  takaful  as  a  credible  solution  for  large  and
specialised risks.
There is also a big opportunity in halal trade facilitation, especially in serving SMEs. The global
halal industry is valued at around USD2 trillion. The takaful industry however, has to be more
committed and visible in serving local and international halal businesses. After all, takaful has its
roots in the Nusantara, when Muslim merchants who plied their trade in the Far East centuries
ago  were  protected  by  early  forms  of  takaful.  This  is  why  the  takaful  industry  must  join  the
banking  industry  in  participating  at  the  upcoming  Malaysia  International  Halal  Showcase.
Participation will indicate intent, non-participation reflects poorly on the takaful industry, showing
the lack of commitment or ability to spot opportunities, or maybe even both. This certainly has to
be addressed if the industry is to make any meaningful progress, this sort of things matter.
Second, the takaful industry must conduct itself in a way that alleviates, not add, to the hardship
of customers. I would make this same remark to insurers and takaful operators alike, but with its
very  essence  of  kafal  emphasising  mutual  help  and  assistance,  takaful  must  do  more.  Our
expectation  is  for  the  industry  to  consistently  deliver  best-in-class  and  superior  customer
experience. It makes perfect business sense for positive customer experience to be at the heart
of the industry’s strategy.
This is true for any business, but even more important for a product that most people do not
normally seek out to buy. McKinsey & Co. estimates that globally, insurers that consistently offer
best-in-class customer experience produce up to four times more growth in new business. They
are also 30% more profitable than those who do it inconsistently.
What  the  research  underscores  is  the  importance  of  being  accessible,  empathetic,  fast  and
reliable. Not just when selling, but also when providing after sales service and processing claims.
In this day and age, customers can hail a taxi ride in five minutes and have their food delivered in
30 minutes. Complaints on service are responded to within the same day, if not within minutes.
Quality and response to services are forever being transformed by technological advances. It is
thus unacceptable that service in the takaful industry is delivered slowly.
When  I  was  finalising  my  speech,  I  was  told  by  my  staff  that  the  average  turnaround  time  to
process  damage  motor  claims  has  increased  by  10,  from  an  already  miserable  record  of  83
days. In the 19th century, Jules Verne wrote that anyone can travel around the world in 80 days.
We can’t settle an insurance claim any earlier in the 21st century. Go figure.
My own experience suggests that the turnaround time is the most important aspect of takaful
operations that shapes the industry’s image in the eyes of the customer. The industry has to
seriously look at this. It should relentlessly pursue changes in processes, rules and parameters
that  are  necessary  to  improve  the  experience  for  customers.  This  requires  creativity  and
persistence.
The situation is not much better in the family takaful business, although we are putting in place
the infrastructure to tackle this problem. The Bank, the insurance and takaful industry, and the
National Registration Department will roll out a new, automated mechanism this year to expedite
the process for claiming death benefits. With this, the industry will be better able to help those in
their hour of need.
The  Bank,  through  the  LIFE  Framework  and  other  initiatives,  is  determined  to  ensure  that
customers receive a fair deal. The recent implementation of the balanced scorecard will increase
the professionalism of takaful intermediaries. It is now incumbent upon the industry to establish
and maintain trust and goodwill with its customers. Takaful operators have started publishing and
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
implementing new customer service charters. The industry must now walk the talk.
In the next few months, a Customer Satisfaction Index Survey will be carried out to measure
actual  service  levels  against  what  operators  promise.  The  results  will  be  made  public.
Customers can shop around and make better informed choices when deciding who to trust to
protect them.
In this digital age, technology has changed the way we live, the way we save, and the way we
bank. But it seems that little has changed in the takaful and insurance space. This perplexes me.
This is quite telling from the industry’s attitude towards efficiency and innovation more generally.
Mobile and internet penetration in Malaysia stand at about 132% and 81% respectively. There is
potential  to  increase  the  offering  of  supplementary  services  online,  such  as  vehicle  anti-theft
services and health advice, as a recent study by Bain & Company on insurance customers in 19
countries  confirms.  The  industry  can  invest  in  its  own  capacity  to  deploy  new  technological
solutions itself, or it can partner with others.
The point is that it has to respond proactively, or risk being disrupted by others. Just a few weeks
ago, Amazon,  Berkshire  Hathaway  and  JPMorgan  announced  a  new  venture  to  disrupt  health
insurance in the U.S. This is the reality that the industry has to face.
Another issue that the industry is lagging behind is in terms of migration to e-payments. The use
of cheques is still prevalent. In 2017, insurers and takaful operators issued 1.5 million cheques
while  5.7  million  were  collected  from  customers.  This  is  a  huge  number.  Cheques  are  very
costly, inefficient and obsolete.
If the industry does not respond to these challenges, then others will. Over the past year, the
Bank has allowed financial product aggregators to offer insurance and takaful products on a non-
advisory  basis  under  the  Regulatory  Sandbox.  These  platforms  allow  consumers  to  easily
compare  and  assess  product  offerings,  thus  increasing  the  visibility  of  insurance  and  takaful
products and supporting our objective of digitalising insurance and takaful distribution.
The  Bank  is  close  to  finalising  changes  to  the  regulatory  framework  that  will  enable  online
product aggregators to operate with broad access to the insurance and takaful market by the end
of  this  year.  This  is  a  game-changing  initiative  that  will  pave  the  way  for  a  more  contestable
insurance  and  takaful  market  going  forward,  ultimately  improving  access  and  choice  for
consumers.
For the industry, it offers the potential to open up new market segments that were previously
untapped,  particularly  younger  millennials,  and  lower  the  cost  of  bringing  new  products  to  the
market.
Third,  the  takaful  industry  has  to  have  the  right  people  with  the  right  competence.  Strong
leadership and quality talent are needed to steer the industry forward to reach greater heights.
Let us start from the top with each company’s leadership – shareholders, the board and senior
management.  For  the  industry  to  really  break  new  ground,  we  need  to  consider  a  total  re-
imagination of the takaful model. It needs to break out of the shadows of insurance by evolving
new business and operating models.
Concepts  in  takaful  with  rich  potential,  such  as  mutual  takaful  remain  largely  untested.  The
mutual model has a long history. It is also enjoying a resurgence with the rise of new online,
peer-to-peer insurers in other countries. This is just one model. There might be others. Boards
and senior management should lead the way in exploring these developments and charting new
territory. This will require more active engagement of shareholders to develop a clear vision for
the company and enlist support for bold strategies that will change the status quo for the better.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Various  programmes  such  as  FIDE  and  FIDE  Forum  already  include  content  to  help  prepare
directors in future proofing their institutions. The focus will be even stronger going forward. We
are also pleased to announce that a specialised executive Islamic finance education programme
tailored for directors of Islamic banks and takaful operators will be launched in the first half of this
year.
It  will  equip  directors  with  an  appreciation  and  knowledge  of  Islamic  finance  by  incorporating
practical business perspectives. With this, directors are better able to contribute towards growth
and innovation, beyond their roles in ensuring that their institutions operate within sound Shariah
and risk management parameters.
At the level of employees, the reality is that good talent is in short supply. And so, the industry
must  take  a  longer  view  in  its  human  capital  strategies.  It  must  invest  to  develop  talent.
Remuneration  that  is  competitive  is  one  part  of  the  solution.  Sadly,  the  remuneration  of
employees of takaful operators is not competitive. Among highly skilled employees, we estimate
that those in the takaful industry earn 15% less than those in insurers. So long as this difference
exists, it will not be the employer of choice for the best talent.
The other part of the solution is in building skills and competencies. The industry needs to take
this seriously if it wants to break new ground in realising the potential of takaful. Takaful operators
must set a clear vision and culture of continuous learning and development.
Programmes such as the Chartered Professional in Islamic Finance, Certified Shariah Advisor
and  Certified  Shariah  Practitioner  play  an  important  role  in  elevating  the  technical  and  ethical
standards of the takaful workforce. The industry needs to get behind these standards and invest
in upskilling employees across all levels, starting with those in key senior roles. This can take the
form  of  sponsorships  for  professional  qualifications,  alignment  of  incentive  systems  and
development pathways for staff.
Agents are also an important component of the takaful eco system. Many of the imperatives that I
mentioned earlier are also applicable to them. In particular, professionalising the agency force is
a priority. The life insurance industry association is already taking steps to require agents to be
accredited by the Financial Accreditation Agency. I hope to see MTA doing the same, and being
proactive in providing the support and resources for its implementation.
Moving forward, Bank Negara Malaysia, will further lay the groundwork to strengthen the industry.
This includes creating an environment that fosters innovation, facilitated by the revised Takaful
Operational Framework which will be published for consultation before the middle of the year.
The revised framework will bring greater clarity on the use of multiple Shariah standards in the
models and structures of takaful. We will also strengthen the governance of takaful operators,
including  how  takaful  funds  are  managed,  to  further  safeguard  the  interests  of  takaful
participants. An exposure draft will be published before the middle of the year, and the industry
and public are welcomed to provide feedback.
Conclusion
Before I end, let me briefly touch on the developments with regards to the Malaysian economy.
The domestic economy grew strongly, by 5.9% in 2017, supported by the global growth upswing
and  robust  domestic  demand.  Domestic  demand  remained  central  to  Malaysia’s  growth,
grounded on healthy income and labour market conditions.
This  is  not  the  fruition  of  just  one  year’s  effort.  It  is  a  reflection  of  the  successful  structural
changes undertaken over the last two decades. Malaysia’s shift towards a domestic demand-
driven economy and continuous economic diversification have placed us in a very good position
to adapt to and leverage on the changes in the global economy.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another transformation that has taken place in the past two years is the increased sophistication
of the onshore financial and foreign exchange market. The introduction of the Financial Markets
Committee  (FMC)  measures  has  put  in  place  the  foundation  for  a  healthier  and  more  vibrant
financial and foreign exchange market.
As a result of the strong economic performance in 2017 and the improved sentiments following
these measures, the ringgit has strengthened by 14.6% in 2017 and 2018 thus far. The ringgit
has  also  been  of  the  most  stable  currency  in  the  region. As  our  economic  outlook  remains
strong, the ringgit will continue to reflect this strength.
For Bank Negara, we have always indicated that market forces will determine the value of the
ringgit. There has never been a target level for the ringgit exchange rate. With the economy and
financial  markets  constantly  evolving,  fixation  on  a  particular  level  of  ringgit  exchange  rate  is
counterproductive, if not detrimental to the economy.
What matters for Bank Negara and all of us here is to ensure that any adjustments taking place
is done in a gradual and orderly manner, without causing undue disruptions to businesses and
households. The foreign exchange market can sometimes be very fickle. Therefore, we should
always remain on our guard, as the global economic and financial conditions may change rapidly
following many developments such as normalisation of interest rates, geopolitical risks and the
tendency to adopt policies that might curtail open trade.
The ringgit’s recent appreciation and stability is not something that we should take for granted.
What we have learnt in recent years is to never downplay the unexpected. The rapid decline in
global  oil  prices,  drastic  disruptive  policy  shifts  in  major  economies,  and  the  more  recent
increase in trade tensions are prime examples of tail-risk events that will continue to affect our
economy and the ringgit. 
Similar  to  the  Malaysian  economy,  while  we  have  witnessed  progress  and  growth  of  the
Malaysian takaful industry, moving to the next level requires us to move away from status quo
and to do things differently.
Therefore I urge the industry to not waste any more time in thinking anew and strengthening its
capacity to play a much more meaningful role in supporting sustainable and inclusive economic
growth.  Let  us  all  be  committed  to  realise  the  values  that  are  fundamental  to  the  benevolent
mission of takaful.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate tonight’s award winners. I am confident that
such recognition will motivate you and all parties to continue to contribute and strengthen the
growth of the takaful industry.
Thank you and enjoy the rest of the evening.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
