John A Rolle: "Get Money Smart Bahamas"
Remarks by Mr John A Rolle, Governor of the Central Bank of the Bahamas, at the Launch of the
Get Money Smart Bahamas Financial Literacy Campaign Launch, Nassau, 1 May 2018.
 The Central Bank of The Bahamas is pleased to announce the launch of its national financial
literacy  campaign,  “Get  Money  Smart  Bahamas,”  with  the  participation  of  the  Clearing  Banks
Association of The Bahamas.
After a competitive search, we engaged the partnership of Colina Financial Advisors (CFAL) Ltd
and Blue Orchids to help with the formulation and execution of the campaign. CFAL brings its
financial management expertise and literacy promotion experience to the campaign. Blue Orchid
Bahamas is providing creative direction and strategic communications support.
The  Central  Bank  recognizes  the  need  to  educate  consumers  more  on  personal  finances,
financial  products  and  the  economy,  especially  in  the  context  of  increasingly  vocal  concerns
about  the  cost  of  banking  services,  and  the  ease  of  access  to  banking  services.  The  Bank
believes  that  literacy  is  an  empowering  and  critical  line  of  defense  for  consumer  financial
protection. We want the users of financial products and services to ask the right questions about
the  services  that  they  receive,  to  understand  their  legal  rights,  to  be  empowered  to  make
responsible  choices  around  savings  and  borrowing  and  to  conduct  their  affairs  safely  and
securely in a digital world.
Since this campaign was conceived, we have benefited from the results on domestic financial
literacy from a national survey, which the Bank sponsored through Public Domain. Some of the
highlights that are soon to be published are as follows:
Although many Bahamians have access to savings accounts, most persons are not using
them to accumulate funds; rather, they are just serving the basic purpose of storing money
that would be spent almost immediately.
More  consumer  education  is  needed  around  how  interest  rates  aid  our  ability  to  build  up
savings over the longer-term; and
Much more education is needed around personal debt management.
The goal of this campaign is to equip Bahamians of all ages and socio-economic backgrounds
with the knowledge and confidence they need to make sound financial decisions.
We especially want to encourage a strong culture of personal savings and reinvesting. This ties
into  the  shared  national  goal  of  keeping  the  value  of  the  Bahamian  dollar  on  par  with  the  US
dollar, because it translates into more prudent use of the foreign currency that The Bahamas
earns.
This campaign will have a special segment on banking products and services to help the public
learn more about how to borrow and use credit wisely. We will also provide education on how to
conduct  transactions  in  safer  and  more  secure  fashions,  especially  given  the  increasing
importance of electronic commerce, online banking and electronic money. This pushes along the
desired path of being less dependent on physical cash in our daily transactions.
We are pleased to be partnering with the Clearing Banks’ Association with this campaign.
We will also be working with several industry stakeholders throughout the year to ensure that the
campaign is well-rounded, relevant, and can reach as many people as possible.
We encourage the public to visit the campaign website www.getmoneysmartbahamas.com/, for
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
information that will be updated at regular intervals throughout the year.
We also encourage the public to follow Get Money Smart Bahamas on Facebook and Twitter and
to join the conversation online using the hashtag #getmoneysmartbahamas.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
