Philip R Lane: The macro-financial environment in Ireland in spring
2018
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Institute  for
International and European Affairs (IIEA), Dublin, 9 March 2018.
Introduction
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at the IIEA. It is timely to provide an assessment
of the current macro-financial environment in Ireland, especially since the Spring is an important
planning period for both public and private decision makers. For instance, the government is due
to submit its Stability Programme Update next month, while households and firms are making
consumption and investment decisions, including in relation to the housing market.
This  speech  has  two  parts.  In  the  first  part,  I  will  review  the  current  prospects  for  the  Irish
economy.  The  ongoing  recovery  in  the  economy  means  that  the  prospect  of  a  return  to  full
employment is in sight, even if there remain significant downside risks. Accordingly, in this part, I
will also discuss the counter-cyclical role of fiscal policy, which is especially relevant when the
business cycle is not being driven by credit shocks but, rather, by other factors.
In the second part, I will turn to the housing market. I will first address the recent evolution of
house prices and discuss the role of our mortgage measures in mitigating the risks associated
with fluctuations in the property sector. Keeping to the topic of mortgages, I will then turn to our
policy stance in relation to the management of non-performing loans (NPLs). Finally, motivated
by what we have learned from the Tracker Mortgage Examination and the wave of international
evidence  on  mis-conduct  scandals,  I  will  explain  the  priority  we  are  placing  on  improving  the
conduct of regulated firms. 
Current economic prospects
Let me begin with an overview of the euro area. Based on new staff forecasts, the Governing
Council at yesterday’s monetary policy meeting re-affirmed its assessment that the current and
near-term economic prospects are favourable. Area-wide output grew by 2.5 percent in 2017,
with  average  growth  of  2  per  cent  expected  over  2018-2020.  By  2020,  it  is  projected  that  the
area-wide unemployment rate will have declined to 7.2 percent, from its 2013 peak of 12 percent
and its 2017 value of 9.1 percent. By 2020, it is also projected that the inflation rate will have
climbed to 1.7 percent. These positive developments are supported by the broad-based growth
of the global economy.
The European expansion is also supported by the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy. At
yesterday’s  meeting,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  keep  the  key  ECB  interest  rates
unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at their present levels for an extended period
of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. Regarding non-standard monetary
policy measures, we confirmed that our net asset purchases, at the current monthly pace of €30
billion, are intended to run until the end of September 2018, or beyond, if necessary, and in any
case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent
with its inflation aim.
The  Irish  economy  meanwhile  continues  to  perform  well.  In  addition  to  the  positive  external
environment,  the  broad  recovery  in  the  various  components  of  underlying  domestic  demand
(private consumption, government spending and investment) underpins the expansion.
Improving labour market conditions indicate that the economy is moving closer to a position of full
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
employment.  Employment  now  stands  at  2.2  million,  which  is  17.4  percent  above  the  2012
trough.  Of  those  employed,  more  are  working  full-time  and  the  average  work  week  has
lengthened from 34.9 hours to 36.7 hours.
The broad-based nature of the expansion has been a welcome feature, with employment and
output increasing across most sectors. Total employment is returning to pre-crisis levels but the
composition of employment shows more balance, with approximately 1 in 16 persons employed
in construction compared to 1 in 9 back in 2007.
We expect the unemployment rate to decline further to an average of 5.2 per cent next year,
down from 6.7 per cent last year and the 2012 peak of 15.5 percent. Moreover, measures of the
potential labour supply show that there may be more labour market slack and therefore more
capacity in the economy than indicated by the headline unemployment rate. 
As the economy gets closer to full employment, wages should rise at a faster pace. While the
latest  data  show  a  modest  pick-up  in  the  growth  rate  of  average  hourly  earnings  during  the
second half of last year, our forecasts are for further increases during this year and next. With
inflation  expected  to  remain  modest  over  the  next  two  years,  rising  wages  will  translate  into
higher real incomes and purchasing power for households.
These  projections  indicate  the  current  economic  prospects  for  the  Irish  economy  are  quite
robust. These forecasts are made based on the available data and our analysis of the factors
currently shaping the Irish economy. At the same time, it is important to recognise the intrinsic
volatility  of  the  Irish  economy,  given  its  high  openness  and  extensive  trade,  technological  and
financial  linkages  to  other  economies.  As  such,  unexpected  events  can  trigger  upside  or
downside  revisions  to  our  forecasts,  especially  in  relation  to  the  longer-term  path  for  the
economy.  It  follows  that  public  and  private  decision  makers  should  ensure  that  choices  are
robust to unanticipated outcomes, rather than putting an excessive and unrealistic reliance on
our central projections.
Let me discuss a few of these tail risk factors. In terms of common international risks, a reversal
in the benign conditions that have characterised the financial markets of advanced economies in
recent  years  could  spill  over  into  the  real  economy,  if  it  led  to  a  revision  in  investment  and
consumption plans. While the adjustment in equity markets has been limited, a more pervasive
and persistent re-assessment of future prospects or a shift in the distribution of risks would be
disruptive through a variety of mechanisms.
For the euro area, it remains important to improve the resilience of the monetary union, through
appropriate  national  macroeconomic  policies,  the  completion  of  banking  union  and  making
progress in capital markets union. The European Union is currently considering a further range of
deepening measures, which will be discussed at the June European Council.
For  Ireland,  the  location  decisions  of  multinational  firms  are  an  important  driver  of  overall
economic  prospects.  While  the  recent  US  tax  reform  has  some  clear  implications  for  the
treasury  operations  of  US  multinationals,  the  net  impact  on  geographical  distribution  of  the
productive activities of these firms is not clear, given the complex, multi-dimensional nature of
the new tax law. More broadly, it will be important to assess the implications of other possible
changes in international tax systems, including in relation to the taxation of digital activities. A
related  international  risk  is  the  threat  to  the  international  trading  system  if  there  were  a
widespread adoption of (explicit or implicit) protectionist measures.
A persistent shift in the dollar-euro rates would also be an influential factor in determining the
location decisions of US multinational firms. While the current dollar-euro rate appears broadly in
line with fundamentals, a more substantial and prolonged depreciation of the dollar would be a
material influence in determining future location decisions.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Taken  together,  these  trade,  taxation  and  currency  concerns  mean  that  US-related  downside
risks require continuous monitoring and reinforce the importance of making decisions that are
robust to such adverse outcomes.
Turning  to  Brexit,  any  increase  in  trade  frictions  between  the  UK  and  EU27  will  generate  a
reduction in long-term living standards, compared to the counterfactual of maintaining the status
quo.  So  far,  the  main  channel  by  which  Brexit  has  had  a  macroeconomic  impact  has  been
through the 11.8 percent depreciation of Sterling against the euro since the referendum. This has
affected exporters to the UK but also contributed to a decline in good prices in Ireland, given the
important role of imports from the UK in the Irish consumption basket. However, the recovery in
domestic demand and the positive global economic conditions has allowed the Irish economy to
absorb the impact of Brexit so far.
As March 2019 draws closer, the resolution of the current uncertainty about the nature of future
UK-EU relations has the potential to generate further economic and financial volatility, especially
if there is an increasing likelihood of a harder version of Brexit. At a macroeconomic level, Ireland
is especially exposed compared to other EU27 countries, especially if there is a downward shift
in  the  prospects  for  UK  economic  growth  or  a  further  sustained  depreciation  in  the  value  of
Sterling.
Furthermore, if there is a substantial shift in the regime governing UK-EU trade, there will be a
costly diversion of resources to setting up new logistics and trade-processing systems. If the
costs of importing and exporting go up (including extra transit time and additional administrative
burdens), the range of imported goods available to Irish consumers and firms may shrink, while
domestic firms will find it more difficult to access export markets.
Counter-cyclical fiscal policy
Let me now turn to the debate about the appropriate fiscal strategy for Ireland.
A balancing act is required. In one direction, the accumulation of good news about the trend path
for  the  Irish  economy  calls  for  the  political  system  to  make  proportionate  decisions  about  the
paths for public spending and taxation, given the extra fiscal capacity to meet social preferences
for increased provision of public services, increased transfers, expanded public investment or an
adjustment in the tax burden. In the other direction, the downside risks that I have just discussed
(together with the still-high level of public debt) call for a prudent approach that recognises the
importance of building fiscal buffers during good times in order to enable more vigorous counter-
cyclical fiscal interventions in the event of a future economic downturn.
It  is  important  to  emphasise  that  fiscal  prudence  can  be  fully  reconciled  with  ambitious  fiscal
plans. However, it is necessary to recognise the genuine trade offs that exist, especially if the
labour market returns to full employment.
For  instance,  additions  to  the  public  capital  stock  can  be  expected  to  raise  the  productive
capacity of the economy and/or assist in the attainment of social objectives over the medium
term. However, the process of public investment acts to raise aggregate demand in the near
term.  A  stepping  up  in  public  investment  under  conditions  of  full  employment  may  require
counter-vailing  measures  to  limit  the  risk  of  costly  over-heating  dynamics.  Alternatively,
stretching out a planned public investment programme over a longer horizon can limit pressures
on the absorptive capacity of the economy.
In this spirit, it is welcome that the recently-published National Development Plan envisages a
phased approach to increasing the scale of public investment towards its medium-target of about
4 percent of GNI*. A targeted approach over the medium term can address the potential cyclical
pressures associated with surges in public investment and help to ensure that private investment
is not crowded out. Research for Ireland shows that when government investment is financed in
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
a  budget-neutral  way,  particularly  when  the  economy  is  operating  close  to  full  capacity,  the
benefits of increasing public  capital  can  be  achieved  without  the  short-run  costs  of  increased
marginal costs for firms and a deterioration in competitiveness.
The housing market
Turning  to  the  second  part  of  my  speech,  we  published  our  comprehensive  analysis  of
developments  in  the  housing  market  as  part  of  the  annual  review  of  our  macroprudential
framework last November. In relation to the level of house prices, our conclusion was that the
data looked broadly in line with the values of the fundamental factors typically included in models
of house prices. Of course, it is important to emphasise always that these fundamental factors
(such as high rents) are not indicators of a sustainable or socially-acceptable housing sector but
rather just capture the most influential market forces in determining house prices.
An important finding is that the evidence does not support a central role for credit dynamics in the
current evolution of house prices. The most recent meeting of our macroprudential measures
committee  (MMC)  on  19th  January  affirmed  that  aggregate  credit  conditions  remain  subdued,
even if the pace of new mortgage lending has picked up.
Our analysis that house prices have moved broadly in line with fundamentals is fully consistent
with a material risk of a reversal in house prices: buying a house is certainly not a one-way bet. In
particular, international and domestic factors may trigger fundamentals-driven corrections in the
housing market. At the international level, the risk factors that I discussed earlier may generate
higher  mortgage  funding  costs  and/or  a  downward  revision  in  the  prospects  for  income  and
employment  growth  in  Ireland. At  the  domestic  level,  a  desirable  expansion  in  the  supply  of
housing would put downward pressure both on rents and house prices.
As  the  national  macroprudential  authority,  we  are  committed  to  ensuring  that  the  domestic
financial system remains resilient in the event of a reversal in house prices. The ceilings we have
placed on loan-to-income (LTI) and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios on mortgage loans are essential in
limiting  systemic  financial  risk  emanating  from  the  mortgage  market.  By  guarding  against
excessive mortgage debt at the household level, these measures also serve a vital consumer
protection  function  while  also  limiting  the  risk  that  a  house  price  reversal  is  amplified  at  the
macroeconomic level through deleveraging pressures on over-extended households. In relation
to  the  financial  health  of  the  banking  system,  the  mortgage  measures  are  reinforced  by  the
higher risk weights associated with mortgage lending in Ireland under our capital requirements,
together with the capital buffers we impose on systemically-important institutions.
In discussing the risks associated with the housing market, it is essential also to maintain our
focus on the legacy issues from the crisis. I next turn to discussing the management of NPLs,
before turning to the financial conduct concerns that have been brought into sharp relief by the
mis-handling of tracker mortgages across the Irish banking system.
Non-performing loans
The Central Bank’s work on mortgage arrears and NPLs spans its financial stability, prudential
supervision  and  consumer  protection  mandates.  Within  the  remit  of  the  Central  Bank’s
responsibilities,  the  approach  to  mortgage  arrears  resolution  is  focused  on  ensuring  the  fair
treatment  of  borrowers  through  a  strong  consumer  protection  framework,  while  ensuring  that
banks  are  sufficiently  capitalised,  hold  sufficiently  conservative  provisions,  and  have  the
appropriate strategies and operational capacities to resolve arrears.
While  there  has  been  progress  in  recent  years  in  reducing  the  stock  of  NPLs  in  Ireland  and
across the euro area, significant challenges remain. In the absence of pro-active management,
the remaining NPL stocks may adversely affect the medium-term supply of bank credit and pose
financial  stability  risks  through  elevated  uncertainty  regarding  the  true  health  of  the  banking
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
system.  Importantly,  these  risks  render  banks  especially  vulnerable  in  the  event  of  a  future
downturn  in  the  economy,  such  that  tackling  the  stock  of  NPLs  during  the  current  benign
conditions would improve the resilience of the Irish and European banking system in relation to
future adverse shocks. For these reasons, addressing the volume of NPLs has therefore been a
priority for the Central Bank for the best part of a decade.
It is important to appreciate that banks can resolve NPLs through multiple channels, including
workouts,  restructures  (including  accounting  write-offs),  foreclosures  and  sales.  Under  the
current  ECB  guidance,  banks  are  required  to  define  their  own  NPL  reduction  strategies  and
choose the most suitable solution for each relevant portfolio. It is up to banks to define realistic
but ambitious timeframes and appropriate options for each portfolio. The Central Bank and the
Single Supervisory Mechanism do not have a preference for any particular work-out modality for
NPLs. This is decided upon and implemented by the executives and boards of banks.
The sale of loan portfolios is therefore just one option available to banks but can play a role in
mitigating systemic risk, since a wider distribution of loan ownership facilitates loss sharing in the
event  of  a  future  downturn  in  the  economy.  In  cases  where  banks  choose  to  sell  their  loans
portfolios,  our  position  is  that  the  protections  travel  with  the  loans  and  that  borrowers  are
protected in accordance with the consumer protection framework. The 2015 Credit Servicing Act
ensures  that  relevant  borrowers  whose  loans  are  sold  are  afforded  the  regulatory  protections
they had prior to the sale, including those protections provided by the Central Bank’s Consumer
Protection Code, the Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears and the SME Regulations. Under the
Credit Servicing Act, if an unregulated entity buys loans from an original lender, then the loans
must be serviced by a ‘credit servicing firm’ that is authorised and regulated by the Central Bank.
Looking at the evolution of mortgage arrears in Ireland, it is clear that the system has been much
more effective in achieving sustainable solutions in relation to early-stage arrears cases than in
addressing  long-term  arrears.  Whilst  sustainable  solutions  can  be  put  in  place  quickly  for
engaged borrowers that are in early arrears, the resolution of long-term arrears (the large so-
called 720 days-past-due mortgage NPL group) has been a particular challenge. As at Q3 2017,
16 percent of mortgages on owner-occupied homes were in restructured arrangements. There is
a stock of 120,000 restructures as of Q3 2017, and 87 percent were meeting the terms of the
restructured agreements. However, notwithstanding the large volume of restructuring activity, 10
per cent of the value of all private dwelling home (PDH) loans as at Q3 2017 were in arrears, with
7 per cent of the total value of PDH cases (or 31,624 cases) in arrears more than 720 days.
The ability to acquire the underlying collateral is the cornerstone of a secured lending market.
Some level of repossessions should be considered normal in a functioning system. Looking at
these patterns in a comparative context across the euro area, the high volume of cases and the
extended timelines associated with repossession proceedings for residential property indicate an
important challenge for private debt resolution. Since Q3 2009, 8,195 PDH properties resulted in
loss of ownership with 2,721 resulting in repossession from a court order and 5,474 properties
surrendered voluntarily.
Therefore,  it  is  clear  that  NPLs  have  been  reduced  through  restructuring  and  re-engagement
between  lender  and  borrower,  with  both  banks  and  non-banks  pursuing  restructuring  where
possible.  Importantly,  the  management  of  arrears  has  been  within  a  policy  and  regulatory
framework  that  provides  robust  protections  for  households.  Given  NPLs  cause  such
considerable distress to borrowers and negatively affect their ability to contribute to the economy,
recent reforms of the insolvency framework are important to give borrowers a second chance.
Financial conduct
Let  me  now  turn  to  another  dimension  of  the  mortgage  market:  the  necessity  of  careful  and
correct conduct by lenders in managing each customer account. A mortgage is by far the most
important financial obligation for households and customers should be able to rely on each lender
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
to act in the best interests of consumers in the handling of mortgage accounts.
The tracker mortgage scandal has had a negative impact on public trust and confidence in our
lending institutions, which were already fragile in the aftermath of the economic crisis. It is clear
from  the  Central  Bank’s  Tracker  Mortgage  Examination  that  customer  interests  were  not
sufficiently protected or prioritised by our lending institutions.
By the end of last year, the Tracker Mortgage Examination has resulted in a pay out of €316m to
affected  customers.  This  bill  will  rise  as  the  rest  of  the  33,700  customers  that  were  denied
tracker products or charged the wrong rates receive redress and compensation. Through our
regulatory  interventions,  we  will  ensure  that  all  affected  customers  will  receive  appropriate
redress  and  compensation.  In  that  regard,  we  will  provide  an  update  on  the  progress  of  the
Examination in April, based on end-March data.
More  broadly,  the  Examination  raises  serious  questions  about  the  culture  in  our  lending
institutions and the extent to which the boards and senior management of those institutions are
really  living  up  to  their  promises  of  putting  the  customer  at  the  heart  of  their  business.  In  the
years  since  the  financial  crisis,  there  have  been  significant  misconduct  issues  identified  at
financial institutions both internationally and domestically. Amid concern that such misconduct
can threaten to undermine the safety of financial institutions, there is an emerging trend towards
more intensive regulatory focus on governance and conduct issues.
For  example,  the  recent  widespread  consumer  abuses  and  other  compliance  breakdowns  at
Wells  Fargo  prompted  the  then  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  to
announce earlier this year she would restrict the growth of the bank until it sufficiently improves
its governance and controls. In related fashion, the Governor of the Bank of England remarked
last  year  that  repeated  episodes  of  misconduct  have  called  the  social  licence  of  finance  into
question and recommended greater focus on improving the culture at financial services firms.
We are undertaking behaviour and culture assessments of each of the five main lenders – AIB,
Bank  of  Ireland,  Ulster  Bank,  PTSB  and  KBC  -  and  will  report  our  findings  to  the  Minister  for
Finance in June.
This  assessment  will  be  underpinned  by  the  Central  Bank’s  enhanced  Consumer  Protection
Risk Assessment  model  which  helps  us  determine  how  financial  firms  identify  and  manage
consumer  risks,  including  the  risk  that  a  firm’s  culture  does  not  promote  and  support  the
protection of consumers. We are working with the Dutch Central Bank, recognised leaders in the
supervision of behaviour and culture, which will support us in the inspections.
This review will shape our future supervisory and engagement strategy. Depending on what we
uncover,  we  may  require  certain  mitigating  actions  at  our  lending  institutions.  These  could
include, for example, requiring the lenders to conduct an annual internal audit of culture; requiring
the boards of the lenders to set up ethics sub-committees; and requiring that incentive schemes
do not reward inappropriate behaviour towards customers.
It is critical that regulators have a full toolkit to promote a culture of ethical compliance by firms
and the people working in those firms. We have already recommended in our submission to the
Law  Reform  Commission  the  adoption  of  reforms  that  strengthen  the  accountability  of  senior
personnel in regulated entities.
Getting the culture right is important not just for consumers but also for shareholders, who are
faced with the substantial costs of redressing misconduct. In relation to the Tracker Mortgage
Examination,  the  main  lenders  have  already  made  combined  provisions  of  about  €900m  in
respect of the Examination, broken down as approximately €600m for redress and compensation
and €300m for costs.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  expect  the  boards  and  senior  management  at  our  lending  institutions  to  take  the  lead  in
rebuilding  trust  with  their  customers,  their  shareholders  and  the  wider  public  by  ensuring  that
they do not focus on short-term gain at the expense of the long-term interests of the business, its
customers and shareholders.
Conclusions
Let me conclude. In this speech, I have conveyed the views of the Central Bank on some of the
key economic and regulatory issues that loom large in our 2018 work programme. In relation to
macro-financial  prospects,  we  welcome  the  ongoing  flow  of  strong  economic  data,  which  is
helping Ireland to move beyond the legacy of the crisis. At the same time, we think that Ireland is
especially exposed to some prominent international tail risk factors. Managing this high-growth
but high-volatility profile is a major challenge for fiscal policy.
Turning to the housing market, the same analysis helps to explain why the recovery in house
prices has been substantial but that, at the same time, there are material fundamentals-related
downside risks. We view our macroprudential policy framework as vitally important in managing
these risks.
In addition, we are fully committed to ensuring that the high NPL stock that remains a legacy of
the crisis is worked through in order to build systemic resilience in advance of the next downturn.
Our  mission  to  safeguard  stability  and  protect  consumers  means  that  we  are  also  intent  on
improving  the  conduct  of  lenders,  including  through  the  completion  of  the  Tracker  Mortgage
Examination and our current work on the culture of banking in this country.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
