  A  public lecture by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African  Reserve Bank, 
at the Nelson Mandela University  
 Port Elizabeth 
1 August  2018 
 Inequality  and monetary  policy  in South Africa 
 Introduction 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. 
 Debates about inequality have kicked into a higher gear in recent years – 
in  academia,  in  policy  circles,  and  in  the  broader  political  space.  For 
central banks, especially those in  advanced economies, inequality has 
become an inescapable issue, and experimental policies like quantitative 
easing are being blamed for making it worse.  
 In South Africa, we have had very high inequality for a very long time, so 
for us, these debates are not new. Nonetheless, there are new ways of 
thinking and new data to help us understand the issue better.  
 Today,  I  would  like  to  make  a  couple  of  points  to  clear  up  some 
misconceptions  that  people  may  have  about  inequality  and,  more 
specifically,  about  the  interactions  between  inequality  and  monetary 
policy.  
 Page 1 of 15 
 First: although everyone knows that inequality within countries has been 
rising, inequality between countries has actually been coming down. This 
is thanks to sustained growth in emerging markets, which are not as far 
behind the rich countries as they used to be.  
 Second: in South Africa, inequality has been persistently high – but the 
composition  of  inequality has  changed. Inequality  among  black  South 
Africans has increased since the end of apartheid, so that South Africa’s 
inequality story is now about class as much as it is about race.  
 Third: people often  don’t know  where their family  fits in  South Africa’s 
income distribution, chiefly because people who are relatively better off 
often do not realise how much poorer most other South Africans are.  
 And  that  helps  explain  my  fourth  point,  which  is  that  the  relationship 
between inequality and monetary policy does not work the way  people 
usually think.   
 Lower interest rates typically worsen inequality.  
 I’m going to spend a large portion of my speech today explaining the four 
most important channels through which monetary policy affects inequality 
– namely inflation, borrowing costs, asset prices and employment coupled 
with growth – to show how this works.  
   Page 2 of 15 
 Inequality at the global level 
 But let me start with the global environment.  
 Over the past few decades, global inequality has either risen sharply or 
begun to moderate, depending on how you look at it. Inequality has risen 
in the sense that inequality within countries is often higher than it used to 
be. As Thomas Pikkety and others have shown us, for example, inequality 
in the United States (US) has been rising since the 1970s, and is now at 
levels last seen nearly a hundred years ago, in the 1920s.1 Similar trends 
are visible in many other countries.  
 This increase in  inequality has captured many  headlines, and has also 
been cited as an explanation for political developments like Brexit or the 
outcome  of  the  last  US  presidential election.  This rise  in  inequality is 
usually attributed to changes in technology, productivity and the skills of 
workers, where  the  return on  higher and  newer  skills  has  accelerated 
faster than the returns to less-skilled workers. 
 However, inequality has also fallen since the 1970s – if  we look at  the 
gaps between countries. Fifty years ago, the gap between rich countries 
and poor countries was very clear. Nowadays, there are a lot more middle-
income countries. There are also many more rich and middle-class people 
in countries that used to be almost universally poor. To take one example: 
fifty years ago, even rich people in China were typically worse off than 
poor people in the US.  
                                                             
1 See Capital in the twenty-first century by Thomas Piketty (2013).  
 Page 3 of 15 
That  is  no  longer  true:  the  rich  in  China  are  now  rich  from  a  global 
perspective, thanks in part to several decades of strong economic growth. 
The same thing is now happening in India, which is also catching up with 
richer countries because its  economy  is  growing at  around 8%  a  year 
(while advanced economies are growing at around 2%).  
 This decline in worldwide inequality is a big change, reversing a trend of 
steadily  higher  inequality  between  countries  that  has  held  since  the 
Industrial Revolution.2 The reduction in inequality is driven by some  big 
trends: better economic policymaking, growth in world trade, the spread 
of technology and finance, and more education. 
 However, the fact that people in poorer countries have been catching up 
with those in richer countries doesn’t mean  that the world has become 
equal. In fact, the world as a whole is probably more unequal than almost 
any  one  country  on  its  own.  For  instance, while  there  are  now  more 
middle-class Indians than ever before, the country has also become more 
unequal internally.  
 Estimates suggest that the Gini coefficient of the whole world is around 
0.7. To put that in perspective, a relatively equal country like Sweden has 
a Gini coefficient a bit below 0.3; the coefficient for the US was around 
0.35 in 1950 and is a little over 0.4 today; Brazil is at 0.6. South Africa is 
around 0.7, which makes it one of the most unequal countries in the world, 
and certainly the most unequal large country.  
                                                               
2 See Global inequality by Branko Milanovic (2016), especially Chapter 3, titled ‘Inequality among 
countries: from Karl Marx to Frantz Fanon, and then back to Marx?’. 
 Page 4 of 15 
Inequality in South Africa 
 South  Africans  know  that  theirs  is  an  extremely  unequal  country. 
However, there  are some  aspects of  this  inequality which  are not  well 
understood. One is that inequality is no longer as completely determined 
by race as it used to be. Historically, of course, inequality in South Africa 
was  fundamentally a  racial story,  with  access  to  economic  as  well  as 
political rights and opportunities based on skin colour. Since the end of 
apartheid, however, this has begun to change.3  
 Inequality within the African portion of society has risen, as some black 
people have moved into the middle and upper classes while others have 
stayed very poor. As a result, inequality among black people is higher than 
for the other racial categories in South Africa.4 The Gini coefficient among 
Africans is above 0.6 – about the same as Botswana, and close to Lesotho 
and Swaziland – countries which are less racially diverse than we are but 
still very unequal. 
 Another  aspect  of  inequality  that  people  tend  to  get  wrong  is  the 
contribution of monetary policy. I  am  often struck by  the comment  that 
higher inflation reduces inequality by  benefiting poorer South Africans. 
The core of this argument is that higher inflation creates more jobs that go 
to poorer people.  
                                                              
3 Leibrandt et al. (2010), Employment and inequality outcomes in South Africa, p. 21, available at 
https://www.oecd.org/employment/emp/45282868.pdf. 
4 As of 2016 data, the Gini coefficient for the black population in South Africa was 0.65. It was 
0.58 for coloured South Africans, 0.56 for Indians / Asians, and 0.51 for whites. The number for South 
Africa as a whole was 0.68. 
 Page 5 of 15 
Another  part  of  the  argument  is  that  –  because most  households are 
highly indebted, and because poorer households are the most indebted – 
interest  rate  cuts  will  disproportionately improve  the  welfare  of  those 
people.   
 I  would  like  to  assess those  arguments,  as  well  as  a  couple  of  other 
monetary policy channels that are less discussed, in an effort to get at a 
deeper  understanding of  how  monetary  policy  affects  inequality. I  will 
discuss the  four  main  channels through which monetary  policy  affects 
inequality: borrowing costs, asset prices, employment  and growth, and 
finally  inflation.  I  will  demonstrate  that  a  decision  to  go  for  a  loose 
monetary policy is likely to worsen inequality and make it more extreme.  
 Interest rates and borrowing costs 
 What South African households borrow for, and at what rate of interest, 
depends  mostly  on  their  jobs  and  income.  We  can  break  these 
households down,  very  roughly,  into  two  groups:  the  top  20%  of  the 
income distribution and the bottom 80%. A team at the University of Cape 
Town has built an online Income Comparison Tool which tells you where 
your household actually fits in, and which I suggest everyone should try.5  
 To  give  away  the  punchline, however:  if  your  family  income  exceeds 
R173 000 a year, or about R14 400 a month, then you are in the top 20% 
of households. Getting into the top 10% of the income distribution requires 
                                                             
5 See http://www.saldru.uct.ac.za/income-comparison-tool/.  
 Page 6 of 15 
just  under  R270 000  a  year,  or  R22 500  a  month.6  The  average 
government salary is R335 000 a year, which is within the top 10%.7  
 Compare those income levels to a household in the poorest 10% of South 
Africans,  which  is  getting  less  than  R17 721  per  year.  That  is  under 
R1 500 per month. That’s roughly a tenth of what a family just within the 
top 20% is getting.  
 These income differences play out in the amount of debt households can 
take out and the interest rates they pay. 
 When the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) moves the repurchase rate 
(or  repo  rate),  households  immediately  see  the  difference  in  their 
mortgage  payments  or  their  car  payments.  But  what  does  this  do  for 
inequality? The reflex answer is that, in South Africa, there are both rich 
and poor people, and the poor borrow from  the  rich, so higher interest 
rates increase inequality while lower rates, or looser policy, reduce it. But 
this is misleading.  
 South Africans in  every income bracket tend to have a lot of debt.  The 
National Credit Regulator reports that there were a bit more than 25 million 
‘credit  active’  people  in  South  Africa  at  the  end  of  last  year,  which 
compares  with  around  16 million  people  who  have  some  sort  of 
employment.  
                                                              
6 These decile figures are used by Statistics South Africa for the consumer price index. 
See http://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/P0141/P0141April2018.pdf, p. 10. The precise threshold 
for decile 10 is R296 903 and for decile 9 it is R173 023. 
7 See National Treasury (2017), Medium Term Budget Policy Statement, Annexure B, p. 62, available 
at http://www.treasury.gov.za/documents/MTBPS/2017/mtbps/Annexure%20B.pdf. 
 Page 7 of 15 
However, South Africans borrow for different things through different parts 
of the financial system. Most mortgages for homes, and vehicle loans, are 
taken out by that 20% of households earning the most  income that we 
talked about earlier. Lower down the income ladder, the composition of 
debt changes. Mortgages and vehicle loans more  or less disappear. In 
their place, we see more high-cost debt, like store cards or informal loans.  
 These kinds of debts carry much  higher interest rates. Crucially, these 
higher-rate debts are also much less closely tied to monetary policy. When 
we  move  the  repo  rate,  which  is  the  rate  at  which  commercial  banks 
borrow  from  the  central  bank  to  fund  their  reserve  requirements,  the 
decision has a direct and strong effect on the prime rate, which is the rate 
at which commercial banks lend to their safest customers. This, in turn, 
changes the  loans  that  are  tied  to  prime,  such  as  mortgage  loans  or 
vehicle loans. To put numbers on this, we currently have the repo at 6.5%. 
The prime rate is at 10%. The average interest rate on a new mortgage is 
also 10%, and the average rate on a vehicle loan is almost 12%. 
 As you can see if we reduce the repo rate by 25 or 50 basis points, people 
with mortgages and vehicle loans get a nice saving. But the same repo 
rate move has little or no effect on a microloan, which has an interest rate 
of roughly 30%, or an informal loan, at an even higher rate. As  a result, 
there is almost no relationship between the repo rate and the interest rate 
on high-cost debt.   
 Put  these  two  facts  together,  and  we  get  an  interesting  implication: 
changes in monetary policy have a much stronger impact on the top 20% 
of  households than  they  do  on  the  rest  of  the  population. That is  not 
because  poorer  households  don’t  borrow.  Rather,  it  is  because  they 
 Page 8 of 15 
borrow at interest rates that are shaped by factors other than monetary 
policy, including higher costs of offering loans, higher risk of default, and 
lack of information about income. When interest rates go down, therefore, 
the more highly indebted and wealthier households save much more on 
interest costs than the poorer households do borrowing at microloan rates. 
This, by itself, worsens inequality. 
 Interest rates and asset prices 
 Now consider asset prices – a channel which is often poorly understood. 
As  with  borrowing costs, people tend to  think that higher interest rates 
reward rich people who have savings. Again, this intuition is misleading. 
In  fact, much  of the global debate about inequality and central banking 
rests on the exact opposite claim: that very low interest rates exacerbate 
inequality.8 This is because lower interest rates raise asset prices, and an 
increase in asset prices benefits those people who already have assets.  
 We have seen this play out in advanced economies following the global 
financial crisis: as  central banks  cut  interest rates as  low  as  possible, 
house prices, equity markets  and  bond prices all  soared. The winners 
were the people who had already invested in those assets. Those who 
lost out were younger people who couldn’t afford expensive homes, as 
well as savers who had their money in interest-bearing accounts. 
                                                               
8 For example, see Bridges and Thomas (2012), ‘The impact of QE on the UK economy – some 
supportive monetarist arithmetic’, Working Paper No. 442, available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/working-paper/2012/the-impact-of-qe-on-the-uk-
economy-some-supportive-monetarist-
arithmetic.pdf?la=en&hash=81412E5177BCE802F2D37ECF42D20144EEB9513D.   
 Page 9 of 15 
As you can see, what really matters for the asset price / inequality channel 
is  the  distribution  of  wealth.  Who  has  assets?  In  many  advanced 
economies, the middle classes tend to have substantial stocks of housing 
wealth, even if most stocks and bonds are owned by richer people. This 
means that higher asset prices don’t necessarily raise inequality, because 
enough people have assets to start with.9  
 In South Africa, the situation is different: most assets are owned by people 
at the top of the income ladder. As one researcher has commented, ‘10% 
of the population owns more than 90% of all wealth while 80% have no 
wealth to speak of; a propertied middle class does not exist’.10 For this 
reason, a  low interest rate policy that  pushes up asset prices will  only 
magnify inequality. This may also explain why some asset managers are 
opposed  to  interest  rate  increases  and  publish  angry  articles  in 
newspapers when we decide to raise rates. 
 Interest rates, employment and growth 
 In  fairness,  asset  managers  aside,  most  people  who  argue  for  lower 
interest rates do not really take these effects into consideration. Instead, 
they are focused on employment. As they rightly observe, reducing South 
Africa’s  extraordinarily  high  unemployment  rate  is  crucial  to  fighting 
poverty and moderating inequality.  
                                                             
9 As argued, for instance, by Josh Bivens (2015) in Gauging the impact of the Fed on inequality during 
the Great Recession, available at https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2016/06/Josh_Bivens_Inequality_FINAL.pdf.  
10 Available at 
http://www.redi3x3.org/sites/default/files/Orthofer%202016%20REDI3x3%20Working%20Paper%201
5%20-%20Wealth%20inequality.pdf, pp. 3-4. 
 Page 10 of 15 
The problem for us at the central bank, however, is that interest rates are 
not the right tool for addressing South Africa’s unemployment problem, 
and especially not the joblessness among the poorest households.  
 In undergraduate economics classes, students are usually taught simple 
models  in  which  there  is  a  short-term  trade-off  between  inflation  and 
employment – the so-called ‘Phillips curve’. One explanation of the Phillips 
curve relationship is that lower interest rates create more demand, which 
in  turn  creates more  jobs  but  also  more  inflation, hence  the  trade-off. 
Another explanation is that higher inflation destroys the value of people’s 
wages, so they become cheaper to hire and employment rises.11  
 The empirical evidence for the Phillips curve, however, is just not there – 
as researchers have repeatedly reminded us.12 In fact, South Africa tends 
to get stronger economic growth and more job creation when inflation is 
low,  in  part  because  of  demand  effects  but  mostly  from  stronger 
productivity  growth  and  investment.  It  is  the  wisdom  of  the  inflation-
targeting  framework:  that  we  focus  on  something  within  our  control, 
something which is important for balanced and sustainable growth over 
the long term.  
                                                              
11 As discussed in Banerjee et al. (2006), Why has unemployment risen in the new South Africa?, 
p. 6, available at https://www.hks.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/centers/cid/files/publications/faculty-
working-papers/134.pdf. 
12 Fedderke and Liu (2016), ‘Inflation in South Africa: an assessment of alternative inflation models’, 
South African Reserve Bank Working Paper 16/03, available at 
http://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/7275/WP603.pdf. As 
these authors observe: “A core feature of the South African empirical studies has been a resolute 
search for a Phillips curve type of trade-off between prices and demand-side inflationary pressure 
associated with real economic activity. A second constant that emerges from the empirical literature 
is the consistent failure to successfully support the Phillips curve trade-off.” See also Vermeulen 
(2017), ‘Inflation and unemployment in South Africa: is the Phillips curve still dead?’, Southern African 
Business Review, Vol. 21, available at 
https://www.ajol.info/index.php/sabr/article/viewFile/154882/144463. 
 Page 11 of 15 
Targeting employment  and  not  inflation  could  worsen  inequality  even 
more, especially if we were specifically trying to target employment for the 
poorest  South  Africans.  This is  because  poorer  households are  more 
disconnected from labour markets. In fact, as data from Statistics South 
Africa  tell  us,  jobs  are  not  even  the  primary  source  of  income  for  the 
poorest 30% of  households in South Africa.  Instead, these households 
rely heavily on grants. For the poorest 10%, which is around 1.3 million 
households, 60.9% of income is from grants and just 13.9% from work.13  
 People tend to use the term ‘working class’ to mean poor people, but the 
poorest third of  South Africans  mostly  are  not working. Joblessness is 
fundamentally a structural problem, explained by factors such as quality 
of  education, skills  shortages and  settlement  patterns –  people  aren’t 
living near jobs. These are not problems that monetary policy can solve. 
 If we did have the ability to create jobs generally, that would be a powerful 
tool for reducing inequality. But in fact, as a  central bank, our ability to 
create jobs for anyone is  weak in  the short run and non-existent in  the 
long run. If we were in a skills-rich country like the US, with flexible labour 
markets, there would be a respectable argument that low interest rates 
could help ease inequality by bringing down unemployment caused by a 
recession.14 But  that’s  not  the  economy  we’ve  got,  and  that’s  not  the 
labour market we’ve got, so this isn’t an option for monetary policy here. 
                                                              
13 See table 3.7 of the 2014/15 Living Conditions Survey, p. 18, available at 
http://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/P0310/P03102014.pdf. 
14 See, for instance, Ben Bernanke (2015), Monetary policy and inequality, available at 
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2015/06/01/monetary-policy-and-inequality/.  
14 As discussed in Banerjee et al. (2006), Why has unemployment risen in the new South Africa?, 
p. 6, available at https://www.hks.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/centers/cid/files/publications/faculty-
working-papers/134.pdf. 
 Page 12 of 15 
Interest rates and inflation 
 The final channel I’d like to discuss is inflation. Inflation is a problem from 
an inequality perspective because it tends to hurt poor people more. One 
reason for this is that poorer people have less choice over spending. Poor 
people’s consumption baskets are mostly taken up with a few basic items, 
especially staple foodstuffs and shelter. Richer people buy many  more 
kinds of things, so they have more room to adjust away from items that 
get too expensive.15  
 A  second reason why inflation exacerbates inequality is that it is harder 
for poorer people to protect their wages and savings against inflation. If 
you have a job where you get a cost-of-living increase every year, or if 
you have some assets which keep their real value despite inflation, like 
Krugerrands or a house, then you can avoid much of the pain of inflation. 
But  if  you  are  not  in  a  position to  negotiate with  your  boss, or  if  your 
savings are in cash, inflation can hurt you badly. 
 Given these factors, a  monetary policy stance that lowers inflation can 
actually increase the expenditure of the poorest South Africans – even as 
it  reduces the buying power of  richer South Africans. The conventional 
wisdom about a short-term growth-inflation trade-off therefore needs to be 
supplemented with the knowledge that this also poses a growth-inequality 
trade-off. Or, to put the point more simply, any decision to tolerate a bit 
                                                             
15 Bhorat and Oosthuizen (2005), The relative inflation experience of poor urban South African 
households, available at 
https://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/346/Relative%20inflation
%20experience%20of%20poor%20urban%20SA%20households.pdf.  
 Page 13 of 15 
more inflation for the sake of a little extra growth is also a decision to make 
inequality a bit worse.16  
 Unfortunately, South African inflation has tended to be quite high, and it 
has been even higher for the poorest South Africans. Our inflation target 
is a range of 3-6% for headline inflation. Since 2010, inflation has been 
above 6% for 28 months, just over a quarter of the time. Meanwhile, the 
inflation rate for the poorest 10% of households has been above 6% for 
51 months, which is about half the time. With an inflation rate of close to 
6%,  on  average,  South  Africa  has  become  a  relatively  high-inflation 
country  –  almost  three  quarters  of  the  world’s  countries  have  lower 
inflation rates than we do.  
 This suggests that we haven’t taken the battle against inflation seriously 
enough. We hope to remedy this by anchoring inflation nearer 4.5% – the 
midpoint  of  our  target  range  –  as  we  have  repeatedly  said  in  MPC 
statements  and  in  speeches.  The  poorest  South  Africans  should  be 
among the biggest beneficiaries of that policy. 
 Inequality and macroeconomic policy 
 To conclude, monetary policy affects inequality through several channels. 
Low interest rates tend to push up asset prices, helping those who have 
assets already. Low interest rates also reduce borrowing costs, but mainly 
for borrowers at the high end of the income spectrum. Interest rates have 
weak  and  limited  effects  on  employment,  especially  for  the  third  of 
                                                             
16 International Monetary Fund (2018), ‘Annex VIII. The distributional impact of inflation’, South Africa 
2018 Article IV Consultation, available at 
https://www.imf.org/~/media/Files/Publications/CR/2018/cr18246.ashx .  
 Page 14 of 15 
households which are not closely connected to labour markets or which 
are  disadvantaged  by having  less  education.  Where  monetary  policy 
tolerates higher inflation, this tends to reduce spending power, especially 
for  the  poor.  Put  together,  all  this  suggests  that  a  more  inflationary 
monetary policy is likely to make inequality worse.  
 As the guardians of the value of the currency in South Africa, it is important 
that we at the South African Reserve Bank bear all this in mind when we 
make monetary policy decisions. The richest 20% of South Africans can 
make themselves heard quite easily. They let us know when our raising 
of rates pushes up their bond repayments. They do a good job of getting 
a cost-of-living adjustment every year. They often don’t realise how many 
poorer people there are out there, because they assume they are roughly 
in the middle of the income distribution, not close to the top. But we as the 
central bank have to think about everyone in South Africa, including the 
other 80% of households.  
 I  hope that today I  have left you with a clearer sense of what monetary 
policy does, and what it cannot do. At the simplest level, we know that low 
inflation has many benefits, so that’s what we aim to deliver. But there are 
also  many  other policies and  agencies that  affect South Africa’s  worst 
problems, 
including  poverty,  unemployment  and 
inequality.  Our 
contribution as the central bank is just one part of the fight against these 
evils.  
 Thank you. 
 Page 15 of 15 
