Andreas Dombret: Finding the right measure of consolidation in the
banking sector
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank
until 30 April 2018, at the Center for Financial Studies, Frankfurt am Main, 24 April 2018.
 1. Introduction
Mr Issing
Ladies and gentlemen
It is a great honour and pleasure to be here at the CFS this evening. It was here that I delivered
my first speech to the public in 2011 – and today marks my last official speech as a member of
the Bundesbank’s Executive Board. In a sense, I have therefore come full circle.
As has the topic as well: this evening, I will be talking about consolidation in the banking sector.
“Old hat”, some of you will be thinking, “how fitting for a farewell speech”. You are possibly not
completely off the mark, but old hats can be in vogue as well – especially if they are as relevant
to the future as consolidation in the banking sector.
There are two good reasons why I have chosen this topic. The first of these is: M&A is what
characterised my career as a banker – it has thus always been one of my most important topics.
The second reason is: consolidation will help to shape the banking sector of the future.
Let me begin with this statement: we must think the debate on consolidation further; we must
think it anew. I would like to posit four theories.
Theory one: the banking sector will continue to “shrink to health”, in Germany and in Europe
alike.
Theory  two:  on  the  heels  of  this  consolidation,  mergers  and  acquisitions  will  lead  to  a
concentration of the market on a reduced number of institutions. However, mergers should
be  undertaken  with  a  view  to  creating  institutions  that  will  be  stable  in  the  long  run.  In
mathematics, minus times minus equals plus – but it does not follow from this that two weak
institutions will necessarily add up to a stable bank.
Theory three: if the underlying economic conditions are good and if the euro area and the
banking union offer the requisite environment, there will be more mergers and acquisitions
going  forward  –  initially  within  the  German  market,  and,  later,  across  borders  in  the  euro
area.
And, finally, theory number four: those who think of consolidation and structural change only
in linear terms and who are fixated on exploiting economies of scale overlook the future of
financial intermediation.  “Shrinking to health” and innovation have to be thought across the
established limits of the banking industry – along new, digitalised value chains. And this does
not  necessarily  lead  us  to  a  concentration  of  today’s  banking  business  in  the  hands  of  a
small group of large banks.
 
2. Why are we talking about consolidation?
Let me begin with a question: why is there so much talk of consolidation in the banking sector?
And  why  am  I  also  talking  today,  in  my  farewell  speech,  about  a  topic  as  “old  hat”  as
consolidation? There are four reasons for this.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, because the financial sector, especially the banking sector and large banks in particular,
dominated large segments of the economy in the 20 years prior to the financial crisis. A case in
point  is  shown  by  the  highly  educated  engineers,  physicists  and  economists  who  developed
complex  financial  products  and  risk  management  models  –  instead  of  building  bridges  or
developing  medical  devices.  These,  but  also  many  other  bright  university  graduates,  were
sucked in by the financial sector because they could measure themselves against the best and
could earn a lot of money – however, only thanks to a financial bubble. Although this bubble burst
in 2008, overcapacity in the financial sector did not automatically go away, but has had to, and
still has to, be gradually shrunk in a process that has been going on for years – much as it also
took years to build up.
Second, in the past few years, we have been repeatedly found ourselves debating the topic of
“overbanking”  –  the  European  economy’s  overdependence  on  the  banking  sector,   the
bloatedness of the banking sector, its political influence, the size of its payrolls, the number of
institutions. That, too, is a reason why I am talking about consolidation this evening. The extent
quickly becomes clear if we look at the size of the banking sector relative to GDP: in Germany,
for instance, it rose from less than 190% in 1993 to 360% in 2008, the year the financial crisis
broke out.
1
But  there’s  another,  third  reason:  the  banking  sector  is  currently  in  the  throes  of  fundamental
transition.  Because more and more financial services are being offered outside the traditional
banking  sector,  fintechs  and  “shadow  banks”  are  putting  pressure  on  the  banking  sector  to
consolidate.
And,  finally,  there  is  a  fourth  driver  of  the  debate  on  consolidation:  the  poor  profitability  of
European  and,  not  least,  also  German  institutions.  The  earnings  of  German  credit  institutions
have been falling for more than 15 years – by around 30% since 1999.   The  persistently  low
interest  rates  have  significantly  exacerbated  this  situation. And  the  fact  that  interest  rates  are
expected to remain low for the foreseeable future means that the outlook for profitability here and
in wide swathes of Europe will be more on the gloomy side.
2
Germany  is  particularly  affected  by  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  because  most  German
institutions have business models which are highly dependent on interest rates. The recent low-
interest-rate  survey  conducted  by  the  Bundesbank  and  BaFin  has  shown  that  small  and
medium-sized German credit institutions are expecting a 9% drop in their profits  from 2016 to
4
2021; this represents a whopping 16% decline in the return on assets over the same period. 
3
One  major  cause  is  growing  competition  in  the  low-interest-rate  environment.  Over  70%  of
institutions are expecting intensified competition from other banks and savings banks. And as
many as 85% are expecting increasing competition from fintechs.
I am therefore not truly surprised that M&A has been a topic in the European and the German
banking  sectors  since  2008.  Indeed,  many  market  observers  are  probably  surprised  at  how
slowly consolidation is progressing.
But  where  are  we  now  in  this  process?  Since  2008,  we  have  seen  a  moderate,  continuous
process of downsizing in Europe: the ratio of banks’ assets to GDP was, at the end of 2016, well
below its 2008 levels. More precisely, it dropped from 350% to around 260%. Measured in terms
of  the  enormous  rise  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  the  downsizing
process will continue further, although it has stalled somewhat of late.
Another  measure  of  consolidation  in  the  banking  sector  is  the  number  of  branches  and
employees per capita of the population. From 2008 to 2016, the average number of inhabitants
served  by  a  branch  rose  by  nearly  one-third;  over  the  same  period,  the  average  number  of
inhabitants per bank employee rose by one-quarter. And the number of institutions in the euro
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
area has also already dropped considerably, by nearly 30%: from 6,062 in 2008 to 4,385 at the
5
end of 2016.
There is little doubt that this process will continue. How far this process will go, however, nobody
can say – though there has been no shortage of attempts to predict the number of German or
European institutions in 2050.
And thus, my first hypothesis was that, in the years to come, we will likewise see a moderate
shrinkage of bank balance sheets and transaction volumes in the euro area – albeit, of course,
with a certain variation from one country to the next. The number of employees and branches per
capita,  too,  will  continue  to  decline.  These  trends  will  be  driven  further  by  the  digitalisation  of
financial services. And the number of institutions itself will keep falling. One of the reasons, to
which I will come in a second, is mergers. The other is that there will be market exits which, I
hope,  will  be  carried  off  without  any  political  intervention  and  in  an  orderly  fashion  under  the
resolution regime.
There  is  little  doubt  that  this  downsizing  process  is  “shrinking  to  health”  –  difficult  as  the
repercussions will be for institutions and their employees. Out of cost-efficiency considerations, if
nothing else, overcapacity which is no longer needed has to be either downsized or deployed to
other profitable purposes. And, from a macroeconomic perspective, it is particularly necessary to
want a financial sector that is not inflated but efficient.
 
3. The role of mergers & acquisitions
What is more doubtful, however, is the weight that each of these three different consolidation
approaches will have. What share will the shrinking of existing institutions have? How many of
them will exit the market? How many of them will merge with other institutions?
My  personal  take  on  this  –  which  dovetails  with  the  second  hypothesis  I  mentioned  at  the
beginning of my speech – is that an increase in M&A activity, and thus a higher level of market
concentration, can make sense from both an economic and a commercial perspective; that said,
long-term  success  will  be  reserved  for  initiatives  which  ultimately  bring  forth  a  stable  credit
institution running a sustainable business model.
Why  am  I  making  this  point  so  emphatically?  Because  M&A  has  a  mixed  track  record  in  the
banking sector, if you measure it in terms of profitability, stability, market power and customer
satisfaction.
Some see bank mergers as a kind of magic formula for driving consolidation forward. They’re so
optimistic because of the economies of scale which typically arise when identical activities are
combined and the synergy effects which can be harnessed when complementary operations are
fused. And it does indeed appear that mergers unleash positive effects in reality, not just in theory
– a meta study conducted last year by the ECB concluded that M&A tends to generate positive
6
economies of scale, even if they would not appear to be overwhelmingly large. 
However, increased M&A activity can also be problematic, because this form of consolidation
drives even more market share into the hands of a small number of market participants. And
large institutions are, first, not just particularly susceptible to poor governance; they can, second,
also present a risk to financial stability – I’m talking about the too-big-to-fail problem here.  The
bigger banks become, the more closely they need to be supervised and the better the resolution
options need to be formulated.
7
Third, concentration in the market can lead to an agglomeration of market power, and thus to a
lower quality of services and higher prices.  The ECB’s paper discovered that the market power
8
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
of credit institutions in the euro area has increased since the financial crisis.
Overall,  according  to  the  ECB’s  meta  study,  it  cannot  be  concluded  beyond  doubt  which
empirical factor has more of a bearing – the positive efficiency gains, or the problems which the
heightened concentration causes for customers and financial stability.
So there is conclusive evidence, it would seem, that M&A is not a magic bullet. Any merger or
acquisition  has  a  certain  likelihood  of  failing.  Only  well-thought-out  M&A  transactions  stand  a
genuine chance of success. It’s quality that counts, not quantity.
Now some of you might be thinking that’s all very well – but what are the hallmarks of a well-
thought-out and successful merger? Those of you who’ve just pulled out your pen and paper will
be in for a disappointment because there is no ready-made solution.
That said, I would nonetheless like to share with you four minimum conditions which I consider to
be important for mergers and acquisitions in the banking sector:
The first applies to any strategy, but it is particularly relevant to M&A: an M&A transaction is
more likely to succeed if it is planned, purposeful, and done out of conviction rather than
compulsion.
Second, M&A transactions in the banking sector need to be examined analytically in order to
quantify  as  accurately  as  possible  whether  and  to  what  extent  economies  of  scale  and
synergy  effects  can  indeed  be  harnessed.  Complementary  mergers  in  which  business
operations and/or regions fit together perfectly can fall flat, but they can also be blessed with
success if they are based on detailed analysis upfront.
Third, they are far-sighted – that is to say, they consider which problems might arise and
look at how other mergers panned out.
Fourth, they are creative – in other words, they look beyond the confines of existing business
operations. In a market gripped by structural change, this calls for a great deal of creativity –
imaginative  solutions  which  think  outside  the  limitations  of  the  banking  sector  of  old.
Dovetailing complementary business operations, which I mentioned just now, can also be a
successful approach across traditional sector boundaries.
 
4. The future of M&A in Germany and Europe
The question now is this: how many successful and well-thought-out mergers are we likely to
see in Germany and Europe?
That is what my third hypothesis is all about. Given good economic conditions and a reformed
banking union, there may well be more M&A activity in future – both within the German market
initially and later across national borders in the euro area.
That’s because institutions will gradually emerge from crisis mode and the period of regulatory
reform  over  the  past  ten  years  in  which  they  had  better  things  to  do,  to  put  it  crudely,  than
simulate strategic M&A options. This creates huge potential.
The  more  accommodative  the  current  economic  environment  is  and  the  more  regulatory
uncertainty recedes, the greater that potential will be. Basel III was concluded at the end of last
year, and the plan now is to implement it in full in the EU, the USA and the other member states.
Implementation  of  these  final,  major  reform  elements  introduced  in  response  to  the  financial
crisis will push back regulatory uncertainty once and for all. That is why it is so important for the
Bundesbank, and for me personally as well, that we now set about preparing implementation in
the EU, even if the European elections will soon be upon us, so that we can swiftly wrap up the
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
process once the elections are over.
In my view, this gradual reduction of economic and regulation uncertainty opens up a window of
opportunity, above all in Germany, for more mergers and acquisitions. At this point, let me remind
you of one of the most fascinating findings from the latest low-interest-rate survey: nearly 50% of
small  and  medium-sized  German  credit  institutions  can  see  a  prospect  of  mergers  and
9
acquisitions over the medium term.
But that will call for creative and unconventional solutions within the German banking sector as
we know it – solutions that are needed not just by private institutions but by their public-sector
counterparts as well. The latter have a public mandate, making them an important pillar of the
German  economy. And  they  should  stay  that  way  –  which  is  also  why  this  pillar  needs  to  be
refreshed.
Specifically,  the  Landesbanken  spring  to  mind  here.  Something  like  two  months  ago,  the  first
sale of a Landesbank to private investors was set in motion, bringing a long and arduous journey
to a close. This transaction is a novelty for the German banking sector.
It was a forced sale, admittedly, but it shows that a transaction like this is doable – yes, it is
possible to sell a Landesbank to private investors, and even at a price that many had considered
impossible beforehand. With a little luck, this story will be a prelude for bigger solutions in the
Landesbank sector. The market environment, in any case, is still exceptionally favourable.
As a banking supervisor I will always take a neutral stance when it comes to structural policy.
Industrial  policy  is  out  of  bounds  for  central  banks,  and  rightly  so  –  even  if  that’s  a  view  not
everyone would agree with. That said, I would like to take this opportunity to encourage banks
and savings banks to explore fresh and creative avenues – before problems force them to do so.
But we also need to take a look beyond the German horizon. Because in a currency and banking
union, one could be forgiven for wondering whether we need more cross-border mergers in the
euro area.
The management of the SSM took quite a clear line on this topic in a recent speech.  Cross-
border  mergers  and  acquisitions  within  the  SSM  are  rare,  it  was  said,  and  the  degree  of
concentration across the SSM banking sector, and particularly in a number of member states, is
too low.  According to the ECB, this is due not least to the political and supervisory obstacles
that still persist in the euro area.
11
10
Even if there is some evidence to suggest that cross-border mergers and acquisitions tend to be
more successful and have less of a negative impact on competition,
 I currently see national
mergers as a more promising avenue for tapping synergy gains. In my view, only once these
synergies  have  been  harnessed  will  institutions  think  more  along  European  and  cross-border
dimensions.
12
For now, cross-border mergers in the euro area will probably be few and far between. That’s
because  mergers  and  acquisitions  across  national  borders  are  exceptionally  complex
transactions  on  account  of  the  cultural  and  lingual  barriers  they  need  to  transcend. A  lack  of
clarity  surrounding  the  future  regulatory  framework  for  a  cross-border  project  makes  it  more
difficult still to gauge whether the complexity of governance across cultural areas is something
that can be organised while still making a profit. 
 
5. Conditions and limits to European mergers and acquisitions
Additional  reforms  are  necessary  before  any  further  progress  can  be  made  here.  I  don’t  just
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
mean the completion of the banking union, but it is especially necessary. We have an opportunity
– and also an obligation, in my view – to establish the banking union on a firmer foundation. This
is why the EU must succeed in reducing the excessive risks still latent on many banks’ balance
sheets. We can do this first by scaling back existing non-performing loans and preventing the
build-up  of  new  ones.  I  firmly  believe  that  in  this  matter  there  are  no  alternatives  to  the  ECB
guidelines.  The  foundation  of  the  banking  union  can  then  be  fortified  by  putting  an  end  to  the
preferential treatment of sovereign bonds, third by building up loss-absorbing capital, TLAC and
MREL, and fourth by harmonising insolvency regimes. As a second step further down the line,
we should then discuss how we can create a strong European reinsurance system for deposit
protection  that  intervenes  when  national  schemes  are  unable  to  cope  –  but  only  then.  If  we
manage to do this, we will make the banking union more stable and more credible.
There is, of course, a “but” to all this, because I can see the danger that, as supervisors, we
might  go  too  far.  I  see  the  danger  of  overestimating  the  opportunities  of  M&A  strategies  and
underestimating their risks. We cannot expect scale and synergy effects to simply materialise
across  cultural  areas,  nor  can  we  act  as  though  the  banking  union  is  already  completely
supranational today – in many places there will also be national security hurdles over the coming
years. And that is as it should be.
My concern is that European mergers and acquisitions may be misused for political interests.
Here  I  am  referring  to  potential  attempts  to  create  European  champions  that  could  then
supposedly  take  on  large  competitors  from  other  parts  of  the  world.  I  consider  this  type  of
thinking questionable. We must not now make the error of replacing the misguided ideology of
national champions with a no less misleading ideology of European champions. This will not lead
to growth and more jobs, but it may result in ossified structures and risks to financial stability.
Ladies and gentlemen, consolidation is essential and fundamentally good for the banking sector,
but neither national nor cross-border mergers and acquisitions should be seen as a means of
escaping the digital revolution and structural change.
 
6. What will the digital revolution mean for the future of financial intermediation?
The last part of my speech today will address these fundamental changes. That isn’t to say that
too little is spoken about digitalisation – one would be hard pressed to find a business section of
a newspaper or a conference programme today that doesn’t mention it. We do have a tendency,
however, to overstate short-term trends – just think of Bitcoin and fintech start-ups – while we
underestimate and think too little about long-term trends.
Who among you has a clear idea of how digitalisation will alter banking and the banking sector’s
structure in the medium and long term?
Luckily, when we consider this, we don’t have to start from scratch. We have been working on
this for quite a long time on the Basel Committee’s Task Force on Financial Technology. An initial
result of this has been the development of five scenarios of how digitalisation could change the
banking sector, and I’d like to share these five visions of the future with you now.
Let’s start with the least disruptive scenario: the “better” bank. In this scenario, institutions that
are already established on the market are successfully modernising and becoming digitalised.
They continue to maintain good customer relations and carry out banking services themselves.
Though  established  institutions  are  under  considerable  pressure  to  reduce  their  costs  and  to
modernise extensively, they also have in-depth knowledge of the market, a broad customer base
and  high  capacity  for  investment.  This  suggests  that  established  banks  are  able  to  reinvent
themselves piece by piece during their day-to-day operations and ultimately hold their own in the
market.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Scenario two concerning the “new” bank tells a different story. In this scenario, established banks
founder due to their structures, which have evolved over many years and turn out to be legacy
risks.  New  banks  –  small  start-ups  or  those  founded  by  tech  giants  –  then  take  over  their
business. Free of legacy  risk  and  designed  specifically  for  a  digital  and  interconnected  world,
these new banks can offer their services more cheaply and are more attractive to customers –
they are quick, innovative and state-of-the-art.
But the sector could change even more radically, as scenario three – the “fragmented” bank –
shows. In this scenario, banking business becomes fragmented and the value chain is broken
up. Universal banks are history, regardless of whether they are “old” or “new”. Instead, a large
number  of  specialised  providers  emerge,  offering  individual  financial  services.  From  the
customer’s  perspective,  this  fragmentation  wouldn’t  necessarily  be  a  disadvantage  and  it
wouldn’t be visible at all if the providers offered their services on joint platforms – dubbed the
platform economy.
Scenario four is similar: the “invisible” bank. As in scenario two, established institutions in this
case  are  unable  to  keep  pace  with  the  new  competitors  when  it  comes  to  customer
relationships.  Nevertheless,  they  don’t  disappear  from  the  market,  but  maintain  a  background
role  as  a  service  provider.  In  this  role,  they  carry  out  the  tasks  that  are  only  possible  with  a
banking  licence  or  that  require  specialist  knowledge  –  risk  management,  lending  or  deposit
business,  for  example.  We  can  already  witness  this  type  of  cooperation  today  when  tech
companies present themselves to customers as service providers, while the settlement side of
transactions is carried out by established financial institutions. Payments and credit platforms
are two such cases in point.
This leaves us with scenario five: disintermediation. In this scenario, established banks are no
longer  relevant  market  participants  and  nor  are  they  replaced  by  new  banks,  because  the
intermediary  role  of  traditional  credit  institutions  is  simply  no  longer  needed.  Here,  innovative
technologies take on the task of connecting end customers with each other directly. This may
sound  rather  far-fetched  at  first,  but  we  are  seeing  at  least  some  attempts  in  this  direction
already: for example, lending via P2P platforms or business financing via crowdfunding.
Ladies and gentlemen, these are five scenarios, five visions of the future of how digitalisation
could change the banking sector, though there are of course others. Personally, I believe we will
see a mix of these scenarios as the banking sector evolves.
On  the  one  hand,  customer  needs  will  be  key  to  developments  –  consider,  for  example,  the
smartphone  generation,  many  of  whom  have  never  set  foot  in  a  bank  branch.  In  the  second
stage, how financial service providers respond to these needs will be crucial. Joint ventures and
M&As may play an important role here by speeding up the change processes. Small fintechs that
do not have any legacy risks are by their very nature more agile and can more easily develop
innovative products and business models. Established banks have a solid customer base and
strong marketing channels, which means they can bring promising concepts to the wider market
within a short time frame. In many cases, although not all, it would appear that the secret is in the
mix.
And that’s why my fourth theory was that the process of designing structural change in general,
and  M&As  in  particular,  cannot  be  linear.  Instead,  it  must  be  dynamic.  Whilst  placing  hope  in
scale effects, we must not forget one thing: the most important factor in the success of a market
economy  is  its  growth  dynamic,  which,  unlike  in  a  planned  economy,  is  the  result  of  many
decentralised decisions by a variety of market players. This system gives rise to high levels of
innovation and efficiency.
By the same token, clever M&A strategies also permit and seek out creative ways to break up
enterprises – by which I mean selling off certain portfolios or business units. They are not limited
to one sector, they take a service-based approach, and they follow the new, digital value chain.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
And we must even go one step further. If digitalisation reaches all corners of the economy – think
of  “Industry  4.0”  –;  if  today’s  forms  of  economic  cooperation  undergo  a  complete  change
because  the  technological  revolution  also  facilitates  revolutionary  cooperation  forms,  which
financial services will still actually be in demand at that point? What form can they be offered in?
How could they be linked to other services?
To  put  it  another  way:  if  the  economic  structures  change  as  the  world  becomes  increasingly
digitalised, how will the demands placed on the banking and financial industry and its structure
change? What will the enterprises of the future want from the financial sector? Does the digital
revolution of economic structures also mean a revolution for the financial market?
Although questions like these are still faint whispers from the future, we can already hear them
today, and they are becoming ever louder. This is clear from cases such as the music streaming
provider Spotify going public, for example. In doing so, the company that revolutionised the music
industry through its streaming services is flying the flag for a revolution in the financial industry,
too. The IPO took place with minimal assistance from investment banks and the issue price was
not set in advance, but instead was determined through a free market process. Spotify’s IPO
was not, in itself, by any means a revolution in the financial world. But it was the first step along
the way. And it won’t be the last – of that I am sure.
 
7. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, during my time as a member of the Bundesbank’s Executive Board, I
devoted a great deal of energy to guiding the banking sector through its recovery process. When
I  gave  my  first  speech  at  the  CFS  in  2011,  I  talked  about  financial  stability.  I  discussed  what
challenges the German banking system was facing and how financial stability could be ensured.
Although we have made considerable headway over the last few years, we are still a long way
from our destination.
With this in mind, my first theory this evening was that contraction and consolidation will help
assist the recovery of the sector in the future, too.
In my second theory, I outlined the role I expect mergers and acquisitions to play going forward.
In Germany and Europe, I expect to see a concentration of the market on a smaller number of
larger  institutions.  This  will  depend  on  well-thought-out  strategies  and  will  separate  the  wheat
from the chaff.
I am certain that – as I mentioned in my third theory – we will see more of this type of merger if
we create positive economic conditions, including a stable banking union in a stable euro area.
Under these conditions, I assume that, in future, we will see more M&A activity within Germany to
begin with, and then across borders within the euro area, too. Despite this, the stability of the
bank market hinges on it remaining fragmented in many areas – in terms of size and business
models, to be clear.
And, finally, theory number four: I hope that, in future, we will spend less and less time discussing
consolidation within the old conceptual confines. In a digitalised economy, not only will the ways
in which financial services are provided be radically overhauled; there will also be a structural
change in the demand for services. We have no idea what financial services will actually still be
in demand at that point, or by whom.
Banks and savings banks therefore cannot simply carry on as before. If they want to remain a
meaningful part of the financial services industry in the future, they must run their established
business  more  efficiently  and  more  innovatively  and,  at  the  same  time,  ask  themselves  how
heavily they want to rely on the established banking structures making a recovery.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
While  these  mammoth  tasks  are  being  performed,  supervisors  must  not  work  against  the
institutions, but must support them. Even if we are first and foremost responsible for financial
stability, it is just as important not to curtail economic growth disproportionately. It was always my
aim to find this balance and encourage dialogue about it.
On that note, I now look forward to a lively debate with you.
Thank you very much for listening.
 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
ESRB (2014), Is Europe overbanked?, Reports of the Advisory Scientific Committee, No 4, June 2014.
A R Dombret (2017), The cake’s getting smaller. Consolidation and reorientation in the German banking sector.
Speech  delivered  on  30  March  2017  at  the  Fifth Annual  Conference  on  Integrated  Performance  and  Risk
Management of the Frankfurt School of Finance & Management.
Decline in the profit for the financial year before tax.
A R Dombret (2017), Opening statement at the press conference on 30 August 2017 presenting the results of
the low-interest-rate survey conducted by the Bundesbank and BaFin.
European Central Bank (2017), Report on financial structures, October 2017.
An overview can be found in European Central Bank (2017), Financial integration in Europe, Special feature:
cross-border bank consolidation in the euro area.
See L Laeven, L Ratnovski, H Tong (2016): Bank size, capital and systemic risk: some international evidence.
Journal of Banking & Finance, 69(S1): pp 25–34. 
See European Central Bank (2017), Financial integration in Europe, p 48.
A R Dombret (2017), Opening statement at the press conference on 30 August 2017 presenting the results of
the low-interest-rate survey conducted by the Bundesbank and BaFin. 
See D Nouy (2017) Too much of a good thing? The need for consolidation in the European banking sector.
Speech at the VIII Financial Forum, Madrid, 27 September 2017; ECB (2017), Financial integration in Europe.
Although the banking sector has contracted significantly since 2008, the same period has seen a decline in the
number  and  volume  of  M&A  transactions  in  the  EU,  above  all  since  2013.  The  slight  increase  in  sector
concentration observed up until 2014 has since even given way to a gentle decline. Further details can be found
in ECB (2017), Financial integration in Europe, Special feature: cross-border bank consolidation in the euro
area.
See European Central Bank (2017), Financial integration in Europe, pp 50–51.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
