Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 8 March 2018.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at their present levels for an
extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, we confirm that our net asset purchases,
at the current monthly pace of €30 billion, are intended to run until the end of September 2018, or
beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment
in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. The Eurosystem will continue to reinvest
the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  purchased  under  the  asset  purchase
programme for an extended period of time after the end of its net asset purchases, and in any
case for as long as necessary. This will contribute both to favourable liquidity conditions and to
an appropriate monetary policy stance.
Incoming information, including our new staff projections, confirms the strong and broad-based
growth momentum in the euro area economy, which is projected to expand in the near term at a
somewhat faster pace than previously expected. This outlook for growth confirms our confidence
that inflation will converge towards our inflation aim of below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term. At the same time, measures of underlying inflation remain subdued and have yet to show
convincing signs of a sustained upward trend. In this context, the Governing Council will continue
to  monitor  developments  in  the  exchange  rate  and  financial  conditions  with  regard  to  their
possible  implications  for  the  inflation  outlook.  Overall,  an  ample  degree  of  monetary  stimulus
remains necessary for underlying inflation pressures to continue to build up and support headline
inflation developments over the medium term. This continued monetary support is provided by
the  net  asset  purchases,  by  the  sizeable  stock  of  acquired  assets  and  the  forthcoming
reinvestments, and by our forward guidance on interest rates.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Real
GDP increased by 0.6%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter of 2017, after increasing by
0.7% in the third quarter. The latest economic data and survey results indicate continued strong
and broad-based growth momentum. Our monetary policy measures, which have facilitated the
deleveraging process, continue to underpin domestic demand. Private consumption is supported
by rising employment, which is also benefiting from past labour market reforms, and by growing
household wealth. Business investment continues to strengthen on the back of very favourable
financing  conditions,  rising  corporate  profitability  and  solid  demand.  Housing  investment  has
improved further over recent quarters. In addition, the broad-based global expansion is providing
impetus to euro area exports.
This assessment is broadly reflected in the March 2018 ECB staff macroeconomic projections
for the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 2.4% in 2018, 1.9%
in  2019  and  1.7% 
the  December  2017  Eurosystem  staff
macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised up for 2018 and
remains unchanged for 2019 and 2020.
in  2020.  Compared  with 
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook are assessed as broadly balanced. On the
one hand, the prevailing positive cyclical momentum could lead to stronger growth in the near
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
term. On the other hand, downside risks continue to relate primarily to global factors, including
rising protectionism and developments in foreign exchange and other financial markets.
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  decreased  to  1.2%  in
February  2018,  from  1.3%  in  January.  This  reflected  mainly  negative  base  effects  in
unprocessed food price inflation. Looking ahead, on the basis of current futures prices for oil,
annual rates of headline inflation are likely to hover around 1.5% for the remainder of the year.
Measures of underlying inflation remain subdued overall. Looking forward, they are expected to
rise gradually over the medium term, supported by our monetary policy measures, the continuing
economic expansion, the corresponding absorption of economic slack and rising wage growth.
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  March  2018  ECB  staff  macroeconomic
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.4% in 2018, 1.4% in 2019
and  1.7%  in  2020.  Compared  with  the  December  2017  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic
projections, the outlook for headline HICP inflation has been revised down slightly for 2019 and
remains unchanged for 2018 and 2020.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continues to expand at a robust pace, with
an annual rate of growth of 4.6% in January 2018, unchanged from the previous month, reflecting
the impact of the ECB’s monetary policy measures and the low opportunity cost of holding the
most  liquid  deposits.  Accordingly,  the  narrow  monetary  aggregate  M1  remained  the  main
contributor to broad money growth, continuing to expand at a solid annual rate.
The recovery in the growth of loans to the private sector observed since the beginning of 2014 is
progressing. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations strengthened to 3.4%
in  January  2018,  after  3.1%  in  December  2017,  while  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to
households remained unchanged at 2.9%. The pass-through of the monetary policy measures
put in place since June 2014 continues to significantly support borrowing conditions for firms and
households, access to financing ‒ notably for small and medium-sized enterprises ‒ and credit
flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from 
for  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but
close to, 2% over the medium term.
the  monetary  analysis  confirmed 
the  need 
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities. The
implementation of structural reforms in euro area countries needs to be substantially stepped
up to increase resilience, reduce structural unemployment and boost euro area productivity and
growth potential. Against the background of overall limited implementation of the 2017 country-
specific recommendations, as communicated by the European Commission yesterday, greater
reform effort is necessary in the euro area countries. Regarding fiscal policies, the increasingly
solid and broad-based expansion calls for rebuilding fiscal buffers. This is particularly important
in countries where government debt remains high. All countries would benefit from intensifying
efforts  towards  achieving  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  public  finances.  A  full,
transparent  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  of  the
macroeconomic  imbalance  procedure  over  time  and  across  countries  remains  essential  to
increase  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  economy.  Deepening  Economic  and  Monetary  Union
remains  a  priority.  The  Governing  Council  urges  specific  and  decisive  steps  to  complete  the
banking union and the capital markets union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
  2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
I notice that you have changed somewhat your monetary policy statement, dropping the
commitment to increase the size of quantitative easing, if necessary. Could you explain
the  reasons  for  that,  especially  against  the  backdrop  of  trade  war  talks  that  we  have
been hearing and somewhat slowing down of survey indicators for the recovery?
Second  question  on  Latvia,  on  the  affairs  surrounding  Mr  Rimsevics,  a  Governing
Council member. Do you see the fact that Latvian authorities are effectively blocking a
Governing  Council  member  from  attending  Governing  Council  meetings  as  an
infringement of central bank independence? If not, why not?
Also do you feel the Latvian authorities have been not fully cooperating with the ECB on
this affair?
Draghi: First of all, the first question: let me just read to you the sentence we have removed. By
the way, it was a sentence introduced in 2016, when we cut our monthly purchases from €80 to
€60 billion. Thinking about that, you can just figure out, how different the situation was at that
time.  The  sentence  says:  if  the  outlook  becomes  less  favourable  or  if  financial  conditions
become  inconsistent  with  further  progress  towards  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of
inflation,  we  stand  ready  to  increase  the  asset  purchase  programme  in  terms  of  size  and/or
duration. So, what we did was to remove the explicit reference to the likelihood of an increase in
the pace of purchases in the near future.
We shouldn’t forget that we have kept the other reference to such a possibility when it says: the
Eurosystem will continue to reinvest the principal payments for an extended period of time after
the end of net asset purchases and in any case for as long as necessary. All in all, if you read
this decision – by the way the decision was unanimous – that’s what it is. It’s substantially a
backward-looking  decision  without  signals  or  implications  for  either  our  expectations  or  our
reaction function. We still expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at their present levels for
an extended period of time and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. It also hasn’t
changed our reaction function. We confirm that our net asset purchases at the current monthly
pace of €30 billion are intended to run until the end of September 2018, or beyond if necessary –
and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation
consistent  with  its  inflation  aim.  That’s  what  the  decision  is  and  that’s  what  it  is. And  it  was
unanimous, as I said.
Now, if I may elaborate on the second question about Latvia. Well, on Latvia we really don’t have
enough information. That’s why today we are sending a letter to the European Court of Justice.
The Governing Council has decided, again unanimously, to ask for clarification by the Court of
Justice of the European Union whether individual security measures imposed on the Governor of
Latvijas Banka by the Latvian Anti-Corruption Authority on 19 February 2018, have had the effect
of relieving him from office and they comply with Union law, in particular with Article 14.2 of the
Statute. We are asking the ECJ for a clarification on the present situation.
You  mentioned  that  the  removal  of  the  pledge  to  increase  quantitative  easing  was
unanimous. In the run-up to that unanimous decision, did any policymaker call for a more
radical change, perhaps dropping a link between the APP and inflation or taking out the
option to extend the duration of the APP?
The second question is on trade: could the US administration’s planned tariffs by hurting
the eurozone’s economy slow down the return of inflation to the ECB’s target?
Draghi: Well, on the first question, as I said, it was a unanimous decision and there wasn’t much
discussion about other possible changes in monetary policy for the coming months. Just so that I
can give you a sketchy summary of the discussion, it was a kind of a fairly, in a sense, usual
blend of confidence, persistence and patience. Of confidence – because the latest incoming data
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
on growth reduced the variance of the path of inflation converging to our inflation aim. But also
persistence and patience – and here of course you have different views, some people are more
confident,  some  people  are  less  confident  and  therefore  they  stress  the  persistence  and
patience.  There  was  a  somewhat  repeated  reference  to  the  uncertainty  surrounding  potential
output growth path.
The  reason  for  that  is  that  first  of  all,  we  discussed  several  times  about  how  complex  the
measurements of unemployment are. But also there is a fact that strong growth may produce
stronger potential output growth as well. If you look at the past structural reforms, the increases
in labour supply, the increase in participation rates, the increase in productivity, basically all this
increases the uncertainty about the potential output growth path and therefore about the size of
the slack in the economy. So, the policy will continue to be reactive, basically. These are some
parts of our discussion.
Another part was devoted to assessing the progress of – well, the possible progress we’ve made
– about inflation, where we said that basically, inflation, headline inflation, will hover around 1.5%
for  the  remaining  part  of  the  year.  The  underlying  inflation  measures  remain  subdued.  Even
though we have strong growth, we still have subdued inflation and our mandate is in terms of
price stability, so victory cannot be declared yet.
Finally, you asked about monetary policy. The exchange was about emphasising all the pillars of
our  monetary  policy.  We  have  the  flows  of  net  purchases.  We  have  the  stock  that  it  is
accumulating. We have the reinvestment policy for an extended period of time, as I’ve just read.
Especially we have the forward guidance on interest rate path, and they were all important.
I am sorry, you also asked the question about trade. The immediate spill-over impact of the trade
measures, just if you have a static estimate, it’s not going to be big. But what strikes me is that
whatever convictions one has about trade, we – and certainly the Governing Council is on this
line  –  we  are  convinced  that  disputes  should  be  discussed  and  resolved  in  a  multilateral
framework, that unilateral decisions are dangerous. Also there is a certain, I would say, worry or
concern about the state of international relations, because if you put tariffs against your allies,
one wonders who the enemies are. I think these are two general considerations that are quite
relevant.
Now, on assessing the final impact of these measures many factors come into play. First of all,
is there going to be retaliation or not? Second, what’s going to be the response of the exchange
rate?  So  far  we’ve  seen  that  whenever  there  was  a  threat  of  putting  tariffs  towards  another
country, it was the dollar that would appreciate. But things can be different from time to time.
Third and most important is an aspect of all – I wouldn’t call them yet trade wars, but certainly of
all  the  trade  exchanges  that  we’ve  seen  –  and  that’s  the  effect  on  confidence.  The  effect  on
confidence is very difficult to assess, estimate, forecast. If it is a negative effect on confidence,
that’s going to be negative on both inflation and output.
There is concern in Brussels about the fate of pensions and the labour laws in Italy.
What’s the view of ECB?
Draghi: Well, we haven’t discussed this today, really. We were so focused on our decision on
monetary  policy  that  we  didn’t  discuss  this.  But  the  point  is  generally  speaking  that  fiscal
sustainability is of utmost concern in countries which have high debt.
I also have two questions. The first one: you’ve dropped the easing bias on QE. Does
that also mean that you would argue that the risks to the inflation outlook have become
broadly balanced similar to growth? Or would you still say that the risks to the inflation
outlook are tilted to the downside?
The second one is a very different one. You are ECB president for more than six years
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
now and member of the Governing Council for even longer. What would you say? What
makes a good ECB president? What are the most important skills?
Draghi: Well, the second question is easy to answer: I let others judge, it’s not up to me.
On  the  first  and  we  were  always  –  and  it  goes  back  in  tradition  –  not  to  discuss  risks  about
inflation. We’ve discussed risks about growth. The point here is basically that we see headline
inflation driven often by energy prices, food prices and other components that are more volatile.
Then  we  look  at  underlying  inflation  to  judge  the  robustness  of  the  convergence.  These
measures  of  underlying  inflation  are  still  –  some  of  them  actually  ticked  up  a  little.  Others,  in
general are subdued. The picture isn’t much different from last time, really. In this sense, I said
before that the decision we took today is obviously using incoming information like, as I said, the
reduced variance. Otherwise it’s really backward-looking; it doesn’t send any new signal.
Two questions: First of all, in a recent speech by Benoit Coeuré he seemed to make two
remarks. The first was that the eurozone is less at risk of a taper tantrum in the US when
it comes time to draw a close to any new bond purchases under QE. The second seemed
to be in that in boom markets at least, the flow of QE no longer matters; it’s a lot more
about the stock. I’d be interested in hearing yours and Mr Constâncio’s views on these
two points that Mr Coeuré made.
My second question is on the Latvian issue and how it pertains to the division of labour
between  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  national  central  banks.  You  said  at  the
European Parliament hearing recently that the permission to grant emergency loans was
better lying with the European Central Bank than, as it does at present, with the national
central bank. Was there a discussion of that today or was that planned? Are there any
other areas on which you think the powers should lie with the European Central Bank
rather than national central banks or other national authorities?
Draghi: Let me answer first to the second question. Now, this experience we had certainly is
giving some lessons we ought to really reflect on. First of all, what has been the role of the ECB
in this so far? The ECB has cooperated, has informed and has requested and this is what the
ECB  does  everywhere  in  these  situations  with  the  anti-money  laundering,  with  the  national
competent  authorities. As  you  said,  as  you  heard  many  times,  the  ECB  is  not  competent  in
money laundering and it doesn’t have investigative powers. Having said that, the current situation
as far as anti-money laundering is concerned is not satisfactory. What you would like to see are
two things: more cooperation between national competent authorities on money laundering; more
exchange of information; more coordination. There is a spectrum here: it can go from having a
regular and frequent formalised exchange forum or even go up to a centralised authority.
The second aspect is the cooperation between national competent authorities and supervisors,
both national supervisors and the SSM. And that’s key. That’s key because the money laundering
activities  as  far  as  banks  are  concerned  have  produced,  unavoidably,  reputational  and  legal
consequences.  Therefore  they  create  reputational  and  legal  liabilities  and  therefore  the
supervisor is going to be called in to react to these risks or prevent them from happening. That’s
what’s so important; the cooperation between the competent authorities and the supervisor.
Now, a partly different thing is about the Emergency Liquidity Assistance. I have expressed in the
European  Parliament  a  view  that  I  share  with  many  Governing  Council  members  and  many
board members, but it’s not something that can be implemented immediately. My view – which
by the way we had this experience, we had other experiences – where the conclusion can’t be
other than – ELA should be centralised. Basically, it should be given through a process where the
Governing  Council  participates  and  discusses  and,  in  the  end,  decides.  This  is  not  possible
legally  now  so  it’s  an  evolution  of  the  system  that  at  present  time  I  judge  unsatisfactory  and
needs to be changed.
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Now, going back to your first question, first of all I don’t think Mr Coeuré said flows don’t matter.
Or that the stock matters a lot more…
Draghi:  Okay,  but  you  see  how  it  makes  a  big  difference  whether  they  matter  or  they  matter
slightly less than stocks. The first time that a reference to stock was made was at the end of
2015 in a press conference I had where there was, I remember, a vast disappointment about the
measures that the Governing Council had just decided and I pointed out that even though the
measures were probably not fulfilling your expectations, we still had the stocks that were going to
go up over the oncoming period of time. At that time, markets paid no attention whatsoever to
stocks. Now attention is on stocks. Now, the reason is not that there is actually more than a
trade-off; I would say that the two are complementary. And it’s normal that this should be this
way. When the flows were huge and the stocks were small, the flows mattered more.
Now, gradually this has changed but this doesn’t [mean] – that flows don’t matter. In fact, flows at
the present time matter a lot also because of the sequence that we have in our monetary policy
decision that it’s cast in stone whereby the interest rate path depends on the dates of the net
asset  purchases  programme.  I  think  the  discussion  today  showed  that  all  four  elements,
including  the  reinvestment  policy  but  especially  the  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates,  are
important.
Mr Draghi, you’ve played down the decision today to remove the easing bias, but the
Governing Council felt it necessary to leave it until now. What is it that you think has
changed in the last seven weeks to merit that move? It seems if anything the outlook has
got more uncertain.
Second question is on your role as ECB – your experience as ECB President. You have
been personally credited with a lot of the decisions that the ECB has made over the last
seven years. That reflects your ability to set the agenda in Governing Council meetings.
How  much  could  a  new  ECB  president  with  a  different  set  of  beliefs  about  QE,  for
instance,  take  the  ECB  along  a  different  course  given  your  knowledge  of  how  the
institution works?
Draghi:  Let  me  answer  the  second  question  first.  Listen,  you  keep  on  asking  questions  as  if
tomorrow I’m going to leave. I still have quite some time before my mandate expires. I may be
willing to answer questions about myself at the date which is closer to the end of my mandate
than it is today.
The  other  question,  as  I  said,  it’s  fundamentally  a  backward-looking  measure.  What  has
changed? Well, we had several revisions of the growth outlook and at the same time, we have a
narrowing of the convergence path, of the variance around the path, which basically explains why
in a sense we are confident. It confirmed our previous confidence. That was the discussion we
had. That’s the main reason. Also if you read the words, these are really unlikely contingencies
now, the ones that would suggest that we would activate this easing bias. That was the reason
why we did it and why we did it today.
Markets seem to be very sensitive to any kind of news at the moment, for example as the
reaction to the December minutes showed. Would it not help to be a bit clearer on the
forward guidance to reduce the risk of such sudden market reactions?
My  second  question,  a  few  weeks  ago  there  were  also  some  hiccups  in  the  markets
because there were sudden fears of increasing inflation. How do you see that risk or the
risk of rising inflation expectations?
Draghi: The second answer is that the market in the United States reacted to a number about
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
inflation – which was falling by the way – and a number about nominal wage growth. In a sense
they reacted with a sharp market correction, which was in a sense amplified by the conditions of
financial markets, especially the stocks, especially the equity market. It was mostly limited to the
equity market and it was pretty short in terms of reaction. In Europe the situation is different. In
Europe we don’t see wage growth of that amount, we don’t see inflation rates of that amount. It’s
just that the risk is different.
First one was on the sensitivity of…
Draghi:  If  we  make  exception  for  what’s  happening  in  the  United  States  between  market
correction, statements, various statements on trade and other issues, you would agree you don’t
see much volatility in our financial markets in the eurozone. If anything, the volatility is mostly
caused  by  our  own  statements.  This  angst  that  everything  should  be  clear  in  advance  isn’t
reflected in the markets. Let me add that the reason why we have these discussions is that there
are different states of mind regarding the new information. There is uncertainty about potential
output growth. There is uncertainty about the size of slack and this uncertainty is more present in
some  members  than  in  others.  In  some  members  there  is  a  little  less  confidence  and  more
desire to wait for more data and to see. And in others, there is more confidence in the fact that
they would like to say things sooner rather than later.
I think that’s the main difference. But so far whatever the difference is on when to say things, the
basic point is that the policy continues to remain reactive and not proactive.
You said today that there is a strong momentum in the European economy, but some
risks remain in the horizon. Do you mean that the political instability in some countries,
for example in Italy, could be a problem for European growth and also for stability in the
euro area?
Draghi: What we have seen in the past few cases of elections outcomes doesn’t suggest that
markets reacted in a way that would undermine confidence. The reaction to the Italian elections
has been more or less the same as it has been to other elections, to other major political events,
where most observers were foreseeing sharp corrections or high volatility. That’s what it is at this
point  in  time.  That’s  not  to  underestimate  the  fact  that  protracted  instability  may  undermine
confidence. As I said before, anything that undermines confidence is negative, has a negative
effect  on  both  inflation  and  output.  This  was  when  I  was  discussing  trade  measures,  but  it
applies to all kinds of contingencies.
I’d like to ask a question about Germany and reform. The coalition agreement for the new
grand coalition could be seen as rolling back some of the labour market reforms that
were undertaken about ten years ago and helped produce the low unemployment that
you see in Germany today. Are you at all concerned not only about Germany but that
there  may  be  some  movement  backward  on  reforms?  Would  that  have  any  effect  on
growth, your estimates of growth, and on monetary policy?
Draghi: It’s a very broad question and therefore it’s very difficult to answer. More generally what
one can say is that all the reforms that have increased productivity and growth ought to be left in
place. If these reforms had negative distributional consequences, producing a more inequitable
income or wealth distribution, these distributional effects ought to be taken care of. I think if there
is one aspect in which, generally speaking, policies not only in Europe I would say, but all over
the world, have been insufficient, was to take care of the distributional consequences of reforms
that basically were positive for growth, but not necessarily for equity.
Back to the Italian elections: aren’t you worried about the fact that in one of the most
pro-European countries traditionally, the anti-European forces have gained more than
50% of the votes? What does this mean for the European project? Don’t you think that it
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
could jeopardise even the euro area reforms? It’s the third biggest country in Europe, in
the eurozone.
My second question is on this day, it’s 8  March, it’s Women’s Day. Don’t you think it is a
little bit sad, with all respect for Mr de Guindos, that there are always men appointed for
the ECB and that the presence of women in the Governing Council is still so rare?
th
Draghi:  On  the  first  question,  I  really  don’t  want  to  comment.  I  can  only  say  that  the  euro  is
irreversible and progress on deepening – and I just read it in the introductory statement, where
the  Governing  Council’s  view  about  this  can  be  found  –  the  Governing  Council  says  that
deepening  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  remains  a  priority.  The  Governing  Council  urges
specific and decisive steps to complete the Banking Union and the Capital Markets Union.
Now, on what you said, certainly I think the gender balance ought to be improved. This ought to
happen  at  all  levels.  By  the  way,  let  me  congratulate  Mr  de  Guindos  because  the  Governing
Council  approved  him.  I  am  absolutely  confident  that  he  is  going  to  be  a  very,  very  good
colleague for all of us.
As far as the ECB is concerned, there will be a press release because we are also working on
improving  our  gender  balance  situation.  There  will  be  a  press  release  stating  what  sort  of
initiatives  we’ve  undertaken  and  the  board  has  approved  recently.  These  initiatives  are
undertaken because we’ve made significant progress since we set explicitly our targets – explicit
targets which had not been set before. Still, this progress is less than what we wished for. The
numbers now fall short of our interim targets.
We introduced the gender targets in 2013 and the interim now, right now – actually at the end of
last year – 27% of management positions were held by women compared with an interim target
of 29%. For the most senior management roles however, the share was 17% against an interim
target of 24% so we’ve got to do some work here. There have been, as I said, various initiatives.
One is basically to ask the head hunters to focus on gender in the recruitment process. Another
one is to sort of motivate the business managers to keep vacancies open and possibly until the
objective is reached. There are various issues that we’ve done some work on. There was also
another important point in that the recruiting panels will now have a considerable presence of
women. In a sense there are often unconscious biases that play a role. That’s why it’s necessary
to assure a, I would say, much more significant presence of women in the recruitment panels.
About the former Spanish Minister, Luis de Guindos, are you thinking about a re-profiling
of the portfolio of the responsibilities of the Governing Council members, having in mind
his profile, his political profile?
Draghi: We haven’t really thought about this.
Let  me  bring  you  back  what  the  market  is  expecting  from  the  ECB.  When  are  you
planning on giving perhaps more of an outlook to what’s going to happen in the second
half of the year? Before, you also were at least slightly guiding us towards when we can
expect to get some more information.
My second question, let me bring you back to the trade aspect. You were saying that
there’s  even  room  that  perhaps  the  economy  might  do  better  than  expected  in  the
eurozone. But still isn’t there also quite a huge amount of downward potential given the
trade distortions which could lay ahead and given how export oriented our eurozone
economy is?
Draghi: I’ll answer immediately the second question. That’s why we said that the risks to growth
are balanced in the sense that we have some upward risks domestically, but some downward
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
risks globally. That’s what we refer to with that. It’s quite clear that if we have retaliation, we may
have  effects  on  confidence  that  I  mentioned  before.  This  would  certainly  at  the  very  least
introduce higher uncertainty in the future growth path. More generally, I think there are two main
risks that one can see today. One is this one that I mentioned related to trade. There is also
another risk that is less mentioned these days. That’s the risk of financial deregulation in other
major jurisdictions. We should not forget what the situation was before the crisis – in the years
leading to the crisis. Like today, we had an expansionary monetary policy which was justified by
the conditions at that time, as ours is justified by the conditions today.
But  in  the  10–12  years  before  the  crisis  there  had  been  a  systematic  disruption  of  financial
regulation in the major jurisdictions. This combination, we may disagree whether the source was
predominantly one or the other, but certainly nobody would disagree about the combination of the
two. I would flag this as one major risk for the years ahead: that we repeat the same mistake.
Now, I should say also that the ‘we’ is not right in this context because  in  the  eurozone  both
national legislators and European legislators and the European Commission are certainly not on
that path. We are talking about a global market and so massive deregulation in one part of the
market is going to affect the whole world.
On your first question, the information will follow our gradual assessment of the convergence of
our  inflation  path  to  our  objective.  As  we  see  more  information  coming  that  says  that  this
convergence is progressing, is  becoming  more  robust  and  is  becoming  more  and  more  self-
sustained, so will be the information – it will be clearer. We’ll be in a position to provide you with
more clarity about the oncoming developments.
If core inflation will be below 2% by the end of July, the QE – the quantitative easing –
will be extended? The press release and the statement is clear, but hearing it from you,
it will be different.
Second question: the country with the largest quantitative easing in quantitative terms is
Germany. Germany was already strong without quantitative easing. Is it dangerous for
the equilibrium of the euro area? Is it a contradiction?
Draghi: Now, responding to the first question, that’s what I read here, and I repeat it: regarding
non-standard monetary policy measures we confirm that our net asset purchases at the current
monthly pace of €30 billion are intended to run until the end of September 2018, or beyond if
necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path
of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. Before I reiterate this, we continue to expect the ECB
interest rates to remain at their present levels for an extended period of time and well past the
horizon of our net asset purchases.
Now, the second question is about one country. We deal with price stability for the eurozone;
that’s  what  matters.  We  don’t  look  at  individual  countries  –  or  we  do  look  at  the  individual
countries  only  as  far  as  the  developments  in  individual  countries  are  useful  to  assess  the
convergence to our objective. Our mandate is price stability for the whole of the euro area.
You were urging progress on banking union and the BIS is getting comments now on the
regulatory treatment of sovereign exposures by banks. I’d like to know whether there is
a comment or what is your view or your position on this?
The second question is broader on inflation as there is a big debate on the fact that it
isn’t moving as fast as one would expect. What’s your view and what’s the ECB’s view on
the way to look at inflation and whether you agree that someone says we should throw
away the books on economics and maybe write some new paragraphs?
Draghi: Now, on the first point, as a matter of fact the BIS, the Basel Committee was not able to
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
agree on a treatment of the sovereign exposures in the banks’ balance sheets. There isn’t any
world  treatment  of  sovereign  exposures. As  a  matter  of  fact,  most  countries  don’t  have  any
specific risk weight with respect to that. Basically, our experience from the crisis in the eurozone
has shown that sovereign bonds are not riskless: they’re risky and they are in the banks. These
are risky assets in banks’ portfolios, so we have to take this into account. At the same time, we
want to keep a level playing field across the world with a treatment of similar risks. This is a
complex  issue  that  people  are  working  on  in  the  European  Commission,  in  the  European
Parliament. We will see how it will be addressed. Not simple to resolve.
Now, the other point was about inflation; shall we throw away the books? Well, I think this was
suggested, or it was more frequent, about until a year ago. Should we abandon the 2% objective?
Then you had two views: one was that we should lower it to 1% or 0%, some people said and
others said we should raise it to 4%. Obviously, the aims were opposite. The ones that were
suggesting  4%,  the  idea  was  that  then  expectations  for  inflation  will  adjust  and  therefore  the
policy would have to become even more accommodative. The point is, basically, that the ECB is
following best practice like all the other central banks – or most of them, certainly all the large
central banks in the world. And there are good reasons for that. And on the other hand, there are
serious costs about changing course on credibility and the anchoring of expectations. We can go
on on this for a while about changing objective.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
