Jens  Weidmann:  Farewell  reception  for  Dr Andreas  Dombret  and
Carl-Ludwig Thiele
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  farewell  reception  for  Dr
Andreas Dombret and Carl-Ludwig Thiele, Frankfurt am Main, 4 May 2018.
 1 Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen
Welcome to the Bundesbank. A distinguished group of guests has gathered here today to take
their  leave  of  you,  Mr  Dombret,  and  you,  Mr  Thiele,  at  the  end  of  your  periods  of  office  as
members  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the Deutsche  Bundesbank. And  they  have  certainly  not
come here today, as you, Mr Dombret, recently speculated, in order to assure themselves that
you  are  in  fact  really  leaving!  No,  obviously  and  quite  rightly,  both  you  and  your  work  are
extremely highly appreciated – including beyond national borders. Otherwise, this event would
certainly have not attracted such an illustrious audience.
This  leave-taking  today  is  on  a  bigger  scale  than  that  to  which  we  at  the Bundesbank,  in  our
modesty, are accustomed. Not all of the guests can be accommodated here inside; some of you
are  following  the  speeches  outside  on  the  monitors.  To  you,  too,  I  extend  a  warm  welcome.
Perhaps the big screens that have been set up will help to create something of a World Cup
atmosphere and compensate at least a little for the physical separation.
Mr Dombret and Mr Herr Thiele, eight years ago – in what was also a World Cup year – you both
joined  the  Executive  Board  of  the Bundesbank: in early May 2010, a time when the European
sovereign  debt  crisis  was  coming  to  a  head  for  the  first  time  and  the  Executive  Board  of  the
Bundesbank  as  well  as  the  institution  itself  were  facing  an  exceptional  challenge.  There  can
hardly have been a more turbulent start. For some euro area countries, the situation on the bond
markets was escalating dramatically. The Bundesbank’s financial crisis management team was
continuously preparing analyses. And just a few day after taking up office, you were both involved
in the meetings that took place twice daily.
On  9  May  2010,  on  a  Sunday  shortly  before  midnight,  the  Executive  Board  then  agreed  to
implement the previous majority decision of the Governing Council of the ECB and also purchase
Greek, Portuguese and Irish government bonds – despite the considerable misgivings about this
decision.  This  meant  that  the  Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP)  could  commence  at  the
beginning of the week. As central bankers, both of you therefore had to make a cold start having
come to the Bundesbank from the financial industry and the political sphere respectively.
The  following  years  were  to  be  no  less  eventful  and  an  appreciation  of  your  work  therefore
necessarily  has  to  throw  a  spotlight  only  on  those  occasions  that  were  of  outstanding
importance: key stages of crisis management, however, will be brought into focus, illustrating
how the Bank has developed and progressed under and thanks to your leadership – and what a
crucial  contribution  you  and  those  departments  under  your  charge  have  made  to  the
Bundesbank’s stability mandate.
 
2 Dr Andreas Dombret
During  your  first  four  years  at  the Bundesbank,  Mr  Dombret,  you  served  as  the  Bank’s
representative on the international committees. It was a time when the G20 was beginning to
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
learn the regulatory lessons from the financial crisis and, together with the FSB, emerge as the
hub  of  the  efforts  to  forge  a  more  resilient  global  financial  system. And  it  was  also  when  the
International  Monetary  Fund  was  in  the  process  of  stretching  a  safety  net  around  the  world,
shifting  quota  shares  and  voting  power  to  emerging  market  and  developing  economies,  and
tripling  its  capital  resources.  So  additional  bilateral  borrowing  agreements  with  central  banks
needed  to  be  negotiated  and  designed.  These  were  mammoth  tasks,  not  just  politically  but
institutionally, too.
And being the Bundesbank’s G20 and IMFC deputy, you were in the thick of things as a forceful
advocate  of  the  Bank’s  positions.  Because  your  ability  to  navigate  the  international  arena
circumspectly and deftly, and to nurture and foster networks, is a rare talent. Everyone who had
the privilege to accompany you on your travels hails your tact, your ability to instinctively read a
conversation the right way, and your gift for bringing people together. And you were out and about
so often that I am sorely tempted to reword in your honour a witticism originally directed at the
former German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher. "Two aeroplanes cross paths over the
Atlantic, and Dombret is on both of them." Our travel office tells me that, over eight years, you
clocked up almost five million air miles – that’s 200 trips around the world. Perhaps that’s why
the media often dubbed you the Bundesbank's "foreign minister".
And time and again, you faced the same challenge. Is it better to kick the problem down the road
by striking a quick compromise, even if it is bound to come back and haunt you, sooner or later?
Or is it better to resolve the issue once and for all? You were always passionate about reaching a
stability-driven, long-term solution – like during Germany’s presidency of the G7 in 2015, when
you  played  a  pivotal  role  in  ensuring  that  credible  standards  for  total  loss-absorbing  capacity
(TLAC) were ultimately in place for systemically important banks.
Your instinctive ability to read a situation and your negotiating skills were a gift that kept on giving
for  the Bundesbank,  including  within  the  Eurosystem.  When  you  were  the  Board  member
responsible for the Directorate General Statistics, for example, there was the matter of whether
the Bundesbank would play an active role in running the system in which securities in Europe are
kept on a security-by-security basis. It was you who convinced the ECB to run the system jointly
with the Bundesbank, and that was a good outcome.
You were also the Bundesbank’s voice when it came to explaining the particular architecture of
the  euro  area  or  the  Bank’s  viewpoints  to  the  world. And  you  did  this  in  your  speeches,  for
example, which you held with remarkable frequency. You’re a record-breaker, Mr Dombret, and
not  just  because  of  all  the  air  miles  you  have  clocked  up.  Our  research  has  found  that  there
wasn’t a single central banker in the euro area or the United States who came close to holding as
many speeches as you did over the past four years – you could say that’s dedication verging on
missionary zeal. But there’s more. You also made the most of every single trip abroad to engage
in dialogue – with colleagues from central banks, with government representatives, diplomats,
executives at commercial banks and sometimes students at colleges as well. And what is more,
you always kept the door to your network open for your colleagues from the Bundesbank so that
they could also tap your valuable contacts.
For long periods, you managed your Directorates General by BlackBerry – and almost half of our
16 Directorates General passed through your responsibility at one point or another during your
term of office. This way of working meant that your units had to be meticulous and focus on what
really  counts:  that  said,  anyone  who  could  condense  an  issue  into  not  much  more  than  two
BlackBerry pages stood a good chance of getting a quick decision from you.
But  you  weren’t  just  fast,  you  were  also  far-sighted.  Just  take  the  establishment  of  the  SSM,
when you showed your flair for intuition. To maximise the Bundesbank’s contribution to European
banking supervision, you made sure that the Bank’s supervisors in the joint supervisory teams
belonged to Central Office in organisational terms but continued to be deployed out in the field.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
That was instrumental in tapping synergies and, at the same time, heeding the personal needs of
the supervisors affected.
It was less Mr Dombret’s quick reactions and more his stamina as a negotiator that was called
for when it came to the topic of Basel III. The finalisation of Basel III at the end of last year was
very much to your credit – and with unilateralism raising its head again, getting the United States
under  President  Donald  Trump  on  board  for  this  global  financial  accord  was  a  major
achievement. Not once during the negotiations did you lose sight of what made Europe’s banking
system special. And yet at the same time, you always negotiated with a view to striking a deal –
not just in order to put an end to regulatory uncertainty for the banks, but also so as not to impair
the Basel process and the multilateral approach. You didn’t negotiate in a vacuum, but always
had a keen eye for the ramifications. In the remarkable round of negotiations in Santiago, you
sent photos of the latest status of negotiations to your team in the banking supervision unit, so
that  you  could  receive  simulations  and  impact  studies  in  return  almost  in  real  time.  The
agreement which the Basel Committee finally reached, eleven years on from the onset of the
financial crisis, was another major lesson learned from the crisis.
There’s one debate you set in motion, though, which you will have to pass on, unresolved, to your
successor,  and  that  is  the  subject  of  proportionality.  You  were  one  of  the  first  to  speak  out
against placing too much of an administrative burden on the small institutions operating within
their  domestic  markets  –  but  you  also  said  that  regulators  would  not  go  easy  on  their  capital
requirements. And you were also quick to put the profitability of German financial institutions in
the  face  of  the  persistent  low-interest-rate  environment  on  the  agenda.  The  low-interest-rate
survey initiated by the Bundesbank and then conducted in partnership with Bafin now sheds light,
every two years, on how smaller and medium-sized banks, with their relatively interest-focused
business  models,  are  coping  with  the  low  interest  rates. Amongst  other  things,  you  used  the
findings from this survey to talk at length with the institutions about how they could boost their
profitability. The wish you expressed in an interview you gave a few years ago – that there should
be a deeper understanding between banks and the Bundesbank when you leave office – is one
that you yourself have made come true.
 
3 Carl-Ludwig Thiele
Mr Thiele, you shared this task of making the Bank more transparent, cultivating the exchange of
ideas  and  opening  up  the Bundesbank  to  the  outside  world,  with  Mr  Dombret  and  rigorously
implemented it, especially with regard to gold. Trust is the most valuable asset that a central
bank has. This is why the Bundesbank's Executive Board provided the general public in Germany
with comprehensive information about the storage of Germany’s gold. You personally made the
gold  reserves  your  primary  concern  and  successfully  managed  to  discredit  any  bizarre  and
absurd conspiracy theories. You made it clear that here at the Bundesbank, all that glitters is gold
and that we have unrestricted access to all the gold that is on our books.
I  can  still  clearly  remember  the  press  conference  that  we  held  at  the  beginning  of  our
transparency campaign in January 2013, when the guest house was almost as crowded as it is
today – the only difference being that much better specimens were on show for the audience to
photograph with their mobile phones. At that press conference, you presented twenty gold bars
from the Bundesbank's stocks and described the methods and equipment used by the Bank to
verify  the  authenticity  of  the  gold  bars.  You  reported  on  how  you  had  personally  inspected
Germany’s  gold  in  storage  in  the  vaults  of  the  other  central  banks.  And  you  explained  the
Bundesbank's new storage concept, which envisaged relocating gold from Paris and New York
to Frankfurt with the long-term objective of having half of all Germany’s gold reserves in storage
in Germany in the future. Even the most critical of journalists seemed delighted when they had
the opportunity to hold one of the gold bars in their hands and send a photo to their colleagues.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  level  of  transparency  that  we  managed  to  achieve  became  particularly  apparent  with  the
publication of the gold bar list, which contains each individual German gold bar with its specific
data,  including  its  storage  location.  By  adopting  this  approach,  we  made  the Bundesbank  a
pioneer  among  central  banks  in  terms  of  gold  transparency.  Yet  transparency  alone  was  not
enough. No less than 674 tonnes of gold with a current value of €23.5 billion had to be physically
transported from New York and Paris to Frankfurt. Not only did you and your team manage to
carry out these shipments without any hiccups, you also managed to do so ahead of schedule.
That said, a few weeks ago, I still momentarily had beads of sweat on my forehead when I saw
on the news that the loading hatch of a cargo plane had come open during take-off and that three
tonnes of gold had come tumbling to the ground. I quickly remembered that our shipments had
long  since  been  completed,  and  that  something  like  this  would  not  have  happened  to  you
anyway.
Part  of  your  commitment  to  gold  in  recent  years  also  involved  providing  details  about  how
Germany's gold reserves came about. On our website there is a meticulous list of all inventory
changes since 1951, back when the Bank Deutscher Länder recorded the first gold bar on its
books.  Furthermore,  the  recently  published  book Das  Gold  der  Deutschen  tells  this  story,
accompanied  by  glossy  photos,  in  a  comprehensible  and  enthralling  way.  By  providing
transparent  facts  and  presenting  the  individual  bars  in  an  appealing  manner  on  various
occasions, you have helped to fundamentally strengthen the general public’s confidence in the
Bundesbank as the custodian of Germany’s foreign reserves and gold.
Mr  Thiele,  your  keen  sense  of  what  is  important  to  the  public  and  what Bundesbank-relevant
issues could come up at any time, led you to address the topics of digital money, blockchain and
distributed  ledger  technology  at  the  beginning  of  2014.  You  warned  of  the  highly  speculative
nature of Bitcoins, a warning that is equally as relevant today. And you made it clear that these
digital creations do not share the qualities of real money.
And so it is only logical that a few weeks ago at a G20 meeting in Buenos Aires, which both
Finance Minister Scholz and I attended, crypto tokens were on the agenda. The inclusion of this
topic  was  at  the  request  of  the  German  and  French  finance  ministers  and  central  bank
governors.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  has  been  tasked  with  presenting  a  report  on  crypto
tokens this summer, taking all aspects into account – from financial stability to crime prevention
and consumer protection. The finance ministers and central bank governors were in agreement
that  crypto  tokens  should  be  regarded  as  a  speculative  niche  phenomenon  and  not  as  a
currency.
You, Mr Thiele, recently made reference to another aspect which should not be neglected: the
environmental  footprint  of  Bitcoins.  You  showed  that  in  view  of  the  increasingly  complicated
computational  tasks  involved  in  mining  new  Bitcoins,  a  Bitcoin  transaction  consumes  –  and  I
quote – as much as 460,000 times more electricity than a standard credit transfer.
I, in any case, do not consider crypto tokens to be a viable alternative to legal tender. We do not
need crypto tokens to ensure a stable and efficient monetary and financial system, but rather
central banks committed to price stability, effective banking regulation, a reliable cash supply and
well-functioning payment systems. We have all of these in the euro area. In addition, with instant
payments, it is now also possible to conduct cashless, final and fail-safe payments using our
high-performance euro payment systems 365 days a year in just a matter of seconds, that is the
concurrent settlement of transactions without the use of cash.
Mr Thiele, compared with instant payments, the launch of SEPA less than four years ago seems
like a project from another era. And yet it was a decisive step on the road towards achieving
integrated euro payments: payment transactions became faster and more efficient with SEPA,
and competition between credit institutions has intensified. To ensure that the launch of SEPA
ran smoothly, you, Mr Thiele, managed to set up a SEPA Council in Germany in which all the
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
parties involved, including the end users, get to sit down at the same table. And the reservations
associated  with  "IBAN  the  Terrible",  as  it  was  referred  to  back  then,  were  dispelled  with  the
introduction of the 22-digit IBAN, which was split into four-digit blocks. During the introduction of
SEPA,  you  also  demonstrated  your  keen  instinct  by  showing  how  important  dialogue  and  an
understanding for the views of the general public are.
As  a  member  of  the  Executive  Board,  you  were  responsible  not  only  for  cashless  payment
transactions but also for cash management – another topic which affects the day-to-day lives of
the general public. "Cash is minted freedom": this is the phrase you like to quote as a convinced
liberal. In keeping with this motto, you consequently advocated the freedom of choice with regard
to payment instruments. After all, each and every citizen should be allowed to choose whichever
available means of payment he wishes to use. You consistently represented the Bundesbank's
neutral position, whilst at the same time taking a differentiated approach to the issue of cash.
The  Eurosystem  and  the Bundesbank  are  clearly  committed  to  cash  and  the Bundesbank
supplies  the  entire  country  with  high-quality  banknotes  and  coins. After  all,  this  is  the  form  of
money in which citizens experience the single currency most directly and which they also use
the most frequently when making payments at the point-of-sale. Under your aegis, Mr Thiele, the
new  branch  in  Dortmund  is  set  to  become  an  innovative  cash  processing  centre  that  is  in  a
league of its own. After all, you literally visited each and every Bundesbank branch, sought direct
contact with the staff members, listened to their concerns and explained why certain decisions
had to be made. In doing so, you were an early role model in the Bank for the open and direct
communication culture that is so important to me.
 
4 Conclusion
Dear Mr Thiele, dear Mr Dombret, despite having had a fulfilling professional life before joining the
Bundesbank, you both became central bankers with heart and soul. You have made a lasting
difference  in  your  respective  areas  of  responsibility  and  promoted  the  interests  of  the
Bundesbank.  I  would  like  to  thank  you  most  sincerely  for  your  outstanding  contribution  to  the
Bank’s achievements – in the name of the entire Executive Board, but also quite personally.
I expect that you, Mr Thiele, who are seen as a true family man within the Bank, are probably
looking forward to spending more time with your large family. And all I’ll say to you, Mr Dombret,
with your US passport, is: "See you around!" – I am quite sure we’ll run into one another at the
odd art exhibition or elsewhere.
Mrs Thiele and Mrs Dombret, while your husbands will have more freedom, the opposite is true
for you. You will have new obligations planning your families’ schedules. You see here, in line
with  our  traditions,  two  bouquets  of  flowers  for  you.  However,  I  have  been  told  that  you,  Mrs
Thiele, would throw a bouquet of flowers back in my face if they were presented to you as thanks
for "keeping your husband free for work" for many years. I don’t want to risk that. I would therefore
like  to  hand  you  both  the  flowers  not  for  keeping  your  husbands  free  for  work  but  in
acknowledgement of the downsides that the level of professional commitment your husbands
have shown involve for their partners.
And  you,  dear  Colleagues,  I  will  hand  the  certificates  of  appreciation  signed  by  the  German
President, the Chancellor and the Finance Minister.
Ladies and gentlemen
As  we  say  farewell  to  two  worthy  members  of  our  Executive  Board,  we  are  in  the  fortunate
position of already being able to welcome one successor. The second Board member has yet to
be nominated, Mr Scholz. You, Mr Balz, will join our Executive Board in September once you
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
have finished off some tasks for the European Parliament.
At  the  beginning  of  my  speech,  I  pointed  out  that  Mr  Dombret  and  Mr  Thiele  joined  the
Bundesbank just as the government debt crisis started. It would be a typical mistake, mixing up
correlation and causality, to declare the crisis to be over now that Mr Dombret and Mr Thiele are
leaving the board. So rest assured, Mr Balz: while I would not go as far as to say that "the next
crisis  is  inevitable",  it  is  safe  to  say  that  enough  remains  to  be  done.  I  am  sure  you  will
experience exciting and varied activities on the Bundesbank’s board. In any case, we are looking
forward to working together and wish you the best of luck in all you do at the Bundesbank.
And with that, I would like to hand over to the Federal Finance Minister, but not before expressing
my heartfelt thanks to you, Mr Scholz, for being here today. I understand your presence not least
as a mark of respect for the Bundesbank as an institution, its staff and all it does for Germany
and Europe.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
