1st Ferdinand Pecora Prize
Of dogs, black swans and endangered species: 
a perspective on financial regulation
Laudatio of Andrew G. Haldane
by Luigi Federico Signorini
Palermo, 15 December 2017
I  am  happy  to  deliver  the  laudatio  for  Andrew  Haldane  on  the  occasion  of  his  nomination,  by 
unanimous decision of the International Rome Conference on Money, Banking and Finance, as the 
first person to be awarded the Ferdinand Pecora Prize. It is also a pleasure to welcome in Palermo a 
brilliant colleague and a friend. 
Ferdinand Pecora was a native of this island. He was born in Nicosia in 1882, and emigrated to the 
United States as a child, in 1886. There, he started his career as an assistant district attorney in New 
York City, where he earned an excellent reputation as a prosecutor. But his good credit eventually 
turned  against  him:  his  application  as  district  attorney  was  rejected,  due  to  fears  that  an  overly 
fervent Pecora could bring local politicians to court. After this turn of events, Pecora left the district 
attorney’s  office  for  private  practice  until  the  beginning  of  1933,  when  he  was  appointed  Chief 
Counsel  to  the US  Senate’s Committee on  Banking  and  Currency. In  this  assignment he  was the 
fourth – and last – chief counsel in the inquiry launched by the Senate Committee to investigate the 
causes of the Wall Street crash of 1929. It was largely as a result of what came to be known as the 
‘Pecora Investigation’ that the US Congress passed the ‘Glass-Steagall’ Banking Act of 1933, the 
Securities Act of 1933, and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. 
This set of measures produced a radical change in the architecture of financial supervision in the 
United States, establishing a system that was to last for about two generations. The Banking Act 
mandated federal deposit insurance and separated commercial and investment banking; it created a 
Federal Open Market Committee and restricted bank competition and ‘speculation’. These simple 
yet powerful measures were meant to prevent the recurrence of severe financial crises. 
Was this arrangement optimal? Maybe it was fit for the times; but, decades later, the intellectually 
unavoidable  trade-off  between  stability-oriented  supervisory  constraints  and  efficiency-oriented 
market  freedom  resurfaced  in  the  policy  debate.  Beginning  in  the  1970s,  in  a  changed  cultural 
climate and with memories of the Great Depression fading, the Glass-Steagall rules were gradually 
weakened.  The  idea  of  unshackling  market  forces  had  growing  appeal  in  academia,  and  was 
adopted and powerfully advanced by a banking industry eager for deregulation. 
Eventually,  the  pendulum  swung  all  the  way  to  the  other  extreme,  not  just  in  one  country  but 
globally. At some point, minimum capital ratios seemed to be all that was needed to safeguard 
financial stability; beyond that, the markets were assumed to know best.1 Financial innovation in 
the  industry,  coupled  with  the  somewhat  insouciant  attitude  of  (some)  supervisors,  especially 
about  the  quality,  i.e.  the  loss-absorbing  capacity,  of  capital  instruments  (and  a  neglect  for 
liquidity regulation, and a vast overestimate of the modellability of trading-book risk, and much 
else),  paved  the  way  for  a  seemingly  golden  era  of  impetuous  growth  in  finance,  flourishing 
1   The Bank of Italy was a rather reluctant follower. We always kept stricter requirements on the composition of Tier 1 
capital than  was  mandated by the Basel accords, and  maintained for some time our own  maturity transformation 
rules. On the latter, I regret to say, at some point we felt unable to go against the tide and formally abolished them in 
2006. However, we still kept an eye on risks linked to maturity mismatches, and Italian banks were never allowed to 
go for a Northern Rock-style mismatch. 
 innovation, mind-boggling complexity of instruments and transactions, and very fine profits for 
banks. We know how it ended. 
The  shock  of  the  crisis  called  for  a  rethinking  of  a  purely  laissez-faire  approach  to  finance.  To 
some,  the  idea  was  a  return  to  what  could  be  termed  the  old,  safe  ‘Pecora  way’:  an  about-turn 
towards Glass-Steagall and the concept of ‘narrow banking’. To most, it was rather coming back to 
the  Pecora  method:  a  cautious,  thorough  assessment  of  the  evidence,  and  a  reappraisal  of  the 
fundamental trade-offs inherent in banking and financial regulation. 
 
Andy  has  contributed  to  this  debate  in  many  ways,  often  bringing  a  fresh  perspective.  Inquiring 
about the nature of financial regulation has been Andy’s main field of interest over the past decade. 
One of the most important dimensions of the debate on optimal regulation is the trade-off between 
simple/rough/robust rules on the one hand, and a risk-sensitive/sophisticated/granular approach on 
the other;  Andy’s memorable metaphors,  and more importantly the reasoning behind them, have 
loomed large in that debate.  
Like  Mr.  Pecora’s,  Andy’s  investigations  were  prompted  by  a  dramatic  financial  crisis.  Unlike 
Mr.  Pecora,  Andy  lacked  a  specific  parliamentary  mandate.  He  investigated  out  of  his  own 
initiative  from  his  office  in  Threadneedle  Street:  first  as  the  Head  of  the  Systemic  Risk 
Assessment Division; then as Executive Director for Financial Stability; and finally, since June 
2014,  as  Chief  Economist  and  member  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of 
England. Along this path, by the way, Andy also managed to get a nomination by TIME magazine 
as one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2014. 
It  is  certainly  fitting  that  the  first  edition  of  this  Prize  is  going  to  someone  who,  like  Ferdinand 
Pecora,  has  helped  us  think  through  the  potential,  the  objectives  and  the  pitfalls  of  financial 
regulation. Andy’s contributions have been many and diverse; I won’t be able to do justice to all of 
them. 
In  2009  Andy  denounced  the  perils  of  an  increasingly  tight  and  potentially  asymmetric  relation 
between banks and the State.2 His thoughts had wide resonance in the banking world. We always 
knew that the relationship between banks and governments is tricky. However, the Lehman collapse 
and  then  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  brought  the  debate  on  ‘too-big-to-fail’  (TBTF)  and 
systemic externalities to a new level. Andy played a significant role in this debate.  
The  issue  of  the  ‘right’  size  of  banks  is  one  that  Andy  tackled  more  than  once,  from  different 
angles.3, 4 One of his key contributions was to remind us that diversification and diversity are not the 
same  thing.  Size  and  scope  increase  the  benefits  of  diversification,  so  big  banks  (that  is,  larger 
portfolios) ought to be highly diversified and less prone to idiosyncratic risks. But global banks that 
are fully diversified cannot logically be diverse: they must hold the same portfolio. And this means 
                                                 
2   Alessandri P, Haldane AG, Banking on the State, September 2009. 
3   Haldane, AG, The $100 billion question, March 2010. 
4   Haldane, AG, On being the right size, Beesley Lecture at the Institute of Directors, London, 25 October 2012 (then 
published on the Journal of Financial Perspectives, 2, 1, 2014). 
 that they are likely to be more prone to a systemic collapse after a very bad aggregate shock. A 
simple  look  at  what  happened  to  some  large  international  banks  in  the  latest  financial  crisis 
illustrates how real this problem can be.5 This is also an example of how risks that may not appear 
significant  from  a  microprudential  perspective  may  actually  become  much  more  worrisome  if 
assessed through a macroprudential approach – a viewpoint whose importance Andy was among the 
first to stress.  
Another channel through which TBTF status can endanger financial stability relates to the balance 
between idiosyncratic and aggregate risk. Regardless of their portfolios, large banks are particularly 
exposed to sovereign risk and policy uncertainty, two sources of aggregate risk. At the same time, 
the spread-risk relationship, i.e. the sensitivity of banks’ funding costs to bank risk, weakens when a 
bank  is  thought  to  have  TBTF  status.  Put  differently,  in  relative  terms  large  banks  take  less 
idiosyncratic risk, but more aggregate risk. This can make the system inherently riskier, and it is 
one  of  the  reasons  why  many  regulatory  initiatives  have  tried  to  tackle  the  TBTF  problem  and 
reduce its externalities.6 The related issue of the bank-sovereign loop is also dear to Andy.7 
Andy has been an advocate of the idea that economists should communicate more with, and ideally 
learn  more  from,  ‘proper’  scientists,  and  that  some  of  the  tools  employed  by  biologists  and 
engineers  could  be  deployed  in  the  financial  sphere,  too.  His  work  on  financial  networks  is 
motivated by the intuition that financial crises spread pretty much like diseases, through contagion 
mechanisms that depend on the nature and structure of the linkages between banks.8, 9  
A  key  message  from  Andy’s  work  is  that  network  complexity  can  be  good  or  bad  for  financial 
stability. The reason for this is that highly interconnected interbank networks exhibit a knife-edge 
property.  In  the  case  of  small  shocks,  the  connections  across  banks  (such  as  loans  and  repos) 
typically  serve  as  risk  sharing  and  mutual  insurance  devices,  making  the  system  more  resilient. 
Beyond  a  certain  threshold,  however,  they  act  as  amplifiers,  generating  broad  and  unpredictable 
default  cascades  –  an  extreme  form  of  systemic  risk.  Once  again,  the  appeal  of  this  story  is 
immediate when thinking about our recent history: increasingly complex financial networks seemed 
to deliver greater stability for a long while, until Lehman – a large shock – came along. 
The most vivid example of this principle that comes to my mind, however, has nothing to do with 
finance. On the 28th of  September 2003,  Italy  was hit by  a massive electricity black-out when a 
storm  caused  a  tree  flashover  that  interrupted  the  energy  supply  coming  from  Switzerland.  This 
interruption increased the burden on the rest of the network, causing a number of other cross-border 
                                                 
5   See  e.g.  Tracking  banks’    systemic  importance  before  and  after  the  crisis,  Banca  d’Italia,  QEF  no.  259, January 
2015. https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/qef/2015-0259/QEF_259.pdf.  
6   Regulatory initiatives range from introducing a capital surcharge to placing limits on bank size, implementing a full 
structural separation of investment and commercial banking, and enhancing banking competition (see Haldane, AG, 
2012, On being the right size). 
7   Alessandri P, Haldane AG, Banking on the State, September 2009. 
8   Haldane AG, Rethinking the Financial Network, April 2009. 
9   Gai P, Haldane AG, Kapadia S, Complexity, concentration and contagion, Journal of Monetary Economics, 58 (5), 
2011. 
 energy  lines  to  switch  off,  then  domestic  generators  to  switch  off  as  well.  Within  a  couple  of 
minutes the entire country had been left in the dark and it stayed there for hours-with one exception: 
the island of Sardinia,10 a peripheral node of the network, essentially unconnected to the rest. The 
conclusion appeared to be that while isolation may imply lower efficiency and higher volatility in 
normal times, it can deliver more resilience to unusual shocks. As a matter of fact, on the 28th of 
September 2003 people in the ‘periphery’ were watching TV while people in Rome and Milan – the 
core of the network – had to cast about for candles. 
Andy forcefully argued that complexity can be a problem for regulators as much as for the entities 
and  activities  they  aim  to  regulate.11, 12   In  his  thought-provoking  Jackson  Hole  speech  of  2012, 
Andy famously suggested that ‘catching a Frisbee’ is in some ways like ‘catching a crisis’. One of 
the reasons why  certain  mammals (dogs especially, but  even humans to  some extent) tend to be 
successful  with  Frisbees  is  that,  rather  than  sitting  down  and  trying  to  solve  dynamic  control 
problems, we stick to simple rules that are not ‘optimal’ in any sense but work fine most of the 
times.  More  generally,  in  an  uncertain  environment  simple  rules-of-thumb  can  work  better  than 
complex decision-making systems. 
Seen  in  this  perspective,  the  growing  complexity  of  financial  regulation  is  in  itself  a  source  of 
concern. As Andy noted, under Basel I a bank could calculate its capital requirements with pen and 
paper.  That  is  inconceivable  with  the  current  rules.  Since  the  establishment  of  Basel  II,  which 
allowed banks to compute their own capital requirements through internal models, the complexity 
and  granularity  of  such  models  has  exploded.  Model  complexity  and  uncertainty,  coupled  with 
shortseries of data, make calibration difficult and robustness questionable.  
An issue the framers of Basel II did not, in my opinion, get quite right concerns incentives. They 
thought that using the banks’ own models to compute capital requirements would align banks’ and 
supervisors’  incentives,  and  improve  both  the  banks’  risk  management  practices  and  the  risk 
sensitivity of prudential requirements. Such a mechanism does exist, but it is of the second order. 
The first-order incentive for bank model-builders is to save costly equity capital. It would be unfair 
to say that regulators at the time were blind to this fact; they just thought that supervisory validation 
would  easily  fend  off  abuse.  Well,  maybe,  but  not  easily.  The  dark  side  of  granularity  and 
sophistication are complexity and opaqueness, which make validation a daunting task. Despite all 
supervisory activity, in fact, the regulatory risk density of banks’ assets came to vary wildly across 
banks. It was not always obvious that variation in risk density related to variation in actual risk.13 
                                                 
10   Plus a few minor islands. 
11   Haldane AG, Madouros V, The dog and the Frisbee, Jackson Hole Symposium, 2012. 
12   Haldane AG, Multi-polar regulation, International Journal of Central Banking 11(3), June 2015. 
13   Italian IRB banks have typically been in the high range of risk density. This depends partly on the fact that their 
business models are largely oriented to credit risk, which especially under Basel II was penalised vis-à-vis market 
risk  in  terms  of  risk  weights;  and  partly  on  the  liberal  use  of  output  floors  in  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  supervisory 
practices, already under Basel II. The use of output floors, set at adequately high levels, has been recognized as a 
useful  tool  to  address  the  variability  in  the  capital  requirements  for  credit  risk.  See,  e.g.,  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision, Reducing variation in credit risk-weighted assets – constraints on the use of internal model 
approaches, March 2016.   
 As I just mentioned, there is another element to the dark side of internal models: lack of robustness. 
Financial  risks  are  not  always  amenable  to  analysis  via  tractable,  well-behaved  probability 
distributions. Crucially, what seems to work reasonably well 95% or even 99% of the times, can fail 
spectacularly in a crisis. When black swans fly, models flounder. (The question of whether dogs can 
catch black swans like Frisbees is still open to debate.) 
The  finalisation  of  Basel  III  reforms,  recently  signed  off  by  the  G20  Group  of  Central  Bank 
Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision,  tackles  the  robustness  vs  sensitivity  trade-off  through  the 
simple  device  of  putting  a  floor  to  the  amount  of  risk-density  reduction  that  banks  can  achieve 
through  their  own  models.  The  debate  on  floors  has  been  fierce.  Opponents  claim  that  they 
compress risk sensitivity too much and are obviously no first best. But there is no such a thing as a 
first best in the difficult art of bank regulation; only reasonable compromises based on experience, 
often bad; the usual catchphrase to describe compromises involving elements of both complex and 
simple, rough-and-ready, Frisbee-catching rules is that you need ‘belts and suspenders’. (I would 
add, ‘… and braces’, both to account for the three-pronged system of capital requirements  under 
Basel III – models, output floors, leverage ratios – and to do some justice to the European dialects 
of the tongue). 
Andy is of course free to disagree, but it seems to me that the final Basel III compromise goes some 
way towards heeding his call for simple models and simpler regulatory rules and practices. It is by 
no means simple in itself, of course; but it does contain comparatively simple backstops to avoid 
some of the pitfalls of complexity. Andy himself might just say: ‘you do not fight complexity with 
complexity’.14 At a minimum, you cannot delude yourself that regulatory complexity is a cure-all. 
As I mentioned, regulators are faced with a trade-off. Simple rules are transparent, robust to model 
risk and more difficult to ‘game’; but they may fail to penalise risk-taking adequately. Complex 
rules  may  be  risk-sensitive,  but  they  are  more  prone  to  manipulation  and  model  failure. 
Furthermore, both are subject to the Lucas critique: unlike Frisbees, banks and markets adapt to the 
rules, and this makes the task of the regulatory ‘dog’ harder.  
 
Now that Basel III has finally been completed, it is time to look ahead. The financial system keeps 
evolving.  Some  of  the  challenges  that  Andy  examined  in  his  past  work  remain  critical;  new 
problems have emerged; other issues will surely come up in the future.  
Not all financial risks materialise in banking, and the financial ecosystem is much more complex 
today  than  it  was  in  the  Ferdinand  Pecora’s  times.  Risky  activities  tend  to  shift  between  the 
traditional  and  the  ‘shadow’  banking  sector.  If  it  is  hard  to  regulate  banks,  it  is  even  harder  to 
monitor the evolution of risks in the more lightly regulated segment. The lack of data does not make 
it any easier. This theme is now at the forefront of the FSB agenda,15 and rightly so.   
A  recent  emphasis  on  regulating  financial  activities  rather  than  specific  entities,  or  classes  of 
entities, is meant to overcome the differences between traditional and shadow banking activities. 
                                                 
14   Haldane AG, Madouros V, The dog and the Frisbee, Jackson Hole Symposium, 2012. 
15   See FSB Chair’s letter to G20 Leaders on ‘Building a safer, simpler and fairer financial system’, July 2017. 
 Focusing  on  activities  rather  than  institutions  makes  sense.  However,  large  systemic  players  do 
deserve close monitoring.  I believe this applies not only to big banks but also to other institutions 
such as asset managers, pension funds or CCPs, which could be equally systemic, and which we 
know far less about.16 
Asset managers perform a number of business activities that may look different ex ante but often 
turn out to deliver highly correlated returns ex post. Hence, the risks from such individual activities 
add up; they are not diversified away at the macro level. Like asset correlations, business activity 
correlations  can  vary  over  the  cycle,  intensifying  in  bad  times.  It  is  also  possible  that  asset 
managers’  activities  have  become  structurally  more  correlated  over  the  years,  owing  to  the 
diffusion of common investment strategies across different business activities.  
Asset managers also operate with large portfolios, and often in markets where liquidity is low. This 
generates  a  material  risk  of  abrupt  price  corrections  caused  by  shifts  in  a  few  systemic  agents’ 
portfolio allocations (agents that are highly diversified but not diverse, to borrow Andy’s concept). 
These  shifts  can  stem  from  maturity  mismatches:  open  funds  can  invest  in  long-term  and 
(structurally  or  occasionally)  illiquid  activities,  and  this  can  give  rise  to  fire  sales  in  case  of  a 
redemption shock, with spillovers between asset classes and types of investors.17  
The FSB has begun studying the impact of large investors’ strategies on market liquidity, starting 
with a simulation exercise on fund redemptions. This line of inquiry is important. Differently from 
the case of banks, it is not the resilience of individual institutions that needs to be tested, but rather 
the presence of shock amplifiers in the market. This is why potential investment-strategy loops are a 
subject of attention for the FSB. Some of these issues were very usefully examined by the Bank of 
England and the Procyclicality Working Group, chaired by Andy.18  
Procyclicality  is  a  pivotal  issue  for  financial  stability.  The  idea  that  markets  are  inherently  pro-
cyclical  is  hardly  new;  however,  new  forms  of  procyclicality  are  likely  to  emerge  as  a  result  of 
technological innovation (such as high-frequency and algorithmic trading, robot advice, or volatility 
trading)  and  growing  market  concentration.  Contrarian  investors  may  become  an  endangered 
species, and as such they should be protected. 
The role of market supervisors may also have to change. Traditionally their mandates are mostly 
centred on disclosure and investor protection, i.e. on ensuring that investors are fully aware of risks 
and  can  take  informed  decisions  on  an  individual  basis.  However,  if  one  recognises  that  market 
liquidity  crises  and  shock  amplification  have  a  systemic  impact  and  are  therefore  a  matter  for 
regulatory concern, then financial stability must find a way into market supervisors’ mandates. This 
change requires an adaptation of culture as well as laws. It is happening, but slowly. 
 
                                                 
16   Global pipes: challenges for systemic financial infrastructure, Speech given by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor 
Financial Stability, at the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum, London, 22 February 2017. 
17   On the risks posed by the asset management industry, but also on the opportunities that asset management offers, see 
‘The age of asset management?’, speech by Haldane, AG, at the London Business School, London, April 2014. 
18   See,  for  example,  Procyclicality  and  Structural  Trends  in  Investment  Allocation  by  Insurance  Companies  and 
Pension Funds, A Discussion Paper by the Bank of England and the Procyclicality Working Group, July 2014. 
 The regulatory agenda is crowded and is moving fast. Andy has greatly contributed to shaping it in 
the past. His creativity and eclectic approach to economics, and his ability to be provocative in a 
clever, constructive way, have been an asset to the policy making community. I have little doubt 
that they will be equally valuable in the future. We need, more than ever, people who can think ‘out 
of the box’ and actively spur the debate. After all, concentration and correlation are as bad for ideas 
as they  are for financial assets. The central banking community  counts on Andy to mitigate that 
risk.  
The records suggest that Ferdinand Pecora was ‘an astute prosecutor with a sharp wit and acerbic 
tongue’.19 Andy’s tongue may not be acerbic, but his wit is sharp. Today you had the chance to 
discover that he is also an excellent speaker.  
 
                                                 
19  ‘A  History  of  Notable  Senate  Investigations  prepared  by  the  United  States  Senate  Historical  Office’, 
https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/investigations/pdf/Pecora_investigation_citations.pdf. 
 Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
