Christopher Kent: Australian fixed income securities in a low rate
world
Address by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of
Australia, to the Debt Capital Markets Summit, Sydney, 14 March 2018.
 I would like to thank Leon Berkelmans for help in preparing this material.
This is my first time at the Debt Capital Markets Summit. I appreciate the opportunity to speak at
such an important event in the Australian fixed income calendar.
Over the course of recent months, interest rates on a range of fixed income securities across
the  globe  have  risen.  Nevertheless,  they  remain  at  historically  low  levels. At  the  same  time,
spreads  between  non-government  and  government  debt  have  remained  low.  Indeed,  over  the
past  year  or  so  they  have  declined  to  be  around  their  lowest  levels  since  the  global  financial
crisis. Accommodative monetary policies and generally low levels of inflation are contributing to
easy financial conditions for issuers.
In my presentation today, I’ll lay out some of the factors contributing to these financial conditions
and then discuss how Australian issuers have responded. In brief, more has been issued, by a
more  diverse  set  of  issuers  at  longer  average  tenors.  I’ll  finish  by  looking  forward  to  the  year
ahead.
The global story
To tell the story on pricing, for the most part I’m going to focus my attention on spreads between
yields on non-government debt and those on government debt. That’s a familiar way of thinking
about a key part of cost of those funds. At the same time it provides a sense of the market’s view
1
of the risks involved.
Globally, spreads on non-government debt are low and they have tightened further over the past
year. Indeed, spreads in many markets are as low as they have been since the financial crisis.
For  corporate  bonds  that’s  true  of  both  investment  grade  and  non-investment  grade  debt
(Graph 1). In short, demand for fixed income securities is strong.
 1 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Why  might  that  be?  One  contributing  factor  has  been  the  improvement  in  global  economic
conditions.  This  is  supporting  business  profits,  which  helps  to  reduce  actual  and  prospective
defaults.  In  turn,  this  underpins  a  narrowing  of  credit  premia.  We  see  evidence  of  this,  for
example, in the decline in default rates on high-yield US bonds over the past few years, although
some of the decline since last year may also reflect the improvement in conditions affecting US
oil producers.
Another part of the story may be that uncertainty has declined. This has been most evident in the
low levels of financial market volatility observed last year and early this year. That suggests that
market participants are more confident about their forecasts of the future. A sense of greater
certainty is consistent with the reduction in the variability of many key macroeconomic indicators,
2
which has been accompanied by a decline in revisions to analysts’ forecasts of these variables.
Yet another possible reason for the low spreads is that financial market participants appear to be
willing to take on risks at lower levels of compensation. In other words, the price of risk may have
declined. This could be as a consequence of a few developments. Importantly, accommodative
monetary policies have provided investors with an incentive to take more risk so as to achieve a
reasonable rate of return. As investors take on more risk, they will tend to bid down its price – as
captured by spreads, for example. This is the search for yield that we hear about a lot.
Why does this matter for Australia?
So what is the relevance of the decline in spreads on offshore fixed income assets for Australian
markets?
First,  it  matters  because  many  of  our  corporations  issue  overseas.  This  offshore  issuance
facilitates  capital  inflows,  which  are  the  financial  counterpart  to  Australia’s  current  account
3
deficit.
 2 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Most bonds issued by Australian companies are issued offshore, whether they are financial or
non-financial companies (Graph 2). For non-financial companies, the influence of mining firms in
this market had been significant over recent years. Overseas issuance is quite natural for miners
operating  in  Australia  because  their  revenue  streams  are  often  denominated  in  foreign
currencies.
Second, the decline in spreads offshore also matters because they are highly correlated with
spreads in the domestic market (Graph 3). For example, spreads on bonds issued by Australian
banks  in  the  Australian  market  have  a  strong  relationship  with  the  spreads  faced  by  US
corporations. The same is true for spreads on bonds issued by non-residents in the Australian
market (so called ‘Kangaroo bonds’). This should not be that surprising because the market for
capital is a global one. If the price of risk in Australia were to deviate too far from the global price
–  beyond  that  suggested  by  any  differences  in  fundamental  credit  quality  –  there  would  be
opportunities for profitable arbitrage. One way or another, the process of arbitrage would lead to
a degree of convergence between spreads.
 3 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
The response
So  spreads  have  declined  in Australia,  much  like  the  rest  of  the  world.  Is  that  the  end  of  the
story? Far from it. Non-government issuers have responded to these developments in a number
of ways.
Low  spreads  have  made  it  more  attractive  for  companies  to  issue  fixed  income  securities.
Issuance is up across a range of markets. But quantities are not the only part of the story. Good
demand conditions have also made it easier for a more diverse range of companies to issue.
Moreover, tenor has increased, notably in the domestic market.
Quantities
Let me start with quantities.
4
Issuance  in  many  markets  is  up.   Gross  issuance  of  bank  bonds  in  2017  was  the  second
highest  since  the  global  financial  crisis  (Graph  4).  In  2016,  banks  acted  ahead  of  time  in
preparation  for  the  implementation  of  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR)  requirement.  So,
having  issued  a  bit  more  paper  in  2016  than  had  been  the  case  for  some  time,  it  seemed
reasonable to have expected that 2017 was going to be a somewhat subdued year for bank bond
issuance. As it happened, though, banks took advantage of favourable funding conditions over
the past year or so to tap the bond market more actively than might otherwise have been the
case.
 4 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Corporate bond and Kangaroo issuance rebounded from their 2016 levels in 2017, although there
have been recent years where issuance was higher.
Issuance  of  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  (RMBS)  was  particularly  strong  in  2017.
Indeed, it was the strongest since the global financial crisis. Part of that is likely to have owed to
extra  issuance  by  non-banks  (i.e.  financial  institutions  that  are  not  authorised  deposit  taking
institutions,  or  non-ADIs).  Their  housing  lending  picked  up  strongly  at  the  same  time  as  the
growth of lending by the major banks was easing. (That in turn reflected the decline in the growth
of the major banks’ investor and interest-only loans as the banks responded to the Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) and Australian Securities and Investments Commission’s
(ASIC)  actions  to  tighten  lending  standards.)  Despite  these  supply-side  motivations,  it  still
appears that demand-side factors were the dominant influence. If the only influence on RMBS
spreads  had  been  via  increased  supply  of  paper  from  non-banks  to  fund  their  lending,  then
spreads would have increased. However, spreads have tightened, consistent with a rise in the
demand for RMBS.
Diversity
The RMBS market is an important source of funds for mortgages issued by smaller competitors
to the major banks. So, it’s reasonable to expect that low spreads should encourage some more
of those competitors to come to the market. Indeed, that’s what we have seen (Graph 5). As a
whole, non-major banks (labelled as ‘other ADI’ in the graph) issued $16 billion of securities last
year, the highest since 2007. Perhaps more remarkable was the number of ‘other’ (non-major)
banks that issued RMBS – by our count it was 17, the highest ever.
 5 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Interestingly, major banks have been relatively inactive in this market. Only 13 per cent of the total
volume  of  issuance  in  2017  was  accounted  for  by  the  majors,  the  lowest  since  2010.  One
reason the majors have not been more active is that, even with the decline in RMBS spreads,
pricing  is  not  particularly  attractive  for  them.  Rather,  alternative  sources  of  funds  –  such  as
unsecured wholesale markets – remain more attractive because spreads in those markets have
also narrowed. It’s worth noting that many of the other banks, and non-bank securitisers, have
rather limited access to long-term wholesale funding, particularly in offshore markets. So they
cannot avail themselves of the favourable terms currently on offer there.
An alternative way of showing the increase in diversity is through a Herfindfahl-Hirschman index,
which is a standard way of measuring concentration. The lower the index, the lower the level of
concentration.  There was a sizeable fall in that index in 2017 for RMBS issuers (Graph 6). By
this  metric,  concentration  has  been  falling  since  2014,  when  non-banks  issued  less  than  half
what they did in 2017 and major banks were far more active in the market.
5
 6 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
The  diversity  of  issuers  has  increased  in  other  markets  as  well.  I  have  made  the  point  in  a
previous speech that the mining industry is an important part of the Australian corporate debt
market.  For a number of years following the financial crisis, those companies issued debt to
help fund the mining investment boom, although most finance was raised internally.  Over the
past couple of years, however, resource-related companies have been relatively inactive; some
have even bought back bonds as they have sought to reduce their gearing (thereby contributing
to the decline in offshore bonds on issuance for non-financial corporations shown in Graph 2).
Meanwhile,  other  companies  have  stepped  up  their  issuance  (Graph  7).  In  2017,  we  saw
particularly  strong  issuance  from  utility  companies.  Indeed,  combined  issuance  across  non-
resource-related  sectors  was  at  a  record  high  in  2017.  I  should  note  that  we  would  expect
issuance to grow in nominal terms as the economy expands. Regardless, it is worth noting that
the market is not dominated by resource companies in the way it has been in the past.
7
 7 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
We also have seen a more diverse type of issuer in the Kangaroo market. Again, this is not a
story  of  the  past  year  alone  (Graph  8).  If  we  look  back  10  years,  the  Kangaroo  market  had
previously been reliant on financial corporations and European based supranational, sovereign or
quasi-sovereign agency entities, known collectively as SSA’s. However, as time has passed, we
have seen more non-European SSA’s enter the market. Also, over the past three years or so,
non-financial corporations have begun to issue in the Kangaroo market, such as companies from
the United States.
 8 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  increase  in  the  variety  of  the  types  of  issuers  in  the  Kangaroo  and  non-financial  bond
markets can also be summarised by Herfindahl indicies (Graph 9). These show a clear decrease
in concentration over the past few years, with the indices reaching their lowest levels for some
time.
 9 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Tenor
Finally,  another  development  worth  highlighting  is  the  lengthening  in  the  tenor  of  issuance  in
some parts of the market in 2017 (Graph 10). In the case of domestic issuance for non-financial
corporations,  this  increase  is  part  of  a  longer-running  trend,  which  has  been  a  positive
development for domestic markets. Recent increases in average tenor more generally may also
be related to the low levels of spreads.
In the case of overseas issuance by Australian banks, 2017 saw some notable deals with quite
long tenors. We understand that this lengthening of tenor by the banks has been influenced by
market conditions. In particular, banks are taking advantage of the lack of any term premium for
longer-term funding. The regulatory environment, particularly the NSFR requirement, may also be
contributing to a desire to issue at longer tenors.
You may have noticed that offshore issuance tends to be at longer average tenors than domestic
deals. It seems that it is easier, or at least has been in the past, to borrow at term overseas than
in  the  Australian  market.  By  all  accounts,  Asian  investors  have  helped  support  longer-term
Australian dollar issuance of late.  It does not yet seem to be the case that resident investors are
able to provide the demand needed for a large volume of longer-term issuance, although that
could evolve over time.
8
 10 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Where to now?
These developments I’ve summarised have generally been positive. To recap, accommodative
monetary policies and greater confidence in the outlook for global growth have contributed to low
spreads  on  a  range  of  non-government  debt. Australian  issuers  have  benefited,  with  greater
issuance, across a more diverse range of issuers and at longer average tenors. But the outlook
is not without risks.
Indeed, accommodative monetary policies have encouraged greater risk-taking by both lenders
and  borrowers.  This  is  one  of  the  important  ways  in  which  the  monetary  transmission
mechanism works. It has supported the decline in spreads and other positive developments I’ve
just discussed. At the same time, however, the combination of low interest rates and low volatility
in  financial  markets  is  of  concern  to  the  extent  that  it  can  lead  to  excessive  risk-taking  via  a
9
search for yield. This is something that the Reserve Bank has been noting for a time.
Is  there  evidence  of  excessive  risk-taking  in  fixed  income  markets?  It’s  hard  to  say.  Spreads
have been bid down across a range of Australian markets to levels that are close to those that
prevailed ahead of the global financial crisis (Graph 11). However, spreads for RMBS are not
quite  so  low  relative  to  that  history  (Graph  12).
  First  and  foremost,  this  reflects  the
reassessment at the time of the crisis by investors globally of the risk of this type of asset. That
assessment has persisted. Also, it may be that the spread is somewhat higher in Australia than it
was  a  few  years  ago  in  response  to  the  build-up  of  risks  in  housing  markets  and  household
balance sheets – on the back of high and rising household indebtedness. We have talked about
that at length for a time now.
10
11
 11 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
 12 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
It’s not clear that the relatively low level of spreads in fixed income markets represents irrational
mispricing  of  risk  or  is,  by  itself,  a  cause  of  concern.  Issuance  has  picked  up,  but  it  is  not
especially  high.  Moreover,  measures  of  corporate  indebtedness  are  generally  not  elevated
(Graph  13).  This  has  been  helped  by  some  deleveraging  among  resource  companies,  which
have been able to reduce the extent of their debt.12
 13 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Still, it is possible that we could see a noticeable pick-up in financial market volatility, a sharp re-
pricing of assets and, as a result, a tightening in financial conditions, including higher spreads for
corporate issuers.
The recent experience in US equity markets has been a stark reminder of that possibility. While
US  equity  markets  reacted  sharply,  and  other  equity  markets  around  the  world  responded
(though  generally  to  a  somewhat  lesser  extent),  the  knock-on  effect  to  other  markets  was
modest. In particular, spreads on corporate debt were little changed.
My sense is that this limited response of spreads reflected at least two features of the bout of
equity market volatility. First, the sharp response of the US equity market was driven, at least in
part, by some sizeable positions that had been taken on the back of an expectation that volatility
in that market would remain low.
Second, the equity market turbulence was triggered by a reassessment of the outlook for US
inflation and monetary policy. In particular, there was evidence of stronger wages growth and a
prospect of rising inflation. It would be appropriate and welcome in that case to see a tightening in
financial  conditions.  If  that  were  to  be  sustained,  it  would  naturally  be  accompanied  by  a
reduction in the search for yield and some increase in spreads, which would tend to weigh on
issuance. While there’s nothing that guarantees that the path of adjustment will be smooth and
pain free, the forces that might push the US economy in that direction are not unwelcome in of
themselves.  And  while  other  advanced  economies  are  further  from  that  point,  including  in
Australia,  the  expectation  is  that  these  same  forces  will  come  into  play  as  spare  capacity  is
gradually eaten into and inflation rises.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to answering questions you might have.
 14 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
An important aspect of that is default risk, which I suspect is the thing many people have in mind when I mention
risk. However, these spreads will also incorporate liquidity premia – government bonds tend to be quite liquid,
and that will also affect their pricing vis-à-vis private sector debt.
For  further  discussion  of  this  point,  see  RBA  (2018),  ‘Box  A:  The  Period  of  Low  Volatility  in  Financial
Markets’, Statement on Monetary Policy, February, pp 25–26.
Debelle  G  (2017),  ‘Recent  Trends  in  Australian  Capital  Flows’,  Address  to  the  Australian  Financial
ReviewBanking and Wealth Summit, Sydney, 6 April.
The data in Graph 2 show that the outstanding stock has fallen in overseas markets recently. These data
include  the  effect  of  issuance  and  maturities  of  bonds,  as  well  as  exchange  rate  movements  and  bond
buybacks.
If the market is accounted for by only one player, this index is 1. If, on the other hand, n participants each have an
equal share of the market, the index is 1/n.
Kent C (2017), ‘Fixed Income Markets and the Economy’, Address to Bloomberg, Sydney, 9 August.
Arsov I, B Shanahan and T Williams (2013), ‘Funding the Australian Resources Investment Boom’, RBA Bulletin,
March, pp 51–61.
For example, see Davidson L (2018), ‘Taking Stock’, KangaNews, Dec 17/Jan 18, pp 12–13. Available at <http:
//www.kanganews.com/document/magazines/2017/2017-dec-jan/141-kndecjan17column>.
See, for example, RBA (2017), Financial Stability Review, October.
The RMBS spreads are shown relative to BBSW, which is not a risk-free benchmark. Calculating spreads to
Australian Government Securities is difficult given the pre-payment uncertainty of RMBS, nonetheless, when we
attempt to do so, we get a similar picture as emerges in Graph 12.
Lowe P (2017), ‘Household Debt, Housing Prices and Resilience’, Address to Economic Society of Australia
(QLD) Business Lunch, Brisbane, 4 May.
Kent C (2017), ‘Fixed Income Markets and the Economy’, Address to Bloomberg, Sydney, 9 August.
 15 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
