Yannis  Stournaras:  The  world  economy  and  Greece  -  prospects
and challenges with a focus on the role of shipping
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Union  of  Greek
Shipowners, Athens, 4 December 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure for me to be with you today, especially since this year has been proclaimed
“Year  of  Shipping”  for  the  EU  and  marks  the  entry  of  the  Union  of  Greek  Shipowners  into  its
second century, after it celebrated its centennial last year.
I will start my speech with an overview of international economic developments. Then I will give
an account of recent developments and describe the prospects of the Greek economy. I will go
on to discuss the importance of Greek shipping and the challenges facing it. I will conclude by
highlighting the preconditions for sustainable recovery of the economy.
1. The international environment
The world economy is on a stable upward trajectory. Business and consumer confidence
indicators  suggest  that  sentiment  remains  positive,  while  financial  conditions  in  advanced
economies  remain  supportive,  assisted  by  accommodative  monetary  policies.  In  emerging
market economies, financial markets remain resilient and capital inflows are strong. Economic
recovery is broadly based both across developed and emerging economies and in terms of GDP
composition. 2017 is expected to be the first year since 2010 to see all large economies grow in
synch. There are also growing signs of a recovery in investment worldwide.
Looking forward, world economic activity is expected to pick up moderately. The improvement in
activity  in advanced  economies is  supported  by  the  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  pursued.
Among emerging economies,  growth  is  expected  to  remain  robust  in  commodity-importers,
such as China, while in commodity-exporting economies the downturn will bottom out after the
deep  recessions  observed  in  the  last  two  years. World  trade  is  recovering and  over  the
medium term is expected to expand as world economic activity gathers pace. A significant boost
to world trade could come from the recent multilateral or bilateral trade agreements, such as the
WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement and the EU-Canada Trade Agreement.
However,  there  are  several risks  surrounding  the  short-term  outlook  for  the  world  economy,
trade  and  –  therefore  –  sea  transport.  Specifically,  in  addition  to  geopolitical  risks,  there  also
downside  risks  related  to  rising  protectionism,  the  impact  of  gradual  monetary  policy
normalisation  on  international  financial  conditions,  a  possible  sharp  correction  of  asset
(especially equity) prices, the sustainability of growth in emerging markets (most notably China),
and the implications of Brexit for trade.
In the euro area, economic growth is increasingly gaining traction. The euro area economy
has been posting positive growth rates for 18 quarters in a row and the latest data suggest that
this momentum will be maintained in the period ahead. The accommodative stance of monetary
policy  bolsters  domestic  demand.  Employment  growth  and  some  pick-up  in  wage  growth
support  households’  disposable  income.  Combined  with  a  progressive  increase  in  household
wealth, these have a benign effect on private consumption. Investment recovery is assisted by
improved  corporate  profitability  and  very  favourable  financing  conditions.  Robust  external
demand supports euro area exports, although the recent appreciation of the euro is a source of
uncertainty regarding the overall contribution of net trade to economic growth.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Inflation  is  expected  to  decline  in  the  short  term,  mainly  reflecting  base  effects  in  the  energy
component. Over the next two years, inflation is expected to remain well below a level compatible
with  the  ECB’s  inflation  target.  Moreover,  developments  in  core  inflation  have  yet  to  show
convincing  signs  of  a  sustained  upward  trend. Against  this  background,  the  ECB  Governing
Council,  with  the  recent  recalibration  and  extension  of  its  asset  purchase  programme  until
September  2018  or  beyond,  if  necessary,  confirmed  that  a  substantial  degree  of  monetary
accommodation is still needed to ensure a sustained return of inflation to rates of below but close
to 2%.
2. Developments and prospects of the Greek economy
Since  the  onset  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  2010,  Greece  has  implemented  an economic
adjustment  programme that has eliminated the fiscal and external deficits and has improved
international (especially labour cost) competitiveness.
At the same time, a bold reform programme has been implemented in the pension system, the
health system, labour and product markets, the business environment, public administration, the
tax  system  and  the  budgetary  framework.  Its  implementation,  alongside  a  privatisation  and  a
public asset development programme, is ongoing. According to a recent Lisbon Council report
(EuroPlus Monitor, September 2017 Update), Greece ranks first in the EU-28 on the basis of
the Adjustment Progress Indicator.  Moreover,  on  the  basis  of the World Bank’s “ease of
doing  business”  index (“Starting  a  business”  subindex),  Greece’s  ranking  has  improved
considerably between 2011 and 2017 (from 148th in 2011 to 37th in 2017), although there is still
significant room for improvement.
As a result of these efforts, openness has improved substantially and the economy has started
to rebalance towards tradable, export-oriented sectors.
Specifically, the share of total exports in GDP increased from 19.0% in 2009 to 30.2% in 2016,
while between 2010 and 2016 the relative prices of tradables versus non-tradables rose by about
9%. As  a  consequence,  the  size  of  the  tradables  sector  relative  to  that  of  the  non-tradables,
measured by gross value added, grew by approximately 11% at constant prices and by about
21% at current prices, while in terms of employment it increased by around 7%.
Despite  any  missteps  and  conflicting  signals, 
there  are  encouraging  signs  also
regarding foreign direct investment (FDI). FDI inflows reached a post-2010 record of almost
€2.8 billion in 2016 (1.6% of GDP), and were mainly targeted at services sectors (i.e. hotels and
restaurants,  transportation,  financial  intermediation  and  real  estate  activities).  In  the  first  nine
months of 2017 the cumulative inflow already reached €3.0 billion, and as was the case in 2016,
continued  to  target  the  services  sectors. Increased  FDI  inflows  indicate  the  positive
assessment of major foreign investors about the prospects of the Greek economy.
Turning to the banking system, significant recapitalisation, following stringent stress tests along
with  in-depth  asset  quality  reviews,  now  ensures  that Greek  banks  are  among  the  best
capitalised in Europe. This fact, along with an NPE coverage ratio of 47% and good collateral,
will  play  a  catalytic  role  in  allowing  banks  to  address  the  pressing  issue  of  reducing  the  high
stock  of  non-performing  loans.  In  addition,  significant  institutional  reforms  have  been  initiated
aiming at providing banks with a variety of means of reducing non-performing loans, such as the
creation of a secondary market for distressed assets, an out-of-court settlement mechanism and
e-auctions. According to incoming data, there has been progress since the beginning of the year
in the area of banks’ non-performing exposures (NPE). At end-June 2017, the stock of NPEs
(including off-balance-sheet items) was 3.2% lower than at end-December 2016.
2.1 Prospects of the Greek economy
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The economic recovery continues and growth is gathering pace following the completion of the
second review and the positive impact it had on confidence and liquidity. Further positive effects
are expected from the staff-level agreement on the third review that was reached last Saturday.
The  consolidation  of  growth  dynamics  is  reflected  not  only  in  GDP  figures,  but  also  in  the
performance of several short-term indicators of economic activity, such as industrial production,
retail sales, dependent employment flows in the private sector, exports of goods and services, as
well as soft data such as the manufacturing PMI and the economic sentiment indicator. With
particular regard to exports, over the first nine months of 2017:
real exports of goods rose by 3.5% year-on-year; and
tourist and shipping receipts grew, in nominal terms, by 10.3% and 22.1%, respectively.
The improved outlook for the economy boosted economic sentiment, increased bank deposits,
led  to  a  slowdown  in  the  negative  rate  of  change  in  bank  credit  to  non-financial  corporations,
improved Greece’s credit rating and led to successive declines in banks’ dependence on central
bank financing: for example, the ceiling of Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) for Greek banks
now stands at €25.8 billion, down from its peak of €90 billion in July 2015. In addition, yields of
Greek government bonds declined to late-2009 levels, which allowed the Greek government to
return to international markets, after a period of three years, on 25 July 2017.
More recently, the Public Debt Management Agency conducted an exchange operation of twenty
PSI bonds maturing from 2023 to 2042, with a total face value of €29.7 billion, for five new fixed-
coupon bonds maturing in 5 to 25 years, in order to enhance the liquidity of the market for Greek
debt  and  normalise  the  yield  curve  of  sovereign  bonds,  thus  facilitating  Greece’s  next  bond
issuance programme on international markets. 
At the same time, the slope of the yield curve steepened, implying improved investor perceptions
about the outlook of the Greek economy. Corporate bond yields have also fallen to historically low
levels. Meanwhile, Greek banks have made their way back to international financial markets by
selling covered bonds.
The  above  data  support  the  assessment  that  recovery  will  gain  momentum  in  the  coming
months. For  2017  as  a  whole,  the  economy  is  expected  to  return  to  positive,  albeit
relatively low growth rates.  The  recovery  will  be  supported  by  higher  exports  of  goods  and
services,  and  the  continued,  foreign-demand-driven  increase  in  industrial  production,  which
contributes to job creation.
Exports  of  goods  have  been  on  a  strong  upward  trend  since  2014,  as  a  result  of
improvements in the international competitiveness of the economy.
Regarding exports of services, their rise in 2017 is attributable to buoyant travel receipts as
well  as  higher  shipping  receipts,  as  a  result  of  both  a  recovery  in  global  trade  and  sea
transport and the fact that the impact of capital controls has weakened.
Growth  is  expected  to  pick  up  in  2018  and  2019,  with  private  consumption  and
investment as its key drivers.
Consumption is expected to recover, mainly on the back of higher household real disposable
income as a result of increased employment.
The contribution of investment is expected to be positive, chiefly due to stronger business
investment,  reflecting  the  gradual  restoration  of  confidence  and  liquidity  in  the  financial
system, as well as the acceleration of privatisations.
Exports  are  expected  to  remain  robust,  reflecting  higher  foreign  demand  and  the
restoration of the international competiveness of the economy.
Employment is  expected  to  rise  in  line  with  the  upturn  of  economic  activity.  The  benign
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
outlook  for  employment,  in  particular  dependent  employment,  is  supported  mainly  by  the
positive performance of manufacturing and tourism, low labour costs, and labour flexibility
ensured by the institutional framework.
These forecasts are based on the assumption that the reform and privatisation programme will
be implemented smoothly and according to the agreed time schedule.
2.2. Risks and challenges
However,  despite  the  positive  forecasts,  there  are  still downside  risks that  need  to  be
addressed. The most important domestic risks are:
any delays in the implementation of the recently agreed measures under the third review;
any delays in the fourth (and last) review signalling the end of the programme;
a higher than expected negative impact from high tax rates on economic activity; and
uncertainty  about  the  Greek  government’s  financing  conditions  after  the  end  of  the
programme.
In  addition,  there  are external  risks associated  with  developments  in  international  financial
markets and geopolitical factors, such as the refugee crisis.
At the same time, the protracted economic crisis has left a number of stock imbalances that
must  be  addressed  over  the  medium  term  if  the  Greek  economy  is  to  return  to  sustainable
growth, most notably:
high and persistent long-term unemployment;
the high stock of non-performing loans;
the investment gap;
the public debt overhang.
These challenges need to be tackled in order to safeguard social cohesion, preserve Greece’s
high-quality human capital, facilitate the financing of the Greek economy, entrepreneurship and
FDI inflows, and strengthen the medium- to long-term potential growth of the Greek economy.
3. The importance of shipping for the Greek economy
Greek shipping, an extrovert activity by definition, has traditionally been a key driving force of
the Greek economy, despite the challenges it has faced at both the international and the national
level.
Shipping receipts have always been essential for covering a large part of the country’s external
financing needs. Over the 2002–2014 period, inflows from shipping accounted, on average, for
roughly 44% of total receipts from services and offset about 43% of Greece’s goods deficit.
However,  according  to  Bank  of  Greece  balance-of-payments  data  on  shipping  inflows  on  the
basis  of  bank  transactions  data,  a  considerable  drop  in  inflows  has  been  recorded  since  the
second half of 2015. This drop is primarily due to the imposition of the capital controls and may
therefore be reversed once the controls are fully removed. In 2016 in particular, as a result of the
capital controls and low freight rates, receipts from sea transport services accounted for a mere
23% of total receipts in the services balance and financed 35% of the goods deficit, while net
receipts (receipts less payments) accounted for 29% of the surplus of the services balance. As I
have  already  pointed  out,  available  data  for  the  January-September  period  suggest a  partial
return, during 2017, to the pre-2015 situation. This upturn may improve further in view of the
anticipated  relaxation  of  the  capital  controls,  as  well  as  on  the  back  of  higher  freight  rates  in
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
international markets, mainly in the dry bulk sector.
It should be noted that the Greek shipping industry and maritime cluster can play a pivotal role in
the  effort  of  the  Greek  economy  to  recover,  contributing  to  GDP  growth  both  directly  and
indirectly. According to a study conducted by IOBE (2013), the (direct and indirect) contribution of
the Greek shipping industry to the economy’s total value added was estimated at more than 6%
of GDP in 2009, while its contribution to total employment came to about 200,000 jobs. In 2016
shipping receipts declined to 3.3% of GDP, from 6.4% of GDP in 2014, i.e. one year prior to the
imposition of the capital controls.
In any event, the expected relaxation and the ultimate abolition of the capital controls, coupled
with the pick-up in global economy and trade, should increase the shipping industry’s share in
GDP and enhance the openness of the Greek economy. 
4. Challenges facing the shipping industry
It is indeed a remarkable achievement for a small country like Greece to be a leader in global
shipping.  On  the  basis  of  recently  published  data  by  the  United  Nations  (UNCTAD), Greece
remains the largest ship-owning nation in terms of cargo carrying capacity (dead weight
tonnage  –  dwt),  even  though  only  22%  of  the  merchant  fleet  under  Greek  control  and/or
management is Greek-flagged.
Greek  shipping  has  good  track  record  in  overcoming  challenges.  Today,  it  is  confronted  with
a number of new challenges:
1. World trade and shipping: The expansion of the global economy is a key factor behind the
increase in demand for seaborne trade. Nevertheless, this increase – although it is expected
to accelerate in the years ahead – is not always sufficient to match the increased supply of
transportation services on account of rapid fleet growth. Overall, freight rates, as captured
by the ClarkSea Index, have risen by about 15% so far in 2017. However, this development was
driven by a sharp rise in dry bulk freight rates from their 2016 historic lows, while tanker freight
rates have declined markedly, despite a short-lived – as it turned out – recovery in late 2016. In
the near  future,  the  balance  between  new  ship  deliveries  and  demolitions,  given  the
upward  trend  of  world  trade,  will  determine  the  path  of  freight  rates.  Over  the medium  term,
the development of infrastructure projects in the context of the Chinese One Belt One Road
Initiative should also play an important role in strengthening demand, mainly for the dry bulk and
container sectors.
2 . Tax  regime:  It  is  now  generally  accepted  that  one  of  the  key  factors  contributing  to  the
success of Greek shipping has invariably been the stable tax regime for shipping. In December
2015  the  European  Commission  invited  Greece  to  better  target  its  tonnage  tax  and  related
support  measures  in  the  maritime  sector,  as  the  Commission  found  that  certain  current
provisions on the taxation of ships (for instance, Law 27/1975) may breach EU state aid rules, as
specified  in  the  Maritime  Guidelines.  Today,  two  years  on  and  after  many  efforts,  a  mutu  ally
accepted  and  workable  solution  has  been  found  for  the  vast  majority  of  the  identified  issues,
while there is good progress in addressing the remaining ones.
At this point, let me say a few words about the voluntary  contribution of the Greek shipping
community in support of the Greek economy during the crisis, as provided for in Article 42 of Law
4301/2014,  ratifying  a  relevant  Memorandum  of  Understanding  signed  between  the  Greek
government and the Union of Greek Shipowners in summer 2013. The initial duration of the MoU
was three years (2014–2016). Subsequently, it has been extended twice, in summer 2014
and 2017, to ultimately cover a total period of five years (2014–2018), with the additional
revenue for 2018 estimated at €107 million.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
3 . The  capital  controls:  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  imposition  of  the  capital  controls  was
followed  by  a  significant  fall  in  shipping  receipts,  partly  due  to  a  loss  of  confidence  in  the
domestic  banking  sector,  which  led  to  a  shift  of  shipping  receipts  towards  foreign  banks.
However, today,  two  years  later,  the  Greek  banking  system  is  fully  recapitalised,
measures  for  the  relaxation  of  capital  controls  have  been  taken,  some  of  which  are
targeted  to  the  shipping  industry,  while  a  roadmap  on  the  full  removal  of  the  capital
controls has been published. Against this background, trust in the Greek banking system is
being restored rapidly and financial normalcy is gradually returning.
4. Domestic bank financing: In recent years, the financing of oceangoing shipping by the
Greek banking system has dropped sharply, with outstanding loans to shipping now standing
at €8.2 billion, against over €18 billion in mid-2010. This trend is not specific to Greece, since
sizeable reductions in the portfolios of traditional shipping lenders have also been observed in the
rest of Europe as well. Part of this gap was covered, through various types of financing, by
Asian financial institutions.
Besides,  Greek  shipping  should  adapt  to  the  new environmental  requirements of  the
international regulatory framework for shipping (e.g. management of ballast water, use of low-
sulfur-content  fuels,  participation  of  the  shipping  industry  in  the  greenhouse  gas  emissions
trading system, etc.).
5. Conclusions
Over the past seven years, Greece has gone a long way in adjusting its major macroeconomic
imbalances, reforming its economy and restoring competitiveness. The Greek economy now has
the  potential  and  the  prospect  to  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path,  by  embracing  a  new,
extrovert growth model.
Still, as I have already mentioned, risks and challenges remain for the Greek economy and the
Greek maritime sector and must be addressed, in order to ensure that the economy remains on
a  sustainable  growth  track  and  to  increase  the  contribution  of  shipping  to  GDP.  To  this  end,
economic policy must from now on focus on the following areas:
1 . Speed  up  the  implementation  of  reforms  and  privatisations. Such  actions  foster
competitiveness in goods and services markets, improve the business environment and help to
attract domestic and foreign investment.
2 . Improve  the  quality  of  institutions  and  ensure  their  proper  functioning  and
independence.  With  regard  to  independent  authorities,  it  is  important  to  strengthen  their
administrative and financial autonomy, ensure respect for their independence and increase their
accountability 
structural
competitiveness  and  promote  economic  growth,  as  they  affect  incentives  for  individuals  and
businesses  to  invest  in  physical  and  human  capital,  technology  and  the  organisation  of
production.
3. Tackle the problem of non-performing loans (and strategic defaulters), which prevents
the  banking  system  from  financing  economic  growth.  Banks  should  utilise  all  the  available
toolbox  to  reduce  troubled  assets,  and  in  particular  speed  up  the  sale  of  NPLs.  Particular
emphasis should also be placed on the restructuring of viable companies and the liquidation of
non-viable ones. This will release resources to support new and existing sound investment and
business initiatives, thereby supporting the economic recovery.
4. Adopt a growth-friendly fiscal policy mix.
5. Gradual relaxation of the capital controls in tandem with the return of confidence.
towards  Parliament.  Well-functioning 
institutions 
improve 
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
6. Address the public debt overhang. Decisive and concrete actions are needed to ensure
the  sustainability  of  Greek  public  debt  in  line  with  the  Eurogroup  decisions  of  June
2017.  The  Bank  of  Greece  has  put  forward  a  specific  mild  debt  reprofiling  proposal,  which
involves  only  a  negligible  cost  for  Greece’s  partners  and  consists  in  extending  the  weighted
average maturity of interest payments on EFSF loans by at least 8.5 years.
Last but not least, in order for Greece to tap the financial markets on sustainable terms after the
end of the current programme in August 2018, the Greek authorities must close the 4th (and
last) review on time, with a view to significantly improving the credit rating of the country. At the
same time, our European partners, apart from specifying in more detail the medium-term debt
reprofiling  measures,  which  would  enable  the  refinancing  of  public  debt  from  the  markets  on
sustainable terms, should, in close cooperation with the Greek authorities, provide more clarity
on the post-programme support for the Greek economy.
These actions will improve the investment climate, attract domestic and foreign direct investment
and facilitate the return to financial normality and positive GDP growth rates after seven years of
sacrifices, recession and stagnancy, which have taken a toll on economic and social cohesion. 
 
References:
Draghi,  M. 
November, www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/ecb.sp171117.en.html.
“Monetary  policy  and 
the  outlook 
(2017), 
for 
the  economy”,  17
Praet,  P. 
November, www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/ecb.sp171116_1.en.html.
“Recent  economic  developments 
(2017), 
in 
the  euro  area”,  16
ΙΟΒΕ (2013), The contribution of ocean-going shipping to the Greek economy: performance and
outlook, iobe.gr/docs/research/en/RES_05_F_07012913REP_ENG.pdf.
IMF (2017), Global prospects and policies, World Economic Outlook, October.
Lisbon Council (2017), EuroPlus Monitor, September Update.
Stournaras,  Y.  (2017a),  “Greece  and  the  global  economy:  Prospects  and  main  challenges
ahead”,  Speech 
11
, www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
O c
Item_ID=476&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b.
by  Credit  Suisse,  Athens, 
t o b e r
organised 
event 
an 
at 
Stournaras, Y. (2017b), “The Greek economy: Prospects and main challenges”, Speech at the
2nd 
10
N o v e m b e r
, www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=482&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b.
EU-Arab 
Summit, 
Athens, 
World 
UNCTAD (2017), Review of Maritime Transport, unctad.org/en/pages/PublicationWebflyer.aspx?
publicationid=1890
World Economic Forum (2017), The Global Competitiveness Index 2017–2018 edition. 
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
