Yandraduth  Googoolye:  Importance  of  corporate  governance  at
ICSA Mauritius Graduation ceremony
Speech by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the ICSA Mauritius
Graduation ceremony, Port Louis, 15 November 2018.
 Mr Ambrish Maharahaje, ICSA President, Mauritius Branch 
Mr  John  Heaton,  ICSA  President  for  United  Kingdom,  Republic  of  Ireland  and Associated
Territories
Mr  Simon  Osborne,  ICSA  Chief  Executive  for  United  Kingdom,  Republic  of  Ireland  and
Associated Territories
Council Members and staff of the ICSA Mauritius Association
Dear Graduates 
Ladies and gentlemen
Good afternoon.
Thank  you  for  making  me  part  of  the  celebration  of  your  success.  Your  hard  work  is  being
rewarded  by  earning  an  internationally-recognised  qualification  that  ICSA  confers  upon  you.  I
congratulate you for the academic commitment you have displayed and for the passion within
you to contribute to the business community and the country’s progress. 
The Companies Act makes provision for a company secretary in both private and public sector
companies. Section 166 of the Act states that “The duties of a secretary shall include but shall
not be restricted to (a) providing the Board with guidance as to its duties, responsibilities and
powers; (b) informing the Board of all legislation relevant to or affecting meetings of shareholders
and  directors  and  reporting  at  any  meetings  and  the  filing  of  any  documents  required  of  the
company  and  any  failure  to  comply  with  such  legislation”.  This  clearly  demonstrates  the
importance of such a function in an organization. And the Board of directors of a company have
to ensure that the Secretary has the requisite knowledge and experience to discharge his/her
functions. 
The  role  of  a  company  secretary  is  also  visible  in  the  2016  National  Code  of  Corporate
Governance,  where  it  is  explicitly  mentioned  that  “all  organisations  should  have  a  Company
Secretary. The Company Secretary acts as a vital bridge between the Board and the executive
management. The Company Secretary must have access to Board members (executive, non-
executive, CEO and Chairperson). The Board should consider assigning the tasks of applying
and implementing the principles in the Code to the Company Secretary. Boards should ensure
that the Company Secretary be competent to carry out his or her duties.”
Ladies and Gentlemen, your functions are already well defined and you have the duty to ensure
that you comply with them. Gone are the days when a company secretary was merely taking
“notes” or “minutes”. The dynamics of the boardroom are constantly evolving. Chairpersons and
directors recognize such changes and acknowledge the need for specialist skills and technical
knowledge. 
The Board trusts the company secretary to advise, amongst others, on directors’ statutory duties
as prescribed by law, board processes, disclosure obligations, listing rule requirements, and the
requisites of corporate governance and practices. These functions have modernized the role of a
company  secretary  and  put  them  among  the  key  governance  professionals  within  an
organisation. 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
There is no doubt that you have learnt a myriad of critical subjects that spanned through your
curriculum. You will soon be joining (or, may, even have joined) firms in the country or abroad to
discharge  the  duties  for  which  you  have  been  groomed.  You  have  undeniably  pushed  the
boundaries in some areas so as to specialise in a given field. 
I am certain that you have seen how much the world has changed across the last two decades
and how interconnected and inter-dependable countries, economies and people are. The world
has taken more complex twists than the Gordian sociological and corporate scenarios that the
American writer and futurist Alvin Toffler even imagined in his ‘Future Shock’ best-seller. 
Governance  is  more  than  just  complying  with  laws,  regulations,  standards,  and  codes.
 Governance also aims to nurturing a culture of good practice. Good governance sources from
an  institution’s  internal  processes  and  controls.  This  calls  for  another  important  function  of  a
corporate secretary – to identify the required corporate governance practices of an organisation. 
The  corporate  secretary  is  intended  to  be  the  link  between  the  board  and  management;  and
between  the  organization  and  its  shareholders  and  stakeholders.    And  to  accomplish  this
function,  the  corporate  secretary  needs  to  be  fully  aware  of  the  powers,  rights,  duties,  and
obligations  of  all  of  these  groups  so  that  he/she  can  inform,  communicate  and  advise
appropriately. Above  all,  he  or  she  is  also  expected  to  perform  his/her  role  with  the  highest
integrity and independence.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  quote  former  South  African  Supreme  Court  judge  and
governance guru Mervyn Eldred King, father of the famed King Report on Corporate Governance,
for  this  landmark  statement,  I  quote: “It  is  clear  that  good  corporate  governance  makes  good
sense.  The  name  of  the  game  for  a  company  in  the  21st  Century  will  be  to  conform  while  it
performs! “
There  is  no  doubt  that  accountability  and  transparency  are  major  pillars  in  the  architecture  of
governance. We, at the Bank, value these elements to their core. This is the reason why we
have issued a Guideline on Corporate Governance. 
The Bank monitors adherence to the Guideline through its supervisory and regulatory functions.
Bank  supervision  and  regulation  cannot  function  well  if  sound  corporate  governance  is  not  in
place. It is imperative to instil the levels of accountability and checks and balances within each
bank. This principle should also be your motto in your organisation. 
At the Bank, we engage in dialogue with our stakeholders and pursue consultative meetings with
them to gauge their views, which are vital to enhance effective policy formulation and decision-
making processes. We stand guided by the vision of our Board and operate independently within
the parameters of the Bank of Mauritius Act. This notion of full impartiality also applies to our
Monetary Policy Committee, where by law, members act independently and are free to express
their  views  in  full  objectivity.  This  is  what  helps  the  Bank  to  seamlessly  implement  its  core
mandates to better serve the people of Mauritius.
Our country has made significant strides over time and the World Bank, in its Ease of Doing
Business Report 2019, has ranked Mauritius in the Top 20 countries in the world for its ease of
doing business and first in Sub Saharan Africa. This recognition is testimony of the hard work of
every Mauritian. Whilst proud of this achievement, we should continue to work for the betterment
of  our  country  and  contribute  to  enhance  our  standard  of  living,  converging  to  a  high-income
country.  The  world’s  economy  is  fraught  with  uncertainties  and  challenges.  We  must  put  our
minds  together  to  address  these  challenges  and  move  the  country  ahead.  We  need  your
contribution to that effect.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  emphasis  I  have  laid  on  governance  underscore  the  sacrosanct
aspect  of  the  company  secretary’s  duty  to  enforce  governance  and  compliance.  We  have  to
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
compose  with  a  fast-moving  environment  where  Kenneth  Blanchard’s  once  revolutionary
management  concepts  of One  Minute  Goals,  One  Minute  Praisings  and  One  Minute
Reprimands no longer seem to respond to today’s business imperatives.
Dear young graduates, you have built your success on hard work, on hopes and efforts borne by
your parents and your loved ones and your own aspirations of being the best in your league. 
May I congratulate you once again and wish you the very best. May you always discharge your
responsibilities in a most exemplary manner. 
Never forget that your prime duty is to protect the integrity and repute of your country.
I thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
