Kevin Stiroh: The complexity of culture reform in finance
Remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution  Supervision
Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the 4th Annual Culture and Conduct Forum
for the Financial Services Industry, London, 4 October 2018.
 Good  morning.    Thank  you  for  the  kind  introduction,  and  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  today’s
1
forum.
We are all here today to talk about conduct and culture in the financial services sector, so I’m
confident  that  you  will  agree  that  we  have  moved  beyond  the  questions  about  “if”  this  an
important  issue  and  statements  about  “why”  it  is  important.    Rather,  the  focus  is  “how”  the
financial industry—both financial firms and the official sector—can continue to make progress in
improving culture and reducing misconduct risk.
The New York Fed, under the leadership of former President Bill Dudley and current President
John Williams, has been a strong advocate for reform of culture in the financial industry.  Today,
I’d like to offer some thoughts about the progress made to date and some of the challenges that
remain.  These challenges reflect, in large part, the complexity of the problem.
Please note that my comments today are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
Culture Reform as a Complex Problem
I’ll  begin  by  observing  that  the  issue  of  conduct  and  culture  reform  in  the  financial  services
industry  is  a  “complex”  problem  and  not  simply  a  “complicated”  one.    Complicated  problems
have  clear  and  relatively  stable  cause-and-effect  patterns  so  that  outcomes  are  largely
predictable  with  the  appropriate  expertise  and  analysis.    By  contrast,  complex  problems  are
typically  marked  by  interconnectedness  of  a  large  number  of  factors,  constant  evolution,
feedback  loops,  “unknown  unknowns”,  and  unpredictable  outcomes.       Culture  reform  is  that
type of problem. 
2
A firm’s culture can be defined as the shared set of norms that influences decision-making and is
evidenced through behavior.  Now consider a global systemically important bank with trillions of
dollars of assets; with operations that span diverse business lines, customers, counterparties,
investors  and  regulators  across  multiple  jurisdictions;  and  that  competes  in  a  global  industry
against similar firms.  Add in tens, or even hundreds, of thousands of employees with a wide
range of motivations and goals who interact in varied but interconnected operating environments
with different regional, corporate and individual values, incentives, regulations, and laws, and the
inherent complexity becomes clear. 
This complexity makes it virtually impossible to fully comprehend the drivers of culture or predict
its behavioral consequences.  An implication is the need for a long-term, sustained commitment
to  addressing  conduct  and  culture  reform  using  a  wide  range  of  tools  that  are  suitable  for  a
complex problem.
Evolution of New York Fed’s Effort
In  the  ten  years  that  followed  the  financial  crisis,  we  have  continued  to  see  a  stream  of
misconduct scandals and cultural failures, and a corresponding increase in significant litigation
3
and enforcement activity, with costs estimated at an aggregate of $320 billion worldwide.  
At the New York Fed, our work in advocating culture and behavior reform in the financial sector
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
started in late 2013 when our former President, Bill Dudley, delivered a speech on the “too-big-to-
fail” problem.  In that speech, he argued that “there is evidence of deep-seated culture and ethical
failures  at  many  financial  institutions.”     More  recently,  our  current  President  John  Williams
concluded that “we have not yet fully addressed the root causes of many of the problems that
have  plagued  the  financial  sector”  and  that  there  was  still  a  “sense  of  urgency  in  addressing
5
banking culture.”
4
Over  the  past  five  years,  the  New  York  Fed  has  focused  on  shining  a  spotlight  on  culture,
behavior  and  conduct  concerns,  and  pushed  the  industry  to  address  these  issues  through  a
range of activities:
Engaging with diverse thinkers on governance, culture and organizational behavior to better
understand the complexity of culture reform;
Convening  academic  experts,  and  leaders  in  finance  and  the  official  sector  through
6
conferences and workshops on culture and behavior reform;
Facilitating  discussions  among  the  supervisory  community  on  assessing  and  influencing
industry culture-related efforts;
Building a platform for a partnership between business schools and industry representatives
to influence culture reform through training of future leaders in finance; and
Publishing a white paper on “Misconduct Risk, Culture and Supervision” that discussed a
range  of  market  failures  that  provide  a  conceptual  rationale  for  intervention  by  bank
7
supervisors.   
Our  white  paper  also  summarizes  work  of  supervisors  from  multiple  jurisdictions  around  the
world who are increasingly focused on the risks posed by poor culture and misconduct, and have
developed  a  broad  assortment  of  new  tools  and  practices  for  identifying  and  supervising  for
misconduct risk.  International efforts range from the creation of specialized units of behavioral
risk  experts  to  risk  culture  assessment  frameworks  to  supervisory  guidance  that  directs
supervised institutions to develop and promote a sound corporate culture.
I view this variation in approach as a feature and not a bug of the official sector focus on culture
reform.  There is rarely a single solution to a complex problem with many interdependencies and
deep uncertainty.  Rather, the official sector must experiment and innovate; probe and adapt; and
try new approaches to foster a healthy culture that promotes appropriate conduct.
One  common  thread  of  the  recent  innovations,  however,  is  that  supervisors  can  provide  a
horizontal perspective on culture reform that reflects broad social goals in a way that the private
sector cannot.  To be clear, it is not the supervisors’ job to dictate the internal culture of a firm,
but when there are market failures such as externalities or information asymmetries, then there
is a role for the official sector to push firms to do more to address these issues and mitigate
misconduct risk.
We should be cautious, however, about our ability to influence precisely and predictably.  Public
health studies, for example, document “policy resistance” where interventions are defeated by
the system’s response to an intervention.    As an example, a rules-based regime that focuses
on reducing conduct risk by prescriptive regulatory fiat runs the risks of creating a “check-the-box
culture” where everything not explicitly banned is considered acceptable behavior.  This has the
9
potential to facilitate exactly the wrong type of culture, conduct and risk-taking.
Challenges Related to Complexity
8
While I have spoken so far about work by the official sector, progress has also been made over
the past few years by the industry in terms of senior management focus and commitment to
culture reform.  Some firms have created Board-level committees looking at culture, others have
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
introduced behavioral risk into their audit programs, and still others have developed dashboards
with a range of quantitative and qualitative factors to track their efforts and outcomes.  Progress
has been uneven, however, and there is still more to do.  Let me identify several areas where I
think additional work is needed—assessment, technology, and influence.
Assessment
Given the complexity of the problem, measuring and assessing progress is not straightforward. 
Assessment of culture and the factors needed to change it are difficult, but this should not deter
us.  Managers, investors, and the official sector all want to know what is changing and whether
misconduct  risk  has  been  mitigated.    The  question  then  is,  how  will  we  really  know  whether
change is happening and whether progress is sustainable?
I  don’t  believe  that  there  is  a  “silver  bullet”  for  assessing  culture  change—no  single  solution,
approach, or template will work for every firm in every circumstance.  That said, standardized
metrics will help in assessing changes over time and across firms.  The UK Banking Standards
Board (BSB), for example, provides one lens on assessing culture change for a broad cross-
section of financial service firms operating in the U.K.
   I believe diagnostic tools like this are an
important part of the cultural assessment toolkit.
10
Moreover, firms and the official sector need to evaluate a wide range of behaviors, signals, and
outcomes to draw the most robust conclusions about the depth and pace of culture reform.  I
think  it  is  critical  for  both  firms  and  the  official  sector  to  continue  to  experiment  with  new
approaches  to  assessing  culture  change,  to  collect  and  build  new  forms  of  data  and
measurement, to develop qualitative assessments to complement quantitative ones, to use new
techniques and technology to understand how a firm’s culture and conduct are changing, and to
continue  adapting  and  course  correcting  to  a  sustainable  business  strategy  as  the  operating
environment evolves. 
Influence
Fostering productive behavioral change is at the heart of culture reform.  Behavior, in turn, is
driven by a multifaceted set of factors including incentives, cues from peers, observations about
leaders, and formal policies and procedures.  Most of us are not experts in human behavior, so I
believe we should be open to incorporating lessons from behavioral economics and other social
sciences into programs to mitigate conduct risk and promote cultural change.
Behavioral economics blends psychology and economics to provide insight into why individuals
may behave in a certain way and make decisions that may not be in their own economic best
interest.    For  example,  individuals  often  make  choices  that  provide  immediate  recognition  or
satisfaction—higher status within a peer group, for example—often at the cost of a potentially
better financial outcome in the long term.
11
This type of human behavior is at the core of the complexity of culture reform.  Lessons from the
field  have  increased  understanding  of  where  decision-making  can  depart  from  economic
expectations.    Sometimes,  these  lessons  have  been  used  to  create  circumstances  and
environments  that  positively  influence  individual  outcomes  by  “nudging”  individuals  to  better
choices.
   These nudges, in turn, help reinforce acceptable behavioral norms, and ultimately a
firm’s culture.  How can we nudge in order to reduce misconduct risk?  More broadly, how can
the financial services sector, including firms and supervisors, leverage insights from the social
sciences  to  promote  environments  that  foster  healthy  group  behavioral  patterns  with  better
decision-making? 
Technology
The  promise  of  new  technology  and  big  data  for  financial  institutions  is  everywhere  we  look. 
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
From artificial intelligence to machine learning to natural language processing, there seems to be
unlimited potential for more efficient operations, better analytics and more accurate predictions,
and more personalized product development. But, how will advances in technology, particularly
the  adoption  of  new  technologies,  such  as  artificial  intelligence,  influence  the  behavioral  risks
associated with human decision-making?  And how does technology introduce new risks that
prompt  a  rethinking  of  responsibility  and  customer  relationships—especially  with  regard  to
privacy and information security?
Moreover,  the  disruptive  potential  of  innovation  is  likely  to  exacerbate  an  already  complex
environment as decision-making becomes more opaque and new roles and responsibilities are
introduced.  For example, what will effective governance and risk management look like?  Do
artificial intelligence and machine learning introduce new model risk?  Or operational risk?  Or
conduct risk?  What does it mean to supervise or regulate conduct if decisions are made by self-
learning  algorithms?    More  broadly,  what  culture  and  conduct  risk  will  be  embedded  in
technology-driven financial services in the future?  These are hard questions for financial firms
and for the official sector, and our approach to the reform of financial industry culture will need to
address them.
Conclusions
To return to the beginning of this discussion, culture reform in finance is a complex problem. 
Causal  relationships  are  difficult  to  isolate,  linkages  are  constantly  changing,  and  accurate
prediction is impossible.  That does not mean that we are powerless, or that we should accept
complexity  as  an  excuse  for  not  trying  to  foster  change.    Rather,  we  need  a  long-term
commitment that brings the appropriate tools and approaches to bear.  The costs and potential
consequences of market failures associated with misconduct risk and culture suggests that it is
vitally important that we do so. 
Both  financial  firms  and  the  official  sector  should  focus  attention  on  investigating  and  asking
questions to better understand the underlying drivers, motivations and risks behind the behaviors
of  individuals  and  groups.    We  should  ensure  that  we  look  at  behaviors  and  outcomes  from
multiple perspectives, so we can gain a more robust understanding of the operating environment
as a whole.  No single perspective is likely to provide all of the insights.  Experimentation and
iteration,  use  of  narrative  and  story-telling,  and  innovative  methods  for  harnessing  diversity  of
perspective are thought to be effective ways of tackling complex problems and we all need to
innovate, adapt and seek new approaches.
12
I think this focus on conduct and culture is entirely consistent with a traditional supervisory focus
on resilience, both for individual firms and the financial system as whole.  This can be resilience
of a firm’s balance sheet in response to financial risk or an unexpected loss that depletes a firm’s
equity capital or resilience of a firm’s culture in response to conduct risk or an unexpected fraud
that depletes its cultural capital.
 In all of these cases, a resilient firm will be better able to adapt
and evolve in order to continue to function and provide the critical financial services necessary to
support a growing and stable economy. 
13
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
I  thank  Stephanie  Chaly,  Robert  Fitchette,  Jim  Hennessy,  Jackie  McCormack,  and  Tom  Noone  for  helpful
discussions and feedback on earlier drafts.
David J. Snowden and Mary E. Boone, “A Leader’s Framework for Decision Making,” Harvard Business Review,
November 2007
The Boston Consulting Group, Staying the Course in Banking, March 2, 2017.
William C. Dudley, Ending Too Big to Fail, November 7, 2013.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
John C. Williams, Now is the Time for Banking Culture Reform, June 18, 2018. 
Reforming  Culture  and  Behavior  in  the  Financial  Services  Industry:  Progress,  Challenges,  and  the  Next
Generation of Leaders
Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Lev Menand, Kevin Stiroh and Joseph Tracy,  Misconduct Risk, Culture, and
Supervision, December 2017. 
John Sterman, “Learning from Evidence in a Complex World,” Public Health Matters, 96(3), 2006.  For example,
the overuse of antibiotics that spread resistant pathogens.
Michael  Held, Reforming Culture and Conduct in the Financial Services Industry: How Can Lawyers Help?,
Remarks at Yale Law School’s Chirelstein Colloquium, Mar. 8, 2017.
Banking Standards Board
Richard H. Thaler and Cass Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and Happiness,
2009.
 Kurtz and Snowden, “The new dynamics of strategy: Sense-making in a complex and complicated world,” IBM
Systems  Journal,  Vol.  42,  No.  3,  2003;  and,  David  Snowden  and  Mary  Boone,  “A  Leader’s  Framework  for
Decision Making,” November 2007, Harvard Business Review.
See Misconduct Risk, Culture, and Supervision for more on the concept of “cultural capital.”
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
