Yves Mersch: Monetary policy in the euro area - a brief assessment
Speaking points by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the MNI Connect Roundtable, Singapore, 10 October 2018.
 The  euro  area  economy  is  currently  experiencing  a  broad-based  economic  expansion.
Although growth moderated somewhat in the first half of this year, following several strong
quarters in 2017, we expect the expansion to continue at a pace slightly above potential in
the  period  ahead. At  the  same  time,  risks  relating  to  increased  global  protectionism  and
vulnerabilities in emerging markets warrant continued monitoring.
Monetary policy measures introduced since 2014 have been pivotal to these developments.
They have set-in-train a return of euro area inflation to a rate below, but close to, 2% over the
medium term.
Real GDP expanded by 0.4% quarter on quarter in the second quarter of 2018 – the 21st
consecutive quarter of positive growth – with the level of real GDP 10% above the trough.
While the external environment is less favourable, the underlying strength of the euro area
economy is expected to persist on account of strong domestic demand dynamics.
This ongoing expansion has led to strong employment gains. There are now 9.2 million more
people employed in the euro area than at the low-point in mid-2013 and the unemployment
rate is at its lowest level for almost a decade.
The investment outlook also continues to strengthen and is supported by an ongoing need to
modernise the capital stock after years of subdued investment, as well as by very favourable
financing conditions, an improvement in profitability and solid demand.
Since  we  announced  our  policy  measures  in  June  2014,  financial  conditions  have  eased
considerably. Lending rates for non financial corporations and households have dropped by
around 130 basis points and 110 basis points, respectively.
Rates on very small loans, which can be taken as a proxy for loans to small and medium
sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  have  declined  by  more  than  210  basis  points.  Heterogeneity  of
lending rates across countries has also fallen sharply, which indicates that the pass-through
of our monetary policy has become more even.
At the same time, loans to euro area households and firms continue to remain favourable
with  annual  growth  of  3.1%  and  4.2%  in August  2018,  respectively.  This  pick up  in  credit
growth has not led to a crowding out of other forms of external finance for euro area NFCs,
with firms continuing to issue new equity.
Overall,  this  narrative  of  a  continued  broad-based  expansion  is  echoed  in  the  latest
September 2018 staff projections. Real GDP is projected to grow at an annual rate of 2.0%
in 2018, 1.8% in 2019 and 1.7% in 2020.
While risks to growth remain broadly balanced, those related to global factors, including the
threat of increased protectionism, the finalisation of the Brexit negotiations and vulnerabilities
in emerging markets are gaining prominence.
Turning to inflation developments, euro area headline inflation reached 2.1% in September
2018, up from 2.0% in August 2018, which largely reflects higher energy costs. Based on the
latest oil futures prices, headline inflation is expected to remain around the current level for
the remainder of the year.
According to the latest September 2018 staff projections, inflation is expected to rise to 1.7%
in  2018,  2019,  and  2020,  which  is  unchanged  since  the  June  exercise.  The  stable  path
masks changes in inflation components, with the decline in the contribution of the energy
component  over  the  projection  horizon  expected  to  be  offset  by  the  gradual  increase  in
underlying inflation.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
While measures of underlying inflation remain generally subdued, they are increasing from
previous lows. As the labour market continues to tighten this should lead to higher nominal
wage growth, which in turn should support underlying inflation.
Overall,  we  remain  confident  that  the  underlying  strength  of  the  euro  area  economy  will
continue to support the gradual build up of price pressures in order for inflation to return to
levels below, but close to, 2%. Yet, much of the medium-term increase in inflation that we
predict is based on the premise of quite some degree of monetary policy accommodation.
Against this backdrop, this month we began reducing our monthly net asset purchases to
€15  billion  and  we  continue  to  anticipate  that  –  subject  to  incoming  data  confirming  the
medium-term inflation outlook – net purchases will cease at the end of this year.
That  being  said,  in  order  to  ensure  that  a  sufficient  degree  of  monetary  accommodation
continues to support the further build-up of headline inflation, the Governing Council decided
to:
reconfirm its forward guidance on the likely path of our policy interest rates, whereby
rates  are  expected  to  remain  at  their  present  levels  at  least  through  the  summer  of
2019,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued  sustained
convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term;
restate  the  intention  to  continue  to  reinvest  the  principal  payments  from  maturing
securities purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of
time after the end of our net asset purchases, and in any case for as long as necessary
to  maintain  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation.
Looking ahead, monetary policy will be firmly guided by the outlook for price stability and our
stance will evolve in a data-dependent and time-consistent manner.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
