October  25,  2018 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
The Post-Crisis World: 
Evolution of the Economy, Economics, and Central Banks 
 Keynote Speech at "Nippon no Kakushin-ryoku" (Japan's Innovation) Symposium 
Co-hosted by the Faculty of Economics, Keio University and Nikkei Inc. 
Masazumi Wakatabe 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  speak  here  today  at  Keio  University.  As  an  alumnus  and  former 
professor  at  Waseda  University,  an  opportunity  like  this,  given  the  longstanding  fruitful 
relationship between the two schools, is a great honor. Yukichi Fukuzawa, founder of Keio 
University, Shigenobu Okuma, founder of Waseda University, and the Bank of Japan share 
a long and intimate history together. The fact that Fukuzawa and Okuma were close friends 
is  a  famous  story.  During  the  Meiji  Restoration,  Okuma  sought  to  lead  reforms  with  the 
support of Keio's alumni but failed, only to be expelled from the government -- an incident 
later known as the failed Meiji-14 coup of 1881. In the following year, Okuma,  emulating 
his friend Fukuzawa, built a school, which served as the predecessor of Waseda University. 
The Bank of Japan was established that very same year. Truth be told, Okuma, back when 
he was still a member of the government, proposed a plan for building Japan's first central 
bank (Bank of Japan [1982], pp.77-79). Although his plan was rejected, it is not far-fetched 
to consider part of his proposal as having been reflected in the Bank of Japan's charter in the 
form of liquidity provision. 
 This year marks about 20 years since Japan's financial crisis and the 10th anniversary of the 
Global  Financial  Crisis  triggered  by  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Milestones  provide 
us with ample opportunity to look back on the past. 
 In  my  speech  today,  I  will  begin  with  an  overview  of  significant  changes  observed  in 
economic  society  today.  I  will  then  discuss  the  evolution  of  economics  and  the  role  of 
central  banks.  My  message  to  you  is  threefold:  first,  change  holds  the  key;  second,  it  is 
important that we update our knowledge in response to change; and third, understanding the 
basics is essential regardless of -- or because of -- changes. 
 I. Progress for Humankind and Challenges Ahead 
Before  reflecting  on  Japan's  financial  crisis  of  about  two  decades  ago  and  the  Global 
Financial  Crisis  one  decade  ago,  let  me  provide  the  even  longer-term  perspective  of 
centuries  ago.  As  the  saying  goes,  "no  news  is  good  news"  --  people  tend  to  focus  on 
unfavorable  news  including  controversial  incidents  and  natural  disasters.  In  the  long  run, 
however,  humankind  has  been  making  steady  progress.  The  17th  century  philosopher 
1 
Thomas Hobbes once wrote, in his renowned work Leviathan, that "the natural condition of 
mankind" was "solitary, poore [sic], nasty, brutish, and short" (Hobbes [1651], Chart 1). The 
situation  has  changed  drastically  since  then.  There has  been a  dramatic  reduction in  wars, 
violence,  famine,  and  diseases,  and  people  live  longer  so  that  it  is  now  considered 
reasonable  to  expect  to  live  for  100  years.  Poverty,  although  persistent,  is  on  a  declining 
trend from a long-term perspective (Norberg [2017]; Pinker [2011, 2018], Chart 2). 
 What  is  the  driving  force  behind  these  changes?  First  on  the  list  are  the  effects  of 
Enlightenment-based  thought  since  the  time  of  Hobbes  as  well  as  the  development, 
accumulation, and spread of  scientific knowledge. Economists  in the 18th century such as 
David Hume and Adam Smith made notable contributions in these areas. 
 Second,  the  market  economy  plays  a  considerable  role  in  the  development,  accumulation, 
and  spread  of  such  Enlightenment-based  thought  and  scientific  knowledge.  The  so-called 
globalization  has  encouraged  not  only  the  exchange  of  goods  and  money  but  also  the 
interaction  between  people  and  the  sharing  of  knowledge.  We  tend  to  assume  that,  in  a 
market  economy,  human  relationships  become  cold  and  impersonal,  based  solely  on 
profit-seeking  motives,  and  people  become  overly  dependent  on  the  market.  In  reality, 
however, human motivation is complicated and diverse. The market economy in fact allows 
for the coexistence of various motives as long as a certain level of profit is raised. Moreover, 
mutual  trust  among  people  is  indispensable  for  markets  to  function  properly  (Seabright 
[2010]), and further, individuals become capable of supporting themselves through market 
participation (Matsui [2018]). These insights are the very line of thinking that had been held 
by distinguished economists in previous times, such as Hume and Smith.1  Globalization too 
                                                   
1  In  his  "Of  Refinement  in  the  Arts,"  Hume  [1987]  argues  that  industry  and  refinements  in 
mechanical arts would sophisticate the arts and science and humanity, stating "industry, knowledge, 
and  humanity,  are  linked  together  by  an  indissoluble  chain"  (p.271):  "The  more  these  refined  arts 
advance, the more sociable men become…They flock into cities; love to receive and communicate 
knowledge;  to  show  their  wit  or  their  breeding;  their  taste  in  conversation  or  living,  in  clothes  or 
furniture…and the tempers of men, as well as their behaviour, refine apace." 
  In  his  "History  of  Astronomy,"  Smith  [1980]  traces  the  origins  of  philosophical  and  scientific 
thinking to the stability of social life: "Mankind, in the first ages of society, before the establishment 
of law, order, and security, have little curiosity to find out those hidden chains of events which bind 
together  the  seemingly  disjointed  appearances  of  nature…But  when  law  has  established  order  and 
2 
often  is  associated  only  with  the  cross-border  flow  of  goods  and  money,  but  it  is  the 
cross-border exchange of knowledge among countless people all over the world that enables 
us  to  create  new  knowledge  atop  what  already  has  been  built  and  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of 
our lives today. 
 Having  said  this,  we  must  not  presume  that  the  future  is  nothing  more  than  simply 
something that lies in front of us. In the short run, there is an extensive list of issues on our 
agenda waiting to be tackled. Progress is in fact the by-product of unwavering efforts made 
by  humankind  in  order  to  address  challenges  confronted  at  each  point  in  time.  Put 
differently,  failing  to  keep  up  with  these  efforts  will  result  in  stagnation,  or  even  worse, 
retreat.  Indeed,  a  wide  range  of  issues,  such  as  macroeconomic  policy,  stagnating 
productivity  growth,  the  impact  of  robotics  and  machine  learning  on  employment, 
environmental  problems  including  climate  change,  income  and  wealth  inequality,  and  the 
rise of protectionism and the so-called populism, appear to have piled up. Although Japan's 
economy  is  no  longer  in  deflation,  many  people  faced  economic  difficulties  during  the 
period of prolonged deflation up until several years ago. 
 Financial crises are one such issue. While the market economy is built upon mutual human 
trust, money -- the foundation of economic transactions therein -- is also dependent on trust. 
Intrinsically,  circulation  of  money  requires  social  trust;  individuals  must  have  the 
confidence that money will be accepted by a third party. A free and abundant flow of money 
leads  to  economic  growth  through  active  exchanges  and  transactions.  For  example, 
economic growth in emerging economies has been supported by global capital inflows. At 
times,  however,  such  flow  of  money  triggers  problems.  When  capital  inflows  tie  in  with 
overly optimistic growth expectations, this  may cause asset prices such as land prices and 
stock prices to rise excessively and, ultimately, the asset price bubble to burst.  In a time of 
an  abrupt  reversal  in  global  capital  flows,  countries  experiencing  capital  outflows  may  be 
forced  to  undergo  large-scale  economic  adjustments.  Furthermore,  while  developments  in 
                                                                                                                                                     
security,  and  subsistence  ceases  to  be  precarious,  the  curiosity  of  mankind  is  increased,  and  their 
fears  are  diminished.  The  leisure  which  they  then  enjoy  renders  them  more  attentive  to  the 
appearances of nature, more observant of her smallest irregularities, and more desirous to know what 
is the chain which links them all together. That some such chain subsists betwixt all her seemingly 
disjointed phaenomena [sic], they are necessarily led to conceive" (pp.48, 51). 
3 
financial products  brought the benefits of providing greater options for asset management, 
they also catalyzed the contagion of  financial crises worldwide, as seen during the  Global 
Financial  Crisis  of  2008.  The  prolonged  economic  stagnation  that  followed  amplified 
people's doubts about globalization and the market economy itself.2 
 In  addition,  the  data  revolution,  while  significantly  enhancing  information  sharing  and 
utilization, has led to the rise of a small number of big tech companies making full use of 
data.  This  has  caused  voiced  concerns  about  the  increasing  market  power  of  such  firms, 
their  effects  on  income  and  wealth  inequality,  and  protection  of  privacy.3  What  is  more, 
digitalization  is  increasing  the  perceived  threat  of  cyber-attacks  so  significantly  that  some 
claim  that  the  next  potential  financial  crisis  could  well  be  triggered  by  cyber-attacks  on 
global financial institutions. 
 II. Evolution of Economics 
I  would  now  like  to  talk  about  how  an  ever-changing  economy  leads  to  the  evolution  of 
economics. 
 Let me introduce a satirical article about economists published in 1973. The article entitled 
"Life  among  the  Econ"  was  written  in  the  style  of  an  anthropologist's  study  on  a  tribe  of 
economists  called  the  "Econ"  (Leijonhufvud  [1973]).4  In  this  article,  the  Econ  live  in  the 
far  north  and  the  status  of  the  members  is  determined  by  their  skill  in  making  elaborated 
"modls"  (taken  from  "model"  used  in  economics)  of  their  "field"  of  study.  But  "most  of 
these  'modls'  seem  to  be  of  little  or  no  practical  use."  As  for  the  "field"  of  study,  the 
"Math-Econ"  is  considered  as  ranking  higher  than  the  "Devlops,"  where  Math-Econ  and 
Devlops  respectively  refer  to  scholars  of  mathematical  economics  and  development 
economics. The Devlops are ranked lower because they interact with other tribes such as the 
                                                   
2  Eichengreen  [2018]  traces  the  historical  relationship  between  economic  distress  --  the  rise  of 
machines, depressions, and financial crises -- and political reactions. 
3  At this year's Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, discussion was centered on the rise of big tech companies and the effects of intangible 
assets on the macroeconomy.   
https://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/symposiums/escp-2018 
4  In Japan, Sawa [1982] popularized this through his short book. 
4 
Polscis  (political  scientists)  and  Sociogs  (sociologists),  and  are  suspected  of  having  given 
up  modl-making.  The  article  concludes,  "The  prospect  for  the  Econ  is  bleak.  Their  social 
structure  and  culture  should  be  studied  now  before  it  is  gone  forever."  It  warns  of  the 
situation  of  economics  at  the  time,  where  economists  were  too  focused  on  making 
unrealistic "modls" and reluctant to collaborate with those outside the field of economics. 
 Notwithstanding whether such satire was on point at that time,  the days in which it can be 
applied  are  over.  Nowadays,  economic  research  has  become  increasingly  founded  on 
empirical work and data science, along with the increase in computing power, spread of the 
Internet, accumulation of and increase in data, and development of econometric techniques 
(Hamermesh  [2013];  Angrist  et  al.  [2017],  Chart  3).  Data  science  methodology  has  been 
adopted actively not only in economics, but also in social sciences in general and in some 
fields of humanities. Through the sharing of methodologies, interaction of economics with 
other fields of study is being accelerated. 
 This is not to say that economic theory has become extinct, however. In fact,  there is now 
greater variety to economic theory, as seen in the rise and establishment of game theory and 
behavioral  economics.  We  should  say  that  the  share  of  purely  theoretical  papers  in 
economics has decreased. What came of this was the rise in popularity of so-called applied 
work (Backhouse and Cherrier [2017]). 
 With the development of economics acquiring a new character of data science and applied 
science, the areas to which economics is applied have been expanding. 
 The  first  is  applications  to  policy  making.  The  term  "evidence-based  policy  making,"  or 
EBPM, has finally  started to prevail in Japan, and the government is promoting  EBPM as 
part  of  its  administrative  reform.  This  is  a  movement  that  requires  appropriate  empirical 
evidence in policy making. "The cost-benefit revolution" (Sunstein [2018]) is under way, in 
which  a  balancing  of  costs  and  benefits  based  on  empirical  evidence  is  made  use  of  in 
policy making. Specifically, economics has been applied in the context of deregulation and 
market  designs  such  as  spectrum  auction  and  medical  resident  matching  programs,  for 
5 
example,  which  have  started  to  prove  successful  (McMillan  [2002];  Backhouse  [2010]; 
Siegfried [2010]; Litan [2014]).   
 Second,  economics  has  become  a  common  language  among  policymakers.  Without  an 
understanding  of  economics  at  the  very  least,  you  will  have  difficulty  in  communication, 
especially  at  meetings  of  the  Group  of  20  (G-20),  central  banks,  and  international 
organizations such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).5 
 Third,  economists  are  now  working  more  in  collaboration  with  other  disciplines,  and 
engaging  in  research and education  outside economics  departments,  especially  in  business 
schools, law schools, and public policy schools. Economists also play an important role at 
big tech companies (Chart 4). For example, it is said that the latest auction theory is applied 
when online advertising space is sold (Athey and Luca [2018]).   
 In  sum,  economics  has  become  increasingly  empirical  and  useful  in  a  practical  manner. 
Economists have been tackling the aforementioned issues facing humankind. However, this 
does not mean that there are no issues to be addressed in economics itself. 
 In  particular,  the  outbreak  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  in  2008  posed  significant 
challenges  to  economists.  It  is  reported  that,  when  Queen  Elizabeth  II  visited  the  London 
School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) in November 2008, she asked economists 
regarding  the  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets:  "Why  did  nobody  notice  it?"  The 
economists were not ready to comment.6   
 We have to admit that the outbreak of financial crises is essentially  a very difficult issue to 
address,  and  predicting  it  is  a  more  difficult  task.  Also,  as  behavioral  economics  shows, 
economists may sometimes have biases or make mistakes as humans.7  This does not mean, 
                                                   
5  There  is  room  for  discussion  as  to  the  extent  to  which  economics  is  actually  applied  to  policy 
making. See, for example, Blinder (2018). 
6  For the response sent afterwards by U.K. economists to the Queen, see   
http://wwwf.imperial.ac.uk/~bin06/M3A22/queen-lse.pdf 
7  Eichengreen  [2009]  argues  that  economists  could  not  resist  various  "temptations"  to  ignore 
insights  obtained  through  information  economics,  organizational  economics,  and  behavioral 
6 
however,  that  the  insights  gained  in  economics  have  become  useless.  Academic  studies 
progress  as  we  learn  from  past  experiences,  including  failures.  The  accumulation  of  such 
processes  leads to  the  selection  of  our  knowledge; that  is,  our  knowledge  of  economics  is 
constantly  being  upgraded.  What  you  learn  from  textbooks  is  a  result  of  this  selection 
process,  forming  the  basic  framework  of  the  current  economics.  This  holds  great 
significance  in  your  lives,  to  which  I  will  return  later  when  I  talk  about  financial  and 
economic education. 
 III. Changing Role of Central Banks 
Central banks, operating at the intersection between the changing economy and economics, 
have  a  long  history  toward  becoming  what  they  are  today.  In  fact,  the  concept  of  central 
banks itself has been shaped by history. Sweden's Riksbank was established in 1668, earliest 
among currently existing central banks, but it originally differed from central banks we are 
familiar with today, in that the institution's function included extending loans to the Crown 
to finance war (Chart 5). Central banks have changed, evolving in a process of humankind 
tackling  economic  problems  that  occurred  thereafter,  such  as  large  price  fluctuations  and 
financial  crises  (Edvinsson  et  al.  [2018]).  In  the  course  of  this  evolution,  a  number  of 
contributions have been made by economists, from Henry Thornton, David Ricardo, Walter 
Bagehot, Irving Fisher, John Maynard Keynes, and Milton Friedman to those today.   
 Having  assumed  my  current  position  at  the  Bank  of  Japan,  I  am  now  better  aware  of  the 
wide-ranging roles that central banks play today (Chart 6). The Bank of Japan Act stipulates 
that the Bank's purpose is to achieve price stability and maintain financial system stability, 
thereby contributing to the sound development of the national economy. To achieve this, the 
Bank engages in a wide range of operations, such as issuing banknotes, conducting on-site 
examinations  and  off-site  monitoring  of  financial  institutions,  operation  of  payment  and 
settlement  systems,  and  coordinating  with  international  organizations.  Needless  to  say, 
conducting  research  and  studies  through  the  application  of  economics  also  constitutes  an 
important  central  bank  operation.  At  this  point,  I  will  briefly  explain  how  the  Bank  has 
responded to the two trends of the data revolution and globalization. 
                                                                                                                                                      
economics. See also Zingales [2013]. 
7 
Starting with the data revolution, electronic payments have become increasingly common in 
recent  years.  Although  the  so-called cryptocurrency  is  termed crypto-assets  among  central 
banks, partly because of its highly speculative nature, cashless payments using, for example, 
credit  cards,  electronic  money,  and  QR  codes  have  continued  to  increase.  Central  banks 
have been paying close attention to these developments, as payment and settlement systems 
are crucial infrastructures. Some central banks have begun research and deliberation on the 
issuance  of  a  central  bank  digital  currency.8  In  relation  to  the  data  revolution,  economic 
statistics play a significant role. Accurate real-time data are desired since it is required that 
policy decisions, especially by central banks, be made swiftly based on data available at the 
time (Nishimura [2012]). 
 With regard to globalization, not only financial and economic activities, but also knowledge 
pertaining  to  policy  conduct  is  becoming  increasingly  globalized  through  dialogue  and 
cooperation  among  central  banks.  Japan's  financial  crisis  from  1997  to  1998  --  preceding 
the Global Financial  Crisis of 2008 that I mentioned earlier  -- has been studied by central 
banks all over the world as a lesson to be learned (Chart 7). In particular, the fact that Japan, 
the  world's  second-largest  economy  at  the  time,  experienced  entrenched  deflation  and 
prolonged  stagnation  after  the  crisis  drew  the  attention  of  policymakers  and  economists 
worldwide. 
 Let me sum up the lessons learned from Japan's experience. First, it has become clear that 
an  excessive  rise  in  asset  prices  above  fundamentals  --  the  emergence  of  the  bubble 
economy  --  and  its  collapse  triggering  a  financial  crisis  will  exert  a  considerable  negative 
impact on the economy. Second, there are still discussions, however, regarding whether to 
tighten monetary policy as a pre-emptive measure against a rise in asset prices. Although we 
should  not  ignore  asset  price  fluctuations  completely,  taking  a  strong  measure  to  burst  the 
bubble could push the economy into a serious recession. Third, in the event of a  financial 
crisis,  ex  post  policy  response  becomes  extremely  important.  As  downward  pressure  is 
                                                   
8  Such central banks include that of Sweden, where the amount outstanding of banknotes has been 
decreasing rapidly, and those of some emerging and developing economies, where infrastructure for 
banknotes is underdeveloped. While Bordo and Levin [2017] present research from the standpoint of 
advocates,  Cœuré  [2018]  and  Amamiya  [2018]  raise  issues  to  be  considered  from  a  central  bank's 
viewpoint. 
8 
exerted  on  the  economy  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  it  will  be  necessary  to  respond  with 
vigorous  expansionary  macroeconomic  policies.  If  the  response  is  inadequate  or  delayed, 
the economy will fall into deflation and face difficulty escaping from it. Fourth, regarding a 
financial crisis, however, there is no better way than to prevent it. In doing so, ex ante and 
ex  post  financial  regulation  --  monitoring  excessive  risk-taking  behavior  of  financial 
institutions  and  setting  up  a  resolution  mechanism  --  as  well  as  macroprudential  policy  -- 
analyzing and assessing systemic risk in the financial system as a whole and taking policy 
measures based on it -- play key roles (Wakatabe [2015], pp.142-147). 
 Regrettably,  after  Japan's financial  crisis,  policymakers  across  the  globe  could  not prevent 
the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  They  did,  however,  succeed  in  preventing  another  Great 
Depression by taking swift and bold policy responses after the crisis.9  For example, central 
banks  with  inflation  targets  managed  to  keep  their  economies  from  falling  into  severe 
deflation  even  after  the  crisis.10  Moreover,  financial  authorities  including  central  banks 
have proceeded globally with the development of financial regulations, so as not to repeat a 
disaster  like  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  ever  again.  Through  these  efforts,  in  an 
ever-changing  economy,  central  banks  must  be  vigilant  and  prepared  for  possible  future 
financial crises at all times. 
 IV. Promotion of Financial and Economic Education 
Putting  all  this  in  perspective,  we  could  gain  a  good  sense  of  the  most  desirable  qualities 
and skills of people working in the financial industry. Let me start with simple examples. As 
the  data  revolution  proceeds,  there  likely  will  be  greater  demand  for  those  educated  in 
                                                   
9  Kuttner, Iwaisako, and Posen  [2015] point out, "Although the United States and many European 
countries were also hit hard by the collapse of the housing market in the late 2000s, most responded 
decisively,  partly  because  policymakers  in  those  countries  were  determined  not  to  repeat  Japan's 
experience in the 1990s" (pp.31-32). 
10  Some  economists  argue  that,  if  the  2  percent  inflation  target  had  been  set  in  Japan  during  the 
1990s, the subsequent deflation would not have occurred (Braun and Waki [2006]). However, since 
the rate of growth in total factor productivity also declined during the so-called lost two decades in 
Japan, it is also possible to say that there were problems on the supply side as well as on the demand 
side. The past recession possibly had lasting negative effects on productivity growth of the economy. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  has  great  interest  in  the  mutual  relationship  between  business  cycles  and 
economic growth, on which research has been progressing recently. See the Bank of Japan Research 
and Statistics Department [2018] and Kaihatsu et al. [2018]. 
9 
science, technology, engineering, and  mathematics -- the so-called STEM education. On a 
similar note, globalization will naturally raise demand for those with a strong command of 
English  as  a  communication  tool.  Society  as  a  whole,  including  the  government,  should 
work  toward  better  education  and  research  in  these  areas.  I  personally  believe  that  the 
biggest  advantage  to  learning  English  is  that  it  enables  you  to  learn  about  the  world  and 
reminds you to not end up as a "frog in the well that knows nothing of the great ocean" -- a 
Japanese  proverb that  describes  a person  who  measures  things  only  within  his  or  her  own 
world. In relation to learning about the world, I would like to remind you that the economy 
and economics have been changing significantly. Given this, education about the underlying 
mechanism of society and the economy will only grow in importance, so as to help students 
develop the capability to sense and understand such changes properly. 
 For  the  financial  industry  to  recruit  qualified  talents,  the  key  lies  in  whether  they  can 
effectively  demonstrate  the  advantages  of  working  in  the  industry,  since  those  with  the 
qualities I have just mentioned are in high demand across industries. 
 Whether  or  not  you  work  in  the  financial  industry,  financial  and  economic  literacy  is 
necessary  for  everyone.  In  this  connection,  let  me  introduce  the  Central  Council  for 
Financial  Services  Information  (CCFSI),  an  organization  with  the  two  main  objectives  of 
(1) providing  financial and economic information to the general public and (2) supporting 
financial  and  economic  education  (Chart  8).11  Its  secretariat  office  is  located  within  the 
Bank  of  Japan's  Head  Office;  as  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank,  I  serve  concurrently  as  a 
member of the CCFSI. The council, originally the Central Council for Savings Promotion, 
subsequently was reorganized as the Central Council for Savings Information and renamed 
as the CCFSI in 2001.   
 Especially  today,  when  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  to  live  for  100  years,  asset  formation  is 
gaining  more  and  more  importance.  Here  is  a  set  of  questions  relating  to  financial  and 
economic literacy in this regard (Chart 9). I think that some of you here today are currently 
studying  economics.  For  those  who  have  taken  an  introductory  course  in  economics,  this 
should  be  a  piece  of  cake  --  at  least,  I  believe  so.  Take  question  1,  for  example.  This 
                                                   
11  For details on the activities of the CCFSI, see https://www.shiruporuto.jp/e/. 
10 
involves  compound  interest  calculation.  Compound  interest  calculation  is  a  method  in 
which interest is added to the principal sum so that interest for the following period is then 
earned on the principal sum plus the previously accumulated interest. With this knowledge, 
you may see that one would be better off starting asset building from an early stage in life 
and  refraining  from  short-term  transactions  based  on  rash  decisions.  Let  us  next  take 
question  4.  This  teaches  you  the  importance  of  diversifying  your  investment  portfolio. 
Diversifying rather than concentrating your portfolio allows you to control a certain kind of 
risk.  By  combining  these  two  ideas,  you  will  find  an  asset  formation  plan  of  investing 
steadily  in  a  diversified  portfolio  from  a  long-run  perspective.  Basic  knowledge  of 
economics  is  indeed  useful,  but  there  still  seems  room  for  improvement  in  financial  and 
economic literacy in Japan: The percentage of correct answers to these kinds of questions is 
lower  than  those  in  the  United  States  and  European  countries  (Chart  10).  Furthermore, 
consumer fraud is being carried out recently in extremely artful ways, and an understanding 
of economics is also helpful in determining the factors behind such fraud to seek preventive 
measures against it (Fukuhara [2017]).12 
 Conclusion 
Today, I have elaborated on the respective changes in the economy, economics, and central 
banks.  What  they  have  in  common  are  structural  changes  of  the  data  revolution  and 
globalization. You cannot avoid these changes even by choosing a STEM career. According 
to  the  findings  of  research  conducted  in  the  United  States,  compensation  is  high  at  the 
outset  of  a  STEM  career;  however,  because  rapid  technological  change  leads  to  skill 
obsolescence,  there  are  many  cases  where  wages  of  STEM  workers  start  to  level  off  at  a 
certain point and they switch jobs early on their career (Deming and Noray [2018]). Even if 
you choose a different career, the basic knowledge I have described using the financial and 
economic  literacy  questions  will  still  be  necessary,  given  that  you  may  live  for  100  years. 
Whether  or  not  you  seek  a  career  in  the  financial  industry,  you  are  required  to  have  the 
motivation and curiosity to regularly update your knowledge in response to change. 
 In concluding, let me share with you a quote from Julian Simon, an economist (Chart 11): 
                                                    
12  There are various studies on the effects of financial education. See Campbell [2016] for details. 
11 
The main fuel to speed the world's progress is our stock of knowledge; the brakes 
are our lack of imagination and unsound social regulations of these activities. The 
ultimate resource is people -- especially skilled, spirited, and hopeful young people 
endowed with liberty  -- who will exert their wills and imaginations for their own 
benefits, and so inevitably they will benefit the rest of us as well (Simon [1995], 
p.27). 
 Thank you for your kind attention. 
  References 
Amamiya, Masayoshi.  2018. "The Future of Money." Speech at the 2018 Autumn Annual 
Meeting of the Japan Society of Monetary Economics, October 20, 2018. 
Angrist,  Joshua,  Pierre  Azoulay,  Glenn  Ellison,  Ryan  Hill,  and  Susan  Feng  Lu.  2017. 
"Economic  Research  Evolves:  Fields  and  Styles."  American  Economic  Review: 
Papers & Proceedings, 107 (5): 293-297. 
Athey, Susan, and Michael Luca. 2018. "Economists (and Economics) in Tech Companies." 
NBER Working Paper No. 25064. 
Backhouse,  Roger  E.  2010.  The  Puzzle  of  Modern  Economics:  Science  or  Ideology? 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Backhouse, Roger E., and Béatrice Cherrier, eds. 2017. The Age of the Applied Economist: 
The Transformation of Economics since the 1970s, Durham: Duke University Press. 
Bank of Japan, ed. 1982. Nippon Ginko Hyakunen-shi [The Centennial History of the Bank 
of Japan]. Vol. 1. (in Japanese) 
https://www.boj.or.jp/about/outline/history/hyakunen/hyaku1.htm/ 
Bank  of  Japan  Research  and  Statistics  Department.  2018.  "[Minutes  of  the  7th  Joint 
Conference Organized by the University of Tokyo Center for Advanced Research in 
Finance  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  Research  and  Statistics  Department:  'New 
Developments  of  Macroeconomic  Analysis:  Interaction  between  Business  Cycles 
and Economic Growth.']" BOJ Reports and Research Papers. (in Japanese) 
https://www.boj.or.jp/research/brp/ron_2018/ron180330a.htm/ 
Blinder,  Alan  S.  2018.  Advice  and  Dissent:  Why  America  Suffers  When  Economics  and 
12 
Politics Collide. New York: Basic Books. 
Bordo,  Michael  D.,  and  Andrew  T.  Levin.  2017.  "Central  Bank  Digital  Currency  and  the 
Future of Monetary Policy." NBER Working Paper No. 23711. 
Braun, R. Anton, and Yuichiro Waki. 2006. "Monetary Policy during Japan's Lost Decade." 
Japanese Economic Review, 57 (2): 324-344. 
Campbell, John Y. 2016. "Restoring Rational Choice: The Challenge of Consumer Financial 
Regulation." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 106 (5): 1-30.   
Cœuré,  Benoît.  2018.  "The  Future  of  Central  Bank  Money."  Speech  at  the  International 
Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 14 May 2018. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180514_4.en.html 
Deming,  David  J.,  and  Kadeem  L.  Noray.  2018.  "STEM  Careers  and  Technological 
Change." NBER Working Paper No. 25065. 
Edvinsson,  Rodney,  Tor  Jacobson, and  Daniel Waldenström,  eds.  2018.  Sveriges  Riksbank 
and the History of Central Banking. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Eichengreen, Barry. 2009. "The Last Temptation of Risk." The National Interest. 101: 8-14.   
———. 2018. The Populist Temptation: Economic Grievance and Political Reaction in the 
Modern Era. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Fukuhara, Toshiyasu. 2017. "Kodo Keizaigaku wo Oyo-shita Shohisha Sagi Higai no Yobo 
ni  kansuru  Ichikosatsu"  [A  Behavioral  Insight  Approach  to  Prevent  Consumer 
Fraud]. Research Paper Series. Central Council for Financial Services Information. 
(in Japanese) 
https://www.shiruporuto.jp/public/document/container/report6/ 
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 2013. "Six Decades of Top Economics Publishing: Who and How?" 
Journal of Economic Literature, 51 (1): 162-172. 
Hobbes, Thomas. 1651. Leviathan, or, The Matter, Forme, and Power of a Common Wealth, 
Ecclesiasticall and Civil. London: Printed for Andrew Crooke. 
Hume,  David.  1987.  Essays,  Moral,  Political,  and  Literary.  Edited  by  Eugene  F.  Miller. 
Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.   
Kaihatsu,  Souhei,  Maiko  Koga,  Tomoya  Sakata,  and  Naoko  Hara.  2018.  "Interaction 
between  Business  Cycles  and  Economic  Growth."  Bank  of  Japan  Working  Paper 
Series 18-E-12. 
https://www.boj.or.jp/en/research/wps_rev/wps_2018/wp18e12.htm/ 
13 
Kuttner,  Kenneth,  Tokuo Iwaisako,  and  Adam  Posen.  2015. "Monetary  and  fiscal  policies 
during  the  lost  decades." In  Yoichi  Funabashi  and Barak  Kushner,  eds.  Examining 
Japan's Lost Decades. London and New York: Routledge: 17-36. 
Leijonhufvud,  Axel.  1973.  "Life  among  the  Econ."  Western  Economic  Journal  11  (3): 
327-337. 
Litan, Robert E. 2014. Trillion Dollar Economists: How Economists and Their Ideas Have 
Transformed Business. New York: Wiley. 
Matsui,  Akihiko.  2018.  Shijo-tte  nan  daro:  Jiritsu  to  Izon  no  Keizaigaku  [What  is  the 
market?: Economics of Interdependence and Dependence]. Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo. 
(in Japanese) 
McMillan, John. 2002. Reinventing the Bazaar: A Natural History of Markets. New York: 
W.W. Norton & Co. 
Nishimura, Kiyohiko G. "Market Intelligence, Market Information and Statistics in Central 
Banking."  Keynote  Speech  to  the  Sixth  Irving  Fisher  Committee  Conference  in 
Basel, August 29, 2012. 
https://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012 /ko120830a.htm/ 
Norberg,  Johan.  2017.  Progress:  Ten  Reasons  to  Look  Forward  to  the  Future.  London: 
Oneworld Publications. 
Pinker, Steven. 2011. The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined. New 
York: Viking. 
———.  2018.  Enlightenment  Now:  The  Case  for  Reason,  Science,  Humanism,  and 
Progress. New York: Viking. 
Sawa,  Takamitsu.  1982.  Keizaigaku  towa  nan  daro  ka  [What  is  economics?].  Tokyo: 
Iwanami Shoten. (in Japanese) 
Seabright,  Paul.  2010.  The  Company  of  Strangers:  A  Natural  History  of  Economic  Life. 
Revised edition. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Siegfried,  John  J.,  ed.  2010.  Better  Living  Through  Economics.  Cambridge:  Harvard 
University Press. 
Simon, Julian L., ed. 1995. The State of Humanity. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Smith, Adam. 1980. Essays on Philosophical Subjects. Edited by W. P. D. Wightman and J. 
C. Bryce. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Sunstein, Cass R. 2018. The Cost-Benefit Revolution. Cambridge: The MIT Press. 
14 
Wakatabe,  Masazumi.  2015.  Japan's  Great  Stagnation  and  Abenomics:  Lessons  for  the 
World. London and New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Zingales, Luigi. 2013. "Preventing Economists' Capture." In Daniel Carpenter and David A. 
Moss  eds.  Preventing  Regulatory  Capture:  Special  Interest  Influence  and  How  to 
Limit It. New York: Cambridge University Press: 124-151. 
  15 
The Post-Crisis World:
Evolution of the Economy, Economics, and Central Banks
Keynote Speech at "Nippon no Kakushin-ryoku" (Japan's Innovation) Symposium
October 25, 2018
Masazumi Wakatabe
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan
Leviathan (1651)
(Chart 1)
Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679)
"the life of man, solitary, poore [sic], 
nasty, brutish, and short"
Progress for Humankind
(Chart 2)
Life Expectancy                      World Population in Extreme Poverty
World
Europe
Americas
Asia
Africa
(years)
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
Total population
Population living in extreme poverty
(bil.)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
20
CY
1760
1800
1840
1880
1920
1960
2000
0
1820
CY
1850
1880
1910
1940
1970
2000
Source: Our World in Data.
Evolution of Economics
(Chart 3)
Percentage Distributions of Methodology of Published Articles in Economics
 100
80
60
40
20
0
1963
CY
1973
1983
1993
2003
2011
Source: Hamermesh (2013).
Experiment
Empirical: own data
Empirical: borrowed data
Theory with simulation
Theory
Increased Applications of Economics
(Chart 4)
Number of Positions Available for Ph.D. Economists
Other than economics departments
2014
2015
2016
2017
Economics departments
Business schools
Policy schools
Tech companies
250
200
150
100
50
0
Notes: 1. Figures are those for the period from February to the following January.
2. Figures for tech companies represent the number of firms with job postings (each firm may offer multiple positions).
Source: Athey and Luca (2018).
Establishment of Central Banks
(Chart 5)
Year
1668
1694
1800
1814
1850
1876
Bank of Japan
Bank of Italy
Swiss National Bank
Federal Reserve System
Bank of Canada
European Central Bank
Year
1882
1893
1907
1913
1934
1998
Riksbank (Sweden)
Bank of England
Banque de France
De Nederlandsche Bank
National Bank of Belgium 
Reichsbank (Germany)
Source: Central banks.
Objectives and Operations of the Bank of Japan
(Chart 6)
Objectives
Price stability
Financial system 
stability
Source: Bank of Japan.
Operations
Monetary policy
Prudential policy
Banknotes, payments and settlements
Computer systems planning and development
International finance
Research and studies
Public relations
Japan's Experience
(Chart 7)
Japan's Real Economic Growth and Inflation Nominal Economic Growth by Country
(yoy, %)
Bubble's
bursting
Japan's 
financial 
Global 
Financial 
Crisis
crisis
Real economic growth rate
Inflation rate
1981
1991
Prolonged
deflation
2001
2011
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
-2.0
-4.0
FY
(CY1991=100)
United States
United Kingdom
France
Germany
Japan
1991
1996
2001
2006
2011
2016
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
CY
Note: Inflation rates are based on the CPI (less fresh food, adjusted for changes in the consumption tax rate).
Sources: Cabinet Office; Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; International Monetary Fund; Bank of Japan.
History of the CCFSI
(Chart 8)
Transition to Meet the Needs of the Times
Name
Characteristics
Central Council for
Savings Promotion 
National movements to control inflation after WWII 
and to promote savings for capital accumulation
Central Council for
Savings Information
Stress on disseminating information relating to 
savings
Year
1952-
1988-
2001-
Current
Central Council for
Financial Services Information 
Stress on supporting independent consumers
and on promoting financial education at schools, 
amid financial innovations
Source: Central Council for Financial Services Information.
Financial Literacy Questions
(Chart 9)
Q1. Suppose you put 1 million yen into a savings account with a guaranteed interest rate of 2% 
per year. How much would be in the account after 5 years?
Q2. Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was 2% 
per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy with the money in this account? 
More than today, exactly the same, or less than today?
Q3. When compared, a 15-year mortgage typically requires higher monthly payments than a 30-
year loan, but the total interest paid over the life of the loan will be less. True or false?
Q4. Buying a single company's stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund. 
True or false?
Q5. If interest rates rise, what will typically happen to bond prices? Will they rise, stay the same, 
or fall?
Source: Central Council for Financial Services Information, "Financial Literacy Survey: 2016 Results."
Percentage of Correct Answers to Financial Literacy Questions
Comparison with European Countries
70
Comparison with the U.S.
  70
(Chart 10)
60
50
40
60
50
40
30
30
United Kingdom
Note: The average percentage of correct answers to five questions. Comparisons with the U.S. and with European 
United States
Germany
Japan
Japan
countries are based on different sets of questions, respectively (For this reason, the figures for Japan differ).
Source: Central Council for Financial Services Information, "Financial Literacy Survey: 2016 Results."
Simon (1995)
(Chart 11)
The main fuel to speed the world's progress is our stock of 
knowledge; the brakes are our lack of imagination and 
unsound social regulations of these activities. The ultimate 
resource is people -- especially skilled, spirited, and hopeful 
young people endowed with liberty -- who will exert their 
wills and imaginations for their own benefits, and so 
inevitably they will benefit the rest of us as well.
