     ANNUAL DINNER OF THE  
CHARTERED INSTITUTE OF BANKERS (GHANA) 
 ADDRESS BY 
DR. ERNEST ADDISON 
GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
 ACCRA MARRIOT HOTEL 
DECEMBER 01, 2018 
 Page | 1  
    Madam President of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, 
President of the Ghana Association of Bankers, 
Executive Secretary of Ghana Association of Bankers, 
CEOs of Banks, 
Colleague Bankers and Banking Students, 
Invited Guests, 
Members of the Press, 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
 1. Good  evening.  All  too  soon,  a  year  has  passed  by  and  we  are 
once  again  gathered  for  this  special  occasion  which  brings 
together  all  the  distinguished  professionals  in  this  very  unique 
profession.  Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  this  dinner  and  to 
address  the  Institute  of  Bankers  at  the  end  of  a  week-long  of 
activities marking “Bankers” week. It has now become a tradition 
for the Governor of the Bank to talk about the developments in 
the  banking  and  financial  sector,  the  economy  and  the  outlook 
for  the  ensuing  year,  and  I  will  like  to  continue  that  tradition 
tonight. This will be the second time that I am doing so.  
 2. We  thank  the  Almighty  God  for  seeing  us  through  another  year 
where  we  have  worked  together  as  stakeholders  to  shape  the 
future  of  banking  in  our  dear  nation.  A  lot  has  been  achieved 
and a lot more remains to be done to position the banking sector 
as the catalyst for the accelerated socio-economic growth that all 
Ghanaians desire.  
 Page | 2  
  3.  Let  me  take  the  opportunity  to  welcome  new  members  of  our 
fraternity.  In  particular,  I  welcome  Consolidated  Bank  Ghana 
Limited,  and  all  new  or  incoming  Managing  Directors,  Executive 
and  non-Executive  Directors,  and  senior  management.  We  say 
Akwaaba  and  we  look  forward  to  you  playing  your  part  as  we 
together  build  this  industry  for  future  generations.  To  the 
outgoing  executves  or  officers,  I  say  Ayeekoo  for  your 
contributions to the industry and we wish you well in your future 
endeavours.  
 
4. Madam President, our industry is one of the key pillars essential 
to the realization of the high aspirations for development of the 
Ghanaian  people.  The  sustainability  of  the  banking  industry  is 
critical  to  the  vision.  As  such,  all  stakeholders  must  work  to 
ensure  that  banks  operate  within  an  enabling  environment  that 
supports  them  to  carry  out  their  financial  intermediation 
function.  
 5. Madam  President,  a  year  ago  when  I  first  addressed  this 
gathering,  we  were  faced  with  many  challenges  in  the  financial 
sector  and  had  begun  a  process  of  introducing  reforms  that 
would  be  needed  to  build  resilience.  The  reforms  aimed  at 
strengthening 
the  sector 
to  become  strong,  solid,  well 
capitalised,  and  better  positioned  to  support  a  fast  growing 
Page | 3  
  economy.  Madam  President,  as  expected, 
these  reforms 
continued  into  2018,  as  we  sought  to  also  overhaul  the  entire 
supervisory framework.  
 6. Madam President, the  financial systems  stability remains central 
to  the  development  agenda  of  the  country.  Historically,  central 
banks used the lender of last resort function as the principal tool 
to  ensure  stability.  Today  financial  stability  goes  beyond  the 
lender  of  last  resort  function.  Indeed  financial  stability  and 
monetary policy are complementary as without financial stability, 
monetary policy impulses to the economy cannot be transmitted 
to  the  real  economy.  In  Ghana,  the  central  bank  is  mandated 
under  its  laws;  the  Bank  of  Ghana  Act,  2002  (Act  612)  as 
amended  by  Act  918  of  2016,  and  the  Banks  and  Specialised 
Deposit-taking Institutions (BSDI) Act, 2016 (Act 930) to ensure 
a safe and sound financial sector. 
 7. Madam  President,  we  inherited  a  financial  system  which  was 
under a considerable state of distress, with banks that were not 
meeting  capital  adequacy  requirement,  banks  that  had  suffered 
capital erosion with high non-performing loans which had led to 
a  weak  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy. 
Some  of  these  banks  were  insolvent  and  illiquid,  others  were 
solvent  but  illiquid.  Our  predecessors  continued  to  provide 
 Page | 4  
 liquidity support to these weak failing banks, without addressing 
the underlying problems that led to the illiquidity and insolvency 
of these institutions. In short, the financial system had reached a 
tipping  point  and  we  could  not  just  have  assumed  business  as 
usual.  The  cleaning  up  objective  was  to  ensure  the  orderly  exit 
of insolvent banks from the industry with the view that any bank 
licensed  and  regulated  by  the  Bank  of  Ghana  is  guaranteed  to 
access  your  deposits  when  you  need  them  and  not  to  victimize 
wholly  owned  Ghanaian  entities  as  our  detractors  sought  to 
impugn.  The  reforms  were  also  aimed  at  addressing  the  legacy 
problems  in  the  banking  sector  such  as  the  poor  corporate 
governance,  false  financial  reporting,  and  insider  dealings,  and 
other practices that left some banks insolvent.  
 8. Madam  President,  we  took  decisive  actions  underpinned  by  a 
strengthened  legal  framework  under  the  Bank  of  Ghana  Act, 
2002 (Act 612) as amended by Act 918 of 2016, and the Banks 
and Specialised Deposit-taking Institutions (BSDI) Act, 2016 (Act 
930). We closed a total of seven insolvent banks, and protected 
depositors’ claims by  the  government to  ensure  that  the  rest  of 
the banking sector did not suffer contagion.    
 9. There is no doubt that the failure of the seven banks came at a 
cost  to  the  Ghanaian  taxpayer,  staff  of  the  affected  banks,  and 
 Page | 5  
 to an extent, shaked confidence in the financial sector. However, 
the  decisions  we  took  as  a  regulator  protected  the  deposits  of 
more  than  1.5  million  customers  with  deposit  values  of  over 
GH¢10  billion.  Additionally, 
the  orderly 
intervention  and 
revocation  of  these  licences  and  the  purchase  and  assumption 
transactions  that  ensued  minimized  the  potential  adverse 
impacts  by  ensuring  that  about  70  percent  of  the  5,000  jobs  in 
the  affected  banks  were  saved.  This  would  be  contrasted  to 
what  could  have  been  the  imploding  of  these  banks  and  the 
contagion that could have resulted. 
 10.  Madam  President,  lessons  learnt  so  far  from  the  resolution 
experiences  within  the  past  two  years  have  helped  shape  the 
reforms  that  are  being  introduced  in  the  sector.  What  has 
become  very  clear  is  the  need  for  more  regulatory  and 
supervisory  vigilance  to  properly  safeguard  the  new  banking 
system after the reforms.  
 11.  Madam  President,  one  key  lesson  learnt  was  the  level  of 
related-party  transactions  that  have  become  so  endemic  in  the 
banks  that  were  resolved.  This  has  informed  our  decision  to 
operationalize,  in  2019,  the  directive  on  financial  holding 
companies  which  seeks  to  facilitate  effective  consolidated 
supervision  of  regulated  financial  institutions  and  ensure  that 
 Page | 6  
 holding  companies and  affiliates  of  banks and  SDIs  do  not  take 
advantage of banks and SDIs within such groups at the expense 
of  depositors  and  other  creditors.  In  addition,  the  government 
has  indicated  that  it  will  set  up  a  high-level  financial  stability 
council  with  a  key  objective  of  bringing  together  all  financial 
sector  regulatory  bodies  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance  to  work 
together  to  minimize,  if  not  eliminate,  regulatory  arbitrage  and 
other sector-wide risks.  
 12.  Another  key  lesson  was  the  weaknesses  in  the  corporate 
governance  structures  in  some  banks.  Earlier  this  year,  we 
issued  the  corporate  governance  directive  to  address  the 
fundamental  flaws  observed  in  the  governance  process  drawing 
on  international  corporate  governance  principles  developed  by 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. We have received 
feedback  several  comments  from  some  of  you  on  the  draft 
Transitional  Provisions  for  implementation  of  the  directive.  We 
will finalise these provisions and public a final version by the end 
of 2018.  
 13.  We  have  also  introduced  the  Fit  and  Proper  Person’s 
Directive  which  aims  to  reinforce  provisions  in  the  corporate 
governance directive, especially in respect of whether a person is 
fit  to  be  a  director,  a  significant  shareholder,  or  a  key 
 Page | 7  
 management  personnel  in  a  regulated  institution.  Our  initial 
assessment  shows  that  these directives are  already  shaping  the 
corporate  governance  structures  within  the  banking  industry  as 
we continue to ensure full compliance.   
 14.  The  industry’s  effort  at  reducing  the  high  levels  of  non-
performing  loans  is  gradually  taking  shape,  partly  due  to 
compliance  with  the  loan  write-off  directive.  We  expect  further 
improvements in asset quality with the appropriate disclosures of 
loan write-offs in banks’ year-end published financial statements. 
The  draft  Credit  Reporting  Regulations  and  the  draft  Borrowers 
and  Lenders  Bill  are  in  their  final  stages.  When  completed  and 
passed  by  Parliament,  these  pieces  of  legislation  should  help 
improve 
the  credit  underwriting  process  and 
facilitate 
enforcement  of  loan  and  collateral  agreements  by  banks  and 
other regulated institutions.  
 15.  Madam  President, banks  have  adopted  and  are  implementing 
the  global  credit  risk  management  and  financial  reporting 
standards. Currently, the quarterly financial publications of banks 
are  reported  in  line  with  IFRS  9,  using  the  expected  credit  loss 
standard.  This 
is 
improving  on  credit  risk  management 
frameworks  and  enabling  banks  effectively  measure  risks 
embedded  in  their  credit  portfolio.  The  full  impact  and  benefits 
 Page | 8  
 of  this  new  standard  in  our  credit  administration  process  is 
expected to materialise in the coming year. 
 16.  To improve on the compliance and risk governance within the 
banking  sector,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  during  the  year  issued  the 
final  Capital  Requirement  Directive  for  compliance  which 
will  become  effective  in  January  2019,  coinciding  with  the 
completion of the increased minimum capital requirement for the 
industry.  Banks  are  currently  in  the  parallel-run  phase  which 
ends in December 2018. The Banking Supervision Department is 
working with the industry to ensure that all the challenges faced 
by  banks  are  resolved  for  a  smooth  transition  to  the  full 
implementation  of  the  Basel  II/III  pillar  1  capital  measurement 
(capital adequacy).  
 17.  Madam  President,  the  fight  against  financial  crime  in  our 
industry  and  the  entire  financial  system  received  a  major  boost 
this year when the central bank in collaboration with other sector 
agencies of Government, launched the Cyber and Information 
Security  Directive  (CISD),  and  also  opened  the  Bank’s 
Security  Operations  Centre  (SOC),  during  the  National  Cyber 
Security  Awareness  Month  celebrations  in  October.  Among 
others,  the  CISD  provides  a  framework  for  establishing  cyber 
and  information  security  protocols,  establishment  of  reporting 
 Page | 9  
 mechanisms and physical security measures for IT Data centres 
and control rooms, and assurance of data and network security. 
The directive contains an implementation schedule for banks and 
other  regulated  institutions  to  follow,  which  is  currently  being 
monitored by the Bank.  
 18. 
In  addition,  there  is  a  guide  to  Enhanced  Competency 
Framework  (ECF)  towards  the  building  of  cyber  security 
competencies  for  industry  players  and  I  will  encourage  you  to 
implement  this  framework  as  we  work  towards  having  effective 
cyber  security  controls  in  place  to  counter  cyber  and  financial 
crime.  
 19.  Madam  President,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  provided  the 
needed  resources  for  the  take-off  of  the  Ghana  Deposit 
Protection  Corporation  (GDPC).  Under  the  Ghana  Deposit 
Protection Act, 2016 (Act 931), as amended, the Ghana Deposit 
Protection  Scheme  will  be  operational  in  or  before  September 
2019.  Banks  and  SDIs  will  be  onboarded  and  will  start 
contributions  to  the  scheme  by  September  2019.  During  the 
year,  the  GDPC  actively  engaged  various  stakeholders  to  create 
public  awareness  of  their  operations  and  the  expected  role  of 
banks,  SDIs  and  the  microfinance  institutions  to  be  enrolled  in 
the  scheme.  The  GDPC  would  continue  to  engage  the  industry 
 Page | 10  
and  the  general  public  to  ensure  smooth  take-off  in  September 
 2019. 
 20.  Madam  President,  as  you  will  recall,  about  a  year  ago,  we 
announced  an  increase  in  the  minimum  capital  requirement  for 
all universal banks to GHC400 million by end December 2018. A 
few  people  have  wondered  why  the  increase,  but  we  all  know 
that  the  more  capital  a  bank  has  the  safer  it  is.  Bank  owners 
want  to  have  less  capital  and  instead  borrow  more  in  what  is 
called leverage to earn a greater return on their investments and 
using less of their own money.  The most a bank owner loses in 
the case of a bank run is their capital but the wider public loses a 
lot more.  It is therefore important we  set the capital level in the 
banking  sector  to  minimize  the  cost  to  society  of  a  bank  failing 
while  ensuring  the  banking  system  also  remains  profitable.  It 
remains our view that this new capital floor will help make banks 
stronger  and  resilient  and  position  them  to  better  support  the 
Ghanaian  economy.  With  a  few  days  to  end  the  year,  the  Bank 
of Ghana has been reviewing the capital build-up plans of banks, 
providing guidance to banks opting for mergers and acquisitions 
and  voluntary  liquidations  through  the  issuance  of  the  Mergers 
and Acquisition Directive and the Directive on Voluntary Winding-
up  respectively.  I  am  happy  to  inform  you  that  significant 
progress has been made in this area and as at November 2018, 
 Page | 11  
 we  can  confidently  say  that  about  twenty-two  (22)  banks  have 
either  met  or  in  good  standing  to  achieve  full  compliance  with 
the  new  minimum  capital  requirement.  We  have  therefore 
intensified  monitoring  of the  process  as  we  bring  closure  to  the 
recapitalisation process on December 31, 2018.  
  21.   Recent developments in the banking sector reflect gains from 
the on-going reforms in the sector, which are expected to further 
increase  after  the  recapitalization  process  is  completed  in 
December  2018.  In  addition  to  making  profits,  banks  now  have 
more  assets  with  capital  adequacy  ratios  well  above  required 
regulatory levels. It is therefore not surprising that the improving 
banking sector stability partly accounted for Standard and Poor’s 
recent  upgrade  of Ghana’s long-term rating  to ‘B’ from ‘B-’ with 
stable outlook.  
22.  Ladies and gentlemen, while acknowledging that some critical 
issues  remain  to  be  addressed;  our  economy  has  witnessed  a 
significant turnaround in the macro indicators. The restoration of 
macroeconomic stability should provide some basis for improved 
financial intermediation to boost economic activities in the near-
term.  
  Page | 12  
 23.  The stable macroeconomic environments occurred on the back 
of  strong  fiscal  consolidation  and  prudent  monetary  policy 
providing  an  anchor  to  the  disinflation  process.  In  particular, 
improvements in interest rates are beginning to impact positively 
on  availability  of  credit  to  households  and  the  private  sector  to 
support growth. 
24.  In  the  course  of  the  year,  we  experienced  some  headwinds 
from external sources on the domestic foreign exchange market, 
similar  to  many  emerging  markets.  In  particular,  the  shift  to 
monetary policy normalisation in the U.S. led to rising yields and 
portfolio  reversals  especially 
in  emerging  markets,  which 
triggered  volatility  in  most  currency  markets.  To  a  large  extent, 
these pressures have moderated and the local currency has been 
relatively  stable.  The  BoG  will  continue  to  carefully  monitor  the 
external  environment  and  other  related  factors  with  the  goal  of 
ensuring stability in the currency. 
25.  The  gains  achieved  in  macroeconomic  stability,  together  with 
implementation  of  other  policy  initiatives,  will  provide  some 
impetus  to  economic  growth.  Banks,  therefore,  must  position 
themselves  to  scale  up  their  support  for  private  sector-led 
growth.   
 Page | 13  
    What Next for the Banking Industry after Recapitalisation?  
26.  Madam  President,  as  we  take  stock  of  what  has  become  a 
very  engaging  past  18  months,  allow  me  to  share  some 
perspectives on how we see developments in the banking sector 
in the coming year:  
 27.  Even  though  we  have  made  significant  strides  and  seen 
improvements  in  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  banking 
sector,  there  is  still  scope  for  improvement,  especially  from  the 
financial  sector  stability  and  banking  supervision  perspectives. 
Our  collective  responsibility  is  to  ensure  efficient  financial 
intermediation  in  the  economy  as  we  continue  to  provide 
assurances  to  the  general  public  to  address  some  of  the 
confidence  issues  that  arose  during  the  clean-up.  We  should 
collectively  work  hard  to  regain  the  confidence  of  the  general 
public  through  the  introduction  of  prudent  policies,  regulations 
and procedures to ensure irreversibility of reforms introduced. 
 
28.  To this end, the Bank of Ghana will:   
  ●  Enforce  strict  compliance  with  all  Directives,  including  the 
Capital  Requirement  Directive  (Pillar  1)  of  the  Basel  II 
Accord and the IFRS 9 reporting standard; 
●  Finalise implementation of Pillar II of the Basel II Accord; 
Page | 14  
 ●  Fully 
implement 
consolidated 
supervision  alongside 
revisions to the Bank’s Risk-Based Supervision Framework, 
●  Enhance  cooperation  with  other  financial  sector  regulators 
and relevant foreign regulators;  
●  Ensure  that  banks  develop,  adopt, and  implement  plans to 
scale  up  financial  inclusion  and  sustainable  banking  efforts 
to support the achievement of the Sustainable Development 
Goals, deploying emerging technologies on the back of the 
new interoperability framework. 
 29.  Underlying the regulatory agenda for 2019 is an approach that 
ensures that : 
●  Shareholders  of  banks  and  specialised  deposit-taking 
financial 
institutions  exercise 
control  over 
these 
institutions not for the benefit of shareholders and related 
and  connected  parties,  but  primarily  in  the  interest  of 
depositors, creditors, employees, and other stakeholders; 
●  Boards  are  composed  of  persons  that  are  capable  of 
exercising the  strong and  independent oversight  they are 
expected  to  ensure  that  the  interests  of  all  relevant 
stakeholders are protected; 
●  Risk  management  is  integrated  in  the  strategic  focus  of 
governance and management of these institutions; 
 Page | 15  
 ●  Compliance  with  regulatory  requirements  and  ethical 
standards are embedded in overall risk management; 
●  Our supervisory systems, processes, and teams are better 
able  to  identify  early  warning  signs,  enforce  regulatory 
requirements  and  ensure  that  prompt  corrective  action  is 
taken  by  banks  to  recover  quickly  from  any  signs  of 
distress. 
 30.  Madam President, while the recovery in  the banking sector is 
on-going,  pockets  of  distressed  institutions  in  the  Specialised 
Deposit-taking  Institutions  segment  of  the  financial  sector  are 
emerging.  These  also  require  full  attention,  if  the  public  is  to 
regain trust in the whole financial setup. The Bank is monitoring 
these  developments  and  working  closely  with  the  Ministry  of 
Finance  on  a  plan  to  resolve  the  issues  with  a  view  to  restore 
trust and confidence in the entire financial system. 
 31.  Madam President, in concluding, let me reiterate that we have 
a  collective  responsibility  as  bankers  to  ensure  high  ethical  and 
professional  standards  in  the  industry.  And,  the  public  is 
counting on us to perform this role diligently to restore trust and 
confidence. It is my expectation that 2019 will bring good tidings 
to our industry, with fewer challenges as we continue to build a 
robust and resilient banking industry.  
 Page | 16  
  32.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  thank  you  all  for  the  attention  and  I 
wish  you  compliments  of  the  season.  Enjoy  the  rest  of  the 
evening. 
   Page | 17  
