Carlos  da  Silva  Costa:  Banking  conduct  supervision  -  new
challenges 10 years after the financial crisis
Opening  address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the
Conference  on  "Banking  Conduct  Supervision:  new  challenges  10  years  after  the  financial
crisis", hosted by the Bank of Portugal, Lisbon, 25 September 2018.
As prepared for delivery.
Good morning and welcome, 
 It is with particular satisfaction that Banco de Portugal is hosting this Conference, 10 years after
the Bank was given a far-reaching mandate in banking conduct supervision. 
The importance given to supervising the conduct of banking institutions in their relationships with
customers and depositors is still relatively recent, although we now know that it is a fundamental
duty to ensure the confidence of bank customers, and subsequently safeguard the stability of the
financial system. 
I want to make three brief points in this opening address:
The  first  point  is  about  the  growing  importance  of  banking  conduct  supervision,  from  the
perspective of safeguarding financial stability;
The second is on the approach followed by Banco de Portugal in this respect;
And finally a note about the digital challenge.
Importance and evolution of banking conduct supervision
The  international  financial  crisis  reinforced  the  perception  that  the  relationship  between  bank
customers and credit institutions tends to be asymmetrical and the uninformed behaviour of bank
customers generates risks to the financial system. This risk is greater: (i) the lower customers’
financial literacy is, in terms of having specific skills and the knowledge required to make financial
decisions  tailored  to  risk,  and  (ii)  the  lower  customers’  financial  skills  are,  in  terms  of  their
capacity to manage day-to-day expenses and anticipate and prevent the risk of future financial
expenses or burdens.
As a consequence, it has become clear that financial literacy and skills are a requirement for
financial stability. Sound or sustainable financial decisions made by each individual functioning in
a given economic and financial space – especially bank customers – are key to financial stability.
However, they are not enough in themselves, as economic agents do not consider and therefore
do  not  incorporate  the  externalities  that  derive  from  their  decisions  or  actions,  particularly  the
systemic risk. This observation is especially important when the market is euphoric, as is the
case  with  the  residential  real  estate  and  mortgage  markets.  The  intensity  and  propagation  of
distorted expectations of asset price increases are greater the lower the financial literacy and
experience of a particular population. 
This means that an improvement in financial education contributes to financial stability but does
not prevent negative externalities which threaten the stability of the financial system. 
Measures  are  also  needed  to  tackle  negative  systemic  developments  resulting  from  the
interaction  of  individual  decisions  even  when  well-founded  –  measures  which  aim  to  mitigate
negative  systemic  effects  on  the  stability  of  financial  institutions.  Such  measures  would  be
incumbent upon the financial literacy and skills of the economic agents and, in particular, their
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
ability to interpret the signs that result from the intervention of the prudential authorities. As a rule,
a reduced capacity to interpret this intervention creates a greater risk of a bubble developing in
the  market  and  as  a  consequence  determines  a  need  for  more  interventionist  prudential
measures on the credit granting side or on the savings application side, to guarantee financial
stability.
Financial  literacy  and  education  are  therefore  key  for  financial  stability  and  for  the  nature  of
conduct and macroprudential supervision policies. 
In  short,  to  safeguard  financial  stability,  it  is  not  enough  to  monitor  individual  choices  or  to
regulate the conduct of banking institutions with their customers. It is also necessary to monitor
the system as a whole, to mitigate the negative externalities of individual actions, as well as the
supervision of each financial institution to ensure its financial strength, in particular its capacity to
absorb the risks resulting from the application of the resources entrusted to it. 
The relevance of financial literacy and education has increased even more with the globalisation
of markets and growing sophistication of products. Widespread access to banking products and
services that are ever more diverse and complex and the emergence of new sales channels
have all brought new risk sources. 
We have therefore seen, at international level, the progressive strengthening of the framework of
rights  granted  to  banking  customers,  a  broadening  of  areas  of  intervention  for  conduct
supervision and more intrusive action by the supervisors. 
The objective is to encourage the adaptation of products and services to the characteristics and
needs of customers and prevent conflicts between the interests of customers and institutions.
Financial  information  and  education  for  banking  customers  has  also  come  to  be  seen  as  a
structural dimension of banking conduct supervision, complementary to regulation and oversight.
More informed customers and with a greater ability to understand the characteristics of banking
products and services are generally more attentive and demanding. 
They  are  also  better  prepared  to  choose  banking  products  and  services  more  suited  to  their
financial situation, needs and risk profile, thus contributing to the efficient operation of the market
and to safeguard financial stability.
Banco de Portugal’s conduct supervision strategy
Banco  de  Portugal  began  exercising  its  conduct  supervision  mandate  at  the  outbreak  of  the
international financial crisis. 
We have adopted a strategy based on three fundamental vectors of action since the beginning,
which are mirrored in the themes of this conference’s panels: 
(i) Firstly,  Banco  de  Portugal’s  strategy  is  based  on  the  development  of  a  regulatory
framework that covers and regulates the conditions to market the products and services of
retail banks; 
(ii) Secondly,  Banco  de  Portugal  is  responsible  for  compliance  with  the  regulatory
framework  applicable  to  the  relationships  between  credit  institutions  and  their  customers
through effective oversight and sanctions procedures; 
(iii) And finally, but no less important, we have, since the beginning, worked hard to inform
and  educate  banking  customers.  Examples  of  this  are  the  Bank  Customer  Website,
launched  in  2008  and  completely  renewed  in  2017,  and  the  National  Plan  for  Financial
Education, promoted with the other financial sector supervisors and which is supported by a
large network of partners.  
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Digital challenges
I will end my address, as I couldn’t refrain from doing, with a reference to the challenges the
conduct supervisor faces due to the progressive digitalisation of the channels used in the sale of
financial products and services. 
The digital environment encourages the emergence of innovative products and services and new
suppliers,  with  business  models  that  are  sometimes  disruptive  in  comparison  to  traditional
banking.
Furthermore, the dematerialisation associated with using digital channels facilitates the sale of
products and the provision of cross-border banking services.
Regulators  and  conduct  supervisors  must  therefore  take  on  an  active  role  in  the  digital
ecosystem, catalysing the benefits and safeguarding against risks that may emerge. 
Regulation and supervision should not impede innovation but they should ensure that the bank
customer is protected, regardless of the channel used to carry out banking transactions. 
The conduct supervisor must therefore:
Closely accompany the technological innovation process in the retail banking markets;
Reflect on the suitability of the existing regulatory framework;
Develop  new  oversight  tools  and  surveillance  strategies  to  ensure  that  the  regulatory
framework is suitably complied with, that conditions for all operators are equitable and that
banking customers are protected.
Promoting the financial literacy of bank customers is also of particular importance. That is why
the development of digital financial information and education initiatives is one of our top priorities.
So I invite you to get to know the campaign recently launched by Banco de Portugal on social
networks and on the Bank Customer Website to promote the security of young people who use
digital channels. 
Thank you all and I hope that this Conference is beneficial to all those present.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
