Yannis  Stournaras:  Lessons 
from 
challenges for the Greek banking sector
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at a lecture organized by the
International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies (ICMB), Geneva, 13 November 2018.
financial  crisis  and
the 
Ladies and gentlemen,
Introduction
 I am honoured to be here today and have the opportunity to share my thoughts on the lessons
from the international financial crisis. I would also like to touch upon Greece’s experience over
the past eight years and the key challenges for achieving a successful turnaround of the Greek
economy  in  general,  and  the  banking  sector,  in  particular.  However,  before  we  move  on,  it  is
crucial that I stress the importance of financial stability as a necessary condition for achieving
prosperity and sustainable growth, common goals for all market participants and central bankers.
I  shall  begin  this  lecture  by  briefly  commenting  on  the  lessons  from  the  international  financial
crisis and the response of monetary and supervisory authorities. I will then outline the unfolding of
the  Greek  sovereign  crisis  and  its  impact  on  the  domestic  economy  and  the  banking  sector.
Subsequently,  I  will  present  the  authorities’  response,  before  proceeding  to  the  core  of  my
intervention and the lessons from the Greek banking crisis.
Lessons from the international financial crisis
The recent financial crisis has been the most severe in seventy-five years. A key question, not
only for all of us in this room but also for those who study it or act as policy makers, is “Will it
happen again?”
My answer is that − if and when it does happen − it will be different.
First, a valuable lesson is that, while things may work well if left to the invisible hand, during times
of stress that hand seems to lose its grip, in the words of Ahamed Liaquat in his Pulitzer – award
“Lords of Finance”. Policy makers around the world have learned their lessons from the Great
Depression:  a  financial  system  in  distress  requires  active  central  bank  intervention.  Central
banks thus acted quickly and forcefully. They developed their toolkit with a combination of more
flexible, effective and innovative measures and enormous firepower. Given the success of these
policies,  some  of  these  instruments  may  be  permanently  included  in  the  new  standard-
framework, and thus equip policy makers with the tools to engage in proper and timely action.
All in all, there is no strong case for a fundamental change in the monetary policy framework.
Central banks are expected to continue to use the asset side of their balance sheets, as well as
other tools such as forward guidance, in addition to their standard interest rate policies, as the
effective lower bound will likely continue to be a binding constraint on interest rate policy in a low
inflation, low interest rate environment. Going forward, central banks are likely to proceed to the
downsizing of their balance sheets in gradual and cautious steps. In any case, even taking into
account the hazards, sustaining the present high levels of central bank assets creates benefits
for  the  economies  and  financial  markets  alike.  These  benefits  relate  to  the  maintenance  of
accommodative  liquidity  conditions  for  banks  and  the  economy,  as  well  as  the  avoidance  of
financial turbulence in the event of a sudden rise in interest rates in the markets.
Second, we as central bankers have gained a much better understanding of how the financial
system operates and how risks to the stability of the financial system may develop. A lot has
been done to make the system much safer than it was 10 years ago and as resilient as possible.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Such work has progressed in various directions, including not only more effective regulation but
also higher capital and liquidity buffers for banks, early warning systems and the development of
macroprudential tools to increase resilience to shocks when they occur. This was evident in the
results of the 2018 EU-wide stress tests which show that banks have become more resilient to
financial shocks over the past two years.
Third, we have also taken bold steps to strengthen the Eurozone. At the national level, euro area
countries have stepped up structural reform efforts in the labour and product markets to boost
productivity  and  in  the  fiscal  sector  to  make  public  finances  more  robust.  The  Banking  Union
(with a single supervisor, a Single Resolution Mechanism and – a yet-to-be-established but of
utmost importance – common European Deposit Insurance Scheme) has helped create a better
integrated,  more  efficient  and  well  capitalised  European  banking  sector.  Coupled  with  the
completion of the Capital Markets Union, it can support the single market and fund investment
and growth.
Fourth,  many  challenges  remain  and  a  lot  still  needs  to  be  done.  The  financial  system
continuously innovates and the work of regulators comes with a lag. In fact, certain large financial
institutions that conduct activities similar to banks but have no banking license – what we call
shadow  banks  –  remain  insufficiently  monitored  and  under-regulated.  Challenges  also  remain
outside the financial system, with for instance geopolitical risks still elevated, trade disputes or
cyber-risks. As central banks, we have to be prepared for all contingencies.
Fifth, an important lesson is the need to safeguard the independence of central banks both with
respect  to  political  influence  but  also  with  respect  to  business  interests,  which  sometimes
attempt  to  capture  the  supervisory  as  well  as  other  activities  of  central  banks.  Central  banks
have also a duty to speak the truth to the public, to explain the situation of economies as well as
to present their forecasts free from any outside influence. After all this should be part of their
communication policy.
For someone like me, with deep interest in economic history, it is clear that “those who can’t
remember the past are condemned to repeat it”. We need not only the ability to learn from the
mistakes of the past, but also the vision to avert repeat mistakes. At the same time, it is our duty
to strengthen our safety net and build the tools to reduce the effects and the length of downturns,
should risks materialize.
The  Greek  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  its  repercussions  on  the  real  economy  and  the  banking
sector
Unlike other national crisis-related experiences, the origins of the Greek crisis were not in the
banking sector. The Greek crisis was the result of major macroeconomic imbalances, which had
accumulated over a long period of time, leading to the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis in
2010.
In  an  unfavourable  international  economic  and  financial  landscape,  the  macroeconomic  and
fiscal deterioration, coupled with increased investor uncertainty, led to a loss of confidence and
capital market access for the Greek sovereign. As a consequence, recourse to external financial
assistance  was  necessary.  To  tackle  the  ensuing  sovereign  crisis,  three  Memoranda  of
Economic  and  Financial  Policies  (MEFP)  including,  inter  alia,  substantial  sovereign  debt
restructuring (the so-called Private Sector Involvement – PSI in 2012) were required.
The unprecedented fiscal consolidation that followed, contributed to the magnification of the initial
economic shocks, resulting in a cumulative real GDP decline of over 25%, historic high (post-
war) unemployment levels and a substantial drop in gross disposable income. In a nutshell, one
could  say  that,  at  a  national  level,  the  Greek  crisis  has  been  more  severe  than  the  Great
Depression.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
As anticipated, the banking sector took a heavy toll. A large-scale deterioration of Greek banks’
fundamentals, in general, and asset quality ratios, in particular, took place. The domestic sector
recorded  an  NPE  ratio  of  approximately  45%  in  2016,  severely  limiting  banks’  capacity  to
internally generate capital.
Due to a liquidity squeeze, the intermediary role of banks has been undermined and the channels
for  financing  the  real  economy  have  been  impaired.  In  addition,  deposits  fell  substantially  by
some  €117  billion  (a  49%  decline),  between  September  2009  and  December  2015,  in  part
because of depositors’ uncertainty about the macroeconomic environment and the prospects of
Greece  within  the  euro  area.  In  this  context,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  ability  of  financial
institutions  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  real  economy  was  further  constrained  by  procyclicality.
During prolonged recessions the capital base is used as a safety margin to deal with unexpected
risks. As a consequence, even higher capital adequacy levels have to be met, thus rendering it
even more difficult for banks to finance the real economy.
The protracted recession, coupled with austerity measures, resulted in a significant increase of
non-performing loans and impairments, thus undermining profitability. The banking system began
experiencing  losses  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010,  and  the  capital  base  started  to  be  eroded.
Despite efforts to support operating profitability, the high level of loan loss provisions resulted in a
series of loss-making results at least up until the end of 2015.
Moreover,  due  to  the  unfavourable  macroeconomic  environment,  there  has  been  a  significant
credit contraction since the end of 2010, with an accumulated decrease of the outstanding credit
to the private sector of about €54bn (or a decline of more than 20%) for the period December
2010 to December 2015. Demand for credit by enterprises has been dropping as business risk
increased; households also reduced their demand due to uncertainty about their future economic
situation and debt servicing capacity. In addition, the imposition of capital controls at end-June
2015  hampered  economic  activity.  The  effects  appear  to  have  been  less  severe  than  initially
expected,  due  to  the  positive  contribution  of  net  exports  and  lower-than-expected  decline  in
consumer spending; however, adverse effects were observed in the business environment and
particular sub-sectors such as shipping and financial services.
The authorities’ response
Over the past eight years, the economic adjustment programmes that have been implemented in
Greece  aimed  at  addressing  the  twin  deficits  (i.e.  fiscal  and  current  account)  and  structural
weaknesses from which the economy has suffered for decades. The achievements so far have
been remarkable:
•  Unprecedented  fiscal  consolidation:  Over  the  period  2013–2017,  the  primary  deficit  of  the
general  government  was  eliminated  and,  for  the  first  time  since  2001,  general  government
primary surpluses were recorded for five consecutive years.
• Gains in external competitiveness: The current account deficit, which exceeded 15% of GDP in
2008,  was  all  but  eliminated,  underpinned  by  a  recouping  of  the  sizeable  cumulative  loss  in
labour  cost  competitiveness  vis-à-vis  our  trading  partners  and  an  increase  in  the  share  of
exports to 33.2% of GDP from 19% of GDP in 2009. As a consequence, openness has improved
substantially  and  the  economy  has  started  to  rebalance  towards  tradable,  export-oriented
sectors.
• Structural reforms, notably in the labour market, but also in product and services markets, as
well as in public administration, have been undertaken. Important reforms of the tax system, tax
administration as well as in the social security system, have been also implemented.
In a similar vein, the Bank of Greece has taken prompt and effective action to safeguard financial
stability.  The  banking  system  has  been  restructured,  consolidated  and  recapitalized,  following
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
stringent stress tests along with in-depth asset quality reviews. This enabled the banking sector
to withstand the crisis and the flight of deposits.
In particular, the authorities’ response to tackle the issue of non-performing loans comprised of
three pillars:
• Enhancement of the supervisory framework for the management of non-performing exposures
(NPEs). The Bank of Greece, in cooperation with the ECB Banking Supervision (the SSM), has
issued  supervisory  guidelines  for  the  internal  management  of  NPEs  and  has  agreed  NPE
operational targets with banks for the period June 2017 – December 2019, entailing a reduction
of NPEs by 37%. The Bank of Greece monitors the implementation of NPE targets and related
key  performance  indicators  through  an  enhanced  prudential  reporting  framework.  This
framework has been revised to take banks up until end-2021 and fully align Greek banks with the
NPE guidance provided by the SSM.
•  Removal  of  legal,  judicial  and  administrative  impediments  to  Non-Performing  Loan  (NPL)
management. The household insolvency framework has been improved, legal proceedings have
been simplified and accelerated, secured creditor rights have been enhanced, legal protection of
bank  and  public  sector  employees  has  been  established,  the  tax  treatment  of  provisions  and
write-offs  is  favourable,  out-of-court  workout  and  electronic  auction  platforms  have  been
introduced.
• Establishment of a secondary market for NPL servicing and sales. The Bank of Greece has
already  authorized  14  non-bank  NPL  servicers,  with  some  portfolios  being  transferred  for
servicing  either  by  banks  or  by  purchasers  of  NPLs.  The  sale  of  loans  has  also  been  largely
liberalized  and  €12  billion  of  NPE  balances  (nominal  value)  have  been  sold  to  third  party
investors.
These  developments  make  it  clear  that  the  domestic  banking  sector  has  experienced  a  sea
change  in  the  way  it  is  structured,  monitored  and  supervised.  Some  of  these  changes  were
costly  and  painful:  for  instance,  resolving  more  than  a  dozen  banks  was  never  going  to  be
pleasant; neither were three rounds of recapitalization, with substantial effects upon private and
public equity holdings.
However, these initiatives helped both systemic banks and less significant institutions in Greece
to  build  significant  capital  adequacy  reserves  and  buffers.  Moreover,  one  of  the  effects  of  the
crisis in the Greek banking sector has been the fact that it has been subjected to a series of
tests. In fact, since 2010, Greek banks have been subjected to stress tests six times, four of
them accompanied by full blown asset quality reviews. These exercises have been cumbersome
and substantial amounts of time and resources have been consumed.
These exercises have nonetheless had a few major advantages: First, credit losses have been
calculated and recalculated and the possibility of having unanticipated losses is now smaller than
ever. Secondly, as a result of a mandatory adverse scenario, buffers for potential additional loan
losses have been specified and banks have raised high-quality regulatory capital to support these
buffers. Moreover, it is not surprising that Greek banks’ provisioning policies have been radically
changed since the Asset Quality Review (AQR) methodology was implemented and total losses
were recalculated according to anticipated loss drivers.
Lessons learned from the Greek banking crisis
Thucydides, the great ancient Greek historian, considered his writings as “a possession for all
time” for as long as human nature remains the same. In this vein, we ought to carefully consider
what we have learned from the deep and prolonged Greek banking crisis.
The first lesson is that a well-designed and decisive policy response can mitigate the impact of
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
shocks. The Bank of  Greece  along  with  other  Greek  authorities  and  the  European  Institutions
was involved in the establishment of the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund (HFSF) and in securing
the appropriate financial envelope (initially €10 billion and subsequently €50 billion in total) for the
recapitalisation  and  restructuring  of  the  Greek  banking  sector.  The  Bank  of  Greece  also
conducted  in-depth  diagnostic  studies  of  the  banks’  asset  quality  as  well  as  stress  tests,
engaging  international  consultants  with  the  objective  of  estimating  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on
Greek banks. Moreover, the Bank of Greece developed a comprehensive strategy to implement
efficiently  the  newly  established  resolution  framework  for  banks  and  conducted  a  viability
assessment,  enabling  the  smooth  resolution  of  non-viable  banks  without  any  depositor  losing
his/her money. Lastly, the Bank of Greece developed an enhanced supervisory framework for the
management  of  non-performing  exposures,  including  an  NPE  operational  targets  framework,
acknowledging  asset  quality  as  the  key  driver  for  banking  sector  performance.  In  a  nutshell,
financial  stability  was  preserved  thanks  to  policies  that  were  commensurate  to  the  underlying
risks and that were enacted promptly.
The  second  lesson  is  the  importance  of  rigorous  implementation.  For  example,  the  Bank  of
Greece  did  not  hesitate  to  resolve  non-viable  banks,  both  commercial  and  cooperative,  thus
contributing to the consolidation and restructuring of the Greek banking sector. The four systemic
banks,  managed  to  attract  private  capital  in  three  consecutive  recapitalisation  rounds.  This
allowed  the  downsizing  of  the  Greek  banking  sector  via  personnel,  network  and  cost
rationalisation commensurate to the reduction of domestic economic activity. Furthermore, the
Bank  of  Greece  set  up  a  comprehensive  reporting  mechanism  and  conducted  troubled  asset
reviews  and  on-site  examinations  to  closely  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  enhanced
supervisory framework for non-performing exposures, thus ensuring that balance sheet repair is
the  top  priority  for  the  management  of  all  Greek  banks.  Concurrently,  the  Bank  of  Greece
contributed  to  the  effort  of  establishing  a  secondary  NPL  market  via  the  licensing  of  NPL
servicers  and  the  monitoring  of  NPL  sales  and  securitisations.  We  should  bear  in  mind  that
reforms and initiatives bring about tangible results only if implemented appropriately.
Throughout the crisis, the Bank of Greece has been the guardian of financial stability, protecting
fully  all  deposits  (regardless  of  type  and  size)  and  supporting  the  economy  and  the  public
interest.  Our  response  was  focused  upon  two  major  fronts:  ensuring  adequate  provision  of
liquidity and managing and assisting recapitalization, resolution and restructuring of the banking
sector.
With  respect  to  liquidity  provision,  the  intervention  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  has  been  critical  in
ensuring continuous liquidity provision to banks using one of the oldest tools available, that of the
lender  of  last  resort.  On  various  occasions,  the  Bank  of  Greece  has  provided  Emergency
Liquidity Assistance (ELA) to the banking system. This has helped preserve financial stability and
contributed to the avoidance of a banking crisis.
With respect to managing and assisting recapitalization, resolution and restructuring, the Bank,
in  the  context  of  the  adjustment  programmes,  aimed  at  strengthening  viable  institutions  and
winding down non-viable institutions, whilst safeguarding financial stability. To this end, viability
assessments and capital needs assessments were undertaken.
Following an assessment by the Bank of Greece of each bank on the basis of specific regulatory
and business criteria, those banks deemed non-viable were resolved and eventually absorbed by
systemic banks. The resolution tool used had to meet two main criteria. First, resolution had to
be done in such a way as to ensure continued stability of the financial system. To that end, as a
rule,  deposits  from  resolved  banks  were  transferred  to  systemic  banks.  This  process  also
ensured  a  minimum  of  disruption  for  customers  of  resolved  banks.  With  14  such  resolutions
having  successfully  taken  place  since  2011,  this  process  has  also  facilitated  considerable
restructuring of the banking system, eliminating excess market capacity.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Those banks deemed viable were recapitalized. The first round of recapitalization, following, inter
alia, the impact incurred from the Private Sector Involvement (PSI), was completed in June 2013.
A combination of both  private  capital  and  resources  from  the  Hellenic  Financial  Stability  Fund
were used. The second recapitalization took place in 2014, following a macro-prudential stress
test, but involved only private equity capital injections.
A  further  recapitalization  took  place  at  the  end  of  2015.  Following  agreement  on  the  third
adjustment programme, a financial envelope of €25 billion was provided for the banking system.
In August 2015, the ECB launched an Asset Quality Review and stress-test exercise for the four
systemic Greek banks. The result of this exercise was the identification of capital needs under
both a baseline and an adverse macroeconomic scenario. The actual amount of capital raised
was that identified under the adverse scenario, namely €14.4 billion. Thanks to the coordinated
efforts of the Greek authorities, including the Bank of Greece, successful rights issues resulted in
the full coverage of the shortfall by December 2015, with private investors subscribing €9 billion.
These efforts minimized HFSF participation and helped to restore confidence in the longer-term
viability of Greek banks.
Following three rounds of recapitalization, Greek banks now have relatively high capital ratios and
maintain buffers sufficient to absorb additional credit losses, as the 2018 pan-European stress
test indicated. They have also markedly improved their liquidity position, reducing their reliance
on central bank funding, regaining access to the interbank market and issuing securitizations and
covered  bonds,  three  of  which  have  already  been  assigned  with  an  investment  grade  rating.
Concurrently, customer deposits have been gradually increasing.
Challenges for the banking sector going forward
Towards the road to recovery the Greek banking sector faces the following closely interlinked
challenges:
• Reducing the elevated stock of non-performing loans.
• Restoring the intermediation role of banks.
• Developing a sustainable business model.
The  efficient  management  of  NPEs  is  of  utmost  importance  for  banking  sector  stability,
economic growth and social cohesion. As of June 2018, the NPE stock stood at €88.6 billion,
reduced by 6.1% since December 2017 and by 17.3% from its peak (March 2016). So far, NPE
reduction has been mainly driven by write-offs and to a lesser extent by loan sales. This partly
explains the stickiness of the domestic NPE ratio at 47.6%, which remains one of the highest in
the euro area. Despite the progress so far, we still have a long way to go. Greek banks have
already submitted revised NPE operational targets covering the period up to 2021. Loan sales,
collections,  collateral  liquidation  and  curing  are  anticipated  to  contribute  more  extensively
towards NPE reduction, at ratios around or lower than 20% of total non-performing exposures.
Balance  sheet  repair  will  bring  many  benefits  to  banks.  Firstly,  it  will  reduce  credit  risk  cost,
which  remains  far  higher  than  pre-crisis  levels  and  consumes  most  of  banks’  pre-provision
income. The prohibitively high credit risk cost feeds into lending spreads, increasing the funding
cost  of  non-financial  corporates  and  households  and  thus  reducing  loan  demand  and
competitiveness. Secondly, it will underpin banks’ net interest income, since impaired assets are
typically not interest bearing. Thirdly, it may reduce the funding cost of banks alleviating concerns
regarding their asset quality and long-term resilience. Fourthly, it will reduce the administrative
burden and operating cost for handling non-performing assets. Last but not least, the elevated
stock of NPLs diverts management attention from the pursuit of profitable growth opportunities.
After all, banks are not supposed to be distressed-assets managers.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Moreover, one of the main channels through which high NPLs can have a feedback effect on the
macroeconomic environment is through their impact on bank lending capacity to the economy.
NPLs can weigh negatively on the supply of credit by locking in bank capital and funding in the
financing of non-productive assets. In addition, high NPLs distort credit allocation, as non-viable
firms are kept artificially alive in an attempt by banks to avoid or delay loss recognition on these
loans at the expense of firms that are competitive and have better growth prospects. This brings
us to the necessity of restoring the intermediation role of banks in an economy that is suffering
from a significant savings – desirable investment gap as well as continuous deleveraging. It is
well documented that a credit-less recovery is weaker, mainly because the lack of bank credit
affects investment. Yet such a recovery can hardly be tolerated given other drags on potential
output  growth,  such  as  the  high  public  debt  ratio  and  the  negative  demographic  trends.  The
improvement  in  the  liquidity  position  of  banks  on  the  back  of  gradually  increasing  deposits,
enhanced  access  to  the  secured  interbank  market  and  a  handful  of  covered  bond  and
securitization transactions is encouraging. Crucially, the elimination of the recourse to ELA will
allow banks to design and implement credible medium-term credit expansion plans. Against this
backdrop, financing of non-financial corporates for working capital or investment projects would
be given priority. That said it is also important to restore the access of the household sector to
credit after a protracted period of almost a complete standstill.
That  brings  us  to  the  challenge  for  bank  managers  to  come  up  with  a  sustainable  business
model  for  Greek  banks.  In  the  midst  of  the  crisis,  Greek  banks  were  obliged  to  reduce
substantially their international operations as well as non-core domestic activities, as part of their
restructuring plans agreed with DG Competition in the context of State aid support approval. As a
result, domestic traditional banking activities contribute the bulk of their operating profitability and
will continue to do so in the foreseeable future. Undoubtedly, banks face a challenging, to say the
least, operating environment in Greece, while some of their best customers, i.e. large extrovert
non-financial corporates, can tap the international bond markets directly at relatively favourable
terms. Against this backdrop, a digitalization drive coupled with other cost containment efforts
can further improve banks’ efficiency, which already compares favourably with their European
peers. The development of fee-based businesses (e.g. asset management, bankassurance etc.)
could also contribute to the diversification of their revenue sources. Needless to say, restoring
credit intermediation is a “sine qua non” for long-term sustainability.
Concluding remarks
Ladies and gentlemen,
I feel we have gone a long way towards facing a series of challenges and tasks. For us, the
ultimate  goal  in  meeting  these  challenges  is  to  shape  a  competitive  economy,  attractive  to
foreign  direct  investment,  with  its  income  per  head  gradually  converging  to  the  rest  of  the
Eurozone, fully sustainable public finances not only in the short run, but also in the medium and
long term, full access to international financial markets under sustainable terms, and a banking
sector which will be in a position to undertake efficiently its main task, namely the financing of the
real  economy.  I  will  conclude  by  saying  that  the  improvement  of  the  Greek  banking  sector
landscape, the restoration of confidence and the elimination of certain risk factors are positive
elements that are expected to be a prime driver for growth of the Greek economy.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
