Ong Chong Tee: The post-crisis financial landscape - what next?
Remarks  by  Mr  Ong  Chong  Tee,  Deputy  Managing  Director  (Financial  Supervision)  of  the
Monetary Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Society  for  Financial  Studies  Cavalcade Asia-Pacific
Conference's Gala Dinner, Singapore, 13 December 2018.
 Professor Laura Starks – President, Society for Financial Studies
Professor Ron Masulis – Program Chair
Professor Jun-Koo Kang – Associate Chair, Nanyang Technological University
Professor  Bernard  Yeung  –  Dean  and  Stephen  Riady  Distinguished  Professor,  National
University of Singapore, President, Asian Bureau of Financial & Economic Research
Professor Massimo Massa – The Rothschild Chaired Professor of Banking, INSEAD
Associate  Professor  Johan  Sulaeman  –  Dean’s  Chair,  Department  of  Finance,  NUS
Business School
Ladies and gentlemen, a very good evening. Thank you for inviting a few of my MAS colleagues
and I to be here tonight.
Introduction
1     The SFS Cavalcade conference is a distinguished forum that brings together some of the
sharpest minds in the world of finance and research.
2     This evening, I thought I could share some perspectives of a financial regulator. My hope is
to flag a few pertinent issues that could do well with more research insights and discussion. As
the great Hungarian scientist Albert Szent-Gyorgyi once said: “Research is four things: brains
with which to think, eyes with which to see, machines with which to measure and fourth, money”. 
I am sure that each of you will adequately deal with the money bit, but our collective minds and
tools  in  financial  studies  that  all  of  you  have  can  do  much  to  raise  the  understanding  of  the
prospects and challenges for the financial system.
3          One  decade  ago,  we  had  the  global  financial  crisis  (GFC). As  Samuelson  described  it
starkly: “what we know about the global financial crisis is that we do not know very much”. With
the benefit of hindsight, vulnerabilities had indeed built up from:
(a) Highly leveraged financial institutions;
(b) Severe liquidity mismatches;
(c) Fairly opaque over-the-counter derivatives markets that transmitted risks rapidly when liquidity
suddenly dried up; as well as
(d) Moral hazards associated with financial institutions that were deemed “too big to fail”.
4          Ten  years  on,  a  number  of  key  regulatory  reforms  are  being  implemented  in  stages  to
address these vulnerabilities.
5     Take for example, the Basel III reforms after the GFC, a key work of the Basel Committee on
Banking  Supervision,  of  which  I  am  a  member  of.  Many  of  you  may  be  familiar  with  its  key
elements to improve the quality and quantity of bank capital. The Basel III standards also seek to
reduce  excessive  variability  of  banks’  risk-weighted  assets. 
incorporated
macroprudential and liquidity risk elements. A new minimum leverage ratio is included. Global
Systemically Important Banks are further subjected to even higher capital levels, more intense
It  has  now 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
supervision and resolution planning requirements.
6     By many measures, the global banking system is more resilient. For example, compared to
earlier this decade, Common Equity Tier 1 risk-weighted assets of internationally active banks
stand at around 13%, from about 7% before. Their leverage ratios average about 6% now, from
less than 2% previously.
Implementation of post-crisis regulatory reforms
7          We  should  also  remember  that  the  global  banking  regulatory  standards  are  minimum
requirements. National supervisors can use other levers of the Basel framework to apply higher
standards  or  additional  requirements  on  their  banks,  as  appropriate,  based  on  idiosyncratic
considerations.
8     There is a general consensus that the financial system is safer than before. But the follow-
on question can be: safer, yes – but is the system safe enough?
9     To say that regulators have addressed all that can go wrong would be great hubris. Indeed,
this  will  be  contrary  to  the  evolving  and  adaptive  nature  of  financial  activity.  The  reality  is  a
recurrence of financial crises in economic history. I would add that no amount of regulations and
supervision  can  prevent  crises;  what  regulators  seek  to  do  is  to reduce the  likelihood  and
negative impact from one. This will require banking regulators to remain vigilant against emerging
risks, and hence the importance of forward-looking supervision to complement regulations.
10     On the other hand, with the last global financial crisis becoming a distant shadow of sorts,
there are already calls that “this time it is different” and to dial down the enhanced regulatory
requirements – just as all the crises before it.
11     Two weeks ago, at a forum of the International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Sir
John  Vickers  (who  oversaw  the  Vickers  Report  to  reform  the  UK  banking  market)  shared  his
views that the Basel III capital requirements are not stringent enough, and have not sufficiently
reduced the likelihood of crises as intended. I am not saying that this is the view of the MAS. I am
sure that many bankers will disagree. But the point is that this is an area which is deserving of
greater discourse.
12     Evaluating the effects of the banking reforms will be a key exercise. One set of issues
revolve around whether the reforms are having the intended outcomes or, on the other hand,
whether there are unforeseen and undesirable effects. This will involve an assessment of banks’
behavioural responses, whether there are new forms of arbitrage strategies, and the spillover
effects on the broader economy.
Cross-border lending to developing economies
13     One example relates to the impact on cross-border lending to developing economies.
14     There are studies that indicate that some global banks have reduced their presence and
activities in developing economies as part of their business review, and some have attributed this
to the banking reforms. Establishing a clear, causal link between the declining trend in cross-
border  bank  loans  to  developing  economies  and  the  post-crisis  reforms  will  be  helpful,  if
possible.
15          Such  investigations  can  support  the  Basel  Committee’s  work  on  a  full,  timely  and
consistent implementation of the reforms globally.
The increasing role of market-based finance in credit provision
16     The decline in bank inflows to developing economies has been partially offset by these
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
economies  relying  more  on  market-based  finance,  or  non-bank  financial  intermediation.  In  my
view, this is a positive development since a more diverse funding system comprising bank-based
finance  and  market-based  finance  can  possibly  better  meet  the  changing  needs  of  the  real
economy. 
17     But the increased prominence of market-based finance has also led to some concerns that
large  redemptions  from  open-ended  funds  can  potentially  pose  liquidity  risks  and  hence
destabilise financial markets.
18          International  organisations  and  standard-setting  bodies  such  as  the  Financial  Stability
Board  (FSB),  International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  and  Basel
Committee have sought to assess the potential financial stability risks posed by market-based
finance. The FSB, for example, developed a set of policy recommendations to address structural
vulnerabilities of open-ended funds, and IOSCO is reviewing these recommendations.
19     There can be other related areas that merit further investigation, including from academia.
For example, the interaction between market-based finance and traditional asset management
activities, and the effect on underlying markets in which these are invested.
Evaluating the impact of macroprudential policies
20     A key element of the Basel III reforms is its macroprudential framework to assess new
system-wide  risks  and  the  use  of  a  countercyclical  capital  buffer  if  warranted.  In  addition,
macroprudential  policies  have  become  integral  to  many  central  banks’  policy  toolkits.  Various
jurisdictions in Asia such as Singapore, Hong Kong, and Indonesia have used macroprudential
measures  to  reduce  risks  to  their  domestic  financial  systems  and  to  dampen  the  impact  of
economic  shocks,  such  as  the  application  of  loan-to-value  limits  for  mortgage  borrowings.
However, the detailed impact of macroprudential policies is arguably less well understood.
21          There  are  research  challenges  in  this  regard.  For  example,  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements (BIS) highlighted that the impact of tools are likely to vary across jurisdictions based
on their domestic circumstances and phase of the financial cycle. A key focus area is how best
to study the spillover impact across jurisdictions from a macroprudential policy decision point of
view.
22          Another  challenge  relates  to  effectiveness.  Macroprudential  tools  have  largely  been
employed in more recent years, and isolating their effectiveness from other measures will require
further studies.
23     In this context, it may be remiss of me not to mention the apparent artificial divide that has
existed between the analysis of the financial vis-à-vis the real sides of the economy. During the
GFC, I recall some criticism that economists used mathematical models that did not sufficiently
factor the critical roles that banks and other financial institutions play in the economy.
24          Since  then,  important  strides  have  been  made,  including  in  the  workhorse  Dynamic
Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models used at central banks, to better capture the key
interactions between the financial sector and the rest of the economy. This is most pertinent for
regulators and for central banks’ work in economy-wide forecasting, policy analysis and scenario
simulation. I would also encourage further research in this area, including developing empirically-
validated feedback relationships that can be embedded into models for stress testing purposes.
Evaluating the impact of FinTech
25     Turning now to a recent pet topic of interest – FinTech. Much has been written and reported
on technology innovations that have and will continue to disrupt business models. There are also
many views around disruptions to jobs and on socio-economic relationships.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
26          Let  me  make  some  brief  comments  on  MAS’  regulatory  stance  towards  innovation  in
financial services. For any innovation or a new technology-based business model to take off, it
must be purposeful and value creating.
27     For example, there are FinTech entities that have entered the financial inclusion space,
especially in the rural areas, and boosted economic growth.
28     There are other examples. Robo-advisory services can allow investors greater access to
customised, low-cost financial advice. Other initiatives like open banking can provide potential
benefits to a broad range of consumers by allowing for the easy portability of data and payment
instructions.  The  use  of  distributed  ledger  technology,  or  blockchain,  may  replace  traditional
central  party  systems  or  intermediaries  by  creating  alternative  trusted  platforms.  Such
blockchain-based immutable transaction and account records may help to facilitate cross-border
transactions,  by  cutting  costs  and  settlement  time  without  compromising  on  security  and
certainty.
29     There is no contradiction between regulation for safety and prudence vis-à-vis  regulations
that  are  open  to,  or  supportive  of,  good  financial  innovations.  These  may  be  new  business
models  or  use  of  a  technology  that  promote  competition,  improve  customer  experiences  or
simply a more efficient or pleasant delivery of services. So far from adopting a Luddite instinct,
many financial regulators have in fact set up dedicated teams to both support and to monitor new
FinTech developments.
30     But as with any innovation in any era, FinTechs can also bring about new risks. In this
regard, international organisations such as the International Monetary Fund, FSB, IOSCO and the
Basel Committee have all produced several useful public reports on the potential risks.
31     As examples of new risk typologies, there may be increased vulnerabilities to anti-money
laundering  and  efforts  to  counter  the  financing  of  terrorism,  given  the  anonymity  of  digital
currencies.  Cyber-security  is  another  area  as  FinTechs  vary  in  size  and  risk  management
capabilities.  There  can  also  be  an  increase  in  macro-financial  risks  from  contagion,
procyclicality, or excess volatility given the increased speed of financial transactions, and new
networks  of  relationships.  Open  banking  and  the  ease  of  moving  funds  can  also  lead  to
potentially destabilising movements of money, posing liquidity risks.
32     I welcome more research and studies to guide such developments. It is probably too early
to determine whether and how FinTechs  or BigTechs may change the behaviour of incumbent
financial institutions. It is also not unreasonable to expect that traditional business lines between
financial  services,  general  commerce  or  telecoms  will  increasingly  be  blurred  –  and  activities
may concentrate in the biggest institutions with superior competitive advantages including in the
areas of talent, customer base, and customer data. The FAANGs and BATs of this world – the
technology  giants  –  come  to  mind.  These  may  also  have  implications  for  financial  stability.
Indeed, the next systemically important institution could be a BigTech with roots in e-commerce,
and  therefore,  whether  such  entities  require  some  form  of  oversight  by  financial  regulators  in
future.
33     With the increasing use of artificial intelligence (AI) and various forms of data analytics
(DA),  another  area  of  focus  will  be  around  the  governance  of  their  use.  The  MAS  recently
released  a  guide  that  we  co-created  with  some  industry  partners  on  a  set  of  principles  for
Fairness, Ethics, Accountability and Transparency (or FEAT) in the use of  “AIDA”. Whether and
how  the  increasing  use  of  machine-learning  systems  (both  supervised  and  unsupervised),
algorithms  and  data-driven  insights  can  affect  behaviours  and  decision-making  in  financial
institutions will be a rich area for research and attention. Regulators generally like the idea of
deploying smart systems that can do a better job in risk detection or risk management. But what
about  for  business  decisions  or  say,  personnel  decisions?  Whether  AI-driven  systems  will
perpetuate bias and discrimination is also ripe for more extensive studies.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
34     Another field of research work can be around central bank digital currencies, or to use the
buzz word, CBDC. Globally,  there  has  been  some  discussion  on  the  potential  implications  of
CBDCs, but this is still relatively green field thinking. I will not delve more into it as the subject can
be a seminar theme in and of itself.
Conclusion
35     As you will have realised, I have flagged more questions than answers this evening. I think
the post-crisis financial landscape is an exciting time to be an economist, analyst or researcher
in support of financial market development, as well as to help shape policy reviews and thinking.
Many  of  the  developments  I  have  touched  on  are  rapidly  evolving,  and  are  also  not  mutually
exclusive from one another.
36          There  is  a  view  that  we  should  accept  a  more  central  role  incorporating  beliefs  and
expectations  to  both  understand  and  shape  financial  market  developments.  New  advances  in
behavioural economics can provide for tractable and psychologically-founded models of beliefs
to be integrated into the standard analytical frameworks in finance and macroeconomics.
37     It is important that policymakers and regulators have a firm grasp of these interactions and
develop new techniques to calibrate policies and mitigate risks.
38     The MAS therefore welcomes the opportunity to further engage the research community,
hopefully with many of you, so that with your knowledge, expertise and research rigour, we can
deepen our collective learning and understanding.
39     As an example, recently we collaborated with the Asian Bureau of Finance and Economic
Research  (ABFER)  and  NUS  Business  School  to  bring  together  global  academics  for  our
Workshop on Digital Currency Economics and Policy. I encourage more of such forums. In fact, I
would not be surprised if the themes I have touched on have been discussed in research forums
and this Cavalcade.
40     Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
