 BANK OF UGANDA 
   Opening Remarks by: 
 Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile 
Governor, Bank of Uganda, 
 At the Hosting of the Parliament of Ghana Finance Committee 
Members at a Benchmarking Exercise to Bank of Uganda, 
 Board Room, Level 7, Plot 37/45 Kampala Road, Uganda 
 Thursday, September 27, 2018 
  Honourable Members of Parliament, Parliament of Uganda; 
Honourable Members of Parliament, Parliament of Ghana; 
Technical Staff from both Parliaments;  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Good morning, 
 I would like to welcome you all to the Bank of Uganda. It is a privilege 
to  host  our  brothers  and  sisters  from  Ghana,  a  country  which  holds  a 
special status in Africa on account of the pioneering role it has played in 
many different fields - political, economic and social – and in particular 
for  its  pan  Africanist  approach  to  foreign  policy  which  has  been  an 
inspiration throughout the continent.  
 Ghana’s  pioneering  role  is  also  of  relevance  in  the  field  of  central 
banking.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  was one  of  the first  central  banks  in  sub-
Saharan  Africa  to  introduce  an  inflation  targeting  monetary  policy 
framework  in  the  mid  2000s,  at  a  time  when  virtually  all  other  central 
banks  in  the  region  were  either  implementing  monetary  targets  or 
targeting the exchange rate. Ghana’s experience with inflation targeting 
was of great value to the Bank of Uganda and influenced its decision to 
adopt a similar monetary policy framework in 2011; a framework which 
has proved very successful in controlling inflation.  
  1 
Given that our guests are all legislators, I would like to say a few words 
about  the  relationship  between  Parliament  and  the  central  bank,  as  this 
relationship  is  complex  and  not  always  well  understood.  The  1995 
Ugandan  Constitution  confers  independence  on  the  Bank  of  Uganda. 
Specifically the Constitution states that: “In performing its functions, the 
Bank  of  Uganda  shall  conform  to  this  Constitution  but  shall  not  be 
subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.” 
 What  does  this  mean  in  practice?  In  essence  it  means  that  the  Bank  of 
Uganda  is  free  to  implement  its  core  policy  responsibilities,  which  are 
monetary policy and bank regulation, without political interference. For 
example,  the  Government  cannot  give  instructions  to  the  Bank  of 
Uganda  with  regard  to  setting  the  policy  interest  rate.  There  is  a  very 
strong  economic  rationale  for  central  bank  independence,  because 
independence  gives  monetary  policy  and  bank  regulation  more 
credibility with the private sector, which in turn improves incentives for 
the private sector to act in ways which are consistent with low inflation 
and  financial  stability.  This  is  why  central  bank  independence  has 
become  an  important  characteristic  of  modern  central  banking  around 
the world.  
 However,  a  central  bank  is  a  public  institution  and  a  public  institution 
must be accountable to the public, through its elected representatives in 
Parliament. 
 2 
Consequently,  although  Parliament  cannot  give  instructions  to  the 
central bank on how to implement its responsibilities, it must be able to 
provide  oversight  of  the  operations  of  the  central  bank  and  make 
criticisms of it where this is warranted.  
 The main bodies within Parliament which provide oversight of the Bank 
of Uganda are the specialist committees, in particular the Committee on 
Commissions,  Statutory  Authorities,  and  State  Enterprises  (COSASE) 
and  the  Public  Accounts  Committee  (PAC).  The  Bank  of  Uganda’s 
annual report and audited accounts are submitted by the Auditor General 
to  the  Speaker  of  Parliament,  who  can  refer  them  to  a  Parliamentary 
Committee.  
 Myself  and  my  staff 
frequently  appear  before  Parliamentary 
Committees, both to answer questions about our own operations and to 
explain our views in regard to economic and financial issues.  
If  a  central  bank  is  to  maintain  the  confidence  of  the  public  in  the 
independence  of  its  operations,  it  must  be  prepared  to  be  fully 
transparent and explain its actions to legislators and to listen to the views 
of these legislators, who represent the public. 
   3 
Together  with  my  staff,  I  will  be  pleased  to  answer  any  questions  you 
may have and to hear your own views on these matters or any others in 
which you are interested.   
 Thank you all for listening. 
      4 
