Claudia Buch: The Deutsche Bundesbank's 2018 Financial Stability
Review
Speech  by  Prof  Claudia  Buch,  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the
presentation of the 2018 Financial Stability Review of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am
Main, 14 November 2018.
 This  summer  was  unusually  long  and  warm.  But  this  summer  has  now  come  to  an  end,  as
“seasons come and seasons go”.
But  times  are  still  good  on  the  economic  front.  The  economy  is  expanding  at  a  robust  pace,
interest rates are still low, asset prices are high, and volatility in financial markets is relatively low.
So, for the most part, the expectations regarding economic developments have been confirmed.
Furthermore, there is currently a general consensus that growth will continue and that interest
rates will slowly start to pick up again. It might seem, then, that there is nothing much new under
the sun.
But  the  setting  of  strong  growth  and  low  interest  rates  has  contributed  to  the  build-up  of
vulnerabilities  –  and  this  trend  has  continued  to  the  present  day.  We  have  already  described
these vulnerabilities in earlier Financial Stability Reviews.
Underestimation of credit risk,
Overvaluation of assets and loan collateral, and
Exposure to interest rate risk.
And the clouds are already gathering on the horizon. Unlike last year, the risks to future economic
activity are today skewed to the downside.
Geopolitical risks have intensified.
Trade  tensions  remain  unresolved  and  could  particularly  harm  the  internationally  open
German economy.
It is still unclear how the United Kingdom will withdraw from the EU.
So the downside risks to the economy have increased substantially. If these risks materialise,
the ensuing market corrections would expose the vulnerabilities.
At  the  global  level,  too,  financial  sectors  have  become  more  vulnerable.  Globally,  private  and
public  sector  debt  today  is  far  higher  than  it  was  ten  years  ago.  This  limits  the  capacity  of
governments in some countries, in fiscal terms, to cushion a potential downturn in the economy.
This is the time to build up sufficient resilience for tougher times ahead. It is rather like the human
body – we need to boost our immune systems long before the flu season breaks out. Once a flu
epidemic is in full flow, it’s often too late to get vaccinated. But we don’t always follow sound
advice like that.
What  does  this  mean  for  the  financial  markets?  It  is  precisely  when  the  economy  is  in  good
shape that we can be tempted to underestimate the likelihood of catching the flu and neglect the
need to make build up our defences. 
1 Macroeconomic environment
The  German  economy  is  experiencing  the  longest  period  of  expansion  since  the  country’s
reunification.  This  good  setting  is  benefiting  households.  The  positive  economic  situation  and
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
sound financing conditions have contributed to the decline in the German unemployment rate.
The number of consumer insolvencies has also fallen. 
As a consequence, household debt as a percentage of gross domestic product, at roughly 50%,
is at its lowest level in two decades.
Enterprises have boosted their capital from roughly 20% to 30% over the past two decades, and
leverage in the corporate sector has receded slightly.
Similarly,  high  valuations  in  the  financial  markets  reflect  the  strong  economy  and  low  interest
rates. However, they also point to vulnerabilities in the financial system.
Measured relative to leverage in the corporate sector, risk premia are low – investors are
thus charging a very low “price” for taking on risk. This is evident not just in Germany, but
also from an international perspective.
Real  estate  prices  in  Germany  have  been  rising  steadily  since  the  onset  of  the  financial
crisis,  not  just  in  urban  centres. According  to  Bundesbank  estimates,  real  estate  prices
exceed  levels  that  would  be  justified  by  fundamentals  such  as  regional  or  demographic
patterns by about 15–30%.
Let me therefore give you a more detailed description of the vulnerabilities lurking in Germany’s
financial system.
2 Underestimating credit risk
Future credit risk might be underestimated. The good situation for enterprises at present is being
reflected in low provisioning at banks. 
This has contributed to the rise in banks’ capital ratios. However, the risk-weighted capital ratio
rose by more than the unweighted ratio. Larger, systemically important financial institutions tend
to have lower unweighted capital ratios than smaller banks.
An economic downturn would put pressure on banks’ capital buffers due to the ensuing credit
losses  and  increasing  risk  weights.  This  could  reverse  the  trend  observed  over  the  past  ten
years. This period has seen the average risk weights for corporate loans and in retail banking –
that  is  to  say,  business  with  households  and  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  –  decline.
Furthermore, banks have restructured their investment portfolios towards exposures with lower
risk weights.
However,  a  glance  at  banks’  credit  portfolios  also  shows  that  there  has  been  a  shift  in  the
borrower structure. Generally speaking, there has been a relatively strong increase in loans to
financially vulnerable enterprises. Thus, the share of loans to enterprises with low capital ratios
and high interest burdens has increased over time. In addition, a lower value-at-risk for market
risk in the last two years has helped boost capital ratios. Thus, a sharp rise in financial market
volatility could put pressure on banks.
3 Overvaluing assets and loan collateral
High  valuations  point  to  another  weak  spot  in  the  financial  system  –  the  possibility  that  loan
collateral  values  may  be  overestimated.  Let  me  illustrate  my  point  by  taking  the  German  real
estate  market  as  an  example.  The  real  estate  market  is  crucially  important  for  the  German
economy  as  a  whole:  loans  for  house  purchase  account  for  more  than  half  of  lending  to
households  and  enterprises.  Our  assessment  of  developments  in  the  residential  real  estate
market from a financial stability perspective is based on three indicators: 
Housing prices are continuing to increase dynamically.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
But lending is growing at a below-average pace by historical standards.
And overall, credit standards have not changed remarkably – household debt, for instance,
has remained almost static.
Overall, we currently see no need to activate any macroprudential instruments in order to contain
risks to financial stability emanating from the residential real estate market. We are, however,
continuing to closely monitor this market. Because the strong appreciation in prices harbours the
risk that the quality of loan collateral is possibly being overestimated.
In the event of a correction, the value of collateral might decline unexpectedly sharply, pushing up
losses from residential real estate loans as a result. One stress test exercise reveals that an
economic slump and shrinking real estate prices would in some cases take a heavy toll on the
real estate lending portfolios of German banks.
4 Interest rate risk as a result of maturity transformation
Finally, the German banking system has become more vulnerable to an abrupt increase in risk
premia and thus in interest rates. The share of newly granted loans with an fixed-term interest
rates  of  over  ten  years  has  risen  from  26%  at  the  beginning  of  2010  to  45%  at  last  count.  If
interest rates were to quickly spike higher, this would instantly drive up the costs of funding these
loans. But interest income would only increase with a time lag. 
This would affect savings banks and cooperative banks more than the larger credit institutions.
And  precisely  because  many  institutions  would  be  affected  simultaneously,  it  would  not  be
possible to cushion the impact by stepping up new lending business. In an economic downturn,
especially, credit demand would decline. 
A  “snapback”  in  interest  rates  would  not  be  the  only  risk  to  financial  stability.  Persistently  low
interest rates close to the zero lower bound would also continue to put pressure on the financial
system. In this scenario, risk-taking incentives would remain. 
This means that both risk scenarios – a “snapback” in rates, and persistently low rates – would
affect  the  German  banking  sector  as  a  whole. And  other  parts  of  the  financial  system  would
barely be able to offset the impact. That is because insurers and pension institutions might also
come under pressure in both scenarios.
5 Potential pro-cyclical impact of the financial system
What does this imply for financial stability? The vulnerabilities I have just mentioned all have one
thing  in  common:  we  have  evidence  to  suggest  that  market  participants  are  tending  to
underestimate  the  risks  they  incur  and  that  they  are  tending  to  not  charge  enough  for  them.
Underestimating  risk  is  not  synonymous  with  a  credit  bubble. Although  the  materialisation  of
individual risks would be manageable, credit, valuation and interest rate risk may well intensify
within the financial system. Market participants might potentially underestimate downside risks to
the economy. An unexpectedly strong economic downturn and falling asset prices would then
simultaneously expose different vulnerabilities. The financial system could intensify unexpected
negative developments in the economy. In particular, its highly interconnected network allows the
financial  sector  to  perform  its  key  functions,  which  are  to  finance  the  economy,  ensure  that
payment systems operate smoothly, and hedge risk. However, interconnectedness also entails a
risk of contagion.
Let me illustrate this point by using an economic downturn as an example. If the trade conflicts
escalate, for instance, this could hit the German economy hard – external demand might soften,
or value-added chains might become more fragile. Insolvencies might increase in the corporate
sector.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
An economic downturn would put pressure on banks’ equity capital, which would be squeezed by
losses, write-downs and mounting risk weights.
How might banks looking to fulfil the capital ratios set by supervisors or expected by markets
respond to this scenario?
Banks might respond by increasing their capital internally. That is, they would retain profits and
pay out less to shareholders. But this particular avenue would be blocked off, especially if the
economic slump eroded banks’ profits or even causes losses. 
Another  response  might  be  to  tap  the  markets  for  additional  capital.  But  here  again,  if  many
banks try to take that particular road in times of crisis, they will end up blocking it for everyone.
Confidence in entire segments of the market may well erode as a result.
That  leaves  us  with  the  third  possible  response,  which  is  to  deleverage  the  balance  sheet.
Overall, this would reduce the supply of credit to households and enterprises. This could well
amplify an economic slump by spilling out across the financial system.
Whether and with what magnitude an economic downturn is amplified by the financial system
depends  on  the  buffers  within  the  financial  system.  It  is  thus  a  welcome  development  that
German banks have increased their capital since the financial crisis. This is due to numerous
microprudential regulatory measures that have already been implemented or will be implemented
in the near future as well as to capital buffers for systemically important banks. 
However,  the  vulnerabilities  are  not  confined  to  individual  institutions;  they  affect  the  entire
system.  This  risk  is  particularly  acute  when  market  participants  are  overly  optimistic  in  good
times. In other words, each bank on its own would act in a risk-conscious manner and attempt to
strengthen its capital buffers. But there is no way it can have a full picture of the potential impact
on the financial system as a whole. This is how systemic risk potentially comes about.
6 Need for macroprudential action
Macroprudential policy aims to identify such risks to financial stability at an early stage and to
take  timely  measures  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  functions  smoothly.  Germany’s
financial system has become more vulnerable over the past years – the impact of credit risk,
asset repricing, and interest rates on the financial system might be underestimated. At the same
time, the downside risks have increased. This means that action needs to be taken.
First, each individual market participant needs to build up sufficient resilience to unexpected
events.  Even  when  the  economy  is  less  favourable,  financial  institutions  should  have
sufficient  capital  to  cover  the  risks  they  take.  Risk  management  and  financing  decisions
should take scenarios that could lead to large losses into account. This applies especially to
political risks such as the possibility of a “hard Brexit”.
Second, cyclical risks call for timely preventive action. Buffers against economic risks need
to be built up in good times. This can reduce the likelihood that contagion effects within the
financial system might amplify an economic downturn. The macroprudential toolkit includes
warnings and recommendations as well as macroprudential capital buffers.
Third, effective financial stability surveillance calls for improved data on the residential real
estate  market,  as  recommended  by  the  German  Financial  Stability  Committee.  Detailed
information is needed about developments in property prices, the debt levels of investors,
and  especially  those  of  households,  as  well  as  lending  conditions.  When  it  comes  to
systematically capturing some of these indicators, Germany remains near the bottom of the
league in Europe. 
To summarise, the favourable economic situation at present offers a good opportunity to bolster
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
balance sheets and build up resilience for a rainy day.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
