  An address by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the South Africa Tomorrow Conference, 
New York, 
1 November 2018 
South Africa’s adjustment path 
  Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to share a few thoughts with you today. 
 Last  year,  we  had  a  Goldilocks  global  economy.  Inflation  started  picking  up  in  the 
advanced economies, and in emerging markets, it was generally in line with targets. 
Growth  was  stronger,  but  without  much  evidence  of  overheating.  Growth  was  also 
widely shared – most economies were accelerating. The world economy felt just right. 
 As you know, at the end of the Goldilocks story a family of bears comes home. Our 
Goldilocks  tale  has  taken  the  same  direction.  The  synchronisation  of  global  growth 
has  broken  down  this  year,  with  the  United  States  (US)  surging  ahead  while  other 
countries slow down. With unemployment at very low levels, the Federal Reserve has 
been raising rates, just as they  told us they would. The combination of stronger US 
growth and higher rates has appreciated the dollar.  
 This  combination  of  factors  has  posed  challenges  for  emerging  markets.  It  has 
interrupted  capital  flows  and  prompted  wide-scale  currency  depreciation.  Countries 
with  substantial  stocks  of  foreign-currency  debt  have  seen  their  balance  sheets 
deteriorate. Inflation pressures have generally intensified. 
 Unlike Goldilocks, however, most of us in emerging markets weren’t caught napping 
when the bears showed up. We had frameworks in place to handle such challenges. 
In  particular,  most  of  us  could  rely  on  flexible  exchange  rates  to  absorb  the  initial 
 Page 1 of 8 
shock. This works best when countries have avoided contracting excessive foreign-
currency debt, as in the South African case. In these circumstances, the best thing 
one can do is to leave the foreign exchange markets to find its equilibrium. 
 It  is  well  understood  that  currency  depreciation  creates  inflationary  pressures.  But 
many  emerging  market  countries  have  strong  central  banks  who  can  deal  with  this 
problem. Given the credibility accumulated by these institutions, inflation expectations 
have stayed anchored in most emerging markets.1 Emerging markets have also been 
buffered  by  substantial  stocks  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  It  is  clear  that  most 
countries are vastly better positioned than they were during the 1997/98 crisis.  
 Certainly,  a  few  countries  have  been  sorely  tested  by  events  this  year,  and  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  has  been  called  into  action.  Most  emerging  markets, 
however,  should  be  able  to  get  through  without  experiencing  financial  crises  or 
crippling sudden stops.  
 The more difficult question is this: how will countries adjust to the ever-changing global 
circumstances,  and  what  does  this  mean  for  their  growth  and  development 
trajectories? Let me set out some challenges/difficulties. 
 First,  a number  of  countries  are  running  sizeable  deficits  on  their fiscal  and  current 
accounts.  Countries  with  larger  deficits  have  tended  to  experience  more  currency 
depreciation this year, which speaks to their vulnerability to changing global financing 
conditions  –  especially  higher  interest  rates.  Reducing  this  vulnerability  will  require 
deficit reduction, as well as changes in the composition of spending that benefit long-
run  growth  and  therefore  improve  countries’  future  capacity  to  repay  debt.  This 
adjustment  process  is  likely  to  be  difficult,  both  for  political  economy  reasons  and 
because  macroeconomic  adjustment  can  hurt  short-term  growth,  specifically  via 
reduced  demand  or 
through 
import  compression.  Rebalancing 
is 
therefore 
inevitable…. 
                                                            
1 This point was made in the latest International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook, chapter 3. 
See https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2018/09/24/world-economic-outlook-october-
2018#Chapter%203.  
 Page 2 of 8 
Second, there are pockets of prominent emerging market countries where growth has 
stalled.  Looking  back  over  the  past  two  decades,  the  2000s  were  an  era  of 
unprecedented growth for emerging markets. The share of economies converging on 
rich-country  living  standards  also  reached  new  highs,  demonstrating  that  this  was 
more than simply ‘a China story’ or ‘an India story’ – important though those countries 
are. This record of success survived the global financial crisis, but only by a few years. 
From  approximately  2013,  emerging  markets  began  to  slow  steadily,  and  some 
experienced protracted recessions. Outside of Asia, the emerging market story is now 
largely about subdued growth, and some countries are talking about lost decades. We 
need to find a way back to growth. 
 The  third  problem  follows  when  politics  catch  up  with  economics.  In  advanced 
economies and emerging markets alike, dissatisfaction with economic outcomes has 
generated  political  developments  that  would  have  been  very  unlikely,  if  not 
unthinkable, even half a decade ago. Sometimes these reactions have made things 
worse, or threaten to do so, creating a vicious circle of bad economic decisions and 
further political disaffection.  
 These problems – macroeconomic disequilibria, stalled growth and political feedback 
loops – add up to a difficult set of circumstances for  the  emerging markets. Today, 
I would like to talk about how we might navigate them. Given my brief, I am going to 
focus on South Africa’s experience and outlook, although I think that this framework is 
useful for thinking through the broader emerging market challenges. 
 Macroeconomic rebalancing 
 Since  the  2013  ‘taper  tantrum’,  South  Africa  has  undergone  a  substantial 
macroeconomic  adjustment.  In  particular,  the  current  account  has  narrowed  from 
nearly 6% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2013 to 2.4% last year. This change 
came largely from the trade account, which has registered surpluses in 8 of the past 
10  quarters. Our  services  account has followed  a  similar  trend,  and  is  now  roughly 
balanced.  
    Page 3 of 8 
By contrast, our income and current transfers account has remained in deficit. This is 
in part because of transfers to our neighbours in the Southern African Customs Union, 
amounting to roughly  1% of GDP annually.  The balance reflects income  payments, 
driven  by  high  yield  differentials  on  our  foreign  liabilities  when  compared  with  our 
foreign  assets.  A  growing  stock  of  sovereign  debt  held  by  foreigners  has  been  an 
especially important contributor to these income payments. The overall income deficit 
stands at about 3% of GDP, of which close to 1.5 percentage points is coming from 
interest payments on sovereign debt. 
 The  fiscal  balance  has  changed  less  than  the  current  account  deficit,  at  least  at  a 
headline  level.  The  latest  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  indicates  a  fiscal 
deficit of 4% of GDP for the 2017/18 financial year. This is better than the 2012/13 
figure  of  5%,  but  it  is  still  large  –  both  in  absolute  terms  and  relative  to  previous 
projections. The change in the primary balance has been more dramatic, narrowing 
from 2.3% of GDP in 2013 to 1% in the latest financial year. But this number is still 
negative, so the debt stock is not yet stabilising.  
 As a central bank governor, I try not to say too much about fiscal policy  – not least 
because  I  would  like  to  reciprocate  the  courtesy  that  other  authorities  show  us  by 
respecting the independence of monetary policy. Let me therefore just reiterate three 
crucial points made by our Minister of Finance, Mr Tito Mboweni, in his recent address 
to Parliament.2 To quote directly: 
 We must choose a path that stabilises and reduces the national debt. We cannot continue to 
borrow at this rate.  
 
We must choose to reduce the structural deficit, especially the consistently high growth in the 
real  public-sector  wage  bill.  New  fiscal  anchors  may  be  required  to  ensure  sustainability,  in 
addition to the expenditure ceiling.  
 
We must choose public-sector investment over consumption. 
 This is an extremely clear statement of intent to improve the fiscal balance, and to do 
so in a way that favours investment and is therefore good for longer-term growth. We 
are clearly well past the point where we could hope to crowd in investment simply by 
raising spending and boosting demand.  
                                                           
2 See http://www.treasury.gov.za/documents/mtbps/2018/speech/speech.pdf.  
 Page 4 of 8 
With rising long-term interest rates, credit rating downgrades and tax increases, the 
case for fiscal stimulus based purely on spending aggregates is well past its sell-by 
date. Government cannot keep on dissaving. 
 Ultimately,  South  Africa  remains  a  low-saving  economy.  We  can  improve  savings 
rates,  especially  through  fiscal  policy,  but  we  are  not  going  to  be  a  high-saving 
economy for the foreseeable future. For this reason, we need to get to a position where 
we  can  safely  and  sustainably  fund  investment  demand  in  excess  of  local  savings. 
Instead of bemoaning a weak current account, we need to  develop a strong capital 
account.  
 Getting  there  is  likely  to  require  larger  capital  inflows  into  equities  and  direct 
investment, and less into government bonds. One attraction of these investments is 
that  when  growth  weakens,  profits  decline  and  outflows  diminish,  which  keeps  the 
current account under control in low points of the business cycle. Another,  perhaps 
more  critical,  advantage  is  that  these  kinds  of  inflows  help  growth.  Attracting 
investment of this nature is central to the President’s growth vision, as was articulated 
most recently at the Investment Summit he had convened last week in Johannesburg. 
Reducing  government’s  appetite  for  borrowing  is  a  priority  for  our  new  Finance 
Minister.  
 To sum up this discussion: South Africa is still a country with significant twin deficits. 
They are smaller than they were in 2013, but they are still relatively large. Their scale 
is a source of vulnerability, as is their composition. Going forward, we need to reduce 
our fiscal deficits, and we need to ensure that our borrowing is more productive. 
  We are not saying we need to keep our current account deficit as small as possible. 
One does not come to an investor conference in New York to say that capital inflows 
are a source of vulnerability and that we don’t want them. If I believed that, I wouldn’t 
need to be here. Rather, we want to get to a position of capital account strength, in 
which  South  Africa  attracts  investment  because  it  has  good  growth  prospects  and 
because  it  provides  an  institutional  environment  that  gives  investors  security  and 
predictability. 
   Page 5 of 8 
The challenge of stalled growth 
 South Africa’s economy is likely to grow by just 0.7% this year. Earlier in the year, we 
expected  growth  to  be  meaningfully  stronger.  The  SARB’s  March  forecast  was  for 
1.7% growth, and the MPC’s assessment was that the risks to this forecast were to 
the upside. In the short term, those hopes have been disappointed.  
 More  fundamentally,  2018  is  likely  to  be  our  fifth  consecutive  year  of  negative  per 
capita growth, given population growth of about 1.6%. These sorts of growth rates are 
well  below  our  longer-run  average  of  3%  or  so,  let  alone  the  rates  of  above 
5% targeted by the National Development Plan.  
 Some of the blame for this weak growth can probably be attributed to global factors, 
including the declines in commodity prices and weak growth in our traditional trading 
partners. However, domestic growth has remained subdued despite a cyclical upturn 
in  the  global  economy.  The  South  African  economy  has  also  failed  to  accelerate 
despite a large improvement in our terms of trade, which reached an all-time high late 
last year. This suggests that the causes of weak growth are chiefly domestic in nature.  
 Some degree of blame attaches to shocks like drought or strikes in specific sectors, 
but these cannot explain why growth has stayed low for several years. Instead, one of 
the  primary  causes  of  weak  growth  has  been  the  severe  decline  in  South  African 
governance in recent years – a period of political decay which is only now coming to 
an end. This episode – known throughout South Africa as ‘state capture’ – involved a 
hollowing  out  of  institutions  and,  in  many  cases,  the  looting  of  public  resources  for 
private  gain.  One  of  its  many  consequences  was  a  large  decline  in  business  and 
consumer confidence. This, in turn, has contributed to investment stagnating over the 
past five years.  
 ‘State  capture’  has  also  been  a  major  factor  in  our  fiscal  woes,  both  because  it 
burdened  the  state  with  corrupt  and  fruitless  expenditure,  and  also  because  it  is 
seriously undermining its capacity to collect taxes.  As the Commissions of Enquiry 
conclude their work we will draw lessons regarding vulnerabilities in our institutional 
and  governance  frameworks  and  work  towards  further  strengthening  of  our 
institutions. 
 Page 6 of 8 
 There are several reasons to expect better growth over the medium term. One is the 
backlog of investment I have just referred to: our investment levels are now under 20% 
of GDP, and it would make sense for firms to begin investing more, in the first instance 
simply to catch up with depreciation, now that the domestic environment has improved.  
 A second pro-growth factor is better household balance sheets.  Unlike its emerging 
market peers, but like many advanced economies, South Africa had a housing boom 
in  the  mid-2000s.  This  has  left  households  carrying  a  large  debt  stock  –  a  burden 
which  has  been  weighing  on  their  ability  to  consume.  However,  households  have 
achieved significant deleveraging since then, and the debt-to-income ratios are now 
back to 2006 levels and close to longer-term averages. Although it is very difficult to 
specify when we will pass the tipping point, we are probably close to, or even at the 
end of, the deleveraging cycle.  
 A third factor favouring growth is the scope for further reforms. We have already seen 
a  great  deal  of  energy  and  initiative  from  government  around  key  issues  such  as 
raising employment and investment. As an economy, we are still a long way from the 
efficiency frontier in a range of areas, perhaps mostly in our network sectors. This, to 
mix metaphors, leaves an impressive amount of low-hanging fruit available, should we 
develop an interest in picking it. 
 Interactions between politics and economics 
 This brings me to my third and final topic: the interaction of politics and economics. As 
you  all  know,  forecasting  economic  events  is  hard,  but  predicting  the  interactions 
between  political  and  economic  events  is  all  but  impossible.  Once  something  has 
already happened, we are all quite good at stitching together a causal narrative that 
makes  that  outcome  seem  inevitable.  Sadly,  our  ability  to  explain  the  past  is  much 
stronger than our capacity to prophesy the future.  
 One of the great challenges is guessing what will happen politically when a country’s 
growth stalls. A plausible outcome is that bad economic performance, and all  that it 
entails, will produce a populist rejection of incumbent elites and policies.  
  Page 7 of 8 
Another  plausible  outcome  is  that  bad  economic  performance  will  empower  the 
reformers already in government, who are therefore known quantities. This seems to 
be the way South Africa is going. Of course,  South Africa has its share of populists 
who want to do radical things. But it is increasingly clear that the centre will hold. We 
have  strong  institutions,  and  we  have  the  better  arguments. We  cannot  stop  some 
people from saying populist things, but we can win the policy debates – and we are 
winning. Bad economic outcomes, in this case, seem to be supporting better policies.  
 Conclusion 
 In  conclusion:  this  is  a  difficult  moment  for  emerging  markets.  After  a  long  run  of 
success, we are now confronting a range of serious challenges, including excessive 
macroeconomic imbalances, stalled growth and difficult politics.  
 As all of you will know, from your years of experience investing in emerging markets, 
the asset class is marked by volatility. You are here because the returns can be high, 
but you also acknowledge that there can be low moments. Had you been more risk-
averse, you would have the good returns emerging markets offered.  
 In truth, and as has been said in other contexts, we are probably not as good as we 
look when we are winning, but we are also not as bad as we seem when we are losing. 
The  past  few  years  have  been  difficult  ones  for  South  Africa,  as  for  many  other 
emerging  markers,  but  there  is  a  respectable  case  to  be  made  that  things  will  get 
substantially  better.  We  can  achieve  macroeconomic  rebalancing  that  favours 
investment and growth.  
 We aspire to growth rates nearer our historical trend levels, and once we achieve that, 
we can get ambitious about faster growth rates. We are recovering from a period of 
self-inflicted injuries, and there are good growth opportunities that we can exploit when 
we have recovered our health. Our politics have taken a reformist turn, which should 
permit  a  constructive  response,  rather 
than  a  destructive  reaction, 
to 
the 
disappointments of the recent past. I am confident that South Africa tomorrow will be 
better than South Africa today. 
 Thank you.  
 Page 8 of 8 
