Mugur  Isărescu:  Some  considerations  of  the  impact  of  monetary
policy on the economic convergence
Speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the Conference on
Europe Economic Integration 2018 "How to finance cohesion in Europe?", Panel 1 "The role of
monetary  policy  in  catching-up",  organized  by  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Austria
(Oesterreichische Nationalbank),Vienna, 26 November 2018.
 As prepared for delivery
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am honoured to join such a distinguished audience. After so many years spent as the Governor
of the National Bank of Romania, today’s discussion gives me yet another opportunity to look
back at the role that monetary policy has played in supporting nominal and real convergence in
Romania. It is almost two decades since the Romania – EU accession negotiations had been
opened (back then, in 2000, I served as the prime-minister). Romania has been an EU member
for more than 10 years already. Allow me to share with you my view, shaped by the lessons
learned  over  all  these  years,  on  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  economic
convergence.
Let  me  first  make  a  couple  of  considerations  about  economic  convergence.  First,  while  the
nominal  convergence  criteria  are  deeply  rooted  in  the  minds  of  policymakers,  the  Maastricht
Treaty also explicitly stipulates that “a high degree of sustainable convergence” is needed. Yet,
this requirement seems to have been overlooked sometimes. Second, practical experience with
euro adoption so far has proved that real convergence is also critical for success. Even in the
absence of a clear definition and a consensus on a numerical benchmark, it became clear that a
high-enough level of real convergence is a prerequisite for minimising the costs associated with
losing monetary policy independence after euro adoption. Recent years have shown that the euro
area is not a cosy place for economies with lagging competitiveness or rigid markets. We should
not forget that euro adoption involves a permanent commitment, as Otmar Issing, the first ECB
chief economist, pointed out.
Romania  made  significant  progress  in  terms  of  real  convergence,  with  growth  resuming  and
gaining momentum after the global economic crisis. This led to a rise in GDP per capita as a
percentage of euro area average (based on PPS) from 31.7 percent in 2005 to 58.6 percent in
2017. The advance was the fastest within the group of peer countries which recorded similar
trends.
Clear  prospects  for  EU  entry  favoured  Romania’s  real  convergence  before  2007. Afterwards,
actual  membership  in  the  EU  “convergence  club”  has  fuelled  the  catching-up  process.  The
obvious  next  stage  is  joining  the  euro  area.  A  successful  adoption  of  the  single  currency,
however,  requires  optimal  timing.  This,  as  I  pointed  out  before,  is  mainly  conditional  upon
achieving  a  high-enough  level  of  real  convergence,  alongside  compliance  with  the  nominal
convergence criteria. Unlike the EU, the euro area is not a “convergence club”, as its current
members did not necessarily increase their convergence level after adopting the euro. While the
optimal level of real convergence for a successful euro area entry is still a hotly debated issue,
the consistency and sustainability of real convergence are, in my  opinion,  at  least  as
important as its level. And in order to remain on track, economic convergence – both real and
nominal – must advance in step with the economy’s fundamentals lest progress be jeopardised
by abrupt setbacks. At the end of the day, forcing convergence is as harmful as postponing it.
Looking  at  nominal  convergence,  between  July  2015  and  November  2017  Romania  had  been
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
fulfilling  all  Maastricht  convergence  criteria  (yet  without  being  part  of  the  exchange  rate
mechanism).  The  fact  that  currently  the  reference  values  for  the  long-term  interest  rate  and
inflation are no longer being met is a warning that efforts should be made to achieve nominal
convergence  in  a  lasting,  rather  than  coincidental  or  transitory  manner.  This  is  possible  only
when the two types of convergence reinforce each other.
On the way towards sustainable and smooth convergence, a first guiding principle is to avoid
divergence.  Not  only  across  countries;  reducing  development  gaps  within  countries  is  also
essential to mitigate the trade-offs challenging the policies confronted with asymmetric shocks.
In Romania, for instance, one can find areas that are comparable, in terms of development and
living standards, to Western economies, but also regions that trail well behind. Moreover, in 2016,
the wealthiest region in Romania was almost four times richer than the poorest one (measured
by the regional GDP per capita as a percentage of the euro area average).
The second guiding principle towards sustainable and smooth convergence is to keep going. By
this,  I  mean  that  progress,  once  made,  should  not  be  undone.  We  now  need  to  maintain  the
economy  on  an  upward  trend,  while  being  extremely  careful  to  preserve  the  macroeconomic
equilibria restored through a painful adjustment after the crisis. The only way ahead is by means
of  a  coherent  macroeconomic  policy  mix  and  resolute  structural  reforms  aimed  to  boost  the
economy’s  growth  potential,  while  making  it  more  resilient.  This  approach  should  never  leave
room for pro-cyclical policies.
As we have clarified that the consistency and the sustainability of real convergence are extremely
important, now it is time to discuss how monetary policy can support these two dimensions of
the convergence process.
It is beyond any doubt that countercyclical monetary policy favours smooth convergence. This
has  always  been  one  of  the  guiding  principles  for  calibrating  the  stance  of  NBR’s  monetary
policy, as well as for developing and employing our policy tools. An example of the latter are the
unorthodox prudential measures taken before the global crisis to mitigate the impact of extremely
volatile  capital  flows;  with  these  in  mind,  the  IMF  mentioned  the  NBR  as  being  among  “the
pioneers” of what was later referred to as “macroprudential instruments”.
Besides  acting  in  a  countercyclical  manner,  in  order  to  preserve  the  consistency  and  the
sustainability  of  real  convergence,  monetary  policy  should  also  be  flexible  while  avoiding
extremes. On one hand, it should by no means ignore the threat of inflation for the sake of fast
and easily gained (and therefore illusory) prosperity. On the other hand, it should avoid becoming,
in Mervyn King’s words, an “inflation nutter”. With this philosophy, back in 2005, the National Bank
of Romania decided to adopt a “light” version of inflation targeting, as monetary targeting had to
be abandoned mainly due to the broken relationship between monetary aggregates and inflation.
Light inflation targeting was deemed more suitable than any other monetary policy regimes for
sustainably achieving price stability, while limiting the cost of excessive volatility in output and
employment. A  peg  was  not  a  feasible  option,  since  exchange  rate  flexibility  was  seen  as  an
asset for an economy as big and rigid as Romania was at the time, especially given the widening
external  imbalance  and  the  upcoming  stages  of  capital  flows  liberalisation.  We  focused  our
monetary policy strategy on the medium-term achievement of the inflation objective rather than
on  hitting  the  target  as  fast  as  possible  at  any  costs.  This  strategy  has  been  supported  by  a
managed floating exchange rate, which proved to be a highly effective alternative to free floating
in cushioning the economy from the impact of sizeable capital flows. As a matter of fact, after the
crisis, forex interventions re-entered the arsenal of many central banks, including some of the
previously more purist free floaters.
The  NBR  has  never  had  the  luxury  of  being  concerned  exclusively  with  price  stability  and
interest-rate setting in the belief that financial stability and exchange rate stability will follow. With
freely moving capital and a significant degree of euroisation, the idea of being able to manage
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
aggregate demand solely via interest rates is clearly an illusion.
In the first years after adoption of inflation targeting and prior to the EU accession, Romania saw
substantial  capital  inflows  fueling  an  already  fast  growing  economy.  Attempting  to  contain
aggregate demand and anchor inflation expectations only with the interest rate instrument would
have entailed additional and more aggressive hikes. This would have been self-defeating, leading
to  even  larger  capital  inflows  and  an  unsustainable  nominal  appreciation,  boosting  foreign
currency  lending,  increasing  external  sector  imbalances,  and  amplifying  financial  sector
vulnerabilities.
I  dare  say  that, when  it  comes  to  price  stability,  just  as  in  the  case  of  economic
convergence, consistency and sustainability are at least as important as the levels of
headline inflation rates, especially since non-core components are beyond the influence of the
central  bank.  Moreover,  as  we  all  know,  economic  integration  goes  hand  in  hand  with  price
convergence, since prices, along with incomes, also tend to adjust towards EU levels. Therefore,
monetary  policy  in  catching-up  countries  –  unlike  that  in  advanced  economies  –  must  also
foresee and take into account price convergence patterns in the long run and this is a challenge
that still lies ahead of us.
The years that passed since the adoption of inflation targeting in Romania were quite out of the
ordinary.  Until  2008,  we  had  witnessed  an  economic  boom  and  widening  macroeconomic
imbalances  amid  large  capital  inflows,  only  to  move  towards  the  subsequent  bust  in  2009
following  the  outbreak  of  the  global  crisis,  with  the  plethora  of  problems  related  to  correcting
domestic and external imbalances. Over the last years, our economy has come a long way, and
is now better prepared to deal with external shocks than it was at the beginning of the crisis. It
seems that the “light” version of inflation targeting has been working fairly well for a catching-up
economy as Romania, providing a combination of rules and flexibility to overcome such trying
times.
Of  course,  a  coherent  macroeconomic  policy  mix  is  needed  to  maintain  the  economy  on  an
upward course without putting at risk the hard-regained balances. In general, irrespective of how
well-designed the monetary policy may be, in the absence of adequate complementary policies,
it is likely to achieve sub-optimal outcomes.
I would like to end by trying to answer, based on my experience as a central banker, two simple
questions related to inflation and real convergence that concern not only Romania, but also other
catching-up economies. With regard to inflation, one may ask “how much is too much?”. I
believe  that  the  answer  does  not  lie  in  pinning  down  certain  numbers,  but  in  the
commitment to maintain a relatively low and stable inflation in the medium and long run.
Experience  has  taught  me  that  inflation  is  an  insidious  disease  that  should  not  be  treated
carelessly. With respect to real convergence, a question raised by many is “how fast is
fast enough?”. Again, I would not look for a certain figure; I would tackle this issue by
approaching real convergence not as a race where the fastest track is also the right one,
but rather as a complex process giving the steady runner (a marathoner rather than a
sprinter) the opportunity to reap most of the potential benefits, while avoiding excessive
risks. Much like the fable about the turtle and the rabbit, which we all know how it ends...
Beyond targets and levels, and irrespective of the convergence gap an economy faces or the
monetary policy regime a central bank opts for, what matters for both real convergence and price
stability (as part of nominal convergence) is the consistency and the sustainability of the effort. In
other words, being and staying on the right track.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
