Banca d’Italia, Centro Donato Menichella
TIPS LAUNCH EVENT
Welcoming remarks by  
the Governor of Banca d’Italia
Ignazio Visco
Frascati, 30 November 2018
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to welcome you here today for the launch of TARGET 
Instant Payment Settlement (TIPS). And I especially welcome Yves Mersch, 
Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, who will not 
only actively participate to the launch but will also offer us his remarks on 
the role this new market infrastructure aims to play in the system of retail 
payments in Europe.
Instant  payments  are  used  to  settle  retail  transactions  –  24  hours  a 
day,  seven  days  a  week  –  and  are  attracting  much  attention  and  interest. 
Instant  payment  systems  have  been  launched  or  are  being  developed  in 
several  countries  around  the  world.  In  most  cases  these  are  systems  with 
settlement in commercial bank money. TIPS is a pan-European system for 
real-time settlement in central bank money and it has the potential to become 
a benchmark, not only within Europe.
The number of banks offering instant payments to their clients is steadily 
increasing,  as  is  the  use  of  such  services  in  the  European  Union.  A  basic 
condition for their development and their widespread use is that users must 
always be able to make recourse to this instrument to settle a transaction. In 
order to ensure this, the bank of the client making the payment and the bank 
of the client receiving it must adhere to an instant payment scheme and these 
two schemes must be connected. 
National  solutions  have  been  developed,  or  are  under  development, 
across Europe. However, these solutions are not available to every bank in 
the area and often clients of banks participating in two different schemes may 
not make instant payments to each other. The objective of the Eurosystem 
when  it  decided  to  enter  this  market  was  twofold:  (i)  to  promote  market 
infrastructure efficiency by providing an innovative solution for instant retail 
payment  settlement  that  is  available  to  all  banks  throughout  Europe,  and 
(ii) to facilitate the pan-European integration of instant payment settlement 
services, in line with what has already been achieved for large-value payments 
(TARGET2)  and  securities  transactions  (TARGET2-Securities),  ensuring 
that  no  fragmentation  is  introduced  into  the  European  retail  payments 
market. TIPS minimizes this risk by offering a service that can reach any 
bank account holder in Europe. TIPS also makes an important contribution 
to keeping the current payment system infrastructures run by the Eurosystem 
attractive in the face of future challenges on a global scale. 
In June 2017 the Governing Council of the ECB approved the launch of 
TIPS. Today, in line with the original planning, the system goes live. It has 
been a particularly challenging project considering the tight deadlines, the 
strict cost objectives to be respected in order to provide a competitive service, 
and the very innovative high-tech solutions required. In just over a year we 
have managed to develop and test the new system, while the average time 
required to build similar market infrastructures is usually much longer. 
TIPS is built on a modern and advanced technical solution, developed 
specifically  for  the  purpose  of  settling  instant  payments  and  designed  to 
secure  an  end-to-end  processing  time  of  10  seconds  or  less,  support  the 
expected large volumes of transactions, secure availability around the clock 
without  maintenance  windows,  and  enable  a  deployment  process  with  no 
interruption  in  the  service.  The  implementation  of  the  system  within  the 
4CBs – the central banks of France, Germany, Italy and Spain, which are 
the providers of the Eurosystem Market Infrastructures – has been entrusted 
to Banca d’Italia, which has developed the service and will also operate the 
platform. 
The cost of the service is crucial if instant payments are to be used in 
day-to-day transactions, replacing other payment instruments. The technical 
solution selected by Banca d’Italia for TIPS is designed to keep development 
and operational costs very low, as required by the Eurosystem: it allows the 
fee per transaction to be fixed at 0.2 cents. 
At  its  inception,  TIPS  will  only  settle  payment  transfers  in  euros. 
However, if there is the demand, other currencies can be supported as well. 
In  fact,  although  TIPS  is  primarily  devoted  to  settling  euro-denominated 
instant payments, it has been designed as a multi-currency system.    
To conclude, I wish to express my warmest thanks to all the colleagues 
in  the  Banca  d’Italia  and  the  ECB  project  teams  for  their  efforts  and 
commitment  to  the  project’s  success.  They  have  all  been  involved  in 
making TIPS a reality and will now be actively engaged in the operational 
4
phase. I would also like to thank all those involved – national central banks, 
banks, automated clearing houses – for their support and contribution.
Once again, let me extend our welcome to everyone present. I wish you 
all a pleasant day.
5
Designed and printed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
