Yandraduth Googoolye: The importance of financial services to the
economy and the need for good governance
Speech by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Celebration of the
125th  anniversary  of  the  Mauritius  Civil  Service  Mutual  Aid  Association  Ltd,  Port  Louis,  15
November 2018.
 The  Honourable  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  Mr
Pravind Kumar Jugnauth
The  Honourable  Minister  of  Civil  Service  and  Administrative  Reforms,  Mr  Cyril  Eddy
Boissezon    
The First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius and Chairman of the Financial Services
Commission, Dr Renganaden Padayachy
The members of the Board of Directors of the Mauritius Civil Service Mutual Aid Association
Ltd
Ladies and Gentlemen
Good Afternoon
125 years in the life of a financial institution is indeed an occasion to celebrate especially when
the central bank is only 50 years old. As your regulator, we are proud to collaborate and walk
alongside to ensure your sustainability. This achievement takes more sense of pride when we
consider  how  the  Mauritius  Civil  Service  Mutual  Aid  Association  Ltd  came  into  being.  From
November 1893 to date, the Association has undergone changes. Launched by a group of civil
servants at a time when there was only one bank, the Association has carved its way to coexist
commendably  in  the  financial  sector  after  obtaining  a  deposit  taking  license  on  17  June  2005
from the Bank of Mauritius to mobilise fixed deposits from the general public.
Over the years, the Association  has  gradually  grown  to  become  the  largest  non-bank  deposit
taking institution in Mauritius, accounting for over half of the sector’s total assets. The Association
has broadened its customer base, having extended its facilities outside of the civil service with a
total assets base of around Rs43 billion, about a tenth of our GDP. The deposits mobilized by the
Association  have  increased  by  five-fold,  from  Rs5  billion  in  2005  to  Rs27  billion  as  at  end  of
September 2018, which resulted into solid increase in advances from the Association.
The importance of financial services in an economy is undeniable on account of the benefits they
provide  to  the  economy  at  large.  Financial  services  facilitate  domestic  and  international
transactions,  mobilize  and  channel  domestic  savings  and  broaden  the  availability  of  credit  for
firms, including SMEs, and households. The Association has broadened its range of products on
offer to cater for the specific needs of its members and the public at large. Its attractive interest
rates promote healthy competition, whilst contributing to financial access and inclusion. 
We  are  well-versed  with  the  economic  benefits  that  non-bank  deposit  taking  institutions  have
created. But we must also be aware of the risks to financial stability that they can engender given
that  they  evolve  alongside  banks. And  their  activities  are,  in  many  respects,  intertwined  with
those  of  banks  and  have  vulnerabilities  similar  to  those  of  banks.  Weak,  ineffective  and
inappropriate  governance  and  risk  management  infrastructure  may  compromise  the  safe
conduct of business.
The Bank of Mauritius has enhanced the regulatory arena for non-bank deposit taking institutions
by extending the majority of the prudential requirements standards applicable to banks, such as,
corporate governance, capital, liquidity and provisions for impairment, etc. to those institutions.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Bank expects financial institutions to maintain strong, effective and appropriate governance
and  risk  management  infrastructure  so  as  not  to  compromise  the  safe  conduct  of  their
business.  The  financial  institutions  are  subject  to  regular  examinations  to  ensure  their
compliance  with  prudential  and  regulatory  requirements.  The  Bank  is  focusing  on  the
implementation of a risk based supervisory framework for banks. The pilot testing of the project
has  been  rolled  out  to  banks.  The  Bank  is  considering  extending  the  framework  to  non-bank
deposit taking financial institutions.
Institutional anniversaries like this one are appropriate to reflect on achievements and challenges
incurred, but should also lay grounds to ponder on what can be achieved going forward. They
also  provide  the  opportunity  to  remind  about  the  Association’s  fundamental  ideas,  aims  and
visions,  and  to  gauge  the  extent  to  which  they  are  being  accomplished.  Given  that  the
Association has grown to the equivalent of a medium-sized bank in terms of assets and even to
some  big  banks  in  terms  of  profits,  we  may  consider  granting  it  a  banking  license  should  it
decide to apply for one. More so that it has invested in a Core Banking Systems to support its
expanding  transactions  and  has  joined  the  Port  Louis  Automated  Clearing  House  to  make
electronic payments and thus ensure faster payments, including to its customers. Thus, all the
ingredients are present to support this conversion. I leave this to the Board of Directors to ponder
upon, as this will contribute to widen the Association’s range of financial services, indulge in cost
savings and reduce risk through diversification. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the future is bright and the Association has an immense contribution to
make to the financial industry of Mauritius. I commend the role that the Association has played in
the  Mauritian  society. And  so,  happy  anniversary  and  congratulations  to  all  the  members  and
staff of the Mauritius Civil Service Mutual Aid Association Ltd.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
