  Keynote address by Daniel Mminele, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the Risk South Africa Conference   
 Cape Town 
23 October 2018 
 Transitioning to new interest rate benchmarks:  
Why is this important for financial policy? 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  
 I would like to thank Risk South Africa for inviting me to speak at this conference. After 
a long day of speeches and presentations, I hope I manage to keep you engaged over 
the next few minutes, well aware of the fact that I stand between you and a cocktail 
function.  
 I have been asked to make some remarks about the reform of the London Interbank 
Offered Rate (Libor), specifically what the future of Libor entails and what the reform 
of interest rate benchmarks in general means for market participants. Given the recent 
work done by the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) on this topic, I thought I would 
use this opportunity to also talk about how we are thinking about the reform and the 
overall design of interest rate benchmarks in South Africa.  
 Background to the reform of Libor 
 There is extensive literature on the reform of interest rate benchmarks globally, and 
the  SARB  published  a  consultation  paper  on  selected  interest  rate  benchmarks  in 
South Africa on 30 August 2018.  
 Page 1 of 13 
The literature goes a long way in explaining what various international organisations1 
have done, and are still doing, to encourage the reform of interest rate benchmarks 
and  to  inform  global  markets  about  the  benchmark  reform  objectives  and  about 
progress in this regard in the Official Sector Steering Group (OSSG) countries as well 
as the non-OSSG jurisdictions.  
 By  and  large,  the  global  drive  to  reform  interest  rate  benchmarks  is  a  coordinated 
response  by  international  regulators  and  central  banks  to  cases  of  actual  and 
attempted manipulation  of  global  interest  rate  benchmarks  and  declining  liquidity  in 
key  underlying  unsecured  funding  markets. These  responses focus  on  initiatives  to 
improve  the  resilience  and  transparency  of  interest  rates  benchmarks  used  as 
reference rates. Given the lack of confidence in, and the declining credibility of, the 
major interest rate benchmarks after the Libor incidents became public in 2012, these 
initiatives  culminated  in  recommendations  on  how  to  strengthen  the  key  interbank 
offered  rates  (collectively  referred  to  as  ‘Ibors’)  and  use  risk-free  rates  (RFRs)  for 
derivative markets. This was also informed by the systemic nature of the risk that major 
interest rate benchmarks posed to the global financial system, 
 A  key  component  underpinning  all  the  reference  rate  reforms  is  the  International 
Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) principle of a waterfall approach to 
rate  determination,  which  the  OSSG  has  endorsed.  According  to  this  principle, 
benchmarks  should  be  based  on,  in  order  of  preference,  actual  transactions,  live 
tradable  prices,  and  expert  judgement.  Another  key  recommendation,  this  time 
proposed  by  the  OSSG,  is  that  derivative  contracts  should  reference  a  RFR  rather 
than the current practice of referencing an Ibor, which contains bank credit risk.  
 Keeping these two key recommendations in mind, let me now provide a brief recap on 
the progress in the reform efforts of Libor. 
                                                               
1 Such as the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO), and the Financial Stability Board (initially through the Market Participants 
Group (MPG) and since July 2014 through the Official Sector Steering Group (OSSG))   
 Page 2 of 13 
Alternatives for Libor 
 Libor, being  the most widely  referenced  Ibor,  has been  the  centre of attention. The 
scale of its use is estimated to be in the hundreds of trillions of US dollars. Yet, the 
volume of transactions that underpin Libor is nowhere near the gross notional value of 
financial  products  referencing  the  rate.  In  fact,  the  Alternative  Reference  Rate 
Committee  (ARRC)  in  the  United  States  (US)  has  published  a  report  showing  that, 
while exposure to Libor has grown, the volume of transactions underlying Libor has 
been declining.2  
 The scarcity of underlying transactions has been viewed as rather problematic,  as it 
has  already  resulted  in  increased  conduct  risk,  despite  efforts  to  strengthen 
governance processes around benchmark determination. Furthermore, as the ratio of 
underlying transactions to the gross notional value of financial contracts referencing 
Libor continues to dwindle, the risk that Libor will not be sustained over the long term 
increases. From a policymaker’s perspective, this mismatch poses risks to the stability 
of the global financial system, especially given the systemic importance of Libor.  
 Cognisant  of  these  risks,  Libor  currency  areas  have  moved  to  identify  alternative 
reference rates to replace Libor amid growing consensus that, at some point, Libor will 
cease to exist – not least because the Financial Conduct Authority has already made 
it known that it will not persuade or compel banks to submit Libor beyond 2021. And 
somebody has jokingly changes the lyrics of the famous song “Killing me softly with 
his song” to ‘killing it softly with Bailey’s song’.  
 Finding  and  agreeing  on  new  reference  rates  has  proved  to  be  a  long  and  difficult 
road. In the US, the ARRC, which is sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York (New York Fed), has identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) 
as its preferred alternative for US dollar Libor. SOFR, which the New York Fed began 
publishing  earlier  this  year,  is  a  secured  overnight  rate  based  on  a  much  larger 
universe of repo transactions than in any other segment of the US money market.  
                                                             
2 See https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/Microsites/arrc/files/2018/ARRC-Second-report.  
 Page 3 of 13 
In  the  United  Kingdom  (UK),  the  Working  Group  on  Sterling  Risk-Free  Reference 
Rates, operating under the auspices of the Bank of England (BoE), has identified a 
reformed  version  of  the  Sterling  Overnight  Index  Average  (SONIA)  as  the  UK’s 
preferred  alternative  for  the  sterling  Libor.  Like  SOFR,  SONIA  is  based  on  a  larger 
transaction  universe,  which  includes  bilaterally  negotiated  as  well  as  brokered 
unsecured deposits.  
 What is next? And what are the implications for local market participants? 
 Instead of discussing these relatively well-known developments at length, allow me to 
rather spend more time talking about the future  and give my views  on what market 
participants should be doing to prepare for it.  
 But  before  I  do  this,  I must  state the obvious.  In  the  words  of Albert  Einstein:  “The 
future is an unknown, but a somewhat predictable unknown.” Thus, I can only make 
predictions about the path that regulators and policymakers across the world are likely 
to follow. These predictions are, however, based  on the seeds that regulators  have 
been  planting  in  the  recent  past  (including  through  all  the  reforms  I  have  just 
discussed), highlighting the need for and importance of transitioning to a more robust 
and reliable interest rate dispensation.  
 While the transition to alternative interest rate benchmarks is still somewhat uncertain, 
given how resolute regulators and policymakers are about the need for reform, and 
considering the steps they have already taken to give effect to that, I can comfortably 
predict that the future of a new or reformed set of benchmarks will come soon enough. 
It is worth reflecting on some of the transitioning issues being faced in the reform of 
Libor. 
 It is understood that Libor is mostly entrenched in derivative markets. The ARRC has 
estimated  that  about  95%  of  the  US  dollar  Libor  market  footprint  in  the  US  is  in 
derivatives,  both  over-the-counter  and exchange-traded. The OSSG,  which  has  co-
opted the services of the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) on 
how  to  deal  with  the  risks  associated  with  the  discontinuation  of  the major  Ibors,  is 
expected to provide some guidance on transitioning.  
  Page 4 of 13 
This  transition issue  is now officially the third major initiative of the OSSG, which is 
aimed  at  improving  contract  robustness  to  address  the  risks  of  Libor  being 
discontinued among the list of widely referenced interest rate benchmarks. Already in 
July 2018, ISDA launched a market-wide consultation on certain aspects of fall-backs 
for the derivatives referencing these major Ibors. The subject of the consultation was 
options for adjustments that would become applicable in the event  of an Ibor being 
permanently discontinued.3  
 For  those  market  participants  that  have  large  exposures  to  Libor,  there  is  a 
considerable amount of work to be done – even more so in instances where existing 
Libor exposures have maturities beyond 2021. The very first area of contention is the 
potential risk of value transfer from one party to another given the differences between 
the currently referenced Ibors and their respective alternatives. If alternative reference 
rates differ markedly from Libor or other reference rates which they seek to replace, a 
mere adjustment for that spread is unlikely to be sufficient, particularly because, from 
a behavioural point of view, secured and unsecured interest rates do not necessarily 
exhibit similar trends in times of market stress.       
 The year 2021 – the date towards which market participants seem to be converging in 
marking  the  end  of  Libor  –  may  seem  like  a  distant  future,  but  the  amount  of 
preparatory work to be done leading up to that time will make it seem sooner than it 
seems  at  the  moment.  It  is  therefore  important  to  start  preparing  now.  For  new 
contracts that are being written with maturity dates beyond 2021, careful consideration 
must be given to how these contracts are designed. To allow for contract robustness, 
participants  must  already  build  in  provisions  that  allow  for  a  relatively  easier 
adjustment to a fall-back arrangement.  
 All  this  pertains  to  preparing  for  a  somewhat  predictable  future.  But  there  is  also  a 
need to prepare for the unpredictable future. In this regard, there remain a number of 
unanswered questions. The first is whether market participants will migrate to a single 
rate, given all the differences between the existing Ibors and their alternatives. As is 
well understood, the preferred alternative rates in most jurisdictions are either risk-free 
or near-risk-free, and most of them are overnight rates.  
                                                           
3 See https://www.isda.org/2018/07/12/isda-publishes-consultation-on-benchmark-fallbacks/.  
 Page 5 of 13 
Barclays  points  out  in  a  research  report  recently  published  that  ‘there  are  key 
differences between instruments linked to Ibors and overnight risk-free rates in terms 
of market convention and operation. […] These differences are a major impediment to 
seamless adoption and in facilitating a smooth transition to risk-free rates’.4  
 Secondly,  the  transition  is  not  expected  to  take  place  at  the  same  time  –  some 
jurisdictions will probably move ahead of others.  
 Thirdly, Intercontinental Exchange Benchmarks Administration (IBA) has also moved 
to  evolve  its  Libor  determination  process  to  make  it  more  compliant  with  the 
international  standard  for  financial  benchmarks.  The  IBA’s  evolution  of  its  Libor 
determination  process  could  mean  that  the  ICE  Libor  becomes  an  alternative 
reference rate.  
 All  this  points  to  a  complicated  transition  process  that  will  require  infrastructure 
providers and benchmark administrators to change processes and, in some instances, 
run  parallel  processes.  Risk  management  practitioners  will  also  have  to  carefully 
manage  all  the  risks  associated  with  the  transition.  Preparations  for  the  upcoming 
changes should become prominent features of management discussions, leading to 
the  development  of  strategies  on  how  to  manage  their  respective  institutions  and 
customers  through  this  transition.  Given  that  there  is  also  a  risk  of  value  transfer, 
communicating transition plans and strategies, and negotiating with affected parties, 
will be of utmost importance.  
 My comments thus far referred to the work that needs to be done by both local and 
international market participants in respect of Libor, much of which will at some point 
be applicable to the transition that we envision also taking place in South Africa. Let 
me now turn to what we are doing and how we are thinking about the design of interest 
rate benchmarks in South Africa.  
                                                               
4 Barclays, ‘Beyond Ibors: the next generation’, Barclays Interest Rate Research, 14 September 2018  
 Page 6 of 13 
Interest rate benchmark reform initiatives in South Africa  
 On 30th August 2018 the SARB published a consultation paper on selected interest 
rate  benchmarks  in  South  Africa,  which  is  currently  out  for  public  comment.  The 
consultation  paper  represents  a  culmination  of  various  initiatives,  both  local  and 
international, aimed at strengthening the credibility and robustness of key interest rate 
benchmarks. In the context of what was happening globally, and as part of the normal 
governance arrangements in the SARB, various collaborative initiatives between the 
SARB and other local financial market participants were undertaken in recent years to 
establish  the  extent  to  which  South  Africa’s  main  overnight  and  term  interest  rate 
benchmarks remain accurate, reliable, and representative of the economic realities of 
the underlying interest they measure.  
 In  the  past  two  years,  these  reviews  focused  on  the  most  widely  used  three-month 
Johannesburg Interbank Average Rate (Jibar), which the SARB has estimated is used 
as  a  reference  for  over  R40  trillion  worth  of  rand-denominated  financial  contracts.5 
This, along with the reliance on Jibar as a key input used to determine the Short-Term 
Fixed  Interest  (STeFI)  Index,  has  highlighted  to  us  the  extent  to  which  Jibar  is 
entrenched  in  the  domestic  money  market.  Given  its  systemic  importance as a  key 
reference interest rate, the SARB has decided there is a need for a fundamental review 
of Jibar, especially after the reviews conducted between 2015 and 2017 found that:  
  (i) 
There  is  an  increasing  volume  mismatch  between  the  transaction  universe 
upon which Jibar is based and the total book of financial assets and liabilities 
that reset against the rate.  
(ii) 
Jibar is, in fact, not representative of the cost of funding for banks.  
(iii) 
Insofar as the global standard for financial benchmarks is concerned, Jibar is 
not based on actual traded prices. 
The  reviews  also  focused  on  the  overnight  interest  rate  benchmark:  Sabor6.  With 
Sabor, we were concerned about the representativeness of the rate as a measure of 
overnight unsecured funding costs for banks.  
                                                           
5 This finding is based on the results of a data collection exercise conducted by the SARB and refers 
to the notional value of outstanding contracts of selected banks as at 31 August 2017.  
6 South African Benchmark Overnight Rate 
 Page 7 of 13 
The  SARB’s  research  included  consultations  across  different  types  of  market 
participants, seeking to gauge their stance on the problems identified  as well as on 
how  these  shortcomings  could be  addressed. While  market  participants  recognised 
and acknowledged the shortcomings with Jibar and Sabor, and the former’s inherent 
vulnerability  to  manipulation,  there  was  general  consensus  that 
the  current 
governance arrangements limited the scope for untoward behaviour. Notwithstanding 
this position, the SARB still felt it was appropriate to reconsider the design of  these 
benchmarks,  and  thus  published  a  consultation  paper  with  proposals  for  their 
redesign. As you may have seen, the consultation paper went further: proposing the 
adoption of additional benchmarks to enable market participants to have choices of 
different reference rates that are fit for purpose.  
 In formulating these proposals, we considered all the findings I just mentioned relating 
to  Jibar  and  Sabor.  Furthermore  –  in  line  with  our  endorsement  of  the  coordinated 
efforts by global regulators and central banks to ensure that interest rates are credible, 
accurate, and trusted by consumers and financial market participants – we also sought 
to align our proposals to the objectives of the IOSCO principles as well as European 
Union (EU) benchmark regulations.  
 I will first deal with the reform proposals contained in the consultation paper, then the 
thinking  around  the  multiple-rate  approach, before  concluding  with  remarks  on  why 
this is important for financial policy.  
 Reform proposals  
 The  reform  proposals  for  Jibar  and  Sabor  seek  to  anchor  both  benchmarks  to  a 
broader  universe  of  transactions  while  also  adapting  the  respective  calculation 
methodologies to make them more robust.   
With respect to Sabor, it is recommended that: 
  Sabor be reformed to a Sabor Money Market, which will reflect a broader range 
of overnight unsecured wholesale rand deposits with all domestic banks. 
 The proposed Sabor Money Market would include interbank deposit funding raised at 
the prevailing repo rate, but exclude all rand funding raised in the  foreign exchange 
swap market.  
 Page 8 of 13 
Within the universe of overnight deposits, it is proposed that all corporate call deposits 
of  R20  million  and  larger  be  included  in  the  benchmark  calculation  instead  of  just 
focusing on the top 20 corporate deposits. It is also proposed that the transactions of 
all banks be included rather than just the five largest banks, as is currently the practice.  
 With respect to Jibar, it is recommended that: 
 the current Jibar calculation methodology be phased out and replaced with a 
transaction-based rate, comprising a combination of negotiable certificates of 
deposit (NCDs) and non-bank financial corporate deposits; and 
 the current Jibar calculation methodology be changed such that  the reformed 
Jibar  is  measured  as  a  volume-weighted  average  rate  of  all  the  eligible 
transactions,  to  make  the  rate  less  sensitive  to  erroneous  or  potentially 
manipulative trades.  
 While  we  acknowledge  the  differences  between  NCDs  and  deposits,  both  from  a 
regulatory treatment point of view and, consequently, from a pricing point of view, the 
‘hybrid’  approach  to  derive  Jibar  is  recommended  as  a  viable  improvement  for  the 
current Jibar. At a fundamental level, it is unsustainable that at least R40 trillion worth 
of financial  contracts are  priced off a  three-month  reference  rate derived  from daily 
indicative prices of a market that, on average, is underpinned by only R66 million worth 
of transactions.  
 In addition to such thin volumes, an analysis conducted at the SARB has found that, 
between July 2015 and June 2017, no actual eligible NCD transactions took place on 
almost 90% of the days. The lack in frequency of actual transactions makes the current 
methodology severely problematic – and makes its reform imperative. 
 The multiple-rate approach 
 The  SARB’s  reform  agenda  also  sought  to  promote  the  multiple-rate  approach,  in 
which multiple secured and unsecured interest rate benchmarks are developed and 
coexist to enable market participants to have choices that are fit for purpose. Where 
such  multiple  rates  exists  and  are  deemed  credible,  it  is  envisioned  that  this  will 
encourage  market  participants  to  move  away  from  the  current  practice  where 
derivative contracts reference risk-inclusive benchmarks (i.e. Jibar in South Africa) to 
 Page 9 of 13 
one where they reference an RFR. We regard a credit-based interest rate benchmark 
as appropriate for typical credit products, as it provides a hedge against any adverse 
changes in the credit risk embedded in the underlying instrument. However, for other 
purposes, especially derivative contracts, an alternative reference rate that is closer 
to being risk-free may be more appropriate. 
 In the consultation paper, the SARB has also set out a road map for a transition from 
the  current  reference  interest  rate  dispensation  to  an  environment  that  comprises 
multiple  rates.  To  give  effect  to  this  arrangement,  the  SARB  has  proposed  the 
following:  
  A  term  deposit  benchmark,  comprising  all  deposit  categories,  should  be 
introduced. Market participants would have a choice between this benchmark 
and the reformed Jibar for use as a reference rate for credit products.  
  For  derivative  contracts,  there  are  various  options.  For  the  overnight  tenor, 
there  would  be  an  option  to  use  a  government  bond  (GB)  repo  rate  as  a 
reference or, alternatively, a secured financing rate derived from the GB repo 
market  as  well  as  supplementary  repos  conducted  with  the  central  bank. 
Another alternative  would  be  to use a  composite  interbank overnight  deposit 
rate, to be referred to as the South African Interbank Offered Rate (ZARibor), 
which could be considered for designation as a near-risk-free  rate subject to 
predefined credit and liquidity risk characteristics.   
 The  development  of,  and  transition  to,  credible  interest  rate  benchmarks  may  take 
some  time,  mainly  due  to  the  structural  impediments  and  liquidity  conditions  in  the 
markets where we intend to derive these benchmarks. The SARB has established a 
joint  private-  and  public-sector  body,  the  Market  Practitioners  Group  (MPG),  to 
manage  this  process.  The  MPG  will  also  facilitate  decisions  on  the  choice  of  the 
interest  rate  benchmark  to  be  used  as  references,  and  will  advise  on  issues  of 
transition  and  the  operationalisation  of  final  proposals.  As  you  can  imagine,  and 
considering  my  earlier  remarks,  dealing  with  transitioning  issues  is  going  to  be  a 
mammoth task and, as is the case with our international peers, an unknown future that 
I cannot predict with absolute certainty.  
   Page 10 of 13 
The  relevance  of  interest  rate  benchmarks  for  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability 
 Why is all this important for policymakers?  
 The  essence  of  it  is  this:  insofar  as  it  serves  as  a  reference  for  a  large  number  of 
contracts,  any  short-term  benchmark  rate  plays  a  key  role  in  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy decisions to the cost of (and remuneration of) capital in the broader 
economy.  To  the  extent  that  short-term  rates  assist  with  the  timely  and  accurate 
measurement  of  financial  risk,  they  also  play  a  crucial  role  in  maintaining  financial 
stability. Both of these speak directly to the mandate of the SARB, which is to achieve 
and  maintain  price  stability  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic 
growth in South Africa while, together with other institutions, playing a pivotal role in 
ensuring financial stability. 
 To  a  large  degree,  the  extent  to  which  Jibar  is  entrenched  in  the  domestic  money 
market  makes  the  rate  an  important  aspect  of  monetary  policy  transmission.  The 
money market is one of the main conduits through which changes in the policy rate 
are transmitted to the economy and, ultimately, inflation.  
 In some instances, the approach to monetary policy implementation has shifted away 
from a classical cash reserve system to a framework where a target is set for short-
term  unsecured  overnight  interest  rates.  In  such  cases,  effective  monetary  policy 
implementation is measured by the central bank’s ability to keep market rates aligned 
to the operational target. If there is no transparency, measuring the effectiveness of 
policy becomes rather challenging.  
 Operating targets thus provide guidance to the implementation of monetary policy on 
how  and  when  to  conduct  their  open-market  operations.  In  policy  frameworks  that 
target the price of money, open-market operations are conducted when overnight rates 
diverge from the operating target. As long as such open-market instruments are easy 
to  implement and  effective,  and  as  long  as  the  central  bank’s  target  is  made  clear, 
there  should  only  be  limited,  short-lived  deviations  of  the  overnight  rates  from  the 
target, as is the case for the US federal funds rate.    
  Page 11 of 13 
Developing  multiple  rates  and  improving  the  existing  set  of  benchmarks  also  has 
benefits  for  financial  stability  policy  decisions.  It  is  our  view  that,  where  such 
benchmarks provide a more accurate reflection of the interest they measure across 
the  term  structure,  they  can  enhance  existing  frameworks  for  systemic  risk 
identification and monitoring.  
 An important aspect of our assessment of financial stability risks at the SARB focuses 
on monitoring both time-varying risks and cross-sectional risks at any point in time. In 
both instances, we monitor risk factors that could amplify or propagate the levels of 
vulnerability in the financial system as a whole, or in individual financial entities. This 
assessment  depends  on  reliable  and  efficient  measures  of  credit  and  market  risk, 
some of which depend on  benchmark rates that measure the cost of funding in the 
financial markets. 
 For  cross-sectional  risk,  our financial  stability  analysis  also  considers,  among  other 
things,  the  network  structure  of  the  South  African  overnight  interbank  market,  by 
employing measures from network theory as well as the Network Systemic Importance 
Index (NSII) that assess the systemic importance of individual banks in South Africa. 
The  NSII  measures  each  bank’s  size,  interconnectedness,  and  substitutability  by 
employing  network  theory.  We  believe  that  the  development  of  interest  rate 
benchmarks  such  as  the  ZARibor,  which  provide  a  clearer  picture  of  an  otherwise 
opaque  overnight  interbank  market,  will  assist  us  further  in  understanding  the 
interconnections in this segment of the market and the risks embedded therein.  
 Concluding remarks 
 In conclusion, I think it is clear that the transition to new interest rate benchmarks is 
still uncertain, but the process has started to develop transition plans. While the timing 
of  implementation  might  be  uncertain,  and  while  the  plans  might  be  fraught  with 
complications,  benchmark  regulators  are  unlikely  to  reverse  the  decision  to  reform 
rates. It is therefore in the interest of all stakeholders to start positioning themselves 
for  a  new  interest  rate  benchmark  dispensation  instead  of  adopting  a  wait-and-see 
approach.  
  Page 12 of 13 
While the transmission of monetary policy is effective in South Africa, as policymakers 
we  also  care  about  enhancing  the  credibility  and  transparency  of  money  market 
interest  rates  because  that  offers  us  an  opportunity  to  have  greater  clarity  on  the 
dynamics  of  the  transmission  mechanism.  In  the  context  of  monetary  policy 
frameworks  that  target  short-term  unsecured  interest  rates,  the  sooner  we  embed 
these new interest rate benchmarks, the sooner the effectiveness of those price-based 
frameworks can be enhanced. Interest rate benchmarks are also relevant for financial 
stability policy, including through effective risk sharing and transfer when risk can be 
measured more clearly.     
 We believe that, with the assistance of the private sector through the MPG, we will be 
able  to  create  a  more  robust  financial  market  structure  that  will  not  only  reduce 
systemic risk, but also add to transparency and allow for more efficient implementation 
of monetary policy. 
 Thank you.  
 Page 13 of 13 
