CURAÇAO FINANCIAL SECTOR: 
READY FOR 2019 AND BEYOND √ 
Speech delivered by 
Mrs. L. Matroos-Lasten 
Acting President 
Centrale Bank van Curaçao en Sint Maarten 
   On the occasion of the information session on 
Replacing the old Off-shore; Embracing the new Reality 
   Centrale Bank van Curaçao en Sint Maarten 
October 25, 2018 
1 
        Your Excellency: 
The Prime Minister of Curaçao, Mr. Eugene Rhuggenaath 
The Minister of Finance of Curaçao, Mr. Kenneth Gijsbertha 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
 
There is a tendency to assume that stimulating growth and the strengthening of specific economic 
pillars is the sole responsibility of the government. However, as we have been recently experiencing 
in  Curaçao,  initiatives  jointly  undertaken  by  all  key  stakeholders  are  crucial  to  achieve  the  desired 
development and growth of an industry and/or an economic sector. While the private sector knows 
best  the  trends  and  needs,  the  role  of  the  public  sector  is  to  create  and  safeguard  the  right 
investment  climate  and  regulatory  framework  for  businesses  to  operate,  grow,  and  attract  direct 
investment. The collective actions of the public and private sectors will certainly lead to sustainable 
economic growth and progress.  
 For that reason, the Centrale Bank van Curaçao en Sint Maarten, supports the initiatives and actions that 
CIFA  and  other  stakeholders  have  been  taking  in  due  preparation  of  replacing  the  old  offshore 
regime  in  favor  of  a  new  and  more  transparent  (fiscal)  framework,  set  to  take  effect  in  2019.  The 
theme of this information session, “Curaçao Financial Sector, Ready for 2019 and beyond” is fitting, given 
the developments in the international financial services industry.  
 Today, I would like to discuss the potential role of the Central Bank in this new reality starting 2019, 
but first, I would like to provide a short overview of the long history  of Curaçao as a provider of 
international  financial  services  and  the  international  context  in  which  we  have  been  and  are  now 
operating.  
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  international  financial  services  activities  in  Curaçao  date  back  to  the  late 
1930s. Although other countries in the region  provided advantages such  as being zero-tax havens, 
many  companies  ultimately  chose  Curaçao  as  the  location  to  establish  their  business  activities 
because  of  its  political  and  economic  stability,  freedom  of  capital  movements,  the  availability  of  a 
skilled  labor-force,  convenient  location  and  communications,  and  the  presence  of  related  services 
2 
 including banking, legal, tax advisory, and audit. In addition, being part of the Dutch Kingdom was 
also an important advantage for establishing international financial services activities in Curaçao. 
 However,  the  prosperity  of  the  international  financial  services  sector  came  to  a  halt  with  the 
termination  of  the  Tax  Treaty  with  the  United  States,  and  the  abolishment  of  the  US  Foreign 
Withholding  Tax  in  1985.  Over  the  past  two  decades,  the  sector  was  also  negatively  affected  by 
other  developments,  such  as  the  negative  connotation  of  offshore  tax  planning  and  increased 
bundling  as  tax-haven  region.  Furthermore,  we  have  in  the  past  failed  to  adapt  quickly  to  market 
conditions,  and  to  be  innovative  in  terms  of  introduction  of  new  products  to  increase  the 
attractiveness and competitiveness of our jurisdiction.  
 Notwithstanding  the  gradual  decline  over  the  decades,  the  international  financial  services  sector  is 
still an important pillar of our economy as it directly contributes approximately 6 percent to GDP, 
and  is  an  important  generator  of  high-skilled  jobs.  Furthermore,  over  the  past  years,  the  sector 
contributed  on  average  approximately  6  percent  to  foreign  exchange  receipts  from  the  export  of 
primarily  services.  Besides  its  direct  contribution,  the  international  financial  services  industry  also 
has  positive  spillover  effects  to  other  related  industries,  including  telecommunication  services, 
transportation services and hospitality services.  
 Curaçao has taken several measures to meet international standards over the past years. One of the 
main  measures  taken,  reason  for  which  we  are  here  today,  was  the  enactment  of  a  New  Fiscal 
Regime  to  be  in  full  compliance  with  the  policies  of  the  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation 
and  Development  (OECD)  for  fair  tax  practices.  The  New  Fiscal  Framework  became  effective  in 
2002, and aimed to eliminate the difference between offshore and onshore designations. The New 
Fiscal  Framework  also  stipulated  that  international  companies  established  before  2002  were 
subjected to a special tax treaty until the year 2019. This transitional special treatment, also referred 
to  as  the  grandfathering  rule,  ensured  the  orderly  and  smooth  transition  from  the  old  offshore 
regime to the new fiscal regime. This grandfathering period, which will remain applicable until 2019, 
represents  the  old,  and  as  we  are  entering  the  twilight  stage  of  the  grandfathering  period,  we  are 
preparing to welcome new opportunities on the horizon. 
 3 
Ladies and Gentlemen, when we thought that we have seen it all, we are now witnessing the rapid 
development  of  a  global  digital  economy.  These  innovative  changes  are  shaking  global  financial 
services  and  service  providers  to  their  core.  We  all  know  the  benefits  that  disruptive  technologies 
and  innovation  can  bring  to  consumers  and  our  economy  in  terms  of  opening  accessibility  to  a 
larger part of the global population to local providers of services. The current innovation revolution 
offers an opportunity for Curaçao to again take the pioneering lead in shaping the future of regional 
and  global  financial  services  provision.  I  cannot  stress  enough  the  importance  of  our  need  to 
become adaptable and agile to keep our markets efficient, fair, and attractive in an ever-evolving and 
innovative environment.  
Today I want to touch upon the role of the Central Bank in promoting our jurisdictional readiness 
and embracing the new reality.  
 The  Central  Bank  is  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  the  financial  sector  of  Curaçao  and  Sint 
Maarten, and is not exempted of the responsibility of ensuring integrity, continuity, and resilience of 
our markets. In our aim to preserve and foster  the reputation of Curaçao  as a sound, transparent, 
and  reputable  financial  center,  whilst  taking  advantage  of  the  changing  landscape,  we  worked  to 
achieve institutional agility and adaptability needed to usher our financial sector into this new era.  
 While  we  believe  that  there  is  no  substitute  for  good  regulation,  we  are  also  aware  that 
overregulation  will  impair  the  ability  of  our  jurisdiction  to  maintain  a  competitive  position  as  an 
international  financial  center.  Therefore,  a  proper  balance  must  be  reached  between  the  adequacy 
and  effectiveness  of  rules  and  regulations,  and  the  underlying  risks  that  our  financial  sector  is 
exposed to. Our efforts are directed towards complying with the international standards, but keenly 
taking advantage of the now presenting opportunities.   
We have successfully and positively been assessed by the major standard-setting bodies over the past 
years  such  as  the  OECD,  the  IMF,  the  World  Bank,  and  the  (C)FATF,  and  subsequently, 
implemented  their  recommendations.  Although  complying  with  international  standards  and 
principles is a major achievement, we now need to turn our attention to capitalize on our enhanced 
transparency  as  a  jurisdiction.    The  collusion  of  our  transition  to  a  new  fiscal  framework  with  the 
current innovation developments is just what we need as a jurisdiction.  
4 
 Although the Central Bank is not a regulator for technology driven institutions, innovation is rapidly 
affecting  and  changing  our  regulatory  landscape  as  well.  Financial  Technology  or  FinTech  is  now 
driving the financial business narrative in a way that regulators are now scrambling to determine how 
to regulate highly technological institutions and technology driven products.  
The Central Bank has recently installed an innovation committee to explore the possibility to present 
Curaçao as the natural alternative for innovation-driven business. Regulatory innovation is not only 
a theoretical concept, but rather a necessity that the Central Bank is determined to explore. Curaçao 
has all the pre-requisites and the mindset to take the driver’s seat in this area, we now need to start 
the engine of the new, and all hop in to new heights in the international service provision.  
In conclusion, Curaçao has traditionally been an attractive international financial services center, as 
we have always offered the advantages of compliance and optimal service. Therefore, I am confident 
to state that Curaçao can look forward to a promising 2019 and beyond. The Central Bank, as the 
supervisor  of  the  financial  services  industry,  is  open  for  business  as  we  tailor  our  regulatory 
framework to become a 21st century regulator, while meeting international standards to protect the 
interests of the international clients of our financial services industry.  Together we should strive to 
continuously  explore  new  opportunities  and  develop  appealing  products, and  henceforth, we  need 
to keep re-inventing our entrepreneurial creativity.      
A final note. I was pleasantly surprised when I saw the check mark (√) and not the question mark 
(?)  in  the  title:  “Curaçao  Financial  Center:  Ready  for  2019  and  beyond..”.  Because  I  do  share  the 
sentiment that we are ready for the future and that together, we will be better beyond 2019. 
I thank you for your attention.  
 5 
