  Remarks by Ms Caroline Abel 
Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles at the  
Opening of the CBS 40th Anniversary Exhibition 
7 November 2018 
Venue: International Conference Centre of Seychelles 
 
 
President of the Court of Appeal 
Principal Secretaries 
Board  Members,  Management  and  Staff  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Seychelles, 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Good  morning. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all  here  today,  on  behalf  of  the 
Central  Bank  of  Seychelles,  to  the  opening  of  this  exhibition  being  held  in 
commemoration  of  the  40th  Anniversary  of  the  establishment  of  a  central 
banking  institution  in Seychelles. 
 The  Seychelles  Monetary  Authority,  the  precursor  to  the  Central  Bank  of 
Seychelles,  was  established  a  mere  two  years  after  Seychelles  gained  its 
independence.   This  was  the ultimate  act that  validated  us as a sovereign  state, 
with  the  ability  to  issue  currency,  manage  our  reserves,  inspect  banks  and 
financial  institutions  and perhaps  most  importantly,  set our own  monetary  policy 
objectives. 
Fast  forward  forty  years, and  we  are  proud  to  say  that  we  have  achieved  a lot 
in  a  relatively  short  space  of  time.    Through  various  technical  assistance, 
capacity  building  exercises  and  exchanges  with  other  central  banks  in  the 
region,  the  Central  Bank  of  Seychelles  has  evolved 
into  a  well-respec ted 
institution,  both  at  home  and  abroad.    One  notable  achievement 
is  that 
Seychelles  is the  most  financially  included  country  in the  SADC  region,  based 
on  a study  conducted  in 2016.   This  means  that  our  financial  system  is on  the 
right path  to ensure  that  all individuals  and businesses  have  access to financial 
services  and  products  that  are affordable  and  that  meets  their specific needs.  
 On  the  flip side  of the  coin, we  face many  challenges,  some  of which  emanate 
from  within  our  organisation,  while  others  are  unavoidable  consequences  of 
factors on the global  market,  to which our island  economy  is acutely susceptible.   
However,  as  a  central  bank,  we  cannot  allow  ourselves  to  fall  in  the  face  of 
these  adversities,  but  rather,  we  strive 
to 
turn 
those  challenges 
into 
opportunities  for positive  change. 
 One  of the  biggest  challenges  that  we’ve  had  to  face during  the  four decades 
of our existence,  was  the global  financial  crisis of 2008.   Our  debt-to-GDP  ratio 
was  at  151.3%  in  September  of  that  year  and  our  external  reserves  had 
depleted  to  below  one  month  of imports  as at  October  2008.   The  country  then 
embarked  on a macroeconomic  programme  with  the  support  of the  IMF and  as 
the  saying goes,  the  rest  is history.  In a mere  ten  years, we  have  steered  clear 
of that  crisis and have  become  one of the success  stories  not only in our region, 
but  in  the  world.    Nevertheless,  we  do  not  allow  ourselves 
to  become 
complacent,  as  the  post-crisis  era  in which  we  currently  find ourselves,  has  its 
own  set  of challenges  that  we  need  to deal  with. 
 The  title  of  our  40th  Anniversary  Exhibition,  “A  modern  Central  Bank  with  a 
Focus  on Financial  Empowerment”,  speaks  to  the  new  challenges  that  we  are 
tackling.   While  our  objective  to  promote  domestic  price stability,  our vision  to 
become  a  model  Central  Bank  and  our  mission  to  contribute  towards  the 
economic  growth  and  development  of  Seychelles,  all  remain  unchanged,  we 
are keenly  aware  that  we need  to constantly  evolve  to meet  public  expectati ons 
and  to  keep  abreast  with  innovation  in  the  financial  sector.    It  is  of  utmost 
importance  that  as  a  Central  Bank,  we  modernize  the  way  we  deliver  our 
mandate  and  ensure  that  we  provide  the  public  with  the  capacity to understand 
the  newer  products  and  services  that  are  at  their  disposal,  to  enable  them  to 
make  informed  decisions. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen, 
 Innovation  and the  introduction  of newer  products  alone  can only take  us so far.  
What  has  enabled  the  success  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Seychelles  is  the  hard 
work,  conviction  and  dedication  of  its  staff.    Today,  we  have  200  men  and 
women  who  work  tirelessly  around  the  clock  to  ensure  the  stability  of  our 
financial  sector.   I would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  each  and  every 
one  of  these  200  individuals,  as  well  as  the  former  Governors  and  staff 
members  for  their  contribution  to  the  development  and  growth  of  the  Central 
Bank  of  Seychelles.    The  display  in  today’s  exhibition  is  a  testament  to  the 
achievements  of  all  those  who  have  had  the  privilege  to  walk  the  halls  of  the 
Central  Bank  building.   It also  showcases  the evolution  of the  Central  Bank over 
the  past  40  years and  indicates  of the  path  that  we  aim  to  follow  in the  coming 
decades. 
 On  this  note,  I would  like  to  officially  declare  this exhibition  open  and  invite  you 
all  to  peruse  through  the  contents  and  interact  with  our  member s  of  staff  who 
are on hand  to  respond  to any queries  that  you may  have. 
 Thank  you. 
