 October  16,  2018 
Bank  of 
Japan 
 
 Globalization and Monetary Policy 
Panelist Speech at BIS Symposium to Mark the 20th Anniversary 
of the BIS Representative Office for Asia and the Pacific 
(Hong Kong, October 15, 2018) 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
First of all, I would like to extend my sincere congratulations to General Manager Carstens, 
Dr. Remolona, Chief Representative for Asia and the Pacific, and other staff members of the 
BIS  Asian  Office  on  the  Office's  20th  anniversary.  Over  the  past  twenty  years,  the  Asian 
economies have experienced significant changes, particularly improvements in resilience to 
external shocks. The BIS Asian Office has played an important role in these improvements, 
including by enhancing cooperation among central banks in the region. I will touch upon the 
importance of regional cooperation in promoting global monetary and financial stability later, 
but  let  me  first  discuss  price  and  financial  stability  within  individual  economies  under 
globalization. 
 How has globalization affected price and financial stability? As we saw in the global financial 
crisis  a  decade  ago,  and  in  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  about  two  decades  ago,  global  or 
regional financial integration did affect domestic financial stability in many countries. While 
financial  integration  facilitates  consumption  smoothing  and  diversification  of  risks  across 
countries, large and volatile capital flows carry risks for global financial stability. Compared 
with the effects on financial stability, what is less evident is how globalization has affected 
price stability. Since BIS economists, about a decade ago, proposed the hypothesis that the 
factors influencing domestic inflation have become increasingly global,1 this hypothesis has 
attracted considerable attention. A large body of empirical studies have examined whether, 
and to what extent, global factors such as global economic slack and global competition have 
affected  domestic  inflation  dynamics,  and  whether  their  roles  have  increased  with  global 
economic integration. The evidence so far, however, still seems to be inconclusive. 
 There could be several channels through which globalization affects domestic inflation. Most 
obviously,  movements  in  import  prices  directly  affect  consumer  prices.  Moreover,  some 
global  factors  such  as 
international  competition  pressure  and  cross-border  price 
differentiation  of  multinational  corporations  could  affect  domestic  prices  without  actual 
import flows. These channels may be captured by the global output gap and global markup of 
price over cost as additional explanatory variables in the standard Phillips curve equation, in 
addition to import prices. More recently, BIS economists have demonstrated that the growing 
                                                        
1 Borio,  C.  and  A.  Filardo  (2007)  "Globalisation  and  inflation:  new  cross-country  evidence  on  the 
global determinants of domestic inflation," BIS Working Papers, 227. 
 1 
importance of global value chains might be key to explaining the influence of global factors 
on domestic inflation.2 The significance of these global factors has continued to be examined 
empirically. 
 For a better understanding of the role of these global factors in domestic inflation, I would 
like to make three points here. First, there are substantial differences between countries as to 
how much and through which channels globalization affects domestic inflation, depending on 
the country's size, income level, trade openness, and so on. For instance, Japan is a large and 
advanced  economy  but  has  already  been  deeply  integrated  into  global  and  regional  value 
chains,  including  with  emerging  economies.  Its  domestic  output  gap  considerably  reflects 
foreign market conditions through net exports. Under these conditions, the additional impact 
of increased competition pressure from emerging economies on domestic inflation may be 
limited or hard to identify in the estimation of a Phillips curve equation.  
 Second, various aspects of globalization, such as trade, competition, and value chains, may 
affect  domestic  inflation  in  different  directions.  While  increased  competition  pressure  and 
rising  integration  in  global  value  chains  have  placed  downward  pressure  on  domestic 
inflation, there has been another recent trend toward increasing global market concentration, 
particularly  in  information  and  communication  technology-intensive  service  industries, 
which may pose an upside risk to future inflation through rising markups.3 
 Third, it is important to distinguish the short-term and the long-term effects of globalization 
on inflation. Fluctuations in import prices have only a temporary effect on inflation, and there 
is little empirical evidence that the effect of global factors on the trend component of inflation 
has been increasing over time.4 Inflation trends in many countries have mainly been driven 
by domestic factors, especially long-term inflation expectations. Developments in inflation 
                                                        
2 Auer, R., C. Borio, and A. Filardo (2017) "The globalisation of inflation: the growing importance of 
global value chains," BIS Working Papers, 602. 
3 Andrews, D., P. Gal, and W. Witheridge (2018) "A genie in a bottle? Globalisation, competition, and 
inflation," OECD Economics Department Working Papers, 1462. 
4 Forbes, K. (2018) "Has globalization changed the inflation process?" Paper presented at 17th BIS 
Annual Research Conference on June 22, 2018. 
 2 
expectations  are  influenced  by  the  actual  inflation  at  short  horizons,  but  it  is  generally 
considered that they are eventually determined by some anchor point at longer horizons.  
 This  last  point  leads  to  one  answer  to  the  question  how  monetary  policy  challenges  from 
spillovers  can  be  met.  Better-anchored  inflation  expectations  based  on  clear  and  credible 
communications by a central bank would be one way to deal with the spillover of external 
shocks.  Of  course,  I  understand  more  challenging  situations  faced  by  central  banks  in 
emerging economies that are relatively vulnerable to volatile capital flows and exchange rate 
fluctuations. However, as shown in the IMF's World Economic Outlook, published earlier 
this  month,5 the  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  in  emerging  economies  has  improved 
significantly  over  the  past  two  decades.  It  has  also  been  demonstrated  that  further 
improvement  in  the  extent  of  anchoring  could  strengthen  economic  resilience  to  external 
shocks,  by  reducing  inflation  persistence  and  limiting  the  pass-through  of  currency 
depreciations to domestic prices. Here I would like to briefly mention the case of Thailand, 
which was at the epicenter of the Asian Financial Crisis. After the crisis, Thailand moved to a 
floating  exchange  rate  regime  with  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework.  It  then 
established the legal framework of monetary policy conducted by the Bank of Thailand in an 
independent manner. Overall, it has recorded excellent performance in price stability over the 
past two decades, and in recent years, the Bank of Thailand has been tackling low inflation 
rather than high inflation. 
 Finally, I would like to come back to the issue of regional cooperation, which is another way 
for central banks to deal with the spillover of external shocks. In the East Asia and Pacific 
region,  we  have  many  opportunities  to  discuss  regional  economic  and  financial  market 
developments.  Close  communication  and  cooperation  among  central  banks  through  these 
opportunities would be crucial, especially in crisis times when huge external shocks could 
affect domestic price and financial stability. More specifically, a number of initiatives have 
already been established through regional cooperation to enhance the resilience of regional 
economies against external shocks. The Chiang-Mai Initiative Multilateralization has been 
established as a regional financial safety net for crisis prevention and resolution. In addition, 
                                                        
5 International  Monetary  Fund  (2018)  "Challenges  for  monetary  policy  in  emerging  economies  as 
global financial conditions normalize," Chapter 3, World Economic Outlook, October 2018. 
 3 
efforts  have  been  made  to  develop  local  currency  bond  markets,  which  are  important  to 
eliminate the double mismatches of currency and maturity which exacerbated the debt burden 
at the time of the Asian Financial Crisis. In one such initiative, the Executives' Meeting of 
East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP) set up the Asian Bond Fund (ABF) in 2003, and 
since then the BIS has worked closely together with the EMEAP on this initiative. In sum, 
both  closer  regional  cooperation  and  better  macroeconomic  policy  frameworks  within 
individual economies are important ways to deal with the spillover of external shocks and 
thereby promote global monetary and financial stability. I would like to conclude my remarks 
by once again expressing my appreciation for the role the BIS Asian Office has played over 
the past twenty years, especially in supporting regional cooperation among central banks. 
 Thank you very much for your attention. 
 4 
