John A Rolle: Industry solutions to the withdrawal of correspondent
banking relationships
Opening remarks by Mr John A Rolle, Governor of the Central Bank of The Bahamas, at the Third
Caribbean  Roundtable  on  Industry  Solutions  to  the  Withdrawal  of  Correspondent  Banking
Relationships, Nassau, 29 October 2018.
 Good  morning  all,  and  welcome  to  the Caribbean  Roundtable  on  Industry  Solutions  to  the
Withdrawal  of  Correspondent  Banking  Relationships  (CBRs).  I  would  like  to  extend  a  special
thanks to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for convening these sessions. Events such as
these provide valuable opportunities for stakeholders to engage, share ideas and plan decisive,
actionable steps.
The  February  and  November  2017  Roundtables  in  Barbados  and  Jamaica  brought  together
global  correspondent  and  respondent  banks,  and  other  stakeholders  to  discuss  regional
solutions to CBR withdrawal.
The discussions identified the need to strengthen respondent banks’ risk management capacity,
and  considered  whether  there  was  merit  in  consolidation  of  transactional  traffic  and
reconsideration of some high-risk business lines. Increasingly Fintech is seen as providing some
outlet  for  relief,  including  through  substitution  for  traditional  intermediation  channels.  At  the
regional  level,  consolidation  of  AML/CFT  supervision  and  implementation  of  standardized
AML/CFT regulations were considered as well.
The  CARICOM  Central  Bank  Governors  have  continued  to  explore  their  own  Action  Plan
developed  in  late  2016,  which  acknowledges  the  worth  of  some  ideas  that  emerged  in  the
Roundtable discussions, including effective communications strategies, ongoing data collection
to  inform  policies  and  outreach,  and  broad  domestic  education  to  strengthen  the  culture  of
AML/CFT compliance.
Here in The Bahamas, we have taken a series of steps to lower the risk (both real and perceived)
of  banking.  We  have  revised  a  suite  of  legislation,  including  the  Proceeds  of  Crime Act, Anti-
Terrorism Act,  and  the  Financial  Transactions  Reporting Act  and  associated  Regulations.  In
tandem  with  our  fourth  Mutual  Evaluation  Report,  on AML/CFT  effectiveness  we  revised  our
AML/CFT  guidelines,  and  issued  new  guidance  on  proliferation  financing;  we  have  developed
guidance  on  financial  crime  risk  management,  and  revised  our  customer  due  diligence
requirements  for  on-boarding  of  business.  Working  together,  the  Bahamian  financial  sector
regulators held our first national conference on AML/CFT risks management in September 2018,
to build general stakeholder awareness.
As technical improvements to AML/CFT regimes continue, the impression is that perceptions are
not reforming fast enough. We need to understand why this is the case.
I  should  point  out  too  that  there  are  new  strains  around  access  to  foreign  currency  cash
services,  which  are  being  withdrawn  from  the  limited  channels  that  exists,  in  the  Caribbean,
underscoring  the  often  qualified,  restrictive  nature  of  correspondent  relationships  that  have
survived.
The Financial Stability Board has observed that the corridors for correspondent banking services
are still decreasing on a global basis, with fewer institutions providing the services. The volume
of  transactions  though,  has  not  declined,  pointing  to  the  rising  concentration  risks  posed  to
jurisdictions, such as those in the Caribbean.
While we are encouraged by the promises that Fintech based solutions provide, especially for
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
AML/CFT systems and possibly some of the intermediation hurdles, there are important caveats
such as these two:
First,  the  promised  solutions  further  underline  the  importance  of  making  medium-term
progress on cost effective harmonization, both in legal frameworks and in the practices of
and  standards  that  apply  to  the  information  content  on  the  actors;  and  the  transparent
commercial context to financial flows.
Second,  nothing  in  the  Fintech  space  points  to  outright  elimination  of  the  need  for
correspondent  banks.  Solutions  proffered  in  our  region  do  not  eliminate  the  need  for  net
international settlement in dominant currencies such as the US Dollar.
These two points should suffice in understanding the work that is still ahead of us, even though I
could say much more.
Our  medium-term  progress  therefore  must  always  return  to  how  we  preserve  CBR  access,
even if marginal substitutes are procured.
It is my hope that today’s engagement will cement more progress in these areas, including more
precision on technical assistance to reduce both our perceived and actual risk profiles.
Again, my thanks to the IMF for continuing to facilitate dialogue among all stakeholders.
Welcome.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
