                                                Opening Remarks by Ms Caroline Abel 
                                       Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles 
                                            Visa - Digital Payments Workshop 
                                                          August 16, 2018 
                                                      Venue: Eden Bleu Hotel 
 Mr. Majeed Hujair - Senior Director of the Visa School of Public Policy, 
Invited Guests, 
Workshop Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good morning. 
I  am  delighted  and  honoured  to  welcome  you  to  this  ‘Digital  Payments’  workshop,  to  be 
conducted by our fellow colleague from the Visa School of Public Policy. 
Visa has been a long-standing and  active participant  in  the Seychelles’ economy, providing 
services to our commercial banks, merchants and consumers. It is of utmost importance that 
we  continue  to  build  and  maintain  this  collaboration,  especially  through  Public-Private 
dialogues.  It  is  crucial  for regulators to  work with  the private sector  to  provide an enabling 
environment, and to enhance financial inclusion, through private sector expertise.  
I believe we can all agree that the financial services sector is the lifeblood of any economy. 
Access  to,  but  more  importantly,  the  use  of  financial  services,  helps  to  increase  economic 
opportunities and reduce vulnerabilities. Digital  payment platforms are  essential in enabling 
individuals, families and communities, to contribute towards economic development. 
 1 
Over the past few years, the local financial system has experienced some considerable changes, 
with the introduction of new products and services, bringing about many new opportunities, as 
well as unique challenges. These changes have contributed significantly to shaping the local 
financial environment, in terms of policy actions and has highlighted the need to build capacity 
to effectively respond to the challenges. Coordination and collaboration between all players in 
the financial sector, has proven to be crucial to the formulation of policy actions.  
Digital financial services are playing an increasingly central role in financial inclusion efforts 
in Seychelles. The Central Bank recognises digital payments as a priority, as the shift towards 
digital  payments  can  bring  about  exciting  opportunities  and  contribute  immensely  towards 
digitising the economy.  
The  urge  to  modernise  and  introduce  innovative  digital  financial  services,  as  well  as  the 
willingness to build a financially inclusive society, is shared by many other stakeholders.  
Various  initiatives  have  been  introduced  in  Seychelles,  showcasing  our  interest  in  digital 
financial services, for the betterment of the financial sector, and the country as a whole.  
Some of the key developments and initiatives include: 
  The introduction of a near real-time payment platform - the Seychelles Electronic Funds 
Transfer system (SEFT) 
  The adoption of the International Bank Account Number (IBAN)  
  The introduction of internet banking platforms by our banks  
  The introduction of EMV compliant debit cards 
  The introduction of Mobile Money services by Airtel; 
  Government agencies being equipped with Point of Sale (POS) systems; 
Such initiatives serve to show the willingness of different partners towards the digitising of the 
country’s National Payment System. We continue to encourage others to follow suit. 
This one-day  workshop  on Digital Payments will cover the economic and social benefits of 
electronic  payments,  as  well  as  strategic  considerations  in  developing  an  effective  payment 
system that will facilitate the growth of electronic payments in a country. 
All of you present here today are representing organisations and decision makers, whose roles 
are critical to the successful implementation and management of an effective payment system 
in the country. 
 2 
As I conclude this morning, it is my sincere hope that you will all leave here  with a greater 
understanding of electronic payments, the benefits that it provides, as well as the specific role 
of the various stakeholders in the payments industry. 
Once  again,  it  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  workshop,  and  I  look  forward  to  the 
fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you. 
 3 
