Norman Chan: Crypto-assets and money
Keynote speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at the Treasury Markets Summit 2018 "Crypto-assets and Money", Hong Kong, 21 September
2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 1.  In the past few years, different forms of “crypto-currencies”, notably Bitcoin, have emerged
and  become  a  catchword.    Bitcoin  is  the  number  2  trending  searches  of  global  news
according to Google Trends.  These crypto-assets normally deploy the Distributed Ledger
Technology,  or  DLT,  and  have  a  limited  amount  of  issuance  based  on  “mining”  by
participants.  These crypto-currencies can be transferred between participants through the
internet without a central clearing agent.  There are many trading platforms that allow these
crypto-currencies to be traded.  It has been argued by some people that crypto-currencies
would disrupt or at least seriously challenge the traditional fiat money, especially when some
central  banks  have  been  issuing  enormous  amount  of  fiat  money  through  quantitative
easing.    What  I’ll  do  today  is  to  discuss  this  important  question:  will  crypto-currencies
become an alternative form of money in the future?
2.  To answer this question, it is necessary to start with the basic issue: what is money?  I think
there  is  little  disagreement  amongst  us  that  money  should  have  three  key  attributes  or
functions:
             (a) Medium of exchange: Money must be generally accepted as a means or instrument
of payment to facilitate the sale and purchase of goods and services.
  (b)
Store of value: Money must hold its value over time. For example, precious metals
such as gold and silver have high intrinsic value and they have been used as money
for thousands of years. In modern times, fiat money has no intrinsic value other than
the  fact  that  it  is  the  liability  of  the  issuing  central  bank.  The  track  record  in
maintaining  the  value,  or  purchasing  power,  of  the  fiat  money  varies  considerably
over time and in different jurisdictions. Moreover, balances in commercial banks are
also widely used as money in modern societies.
(c)
Unit of account: This is also an important attribute or function of money. Money must
be accepted as a standard measure of value or price of goods, services, assets,
liabilities, income, expenses, profits and losses, in addition to serving effectively as a
store of value and medium of exchange.
3.  While  these  three  attributes  define  what  money  is,  I  would  like  to  add  the  concept  of
“moneyness”  to  the  formula.    This  concept  is  important  because  over  many  centuries  of
evolution, we have witnessed major shifts in the use of different and new instruments as
“money”.    In  the  last  century  or  so,  there  has  been  explosive  improvement  in  the  ease,
speed, cost and safety of keeping and transferring money.   But there is always a question of
relativity.  There are many commodities, such as diamonds and gold, that command high
value over time and are readily traded in the open market.  These commodities meet partially
the three functions of money, but they score very poorly in the ease and cost of use.  As a
result, these commodities have a low degree of “moneyness” and cannot be regarded as
“currencies”,  other  than  in  exceptional  times,  such  as  wars  or  crises  in  which  the
mainstream “money” is no longer trustworthy or usable. 
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
4.  Now let’s get back to the theme of my remarks: to what extent crypto-currencies can serve
as money and will they become a credible alternative to traditional forms of money?  So it
would be useful to measure them using the benchmarks I have just talked about. 
            (a)
Medium  of  exchange:  Crypto-currencies  are  not  readily  accepted  as  a  medium  of
exchange. Despite sporadic news that appear from time to time, we have seen no
real evidence that crypto-currencies are widely used as a medium of exchange in the
purchase of goods or services in any meaningful scale. While it is true that crypto-
currencies such as Bitcoin have attracted many investors and speculators around
the world who own and trade them, it is very different from such crypto-currencies
being  accepted  as  a  medium  of  exchange. As  a  matter  of  fact,  Bitcoin  is  a  very
inefficient  means  of  payment  for  several  reasons.  First,  as  Bitcoin  operates  in  a
decentralised  network,  each  Bitcoin  transaction  needs  to  be  validated  by  the  so-
called  “miners”,  who  need  to  solve  a  complex  maths  problem  using  specialised
computers. It takes a lot of time and consumes considerable electricity to complete a
transaction.  Currently,  the  average  transaction  time  is  some  20  minutes  per
transaction. During periods of high network traffic, the average transaction time can
take anywhere from 30 minutes to many hours. Transaction fee is also high and can
spike up suddenly from time to time. The average fee per transaction in December
2017  was  US$34.  To  put  the  matter  into  proper  perspective,  electronic  payments,
using either balances kept by commercial banks at central banks or retail payments
using commercial bank balances, typically take a few seconds and cost a fraction of
the transaction fees in Bitcoin transfers.
  (b)
Store of value: Crypto-currencies such as Bitcoin have displayed very high volatility in
value. Crypto-currencies have no intrinsic value and are not backed by any institution
or  body  regarding  its  value  or  purchasing  power.  Their  price  and  thus  value  are
determined solely by the supply and demand forces prevailing at the time, which can
fluctuate sharply depending on the appetite of the participants. It is true that in some
countries,  there  has  been  high  volatility  in  the  value  or  purchasing  power  of  their
money,  too.  However,  one  must  bear  in  mind  that  this  kind  of  volatility  normally
happens in times of crisis or in jurisdictions that have rather bad macroeconomic,
fiscal or monetary discipline. But for Bitcoin and most other crypto-currencies, their
volatility seems to be structural in nature and the market dynamics that determine
their price or value is rather opaque and hard to discern. With such high volatility in
value  and  opaqueness,  it  poses  great  risks  to  the  parties  in  accepting  crypto-
currencies as a store of value or means of exchange for goods and services.
(c) Unit of account: With very high volatility and limited use as a means of payment, it is
hard to envisage how any society could adopt crypto-currencies as a unit of account.
5.  As  far  as  I  can  see,  crypto-currencies  are  not  qualified  to  become  money  based  on  the
analysis mentioned above.  It is not a question of time that they can become more widely
accepted  as  money.    Quite  the  contrary,  the  design  of  these  crypto-currencies,  such  as
Bitcoin,  is  such  that  the  transaction  time  and  costs  would  go  up  if  more  people  use  or
transfer them.  Unlike  other  forms  of  electronic  money  using  central  bank  or  commercial
bank balances, crypto-currencies are not scalable, which undermines its prospect of gaining
“moneyness” over time.  For this reason, I would like to call these “crypto-currencies” as
crypto-assets for the rest of our discussion as they do not qualify to be called “currencies”. 
6.  Having concluded that crypto-assets do not qualify as money or currencies, let me highlight
a couple of challenges that they present to supervisors and policy makers around the world:
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
            (a)
Financial stability risk: The Financial Stability Board (FSB), of which I am a member,
has  recently  presented  its  assessment  to  the  G20  Leaders.  Basically  the  FSB
considers  that  while  crypto-assets  do  not  pose  a  material  risk  to  global  financial
stability at this time, given the relatively small size of this market, vigilant monitoring is
necessary  in  view  of  the  speed  of  developments  and  data  gaps.  The  FSB  has
developed  a  framework,  in  collaboration  with  the  Committee  on  Payments  and
Market 
the
developments in crypto asset markets. Noting that crypto assets raise a host of other
issues  that  I  will  explain  shortly,  the  FSB  also  considers  that  further  international
coordination is warranted.
financial  stability 
implications  of 
Infrastructures, 
to  monitor 
the 
(b)
Illicit activities risk: As many of these crypto-assets are so designed that anonymous
email  accounts  can  be  used  for  trading  and  transfers  without  a  central  clearing
agent, they effectively bypass the existing regime in combatting money laundering,
terrorist financing and other illicit activities. The ease with which crypto-assets can be
transferred across national borders has made it even more attractive to criminals in
laundering their proceeds and income. For the banks and other regulated financial
institutions,  it  is  proving  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  them  to  comply  with  the
statutory  or  supervisory  requirements  in  respect  of  know-your-customer  (KYC)  or
ascertaining the source of funds. This was why the HKMA issued a circular in 2014
to banks in Hong Kong advising them to be mindful of the need to comply with all
relevant  KYC  and  anti-money  laundering  (AML)  requirements  in  their  dealings  with
crypto-assets.
(c)
Investor protection or market integrity: As most of these crypto-assets are traded in
unregulated  platforms,  usually  via  the  internet,  there  are  significant  gaps  in  data
collection  and  investor  protection.  Crypto-asset  markets  are  therefore  prone  to
market manipulation, such as spoofing or flooding the market with fake orders to trick
others into buying or selling. Moreover, the security or integrity of some of the trading
platforms  is  also  in  doubt  given  the  number  of  cyber  incidents  that  have  led  to
significant losses of the investors.
  7.  Having said all the above, I wish to conclude by making the following points:
            (a)
Crypto-assets are not money or currencies. So people wishing to invest or speculate
in crypto-assets should do so without harbouring the unrealistic expectation that they
would  one  day  become  money  or  currencies  that  can  be  used  as  a  means  of
exchange.
  (b)
Central  banks  must  take  extra  care  in  making  sure  that  the  issuance  of  fiat
currencies is managed prudently in order not to diminish the purchasing power of the
currencies or people’s confidence in them.
Overseers of payment systems must take proactive steps to ensure that large value
as well as small value retail payment systems, making use of commercial bank or
central bank balances, are efficient, convenient and at low cost to the users. This is
increasingly important as the public now expects and demands a faster and cheaper
means of electronic payment or digital cash, as some would call it, for their day to
day transactions. If the central bank fails to do this, the market will certainly come up
(c)
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
with some alternatives for this purpose. In this connection, you are no doubt aware
that the HKMA has just launched the Faster Payment System a few days ago. Once
the system goes live on 30 September, people in Hong Kong will be able to enjoy
almost instantaneous P2P payments, making use of either mobile phone number or
email address, free of charge to the users.
(d)
While  the  Distributed  Ledger  Technology  used  in  crypto-assets  creates  many
issues,  the  technology  has  shown  great  potential  in  many  other  applications.  For
example,  the  HKMA  and  the  banks  in  Hong  Kong  will  soon  launch  a  digital  trade
finance  platform  using  DLT.  We  are  also  in  the  process  of  developing  a  DLT
interface that can link the domestic trade finance platform with those of other trading
partners, such as Singapore, on a bilateral basis. This new interface is expected to
be launched sometime next year.
(e)
Despite some improvements made in the past few years, cross-border payments,
especially retail or small value, remain inefficient and costly. This is unsatisfactory as
it  is  not  conducive  to  financial  inclusion  in  relation  to  remittances  by  SMEs  or
individuals.  In  this  connection,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  progress  is  being  made
recently, as some banks and non-bank e-wallet operators are now developing new
cross-border payment channels, making use of DLT in some instances, that would
result in faster and cheaper services for users.
(f)
Like several overseas central banks, the HKMA is studying the technical feasibility
and merit of Central Bank Issued Digital Currency (CBDC). It is still early days, but it
seems CBDC offers greater potential in wholesale than the retail area in terms of
payment  and  settlement,  especially 
the  cross-border  context.  However,
considerably more research work is needed to analyse the relative merit of CBDC
over the existing electronic or digital forms of payment in which central bank funds
are  used,  cleared  and  settled  centrally.  It  is  also  necessary  to  assess  the  likely
impact CBDC has on the monetary policy transmission mechanism. We will share
with the public the findings of our research work in due course.
in 
   8.  Ladies and gentlemen, we are now in an exciting era in which FinTech, including DLT, is
advancing in a speed that was unthinkable 10 years ago.  All of us, industry practitioners and
regulators alike, must try our best to keep up with the pace or else we risk being left behind. 
However, in embracing new technology and innovation, we must also guard against the risk
of overlooking the nature of the financial transactions and the risks that are inherent in these
transactions under the pretext of technological advancement.  Crypto-assets are one such
example  in  which  the  use  of  new  technology  does  not  alter  the  nature  or  risks  of  the
products or the transactions. 
9.  I  hope  you  will  find  my  remarks  today  helpful  as  an  elucidation  of  the  HKMA’s  stance  on
crypto-assets and on digital payments and settlement.  One final word of caution though. 
Notwithstanding what I have said today about crypto-assets, I won’t rule out one day new
technology emerges in such a way that would address the KYC or AML concerns that are
present in the current generation of crypto-assets.  We just need to keep an open mind and
stand ready to learn and adapt to new technology and trends.  Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
