Gent  Sejko:  Statement  at  the  joint  press  conference  with  the  IMF
Mission Chief for Albania and the Albanian Minister of Finance, 20
November 2018
Statement by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference with
the  IMF  Mission  Chief  for Albania  and  the Albanian  Minister  of  Finance,  Tirana,  20  November
2018.
Dear media representatives,
 In the last two weeks we have been engaged in discussions with the IMF Mission, which visited
Albania in the framework of periodic Article IV consultations.
Such discussions focus on the current performance of the economy and financial markets in
Albania,  their  outlook,  as  well  as  the  adequate  economic  policies  and  necessary  structural
reforms  that  should  be  implemented  and  monitored  with  a  view  to  guaranteeing  sustainable
development for the country.
I must say, with pleasure, that we share similar views on development trends, challenges that lie
ahead, and the respective measures for tackling them.
Let me now present in brief the opinion of the Bank of Albania on these issues.
The positive trend of Albania’s economic development continued throughout the current
year. From the perspective of aggregate demand, economic growth was supported mainly by
the  expansion  of  consumption,  investments  and  Albanian  exports.  From  the  perspective  of
production sectors, economic growth reflected mainly the expansion of the industry and services
sectors, driven to a large extent also by the rise in electricity generation. From the perspective of
underpinning policies, economic activity expanded, favoured by the following:
The  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  the  favourable  financing  conditions,  in  both
domestic and foreign markets;
The fiscal consolidation, which has reduced the impact of the public sector on the domestic
financial markets; and
The structural reforms programme, which, irrespective of the short-term costs, have started
to yield initial results.
Economic growth has contributed to the overall improvement of Albania’s economic and
financial balances. In line with our previous statements, the following is notable:
Inflation edged up slightly, despite the containing effect of the sharp appreciation of the
exchange rate, suggesting that the improvement of the cyclical position of the economy is
beginning to be reflected in higher wages and other production costs;
  Albania’s  external  position  has  improved,  reflected  in  the  narrowing  of  the  current
account deficit;
Budget deficit remains low and public debt has trended down;
Lastly, Albania’s financial system is stable.  The Albanian banking sector shows stable or
improving capital, liquidity and profitability indicators. Our analyses and stress tests suggest
that  the  sector  is  resilient  to  potential  stressful  situations,  thus  guaranteeing  its  ability  to
withstand shocks.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Such analyses show that the foundations of the country’s development remain relatively
solid.    The  analysis  is  reflected  also  in  our  projections.  In  the  baseline  scenario,  these
projections suggest that economic growth will continue in the medium-term horizon, production
capacities will be utilised in fuller terms, and inflation will converge to the central bank target by
2020.
These projections are conditioned by a series of factors.
First,  they  assume  that  the  external  economic  and  financial  setting  will  remain
favourable to support Albania’s economic growth.
Second, they do not envisage potential shocks, which, if materialised, would cause our
economy or inflation to diverge from the expected trajectory.
Third, the projection for the return of inflation to target assumes that the exchange
rate will be more stable in the periods ahead. Based on the above, we judge that the
balance of risks remains skewed to the down side.
In accordance with these projections, the Bank of Albania deems that the current policy
mix is adequate. The fiscal policy is and should remain committed to lowering the debt level and
diminishing  fiscal  vulnerabilities.  On  the  other  hand,  the  monetary  policy  should  maintain  the
accommodative stance. The convergence of inflation toward the target implies that the intensity
of  the  monetary  stimulus  will  be  diminishing  over  the  medium-term;  yet,  it  does  not  imply  a
change in the nature of the monetary policy. Lastly, our philosophy as well as the supervisory and
regulatory  measures  will  continue  to  balance  the  needs  for  promoting  development  vis-à-vis
guaranteeing the stability of the banking sector and safeguarding the savings of Albanian citizens.
But, our duties as policy makers go further than this. With a view to accelerating the
pace  of  development  and  enhancing  its  sustainability,  the  structural  reform  agenda
needs to continue.
Let me now list some priority aspects.
First, the sustainable and long-term development of Albania’s economy requires further
improvement of our financial system.
Further  development  of  the  financial  system  will  contribute  to  increasing  savings,  facilitate
financing of the private and public sectors and improve the structure of financing with capital and
of financing with borrowed funds. Among other things, further development of financial systems
will become increasingly indispensable in the context of the European financial market, which is
showing lower focus and higher risk premia for financing emerging economies than in the past.
In this regard, the Bank of Albania and public authorities should continue working to improve the
credit environment, among other things, by strengthening contract  enforcement,  implementing
new  legal  and  sublegal  procedures  related  to  collateral  execution,  and  completion  of  the
remaining duties under the national programme for the reduction of non-performing loans. The
signing  of  a  Memorandum  of  Cooperation  in  the  field  of  banking  supervision,  between  the
European Central Bank and the Bank of Albania, will facilitate the exchange of information and
enhance  the  security  of  European  banking  groups  that  operate  in  Albania.  Likewise,  the
completion of the restructuring and consolidation process of the banking sector, which has had
and will continue to have our attention, is an additional guarantee in this regard. In parallel, the
development of other segments of the capital markets should be further encouraged, yet with
prudence, so as to avoid missteps, and in harmony with supervisory and regulatory norms and
standards for the banking sector.
Second, the structural reform agenda should be accelerated.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second phase of this reform should aim at improving the education and know-how of the
labour force, creating a legal, political, administrative and fiscal environment that attracts foreign
developments  and  encourages  domestic  ones,  and  increasing  the  integration  of  Albania’s
economy with the regional and European development infrastructure. 
Third, the opening of accession negotiations with the EU should be viewed as a primary
instrument for the advancement of Albania’s development.
The Bank of Albania judges that the fulfilment of the criteria for opening accession negotiations
and the rigorous implementation of reforms that this process imposes should be the focus of the
entire political spectrum in Albania.
Thank you for your attention!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
