   1. 
Central Banks and money: an everchanging interplay 
Colloquium AEDBF Europe, 30 November 2018 
Keynote address by M. Jan Smets, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium 
 
 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 
It is my great pleasure to welcome you today in the premises of the National Bank of Belgium and to 
have the opportunity to address this interesting colloquium on the vast topic of money and currencies. 
 
Money is subject to a constant evolution and central banks must carefully take these evolutions into 
account when conducting the tasks they are entrusted with. The issuance of euro banknotes is one 
of the best known and most visible activities of the Eurosystem central banks1 but, as will become 
clear hereafter, it is by no means the most important of their tasks. Instead, central banks will take a 
broad interest in the many different appearances and functions of money. Evolutions like the rise of 
local currencies or the emergence of digital money such as privately issued cryptocurrencies will 
certainly not go unnoticed. 
 
First, I will briefly touch upon the concept of money, before shedding some light on the difference 
between commercial bank money and central bank money. I will then clarify the process through 
which central banks create central bank money, and position central bank money against alternative 
forms of money such as local currencies and cryptocurrencies. In this process we will examine the 
impact alternative forms of money have on the central banks’ basic tasks to formulate and implement 
monetary policy and to contribute to financial stability. Finally, I will talk a little about the promises 
that the technology underpinning the rise of cryptocurrencies may hold for central banks, especially 
in view of the possible issuance of a central bank digital currency. 
 
1  WHAT IS MONEY? 
What is money? It is not easy to give a clear definition. Doctor David Mann, in his standard work on 
the legal aspect of money, spends no less than fifty pages to clarify the concept of money2. Not only 
does money exist in the form of banknotes and coins, it can also take many other forms such as a 
cheque, a scriptural form (i.e. units in an account) or nowadays even some lines of computer code. 
 
Furthermore,  money  traditionally  serves  three  main  functions.  First,  as  a  means  of  exchange,  it 
prevents that we would have to exchange goods and services directly for other goods and services. 
Secondly,  as  a  unit  of  account,  money  enables  us  to  compare  the  value  of  different  goods  and 
services. It is the standard used to express their prices. In this function, money may be equated with 
currency, which in the common language is defined as the money or a system of money that is used 
in a particular country at a particular time. And finally, money acts as a store of value, it is used to 
accumulate savings which can be quickly and easily converted into any type of good or service. 
 
The law, too, does not hail a single and uniform definition of ‘money’. To just give an example, found 
in EU law: both the Payment Services Directive and the Payment Accounts Directive explicitly define 
‘funds’ as banknotes and coins, scriptural money, and electronic money in the sense of the electronic 
                                                      
1   In this contribution the notion of ‘Eurosystem’ is also used to refer to the ‘European System of Central Banks’. 
2   CH. PROCTOR, Mann on the legal aspect of money, Oxford University Press, Oxford 2005, 5 – 55. 
Keynote_Governor_AEDBF_30_Nov_2018_final.docx 
2. 
money directive3. The Settlement Finality Directive, on the other hand,4 does not define the notions 
of ‘funds’ and ‘money’, but from the objectives of this Directive it is clear that only money and funds 
by means of a book entry are envisaged and not banknotes and coins. So, from a legal perspective, 
‘money’ is usually defined with reference to the context in and the objectives for which the concept 
is being used. 
 
2  CENTRAL BANK MONEY VERSUS COMMERCIAL BANK MONEY 
Let us now turn to the instances that issue money, and to the money creation process. In modern 
day society, the most familiar issuers of money are on the one hand central banks which provide 
central  bank money in the form of both banknotes and deposit  liabilities,  and on the other hand 
commercial banks, which generally issue private or commercial bank money in the form of deposit 
liabilities5. 
 
Economic activity can in principle take place without the coexistence of central and commercial bank 
money. Both solutions - on the one hand, narrow or mono-banking where there was only central 
bank money and, on the other hand, free banking where there was only commercial bank money - 
have existed in the past. But neither has proved sufficiently stable or efficient to survive on its own. 
There has been an evolution towards intermediate solutions in which both types of money play an 
important part in facilitating economic activity. Up till today, it is believed that the most effective and 
efficient financial system is one in which commercial bank money and central bank money coexist. 
 
2.1  MONEY CREATION BY CENTRAL BANKS 
How then do central banks create money and influence the quantity of money in the market? In the 
first place, central  banks provide central  bank money in the form of banknotes. The issuance of 
banknotes entails a reduction in the liquidity of credit institutions, since credit institutions must deposit 
liquid means with the central bank against the withdrawal of the banknotes. Banknotes and coins in 
euro are the only ones to have legal tender status in the euro area. 
 
Secondly, central banks provide central bank money in the form of deposit liabilities. Deposit liabilities 
are created through the monetary policy that central banks conduct, which aims at maintaining price 
stability.  Central  banks  maintain  price  stability  through  influencing  the  availability  and  growth  of 
money in the economy which is operationally implemented through the transmission mechanism of 
the monetary policy instruments. The quantity of money in euro depends on the liquidity needs of 
commercial banks and eventually of the market participants like households, companies and the 
government. The Eurosystem can influence the quantity of money in the economy in three ways. 
 
First, the Eurosystem central banks conduct open market operations on the basis of Article 18.1, first 
indent of the Statute of the ESCB6. The most important tools are the main refinancing operations, 
which are regular liquidity-providing reverse transactions conducted with a frequency and maturity of 
normally one week7. Since 16 March 2016, the interest rate on main refinancing operations has been 
pegged at 0.00 percent. 
                                                      
3   Article 4, (25) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 
2015 on payment services in the internal market, and Article 2, (22) of Directive 2014/92/EU of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 on the comparability of fees related to payment accounts, 
payment account switching and access to payment accounts with basic features. 
4   Directive 98/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 1998 on settlement finality in 
payment and securities settlement systems. 
5    COMMITTEE ON PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS, The role of central bank money in payment 
systems, Bank for International Settlements, August 2003, 7. 
6   Protocol (No 4) on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank. 
7   Other types of open market operations are longer term refinancing operations, fine-tuning operations and 
structural operations. For more information, see EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK, The Monetary Policy of the 
ECB, 2011, 104-108. 
Keynote_Governor_AEDBF_30_Nov_2018_final.docx 
3. 
 
Secondly, the Eurosystem implements monetary policy by setting the interest rates on its standing 
facilities on the basis of Article 18.1, second indent of the Statute of the ESCB. Standing facilities 
provide or absorb liquidity with an overnight maturity on the initiative of counterparties. Two standing 
facilities are available to commercial banks: the marginal lending facility (to obtain intraday credit to 
cover shortages in liquidity) and the deposit facility (to make overnight deposits of excess liquidity). 
 
Thirdly, according to Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB, the ECB may require commercial banks 
to hold minimum reserves (or compulsory deposits) on accounts with the Eurosystem central banks.  
The intent of the minimum reserve system is to create (or enlarge) a structural liquidity shortage: an 
increase  of  minimum  reserves  entails  a  reduction  of  liquidity  in  the  market  and  vice  versa.  The 
reserve requirement of each institution is determined in relation to elements of its balance sheet. 
 
2.2  MONEY CREATION AND FRACTIONAL RESERVE BANKING 
So how, then, is money created in practice? Let me clarify this process through the monetary policy 
instrument of the minimum reserves. Commercial banks are limited in the total amount they can loan 
to customers by, among others, their required minimum reserve ratios which oblige a commercial 
bank to keep a minimum, predetermined percentage of its deposits in an account with the central 
bank. This is called the system of fractional reserve banking because commercial banks are required 
to only hold a fraction of their total deposits in a central bank account. In practice, if the central bank 
imposes a required minimum reserve ratio of, say, 0.10, then each commercial bank is obliged to 
keep at least 10% of its total deposits as reserves, i.e. in the account it has with the central bank. 
 
The  process  of  money  creation  can  be  illustrated  with  the  following  simplified  example:  when  a 
person deposits 100 EUR in a commercial bank, this bank will keep 10 EUR as reserves in the central 
bank. To make a profit, the commercial bank loans the remaining 90 EUR to another customer. This 
customer spends the 90 EUR by buying something from a merchant. The merchant deposits the 90 
EUR with his bank. The merchant’s bank keeps 9 EUR as reserves in the central bank, and then 
lends the remaining 81 EUR to another customer. If this chain continues indefinitely then, in the end, 
an amount close to 1000 EUR has gone into circulation and has therefore become part of the total 
money supply8.  
 
The system of fractional reserve banking is being criticised by certain scholars since bank deposits 
are only partially backed by central bank deposits, the difference being used to finance investments 
in  the  economy.  Short-term  deposits  fund  long-term  loans,  which  renders  the  banking  system 
inherently vulnerable to bank runs even if prudential regulation and the deposit guarantee system 
are making banks less prone to such risks9. It is also deemed to contribute to an enormous build-up 
of debt, which forms the Achilles’ heel of the financial system. Some therefore propose to move from 
fractional  banking  to  a  so-called  “sovereign  money  system”  or  to  “narrow  banking”,  where  every 
commercial bank deposit would be fully backed by central bank money. Proponents of a sovereign 
money system argue that commercial banks would lose their capacity to create money in the form of 
demand deposits, becoming simple intermediaries between savers and borrowers. Private money 
creation would be eliminated and replaced exclusively by money creation through the central bank, 
on behalf of the public interest. Instead of encouraging or discouraging the accumulation of private 
sector debt by manipulating interest rates, the central bank would moderate the pace of economic 
activity by directly controlling the rate at which additional money would be created, or, in rare cases, 
destroyed10. 
 
No matter how tempting a sovereign money system sounds, many issues remain to be examined 
before considering a move towards narrow banking. For example, such a move could greatly impact 
                                                      
8   This process is known as the money multiplier effect. 
9   J. SMETS, “Fintech and Central Banks”, Rev. banc. fin., 2017/1, 11. 
10  B.  DYSON,  G.  HODGSON  and  F.  VAN  LERVEN,  Sovereign  money.  An  introduction,  Positive  Money, 
December 2016, 4. 
Keynote_Governor_AEDBF_30_Nov_2018_final.docx 
4. 
the funding structure of commercial banks, something they are not indifferent to. Some opponents 
also point to the need to maintain a sufficient degree of credit growth in order to stimulate economic 
growth11. Earlier this year Switzerland organised a referendum on the introduction of a sovereign 
money system called Vollgeld, which requires that every credit granted by a commercial bank is 
entirely covered by deposits. The proposal was eventually rejected. This does not mean that central 
banks are entirely indifferent to sovereign money systems, as will become clear in a little while when 
I talk about central bank digital currencies. 
 
3  ALTERNATIVES  TO  MONEY  IN  THE  FORM  OF  EURO  BANKNOTES  AND  DEPOSIT 
LIABILITIES AT CENTRAL BANKS AND COMMERCIAL BANKS 
So far, I have been talking about central bank money which is being provided in the form of banknotes 
and deposit liabilities in euro. But any type of money can potentially be created and issued by for 
example private entities, as long as it allows in one way or another to fulfil the main functions of 
money. Let us call these types of money alternative money (in the sense that they are an alternative 
for both central bank money and for deposits in euro at commercial banks’ accounts). 
 
Central banks also take an interest in alternative types of money, even though they would at first 
sight fall outside the ambit of the central bank’s usual competences. Central banks may have more 
than one reason for this. For starters, a considerable increase in the quantity and use of alternative 
money may undermine the efficacy of the central bank’s monetary policy. If the market players were 
to massively move away from the use of banknotes and deposits in euro, a central bank could find it 
more difficult to attain its objective of price stability. Indeed, by substitution for regular money such 
as banknotes and deposits in euro, widely adopted types of alternative money could significantly 
reduce a central bank’s control over monetary conditions, such as its ability to steer interest rates12. 
 
Furthermore, many central banks, among which the Eurosystem central banks, are entrusted with 
the task of contributing to the stability of the financial system13. Financial stability may be impacted 
by sudden or considerable changes in the quantity and use of alternative types of money14. 
 
3.1 
A local or complementary currency is a currency that can be spent in a particular and usually limited 
geographical locality, which differs from an official currency (like the euro) and about which a group 
of private persons, companies or government instances have agreed to accept it as a means of 
exchange. A local currency therefore acts as a complementary currency to an official currency, rather 
than replacing it, and aims to encourage spending within a local community or to support the local or 
social economy. 
 
European law does not directly deal with the issue of local or complementary currencies but Article 
178bis of the Belgian Penal Code stipulates that whosoever issues a monetary sign which is meant 
to circulate in public without being authorised by the competent authority, is subject to imprisonment 
or the payment of a fine. This Article does not clarify which is the competent authority to authorise 
the issuance of a local or complementary currency, but without a doubt the National Bank of Belgium 
will have its say, and its opinion is in practice regularly sought by prospective issuers. Article 178bis 
LOCAL CURRENCIES 
                                                      
11  See J. VEKEMAN, “Het systeem is het probleem, niet de banken”, Trends, 11 October 2018. 
12  See  A.  STEVENS,  “Digital  Currencies:  Threats  and  Opportunities  for  Monetary  Policy”,  NBB  Economic 
Review, June 2017, 89. 
13  See Article 127.5 TFEU. 
14  See for example FINANCIAL STABILITY BOARD, Crypto-assets: Report to the G20 on the work of the FSB 
and standard-setting bodies, 16 July 2018. See http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P160718-1.pdf. The 
FSB has published a report setting out the metrics that the FSB will use to monitor crypto-asset markets as 
part of its ongoing assessment of vulnerabilities in the financial system. 
Keynote_Governor_AEDBF_30_Nov_2018_final.docx 
5. 
does not apply if a monetary sign is exclusively issued to serve a particular and well-defined purpose 
or to circulate locally only15. 
 
It should be noted that the prohibition of Article 178bis only applies to the issuance of monetary signs 
in a material and tangible form, meaning that purely digital representations of an alternative currency 
are not prohibited by this Article. This does not mean that a local or complementary currency in digital 
form can be issued without observing any law. If the issuer of a local or complementary currency 
offers payment services in the sense of the Payment Services Directive16, for example, the issuer 
should examine beforehand if he or she must obtain a licence as a payment institution. But even 
under the Payment Services Directive, the issuer of a local currency that can only be used within a 
limited network may be exempt from many of its provisions17. 
 
In Belgium the National Bank of Belgium is designated as the competent authority for grating licenses 
to  payment  institutions  and  to  assess  the  compliance  with  the  grounds  of  exclusion  for  limited 
networks. This is a part of the Bank’s tasks of prudential supervision. In case of doubt, prospective 
issuers of local or complementary currencies in digital form would do well to consult the National 
Bank on this matter. 
 
3.2  CRYPTOCURRENCIES 
Let us turn then to this other infamous type of alternative money, known as virtual or cryptocurrencies 
such as Bitcoin, Litecoin, Ether and many others. The main characteristic of cryptocurrencies is that 
they are issued, kept and exchanged in a decentralized way (usually based on Distributed Ledger 
Technology or DLT), removing the need for intermediate players and systems like commercial banks, 
payment institutions and clearing and settlement systems. Cryptocurrencies can be used only as 
contractual money, when there is an agreement between buyer and seller in order to accept a given 
cryptocurrency as a means of payment. In the EU, cryptocurrency is at present not regulated and 
cannot be regarded as being subject to the Payment Services Directive or the E-money Directive18.  
 
From an economic perspective, most of the cryptocurrencies currently known do not fully meet all 
the three functions of money that I mentioned before. Cryptocurrencies have a limited function as a 
medium of exchange because they have a very low level of acceptance among the general public. 
In addition, the high volatility of their exchange rates to official currencies renders cryptocurrency 
useless as a store of value even for short-time purposes, let alone for the purpose of being a longer-
term savings  instrument.  Finally,  both  the  low  level  of  acceptance  and  the  high  volatility  of  their 
exchange rates and thus purchasing power make them unsuitable as a unit of account. Therefore, 
cryptocurrencies cannot be regarded as full forms of money at the moment19. 
 
Cryptocurrencies  are  actually  fraught  with  many  issues.  From  a  central  bank  perspective, 
cryptocurrencies pose a risk for the conduct of monetary policy or for the stability of the financial 
system. Studies show that cryptocurrencies should not pose a significant threat if they are merely 
                                                      
15  Preparatory works to Article 4 of the Law of 23 December 1988, Senate, 499-1, 1988-89. 
16  Transposed in Belgium by the Law of 11 March 2018 on the statute and supervision of payment institutions 
and institutions for electronic money. 
17  See  Article  3,  (k)  of  the  Payment  Services  Directive.  This  Article  excludes  services  based  on  specific 
payment instruments that can be used only in a limited way when (i) the payment instruments allow the 
holder to acquire goods or services only in the premises of the issuer or within a limited network of service 
providers,  or  (ii)  when  these  instruments can  be  used  only  to  acquire  a  very  limited  range  of  goods  or 
services. A third exclusion ground exists when the payment instruments are only valid in a single Member 
State and are provided at the request of an undertaking or a public-sector entity and regulated by a national 
or regional public authority for specific social or tax purposes to acquire specific goods or services from 
suppliers having a commercial agreement with the issuer. 
18  EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK, Virtual Currency Schemes – A Further Analysis, February 2015, 24. 
19  Idem, 24. The crypto-community is, however, looking for solutions to this problem, e.g. through the creation 
of  stablecoins.  See  https://medium.com/fintech-weekly-magazine/stablecoins-what-are-they-actually-for-
a1bc0732e472. 
Keynote_Governor_AEDBF_30_Nov_2018_final.docx 
6. 
used as a medium of exchange, since in this case cryptocurrencies would usually be converted back 
to regular money as soon as the transaction is settled20. Financial stability risks may, on the other 
hand, appear if cryptocurrencies were to be widely perceived as a proper store of value, which they 
are not. This is because unlike commodities such as oil and gold, cryptocurrencies have no intrinsic 
value. They are nothing more than lines of computer code. Neither do they carry any legal value, in 
that  they  are  not  backed  by  a  sovereign  entity  as  is  the  case  for  regular  money.  The  value  of 
cryptocurrencies therefore depends on self-fulfilling expectations, which renders them conducive to 
speculation and to bubbles21. Finally, cryptocurrencies could pose a considerable risk for monetary 
policy and financial stability if they were to be generally accepted and used as units of account. In 
this case cryptocurrencies would substitute for the bulk of regular money, including central  bank 
money. There is doubt, however, that cryptocurrencies would ever become trusted units of account, 
among others given their lack of either  legal tender  or regulatory status22. In any  case, it  is not 
surprising  that  many  national  and  international  authorities  have  issued  warnings  against  the 
investment in and use of cryptocurrencies. 
 
3.3  WILL THE PROMISES OF DLT LEAD TO THE ISSUANCE OF CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL 
CURRENCIES? 
So, let me wrap up my thoughts. I have thus far briefly explained the process through which central 
banks create central bank money, as a result of the implementation of the monetary policy. The 
creation of alternative types of money by private players, such as cryptocurrencies, carries the risk 
of impairing monetary policy transmission or affecting financial stability. But the advent and rise of 
cryptocurrencies and its underlying technology also offer opportunities to central banks23.  
 
First, DLT has the potential to improve efficiency and security of existing payment systems. These 
benefits suggest that DLT could help to further underpin trust in the monetary system. Central banks 
may, for example, choose to permit interbank payment systems to run on a DLT network24. 
 
Secondly, some central banks have taken interest in DLT to serve as a platform for the issuance of 
a so-called “central bank digital currency” or “CBDC”25. A CBDC can be defined as a central bank 
liability, denominated in an existing unit of account, which serves both as a medium of exchange and 
a store of value. This would be an innovation for the public at large and for use in retail payments, 
but not for certain wholesale entities. Indeed, as we have seen, central banks already provide digital 
money to commercial banks in the form of deposit liabilities26. Some central banks have completed 
proofs of concept, for example to simulate if central bank-operated wholesale payment systems could 
run on DLT-based applications27. These projects usually show that DLT is not yet mature enough 
for current adoption, and that the legacy systems are outperforming DLT-based applications. 
 
Unlike commercial banks, the public at large is only  provided central bank money in the form of 
banknotes and coins. A general purpose CBDC, open to the public at large, would be a substitute or 
                                                      
20  A. STEVENS, o.c., 81. 
21  Idem, 82. 
22  Idem, 82. 
23  For some other recent documents that take either positive or negative views on the crypto-revolution, see 
among  others:  FINANCIAL  STABILITY  BOARD,  Crypto-asset  markets.  Potential  channels  for  future 
financial  stability  implications,  10  October  2018;  EUROPEAN  PARLIAMENT,  Resolution  on  distributed 
ledger technologies and blockchains: building trust with disintermediation, 2017/2772(RSP), 3 October 2018. 
24  A. STEVENS, o.c. 83.  
25  The best-known example today is the Swedish Riksbank’s e-krona project. See https://www.riksbank.se/en-
gb/financial-stability/payments/e-krona/. 
26  COMMITTEE  ON  PAYMENTS  AND  MARKET  INFRASTRUCTURES,  “Central  Bank  Digital  Currencies”, 
Bank  for  International  Settlements,  March  2018,  3.  See  https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d174.pdf.  For  a 
taxonomy  of  CBDCs  and  the  money  flower  concept,  see  M.  BECH  and  R.  GARRATT,  “Central  bank 
cryptocurrencies”, BIS Quarterly Review, September 2017, 55-70. 
27  Like the National Bank of Belgium, which has been involved in a research project simulating DLT-based 
payments in central bank money in Target2. 
Keynote_Governor_AEDBF_30_Nov_2018_final.docx 
7. 
a complement to cash. Whether the introduction of a CBDC is desirable depends on many different 
considerations.  More  research  should  therefore  be  devoted  to  the  benefits,  drawbacks  and 
implications of the issue of a CBDC. Many questions remain, also of a legal nature. Central banks 
must,  for  example,  take  into  account  legal  considerations  when  contemplating  the  issuance  of 
general  purpose  or  retail  CBDCs.  Issuance  may  require  legislative  changes  which  might  not  be 
feasible in the short term. One question is whether CBDCs would have legal tender status just like 
euro banknotes and coins. It may be necessary to extend the ECB’s monopoly to issue legal tender 
banknotes to CBDCs. Central banks would also have to take account of Anti Money Laundering 
(AML) concerns and requirements. Issuing a CBDC that does not adequately comply with these and 
other  supervisory  and  tax  regimes  would  not  be  advisable28.  It  is  currently  not  clear  how  AML 
requirements can be implemented practically for anonymous forms of CBDC. 
 
4  CONCLUSION 
To conclude, it is no understatement to say that there is an everchanging interplay between money 
and the central banks’ mandate to implement monetary policy and to safeguard financial stability. 
The  future  of  money  is  currently  being  shaped  at  an  unprecedented  pace,  thanks  to  the  digital 
revolution. One of the many emerging trends is the rise of so-called asset-backed cryptocurrencies. 
This is a cryptocurrency that represents an underlying traditionally valuable, real-world asset to which 
it  is  pegged.  This  trend,  called  tokenisation,  shows  similarities  with  the  old  gold  standard  where 
banknotes  issued  by  central  banks  were  exchangeable  for  the  corresponding  value  in  gold. 
Tokenisation  shows  a  lot  of  promise  for  traditional  assets  such  as  gold  and  diamonds,  but  is  it 
conceivable that other assets are tokenised and find their way to the financial system and maybe 
into new forms of money? Many questions to which presently few answers can be offered... So, let 
me assure you that a lot of challenging work remains to be done in this area, also with respect to the 
legal issues surrounding them. I wish you all an insightful day! 
 
 
                                                         
28  COMMITTEE  ON  PAYMENTS  AND  MARKET  INFRASTRUCTURES,  “Central  Bank  Digital  Currencies”, 
o.c., 9. On the issue of anonymity of CBDCs, see M. BECH and R. GARRATT, O.C., 65. 
Keynote_Governor_AEDBF_30_Nov_2018_final.docx 
