  31.10.2018 
 Appearance by the Governor of the Banco de España before the 
Parliamentary Economic Committee  
 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and gentlemen,  
I would like to begin my first appearance as Governor of the Banco de España before this 
chamber  expressing  my  sincere  gratitude  for  the  comments  made  by  the  Parliamentary 
group representatives about me when the former Minister for the Economy, Industry and 
Competitiveness – Román Escolano – put forward my proposed appointment to the house. 
Likewise, I particularly value all your suggestions and opinions about the functioning and 
mission of the Banco de España. I take these suggestions as a spur to enhance my work, 
which I undertake to perform with full independence, as the Law of Autonomy obliges me 
to.  
To this end, I should like to seize this occasion to announce that the Banco de España has 
begun  work  on  an  ambitious  strategic  planning  project  for  the  coming  years.  Under  a 
comprehensive and forward-looking approach, the project will address most of the issues 
raised here, along with other matters we consider essential so that our central bank may 
better  perform  its  functions  and  be  of  greater  value  to  society,  in  the  context  of  the 
Eurosystem and the new economic governance of the euro area.  
As I said when I officially took up office, the main objectives are to increase the presence 
and influence of the Banco de España at the European and global levels, and to reinforce 
its  early-warning  capacity  regarding  identification  of  the  vulnerabilities  and  risks  to  the 
Spanish economy’s financial and macroeconomic stability, as well as its responsiveness in 
mitigating these risks and preventing their materialisation. In short, we aspire to a more open 
and transparent institution, and one more flexible and efficient, that harnesses its human 
and material resources to the full, under the guiding principles of independence, intellectual 
rigour and excellence.  
Following this introduction, allow me to turn to the central purpose of this appearance. As 
you know, in late May the Banco de España published its  Annual Report, which reviews 
economic and financial developments in the Spanish economy, and in the European and 
international environment, together with the main challenges and vulnerabilities facing it.  
The Annual Report is the Banco de España’s main publication in respect of its functions as 
the monetary authority and adviser to the Government on economic policies. Accordingly, I 
would like to begin by summarising the main aspects of the current situation of the Spanish 
economy and its external environment, along with its short and medium-term risks, moving 
on subsequently to describe the challenges our country faces over a longer horizon.  
External environment  
As regards the external environment, the global economy has, so far in 2018, shown signs 
of  slowing,  following  the  high  growth  recorded  in  2017  (see  Chart  1).  Less  easy  global 
financial conditions (which have translated in the case of some emerging economies into 
major financial tensions), heightening protectionism (in particular with the escalation of tariff-
related  tensions  between  the  United  States  and  China),  and  increased  geopolitical 
uncertainty  at  the  global  and  European  levels,  are  some  of  the  main  factors  behind  this 
slowdown.  
 3/14 
 Contributing to the tightening of global financial conditions has, among other factors, been 
the  progressive  normalisation  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve’s  monetary  policy,  which  is 
progressing at a swifter pace than in other areas given the relatively advanced position of 
the United States in its economic cycle. To date, it is the countries with greater vulnerabilities 
in  terms  of  external  and  foreign-currency  financing  needs  (as  is  the  case  of  Turkey  and 
Argentina) that have mainly been affected.  
Global inflation, which remained contained in 2017, has risen but gradually in the first half 
of 2018, despite the increase in oil prices. In the advanced economies, core inflation remains 
relatively moderate (see Chart 2).  
In the euro area, following a robust expansion in 2017 (see Chart 3), the economic slowdown 
is proving more pronounced than what was projected some months back and, moreover, it 
has spread to most countries in the area. Against this backdrop, there has been a notable 
loss of dynamism in exports and, on the internal front, increased political uncertainty in Italy, 
which is significantly affecting this country’s sovereign debt markets; that said, the effects 
on other euro area markets have been limited so far.  
Further, the risks to global growth have stepped up. Such risks include most notably those 
derived from the increase in protectionist policies, from the growing vulnerability of certain 
countries and agents to a potential further adjustment to global financial conditions, and 
from the possible heightening of geopolitical tension in certain hotspots. In addition, in the 
European arena, the outcome of the Brexit and the direction of Italian economic policies are 
major  areas  of  uncertainty.  These  developments,  along  with  the  increase  in  global  risks, 
might ultimately affect the growth outlook for the euro area as a whole and, therefore, for 
the Spanish economy.  
The economic expansion in the euro area has not been accompanied to date by an across-
the-board and sustained acceleration in prices (see Chart 4). In this respect, the recent rise 
in inflation, to 2.2 % in October according to the latest leading indicator published today, is 
essentially  due  to  the  increase  in  the  cost  of  energy,  while  the  more  stable  components 
continue to post low rates of increase.  
That said, the intensity of job creation and the progressive reduction in the degree of labour 
market slack in the euro area economies are prompting a gradual rise in wages. Should this 
continue  over  time,  it  would  contribute  to  a  sustained  pick-up  in  inflation  towards  rates 
closer to the Eurosystem’s medium-term price stability objective, consistent with an inflation 
rate lower than, but close to, 2%.  
Recent developments and outlook for the Spanish economy  
Turning  to  the  Spanish  economy,  so  far  in  2018  the  expansionary  phase  has  continued, 
albeit at a lesser pace than in previous years. Real GDP growth stood at 2.5% year-on-year 
in the third quarter, following increases equal to or higher than 3% in the three preceding 
years (see Chart 5).  
This  slowdown  in  growth,  which  the  Banco  de  España  has  been  anticipating  in  recent 
quarters, is partly in response to the international environment, where developments have 
been somewhat less positive this year, as I previously described. In any event, the baseline 
scenario for growth in the Spanish economy in the coming years is consistent, as it is in the 
4/14 
  euro  area  as  a  whole,  with  growth  rates  running  above  potential  and,  therefore,  with  an 
increasingly positive output gap.  
As to consumer prices, the dynamics continue to be greatly affected by the fluctuations in 
the energy component (see Chart 6). The latest available figures, for October this year, show 
a year-on-year increase in the overall harmonised index of 2.3%. However, core inflation 
remains  moderate,  at  around  1%.  As  from  the  final  stretch  of  the  year,  a  progressive 
reduction in the contribution of the energy component is projected, which will tend to be 
offset  by  the  gradual  strengthening  in  the  core  component,  in  step  with  the  foreseeable 
widening of the positive gap between actual and potential output.  
Spanish economic activity continues to be underpinned by easy financial conditions. The 
maintenance of the accommodative monetary policy stance is allowing the average interest 
rates  on  bank  lending  to  hold  at  levels  close  to  their  historical  lows.  Also,  the  financial 
position of households and firms has continued to strengthen in the course of 2018.  
In tandem, private consumption has held at a growth rate which, though it has slowed during 
this year, remains high and is outpacing the increase in real disposable income, which has 
led the saving rate to ease to historically low levels (see Chart 7). Looking ahead, however, 
the room for household saving to further contract appears limited.  
Investment by non-financial corporations has continued to expand (see Chart 8). As in the 
case of households, financing conditions, in terms both of cost and availability of funds, 
have  remained  conducive  to  companies  taking  spending  decisions,  as  has  the 
strengthening of their financial position.  
Maintaining the momentum of investment is pivotal, given that productive investment is a 
fundamental determinant both of the cyclical dynamics of the economy and of long-term 
economic growth.  
A  characteristic  feature  of  the  current  expansionary  cycle  has  been  the  compatibility  of 
economic  growth  with  a  significant  external  surplus  (see  Chart  9).  Various  factors  have 
contributed to sustaining this surplus, including most notably the significant increase in the 
base of firms that export their products regularly, the increase in revenue from the tourist 
industry, despite its recent slowdown, and the environment of low interest rates, which has 
contributed  to  diminishing  the  income  balance  deficit.  However,  looking  ahead,  some  of 
these factors will foreseeably lose steam, owing partly to the effects of the appreciation of 
the  euro,  in  nominal  effective  terms,  and  to  dearer  oil.  These  effects  will  give  rise  to  a 
considerable reduction in the Spanish economy’s net lending vis-à-vis the rest of the world, 
which is nevertheless expected to remain positive over the coming years.  
With regard to the labour market, 2.3 million jobs have been generated since 2013. These 
developments, along with the reduction in the labour force as a result of population ageing, 
have enabled the unemployment level to be reduced most significantly. The unemployment 
rate thus stands below 15%, 12 pp down on its 2013 high (see Chart 10), although still far 
off the level observed in the euro area on average (slightly above 8%). Most recently, the 
robustness  of  employment  has  eased  in  line  with  developments  in  activity,  making  for 
continuing and very low growth in productivity, as has been the case since the start of the 
recovery.  
 5/14 
 Strong job creation has been accompanied by a modest increase in wage compensation in 
the  past  four  years. Chiefly  contributing  to  this  has  been  the  high  degree of  slack  in  the 
labour market which dates back to the start of the current pick-up, and the expectations of 
very low inflation rates during these years. In any event, and in line with the current recovery 
phase, wage settlements under collective bargaining agreements have risen from 0.6% in 
2014 to the current level of 1.7%, on cumulative data to September. This improvement will 
foreseeably continue in the future, in line with the recommendations of the Employment and 
Collective Bargaining Agreement, signed by the social agents on 25 June and in force over 
the next three years, which promotes wage increases of 2%, plus a variable amount of 1% 
conditional upon different sector-based macroeconomic concepts. The variable elements 
in collective bargaining should be viewed favourably, insofar as their application caters for 
firms’  specific  circumstances,  such  that  wage  developments  are  adjusted  as  much  as 
possible to labour productivity. 
Main factors of risk in the short and medium term  
The outline I have offered on the foreseeable course of the Spanish economy is not free 
from risks. And should such risks materialise, they might adversely affect economic growth. 
On the external front, as earlier stated, are the uncertainties associated with the effects of 
monetary  policy  normalisation  (in  particular  in  the  United  States)  on  global  financial 
conditions. Other factors of concern are the possible resurgence of geopolitical tensions or 
a potential escalation in the adoption of protectionist measures. Specifically, the outcome 
of Brexit and the situation in Italy are of particular significance for the Spanish economy.  
In  the  domestic  arena,  the  parliamentary  fragmentation  that  has  characterised  national 
politics  in  recent  years  also  generates  uncertainty  over  the  course  of  some  of  the  main 
economic policies, in relation both to the necessary process of budgetary consolidation and 
to the likewise much-needed adoption of new structural reforms enabling the economy’s 
growth potential to be increased. Moreover, a further rise in uncertainty, associated with the 
political situation in Catalonia, continues to pose an additional risk to economic stability, 
especially in the Catalonian region. 
Achievements and limits of the recovery  
The Spanish economy has completed a growth phase of five years. Specifically, since end-
2013, GDP has grown by 14% in cumulative terms, having exceeded since mid-2017 its 
pre-crisis  level.  Some  of  the  structural  reforms  launched  during  the  recession  will  have 
contributed to this recovery. These include, on the domestic front, the labour market reform, 
the  restructuring  and  clean-up  of  credit  institutions,  pension  system  reforms  and  the 
headway in fiscal  consolidation.  And  at the European  level,  we may  mention the  various 
measures  approved  in  recent  years,  including  most  notably  the  start-up  of  the  Banking 
Union.  
Yet a series of more transitory – though persistent – factors has also contributed decisively 
to  the  momentum  of  the  recovery.  These  factors  include  the  role  played  by  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy and the implementation of an expansionary fiscal policy in recent years, 
combined  with  the  significant  reduction  in  oil  prices  from  mid-2014  to  early  2016  and, 
subsequently, the improvements in external markets.  
6/14 
  In respect of monetary policy, the various ECB measures have allowed financial conditions 
to be eased considerably, and have acted as a mainstay for the economic recovery in the 
area, contributing to countering the deflationary trends looming over the region some years 
back. For the Spanish economy, it is estimated that from 2014 to 2018 the ECB’s measures 
boosted real GDP by 2.3% and the CPI by 1.4% (see Chart 11). These effects are of a fairly 
similar  magnitude  to  those  estimated  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  (2.3%  and  1.7%, 
respectively). 
The fiscal policy stance shifted from expansionary in 2015 and 2016 to neutral in 2017, but 
it will once again be expansionary in 2018 once the various measures included in the State 
Budget for this year materialise. Over recent years, the reduction in the deficit has been due 
to the economy’s cyclical improvement and to the fall-off in interest expenditure, while the 
structural deficit has held at still-high levels, according to the European Commission’s latest 
estimates.  
That said, the role of the foregoing factors should, in future, tend progressively to taper off. 
This has been the case already for oil prices, the course of which has reversed since mid-
2017, and, to a lesser extent, of external markets, following the recent slowdown. But it is 
particularly relevant for demand-side (monetary and fiscal) policies.   
Specifically, it is to be expected that monetary policy will progressively play a less pivotal 
role. With the advance of the euro area economy’s position in the cycle, according to the 
ECB’s latest estimates, there will be a progressive pick-up in inflation levels to close to 2% 
in  the  coming  years.  Indeed,  at  its  meeting  on  14  June,  the  ECB’s  Council  reached  the 
conclusion that the progress to date towards a sustained adjustment of inflation has been 
substantial, which gave rise to a gradual reduction in net asset purchases, duly confirmed 
by subsequent successive meetings of the Governing Council. The anchoring of long-term 
inflation  expectations,  the  sound  underlying  firmness  of  the  euro  area  economy  and  the 
maintenance of a high degree of monetary accommodation offer reasons to believe that the 
sustained convergence of inflation on the Governing Council’s objective will continue in the 
coming months, and that it will be maintained even after the finalisation of the net purchase 
programme, in line with the – very gradual – normalisation of monetary policy announced 
by the ECB’s Council.   
Fiscal  policy  should  resume  the  fiscal  consolidation  process,  given  that  both  the  public 
debt/GDP ratio and the structural deficit are holding at levels some distance off the limits 
set in the Stability and Growth Pact (see Chart 12). 
In recent years notable headway has been made in correcting some of the imbalances in 
the  Spanish  economy,  such  as  the  restructuring  of  the  financial  system,  private-sector 
deleveraging,  the  recovery  in  competitiveness  and  the  attainment  of  persistent  current-
account surpluses, and the adjustment of the real estate sector. However, the progress in 
correcting  other  imbalances  has  been  more  meagre  and  the  economy  retains  significant 
elements  of  vulnerability.  These  include  most  notably  high  public  indebtedness,  running 
close  to  100%  of  GDP,  and  the  nation’s  still-high  net  debtor  position,  despite  the 
aforementioned current account surpluses. Substantial structural dysfunctions also persist 
in the labour market, as illustrated by the still-high unemployment rate, and a growth pattern 
more intensely conducive to high-productivity activities generating high value added has yet 
to  definitively  take  root.  And  this  against  a  background  in  which  population  ageing  will 
 7/14 
 significantly reduce the economy’s potential growth, while imminently posing far-reaching 
challenges in public pensions. Moreover, the banking system still has significant challenges 
ahead, which I shall refer to later.  
In the setting described, characterised by the gradual loss of momentum of the effects of 
demand-side policies, it is particularly desirable that the measures aimed at correcting these 
vulnerabilities should take the lead, thereby supporting medium and long-term growth. The 
current  juncture  of  economic  expansion  should  be  harnessed  to  make  the  necessary 
reforms and gain budgetary room for manoeuvre to face adverse cyclical situations in the 
future.  
Allow me to focus now on each of the challenges mentioned and the potential economic 
policy responses. 
Challenges facing the Spanish economy  
First, regarding fiscal policy, let me stress that maintaining high public debt over a prolonged 
period  may  have  negative  effects  on  economic  growth:  it  raises  financing  costs  for  the 
economy; it makes it necessary to run substantial primary surpluses that demand higher tax 
levels or lower levels of productive spending; it lessens the room for countercyclical fiscal 
policy measures to address potential adverse shocks; and it is a source of vulnerability in 
the face of changes in market investor sentiment.  
Accordingly,  resuming  fiscal  consolidation  is  a  priority,  so  as  to  enable  the  progressive 
reduction of the public debt/GDP ratio and of the structural deficit, in line with the demands 
of European and national fiscal rules.  
The fiscal consolidation process should, moreover, be compatible with an improvement in 
the quality of public finances. The adjustment needed should be anchored in a medium-
term  programme  in  which  the  measures  allowing the  attainment of  budgetary  objectives 
should  be  spelt  out,  along  with  a  prudent  macroeconomic  and  public  revenue  forecast. 
Furthermore, the composition of the adjustment takes on particular importance, as it should 
be conducive to a greater contribution of public finances to the economy’s potential growth.  
Population  ageing is  also  a  challenge of the  highest order  for the sustainability  of  public 
finances. Specifically, the latest estimates of its impact on public spending on pensions, 
health and long-term care reveal a significant increase in expenditure on these areas over 
the  next  three  decades.  In  the  case  of  the  pension  system,  the  2011  and  2013  reforms 
included  a  progressive  raising  of  the  retirement  age,  the  application  of  the  sustainability 
factor,  which  links  the  initial  pension  to  the  increase  in  life  expectancy,  and  an  annual 
revaluation index for pensions, with their increase conditional upon the system’s revenue 
and expenditure being in balance. These reforms were geared to gradually correcting the 
system’s current shortfall, significantly countering the effect of the expected increase in the 
dependency rate in the long term.  
However,  the  latest  legislative  developments  appear  to  be  moving  towards  relaxing  the 
application of the current re-balancing mechanisms, the sustainability factor and, above all, 
the annual revaluation index for pensions. A return to inflation-indexed pensions would, on 
Banco de España calculations, give rise to an increase in public spending of over 3 pp of 
GDP in 2050 compared with the scenario based on the strict application of the revaluation 
8/14 
  index.  Ensuring  the  system’s  financial  sustainability  would  therefore  require  including 
additional measures on the revenue or on the expenditure sides of the system. In any event, 
it is desirable that any reform strategy chosen should increase the system’s transparency, 
strengthen  its  contributiveness  (i.e.  the  relationship  between  contributions  and  benefits) 
and,  in  particular,  maintain  an  automatic  adjustment  mechanism  that  ensures  the 
sustainability of the population’s future pensions.  
It is likewise important to recall that the impact of population ageing is not confined to public 
finances, since it also bears down on the participation rate, productivity and the economy’s 
potential  growth;  hence,  tackling  this  phenomenon  calls  for  a  broad-brush  approach, 
regarding both the time period envisaged and the set of instruments that should be used.  
In  this  respect,  the  outlook  for  the  Spanish  economy’s  long-term  potential  growth  is 
relatively modest (see Chart 13). Specifically, on the latest available estimates, which are 
naturally  subject  to  some  degree  of  uncertainty,  our  economy’s  potential  growth  rate  is 
expected to  fall  from  close  to  3%  per  annum  in  2008  to  post-crisis  levels slightly  below 
1.5%. This level, though close to that of the euro area, is below that estimated for the most 
dynamic developed economies. Among the key structural factors constraining this growth 
are  the  aforementioned  population  ageing,  high  structural  unemployment  and  lacklustre 
productivity.   
Indeed, despite the swift pace of job creation in recent years, unemployment remains very 
high, especially among certain groups, such as the lesser-skilled, whose unemployment rate 
is over 25% (see Chart 14). The difficulties some groups face in finding work means that, 
according to figures for the third quarter of 2018, practically half the unemployed have been 
in  this  situation  for  over a  year.  Of  particular importance here  is  improving  the  quality of 
employment, which is affected by the high involuntary part-time status and short duration 
of  employment  contracts.  Such  marked  segmentation  of  the  labour  market  hampers, 
moreover, productivity gains.  
These market inefficiencies also lie behind – at least in part – the changes in inequality in 
Spain during the crisis. Over the course of the Spanish recession, strong job destruction, 
concentrated  among  certain  groups,  and  the  precariousness  of  many  contractual 
relationships that arose from this more uncertain macroeconomic setting prompted growth 
in inequality in per capita income, despite the fact that wage differences among workers 
oscillated less than in other developed economies. The current upturn and, in particular, 
strong employment creation are allowing some correction of per capita income inequality. 
However,  looking  ahead,  additional  reductions  in  the  indicators  of  income  inequality  will 
depend  on  continuing  reductions  in  unemployment,  which  requires  improvements  in  the 
employability  of  the  lesser-skilled  and  an  increase  in  the  hours  actually  worked  by 
employees with lower wages. In any event, the causes behind the dynamics of inequality 
and  its  effects  are  complex,  and  learning  about  them  will  involve  analysing  in  depth  the 
various key facets (wages, household income, consumption and wealth, among others), this 
being an essential requisite for designing public policies conducive to socially sustainable 
growth.  
Against  this  background,  allow  me  to  refer  to  the  discussions  surrounding  the  national 
minimum wage. The Annual Report mentions the effect of the increases approved in 2017 
and 2018, of 8% and 4%, respectively. In this respect, the empirical evidence available on 
 9/14 
 the effects of increases in the minimum wage offers a wide variety of results, although in 
general, it tends to suggest that an increase in the minimum wage has a negative – although 
limited – effect on aggregate employment in the economy. Nonetheless, according to this 
same evidence, the impact on the probability of job loss is significant in the case of certain 
groups, such as lesser-skilled youths and elderly workers, whose unemployment rate is still 
very  high  and whose level  of productivity is  below  the average. The level of  the  national 
minimum wage and its annual increases should therefore be designed bearing in mind the 
productivity of the workers affected and their level of employability if it is wished to avoid 
undesirable effects, in the form of job loss and increased inequality.  
To address the challenges of our labour market, economic policy should firstly  move on 
evaluating active policies, especially among the lesser-skilled, in order to focus resources 
on those measures most effective with a view to increasing employability. Secondly, future 
changes  in  the  labour  market  should  serve  to  make  progress  in  reducing  temporary 
employment and excessive job turnover, without hindering job creation and, in particular, 
permanent job hires. Thirdly, mechanisms should be set in place to provide for a greater 
alignment of each firm’s wage conditions with their level of productivity. Also, it should be 
sought to enhance work-life balance, to promote the birth rate and to tailor migratory flows 
to the demand for specific professionals and job profiles. Finally, as I said regarding the 
minimum wage, the measures aimed at protecting the lowest incomes should be designed 
in such a way as not to diminish employability.  
Meanwhile, the factor productivity growth rate of the Spanish economy continues to be low 
(see Chart 15). The modest growth of productivity has been associated with a lower rate of 
growth of firms’ average productivity in Spain than in other European countries, and with an 
allocation of resources to less productive firms during the past expansion. Addressing these 
problems requires an improved business competition framework. 
Regarding  this  last  matter,  over  the  last  decade  much  of  the  loss  in  competitiveness  – 
measured  in  terms  of  relative  unit  labour  cost  indicators  –  accumulated  during  the 
expansionary phase relative to the euro area as a whole (see Chart 16) has been recovered. 
This improvement is mainly explained by the improved labour productivity associated with 
severe  job  destruction  during  the  crisis  and  by  wage  moderation,  while  the  correction 
associated with profit margins has been less important. This fact, which at first may have 
been  associated  with  the  need  for  firms  to  improve  their  financial  position,  may  now  be 
evidencing a certain lack of business competition in some sectors, the persistence of which 
may hinder the proper allocation of resources, incentives and innovative capacity and, in 
general, the well-being of consumers. 
In order to foster an adequate level of competition, apart from lowering the barriers to entry 
in some sectors, certain regulations hampering the development of new productive firms 
will have to be reviewed, either because they provide incentives contrary to the development 
of business growth or because they hinder the exit from the market of firms with sub-optimal 
productivity, thereby limiting the proper allocation of productive resources in the Spanish 
economy.  
Additionally,  enhanced  productivity  requires  improvements  in  human  and  technological 
capital.  In  this  respect,  the  educational  legal  framework  needs  to  be  strengthened,  to 
eliminate the gap between the educational quality indicators of Spain and other developed 
10/14 
  countries,  and  the  challenges  to  Spain’s  educational  and  occupational  training  system 
posed by globalisation, technological process and task automation need to be addressed 
without delay.  
Furthermore, during the crisis the technological capital gap between Spain and its European 
partners widened due to lower spending on R&D as a proportion of GDP in the public and, 
particularly, the private sector. In addition to the structural features limiting firms’ innovative 
ability  (in  terms  of  human  capital,  business  capabilities,  productive  structure,  business 
competition and financing), Spain’s public research system is susceptible to improvement 
and the budgetary funding of innovation is low. 
Challenges facing the Spanish banking sector  
Let me now concentrate on some of the main challenges facing the Spanish banking sector. 
Despite the significant progress made in recent years in terms of profitability, solvency and 
liquidity,  it  still  faces  some  significant  challenges,  largely  shared  with  other  euro  area 
banking systems. Overcoming these challenges is vital if Spanish banks are to build up a 
sufficiently strong position to contribute to economic growth and job creation. 
The first of these challenges is to reduce the assets impaired by the crisis. Chart 17 shows 
that  in  June  2018  the  volume  of  non-performing  assets  had  decreased  by  60%  from  its 
peak,  although  it  remained  at  still-high  levels.  Foreclosed  assets  had  fallen  by  40%. 
Economic growth will continue contributing to the ongoing reduction of impaired assets. 
However,  banks  need  to  press  ahead  with  applying  active  management  policies  to  their 
impaired  assets.  In  this  respect,  it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  continued  high  levels  of 
impaired assets have deleterious effects on banks themselves and on the economy as a 
whole,  which  is  why  the  economic  and  supervisory  authorities  have  a  special  interest  in 
banks taking appropriate measures in this area. 
Recouping  profitability  is  another  of  the  challenges  facing  the  Spanish  banking  sector. 
Although Spanish bank profitability has returned to positive levels and stands somewhat 
above the EU average (as shown by Chart 18), it is still below its pre-crisis levels and below 
those of the banking systems of some developed economies which have performed better 
in this respect. This current low profitability is concentrated in banks’ business in Spain, 
although  their  activity  abroad,  which  provided  them  with  a  valuable  source  of  risk 
diversification during the crisis, is not plain sailing, particularly at present when some of the 
economies to which Spanish banks are exposed (such as Turkey and Argentina) are going 
through notable difficulties.  
In any event, as they deal with the low profitability of their domestic business, Spanish banks 
will have to guard against overly relaxing their loan approval and selection criteria. 
The third challenge facing the banking sector is that associated with the process of adapting 
to  a  more  stringent  regulatory  framework  with  higher  own  funds  and  liquid  assets 
requirements and other additional requirements derived from the new resolution regulations. 
Spanish banks have already largely adapted to the new requirements, and their liquidity and 
solvency ratios stand above the minimum requirements, although as can be seen in Chart 
19 their CET1 capital ratios are low compared with those of the other euro area banking 
systems, underscoring the need for banks to strengthen their capital levels. It should be 
noted that although most of the regulatory changes have already taken place, some reforms 
 11/14 
 have yet to be applied in full, such as the Basel III review and the MREL requirements, which 
will involve further adaptation by banks. 
Lastly,  the  main  future  challenge  facing  Spanish  credit  institutions  relates  to  the  new 
competition framework  stemming  from  the  emergence  of new  technologies and  growing 
financial disintermediation. In particular, although high uncertainty surrounds this area, new 
technologies clearly pose the most significant challenge (and opportunity) for banks in the 
medium and long term. These technologies may rapidly alter the competition framework, 
increasing  competition  in  some  segments  and  changing  both  the  demand  for  banking 
services and the way in which they are provided. This means that banks will have to respond 
by anticipating and adjusting to the new environment, even though this may entail higher 
costs in the short term. 
The current degree of penetration of new technologies is comparatively low in Spain, as 
shown in Chart 20. This, together with Spain’s extensive bank branch network, leads one to 
believe that there is considerable room for growth in digital banking and for efficiency gains, 
providing a growth opportunity for Spanish banking institutions. 
Growing  financial  disintermediation  is  yet  another  challenge  for  the  banking  sector.  Its 
intensity  will  depend  on  short-term  and  structural  factors  relating  to  monetary  policy 
developments, the emergence of new competitors, progress in the capital markets union 
and long-term saving trends. 
Challenges facing the euro area 
Lastly,  let  me  now  turn  to  the  challenges  facing  the  euro  area,  since  the  outlook  for  the 
Spanish economy also relies to a crucial extent on these challenges being adequately met. 
In this respect, despite the improvements made in the European architecture in recent years, 
more progress is needed to enhance euro area stability, requiring further steps to reduce 
risks and also to share them between the Member States.  
It should be recalled that, after several years in which limited progress was made in euro 
area institutional reforms, it is now more than a year since the European Commission took 
the  initiative  to  re-open  the  debate,  with  the  reflection  paper  on  the  deepening  of  the 
economic and monetary union. 
This debate revealed a variety of views on the role to be played by national responsibility 
and solidarity between Member States in the institutional framework of the euro area in order 
to achieve greater stability and prosperity. At the summit of heads of state and government 
of the euro area countries in June 2018, a number of agreements were reached for progress 
in institutional reform and to address several urgent challenges. Thus, the European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM) will act as the common financial backstop for the Single Resolution Fund 
(SRF)  and  its  role  in  the  design  and  supervision  of  assistance  programmes  will  be 
strengthened,  with  a  possible  review  of  the  instruments  at  its  disposal.  During  the  last 
stretch of the year, the Eurogroup is to work on these two initiatives, with a view to their 
being adopted at the December summit.  
The Eurogroup should also continue to discuss other possible elements for completion of 
Economic and Monetary Union. In particular, definition of a roadmap for the creation of a 
12/14 
  European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) with sufficient shared fiscal backing would be 
desirable.  In  the  economic  and  tax  spheres,  some  kind  of  common  cyclical  insurance 
mechanism is also needed, to cut adjustment costs for countries experiencing asymmetric 
shocks, and help is needed to design a fiscal policy more tailored to the euro area as a 
whole so that, in the event of a severe crisis, monetary policy will no longer be the only tool 
available to uphold aggregate demand.  
In future, further progress must also be made in the capital markets union, which is essential 
to  achieve  greater  capital  market  integration,  fortify  banking  union  and  strengthen  the 
private mechanisms for efficient allocation of financial resources and the risks associated 
with their investment throughout the European Union. 
Conclusions 
As you can see, the Banco de España’s Annual Report provides an ambitious analysis and 
diagnosis of the Spanish economy. 
The main conclusions drawn in the Report, which was prepared in the first half of the year, 
remain essentially valid, despite the apparent growing deceleration of the global, European 
and Spanish economies:  
-  First, the need to take advantage of a level of economic growth that is still above 
potential to speedily and determinedly address the necessary fiscal consolidation 
process.  In  this  respect,  guaranteeing  the  financial  sustainability  of  the  public 
pension system is particularly important, in view of the medium-term implications. 
For this purpose, a comprehensive package of measures to address the effects of 
population ageing on the economy is essential. 
-  Second,  advantage  should  also  be  taken  of  the  current  cyclical  conditions  to 
intensify the structural reform agenda and prevent its reversal. In the case of the 
labour market, the level of temporary employment and repeated contract renewals 
should  be  reduced,  without  undermining  job  creation,  active  policies  should  be 
focused on the most effective measures to enhance employability and set in place 
mechanisms that facilitate greater alignment between wage conditions at individual 
firms  and  their  productivity  levels.  These  factor  market  reforms  must  be 
accompanied by product market reforms that encourage business competence and 
competition.  Productivity  gains  in  the  economy  also  demand  improvements  in 
human and technological capital. 
-  Third, in the financial sphere, the Spanish financial system continues to face various 
significant challenges. Notably: (i) the need for banks to continue to actively manage 
their impaired assets, so that the financial system, through its lending activity, may 
continue  to  support  economic  growth;  (ii) the  need  to  recover  profitability  levels, 
without  unduly  easing  credit  standards;  (iii) the  need  for  credit  institutions  to 
strengthen  their  capitalisation  levels,  to  adapt  to  a  more  demanding  regulatory 
framework; and (iv) the need to address the competitive challenge stemming from 
the  emergence  of  new  technologies,  competitors  and  services  in  the  financial 
sphere. 
 13/14 
 The materialisation of some of the risks to the economy that were discerned six months ago 
only adds to the importance of the challenges for the medium and long term highlighted in 
the Report and, as I have tried to stress today, to the need  to address these challenges 
speedily and with sufficient resolve. 
 14/14 
 