Mugur Isărescu: Romania and the EIB after 25 years
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the EIB
conference "Investment and Investment Finance in Romania", Bucharest, 4 December 2018.
 Vice President McDowell,
Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to welcome you all at the National Bank of Romania. Allow me to extend a warm
greeting to Mr. Andrew McDowell, Vice President of the European Investment Bank and to Ms.
Debora  Revoltella,  Chief  Economist  of  the  European  Investment  Bank.  It  is  a  privilege  for  the
National  Bank  of  Romania  to  co-host  with  the  European  Investment  Bank  this  conference  on
Investments and Investment Finance.
The  European  Investment  Bank  celebrates  this  year  its  60th  anniversary  since  its  creation  in
1958,  under  the  Treaty  of  Rome. Allow  me  to  congratulate  this  important  institution  and  the
teams of the EIB Office in Romania and the EIB Office in Luxembourg, for their outstanding work
and diligence in promoting strategic investment projects for Europe and Romania.
The topic proposed for today’s conference outlines the fact that 2018 has been rich in lessons for
the  future,  showing  the  impact  of  policy  decisions  upon  the  economic  development.  The
economic growth is strongly linked with the economic cycle, but its durability is dependent on
long-term strategic investments by far more than short-term consumption boost.
I invite you all to debate the subject of Investments and Investment Finance in Romania during
the  two  panels  of  today’s  conference.  The  first  panel  will  be  moderated  by  Mr.  Liviu  Voinea,
Deputy Governor and will approach the theme of investments and investment finance in 2018.
The  second  panel  will  be  moderated  by  Ms.  Lara  Tassan  Zanin,  Head  of  The  European
Investment  Bank  Office  in  Romania  and  will  focus  on  the  support  of  sustainable  growth  in
Romania, shifting from consumption to investments.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Romania and the European Investment Bank share a long and fruitful cooperation that started in
1990. It got closer in 2007 when Romania became a member of European Union and implicitly of
European Investment Bank. This joint partnership has boosted investments in Romania in areas
of significant importance for the national economy, such as the infrastructure, small and medium
enterprises,  environment  and  innovation.  These  coordinates  are  totaling  more  than  13  billion
EUR allocated to around 130 projects financed by the European Investment Bank, besides other
70 projects financed by the European Fund for Strategic Investments. These figures alone speak
about the priorities, however I would like to point out that the financial impact transcends beyond
the sum of total loans.
There is significant potential for development and improvement. Romania is a net beneficiary of
EU funds, the latest data showing a positive aggregate balance with more than 32 billion EUR as
net received funds. In the first seven months of 2018, Romania benefited of 2.7 million EUR in
European  funds  and  past  experiences  show  there  is  a  learning  cycle  in  managing  European
funds and their disbursement increases towards the end of the Multiannual Financial Framework.
We expect the investment  financing  to  increase  in  2019  and  2020.  The  European  Investment
Bank  and  its  investment-financing  arm,  European  Investment  Fund,  have  a  pronounced
contribution  to  closing  the  financing  gap  of  investments  in  the  context  of  economic  downturn,
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
providing the sources for investment finance, the expertise and the support for entrepreneurs.
The recurrent themes for Romania’s development needs are as present as ever in the public
space,  and  they  should  trigger  a  higher  implication  on  all  levels  of  decision,  from  the  private
sector  to  the  public  management  authorities,  to  support  and  extend  the  investments  for
sustainable  economic  growth.  The  shift  from  consumption  to  investments,  the  reliable  and
qualitative infrastructure, the deficit of skilled labor and the gap in the transition from education to
employment, the good governance and accountability framework in institutional investments, as
well  as  the  need  to  enhance  the  EU  funds  absorption  rate,  all  these  are,  at  the  moment,  the
challenges that Romania, faces on its pathway to sustainable growth. In this context, I would like
to point out the fact that the results of the European Investment Bank survey are in line with the
NBR’s  evaluations  of  the  financial  sector,  the  key  aspect  being  the  access  to  finance  and
sustainable  investments.  I  really  hope  that  the  conference  provides  an  excellent  frame  for
communication and exchange of ideas.
It is important that the collaboration in investment finance leads to the implementation of effective
investment  policies  to  ensure  the  engagement  of  both  the  public  and  the  private  sectors  for
economic growth.
As a part of the European Union, Romania needs to align and redefine the economy, to deepen
the integration and to enhance the convergence with the Euro Area countries in the light of the
Euro adoption objective. This statutory obligation as an EU member is assumed in the accession
treaty; however the process requires significant efforts to prepare, on economical, political, social
and cultural levels. This process requires making good use of all instruments and the financial
investments make no exception.
We  still  need  to  develop  the  analysis  capacity,  the  European  investments  absorption  and  the
acceleration of funds distribution in the Romanian economy.
The cooperation and the technical assistance for co-financing of investment projects under the
Multiannual Financial Frameworks 2014–2020 and the next one, as well as the active role played
by the European Investment Bank in the approval of structural funds under the Juncker plan in
Romania  are  key  priorities  to  ensure  the  enablement  of  economic  growth  potential  in  action
towards sustainable economic development.
The partnership between the European Investment Bank and the commercial banks in Romania
ensure the effective transmission mechanism to allocate and distribute the European structural
funds to the infrastructure projects, to the development of production capacities of the small and
medium  enterprises  and  to  the  creation  of  new  jobs  in  the  economy.  The  banks  are  well
capitalized, have an excellent solvency and a superior liquidity, prerequisites for co-financing the
companies and the economy.
The  loan-to-deposits  ratio  is  below  100%,  indicating  available  resources  for  financing.  Non-
performing  loans  have  decreased  more  than  three  times,  from  22%  to  about  6%,  showing  a
positive trend in a healthier internal ratings model and a sound balance sheet position, while the
lending  dynamics  for  companies  is  below  the  European  average.  We  have  the  potential  to
accelerate the access to finance to support investments as a base for economic growth, instead
of  a  consumption  driven  growth.  This  potential  is  demonstrated  by  the  low  financial
intermediation in Romania, around 29%, although this percentage can be misleading, as large
corporations  usually  access  financing  directly  abroad,  from  the  headquarters  or  from  the
financial institutions in the countries where they are headquartered.
The more prudent lending policies and the risk aversion of commercial banks are factors that
could  be  perceived  as  a  break  in  financing  investments  at  full  capacity;  however  there  is  a
positive side, too. It is a safe approach to credit as a driver of economic growth, as credit (lat.
“credere”) supports regaining the trust in the financial system and in the banks as institutions that
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
ensure the allocation of funds to the private and the public sector.
Companies in Romania, as beneficiaries of European funds, need to respond to some pressing
issues such as inadequate management and financial discipline. Only around 15% of small and
medium companies are eligible  for  financing,  with  a  management  team  capable  to  conduct  a
lucrative activity that reflects in a sound set of accounting documents, like the balance sheet and
the P&L account. These companies too, can be affected by the contagion effect, for instance
when  their  projections  and  cash  flows  are  subject  to  repayment  from  other  companies,  with
delays.
To  support  these  companies  and  to  ease  the  access  to  finance,  one  needs  to  improve  the
policies  and  continue  the  financial  reforms  to  create  a  more  adequate  and  flexible  frame  for
investments and the multiplier effect of co-financing.
The European Investment Bank has been a strong pillar for this strategic economic development,
channeling  investments  towards  the  crucial  sectors  of  transport,  digital  infrastructure  and  the
new  technologies,  education  for  skilled  labour  force,  healthcare,  or  agriculture.  The  European
Investment Bank contributes to creating the right mindset and responsible attitude of assuming
calculated  risks.  It  supports  the  communication  of  sound  public  policies  and  priorities  for
Romania’s economic and social development, to continue and expand the European integration
and economic convergence.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Concluding, I believe the challenge and the opportunity lie in the continuous efforts, the relentless
endeavors and the implementation of strategic investment projects, fostering access to finance
for ensuring the sustainable economic development in Romania, as well as in Europe.
Strong European cooperation, like the partnership between the European Investment Bank and
Romania, is the only way to bridge the gaps in investments, to reduce regional disparities and
close on the imbalances that delay the long-term sustainable economic growth.
I would like to wish you all a fruitful dialogue and I invite Vice-President McDowell to take the floor.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
