Honoured, 
I am pleased to be here with you today to discuss and hear about a very important 
topic for our country's economy, and I would like to thank the American Chamber 
of  Commerce  for  the  invitation  and  to  express  my  high  considerations  for 
businesses and their role in the country's economic development.  
I believe that the topic of this conference is very good because it comes at a time 
when the banking sector has made great progress in improving the conditions for 
sustainable financing of the economy, namely businesses.  
 Kosovo's  banking  sector  in  recent  years  has  considerably  increased  its  role  in 
financing  the  economic  growth  in  the  country,  accelerating  the  loan  growth  rate, 
and  significantly  reducing  loan  interest  rates.  Easing  the  lending  standards  and 
reducing the loan interest rates have served as important incentives for increasing 
loan  demand,  resulting  in  an  annual  loan  growth  of  11.6  per  cent  in  October  this 
year.  This  indicates  that  access  to  finance,  which  has  long  been  reported  by 
businesses  as  one  of  the  main  barriers  to  their  business  development,  is  now 
undergoing continuous improvement. This can be noticed by the growth in lending 
to the sectors of the economy which in previous periods had a more limited access 
to  banking  financing.  According  to  the  latest  data  of  October  2018,  the  loans 
granted by the banking sector to businesses are in the amount of EUR 1.7 billion 
which, compared with the same period of five years ago, has increased by 45 per 
cent. 
The lending structure by economic sectors has started to improve compared to the 
previous  periods,  although  there  is  room  for  greater  diversification  of  the  loan 
portfolio  in  favour  of  the  sectors  that  have  the  greatest  potential  to  generate 
 Faqe 1 nga 5 
economic growth. Currently, about 50 per cent of total loans issued to enterprises 
are represented by loans to the trade sector. During this year, the agricultural sector 
and the manufacturing sector were among the sectors with the highest increase of 
loans  received.  However,  the  total  amount  of  loans  granted  to  these  sectors 
continues to be low. The share of manufacturing sector in total loans to enterprises 
in  October  was  13  per  cent,  while  loans  to  the  agriculture  sector  accounted  for 
about 4 per cent of total loans.  
Since  today's  topic  is  related  to  the  role  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  country's 
economic development, I would like to emphasize the fact that the greatest support 
to  these  sectors  of  the  economy,  but  also  to  the  other  sectors  with  the  greatest 
potential  to  generate  economic  growth,  is  indispensable  in  order  to  have  a  more 
sustainable economic development.  
However,  we  are  also  aware  that  the  diversification  of  the  banking  sector's  loan 
portfolio depends not only on the loan supply but is largely dependent on the loan 
demand. In this context, I would like to emphasize that the banks have very high 
financial potential for further lending growth, have eased loan standards, and have 
significantly  reduced  the  cost  of  access  to  banking  finance.  In  October  2018,  the 
average loan interest rate was 6.6 per cent, which represents a great improvement 
compared to previous years. The decline in loan interest rates is clearly visible in 
all  sectors,  including  loans  to  the  agricultural  sector,  where  the  interest  rate 
decreased  to  7.5  per  cent,  compared  to  16.7  per  cent  five  years  ago;  for  the 
industrial sector, interest rates decreased to 5.8 per cent, compared to 12.2 per cent 
in the past; and also for the service sector, the average interest rate decreased to 6.3 
per cent, compared to 11.1 per cent five years ago. 
 Faqe 2 nga 5 
Improvement of the conditions for access to banking financing has also been noted 
with  regard  to  other  aspects,  such  as  easing  loan  approval  standards,  reducing 
collateral requirements, and extending the loan maturity term. 
However,  in  order  to  have  a  greater  lending  to  sectors  that  currently  have  the 
lowest  access  to  banking  financing,  improving  the  loan  supply  is  not  enough, 
rather it is also necessary that the demand of these sectors for loans be higher and 
of better quality. I would like to say that a more comprehensive approach is needed 
to  identify  and  support  the  development  of  sectors  of  major  importance  for  the 
country's economic development. 
We  believe  that  an  important  step  to  increase  support  to  these  sectors  was 
undertaken  when  the  Kosovo  Guarantee  Fund  was  established.  So  far,  the  total 
value of loans guaranteed by this Fund has reached EUR 71.3 million and has been 
distributed to 1,836 micro, small and medium enterprises.     
 In  order  to  have  a  banking  sector  which  serves  the  sustainable  financing  of  the 
country's  economic  development,  the  basic  prerequisite  is  for  the  sector  to  be 
sustainable. On this occasion, I would like to confirm again that Kosovo's banking 
sector continues to be stable based on all the indicators of financial soundness. The 
main focus will be on the very good quality of the loan portfolio, which reflects the 
good  credit  risk  management  by  banks, but  which  can  also serve  as  an important 
indicator  of  the  favourable  economic  environment  for  the  operation  of  banks  in 
Kosovo. In September this year, the non-performing loans ratio was 2.8 per cent, 
reflecting  a  very  good  condition  of  loan  portfolio  quality.  There  are  numerous 
factors that have contributed to the good quality of the loan portfolio, but amongst 
the  most  important  ones  I  consider  the  macroeconomic  stability,  legislative 
 Faqe 3 nga 5 
developments  over  the  last  years,  as  is  the  case  with  private  enforcement  agents 
who  have  facilitated  the  execution  of  collateral  and  the  implementation  of 
contracts,  prudential  oversight  by  the  CBK,  adequate  bank  risk  management  by 
banks, and responsible behaviour of citizens of the Republic of Kosovo in meeting 
their contractual obligations vis-à-vis banks. 
The  satisfactory  situation  regarding  the  stability  of  the  banking  sector  is  also 
reflected  by  other  indicators,  such  as  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity  indicators, 
which  have  consistently  exceeded  the  regulatory  requirements  and  represent  the 
high solvency of the banking sector.     
 The Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo, with all its capacities, is committed 
to supporting the sustainable development of the financial system by providing the 
entire necessary infrastructure to support the development of financial institutions 
and at the same time assuring that their activity provides financial stability. In this 
regard,  we  are  providing  the  banking  sector  with  the  most  modern  standards  of 
regulation  and  financial  oversight,  thus  enabling  the  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions in Kosovo to operate under the rules in force in all developed countries. 
Also, CBK provides the banking sector with a modern financial infrastructure. The 
interbank payment system, which is a modern, efficient and secure system, and the 
loan  registry  that  provides  banks  with  the  most  modern  services  in  this  area  are 
good examples to illustrate the development of financial infrastructure in Kosovo. 
 At  the  conclusion  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  once  again  that 
Kosovo's banking sector is in sound financial position and with continued growth 
of funding the sustainable economic development of Kosovo, nevertheless, greater 
 Faqe 4 nga 5 
inter-institutional  commitment  is  required  to  create  the  necessary  conditions  in 
order  for  this  sector's  support  to  the  country's  economy  and  to  businesses  to  be 
even greater.  
The 100 per cent tax 
 In  principle,  we  support  the  development  of  free  trade  between  all  countries,  but 
only  when  the  principles  of  free  trade  apply  reciprocally.  In  this  respect,  other 
countries should allow our businesses to have free access to their markets just like 
we allow them to freely access our market. Therefore, I consider it is time for other 
countries to reflect and apply the principles of free trade as a whole rather than on 
a selective basis because this is not acceptable to us. 
  Faqe 5 nga 5 
