Florin Georgescu: Challenging the status quo in management and
economics
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Florin  Georgescu,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of
Romania, at the Strategica International Academic Conference "Challenging the Status Quo in
Management and Economics", Bucharest, 11 October 2018.
 Distinguished guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am glad to welcome you at the National Bank of Romania, as we host today the 6th edition of
this prestigious international conference, together with the National University of Political Studies
and Public Administration, and the Romanian Academic Society of Management.
The debates today will be held under a generous and timely topic: “Challenging the Status Quo in
Management and Economics”.
We couldn’t have a better moment to discuss challenges to the status quo than today, as we
witness a whole range of economic, social and political forces pushing for change all over the
world. If this change is in the sense of progress or not, that remains to be seen. I trust that your
presentations and insights will shed more light on these trends.
I confess that I had a look at the titles of the presentations in both days of the conference, and the
word that appears most frequently in these titles is knowledge. And I realize that not less than 50
years  ago,  Peter  Drucker,  the  philosopher  and  management  guru,  launched  the  concept  of
knowledge economy. Since then, economists and management specialists of all doctrines, put
knowledge at the forefront of their views of the world.
The surprise is that after 50 years, we still feel that there are missing elements in our economic
and institutional constructions, which should be knowledge-based. Instead of having more and
more educated and informed people in society, we see a widening knowledge and information
gap. Partially this comes from economic inequalities, another increasing challenge, but partially
from ignorance.
The  Nobel  Prize  this  year  was  recently  awarded  to  professors  William  Nordhaus  and  Paul
Romer for achievements in the economics of climate change, but also for the role of technology
in  economic  progress.  For  both  distinctions,  the  Nobel  Committee  mentioned  that  research
informed  government  policies  and  international  cooperation  are  decisive  for  sustainable
economic growth.
What  we  see  in  this  year’s  Nobel  Prize  award,  is  the  supreme  recognition  of  the  fact  that
knowledge and research are essential inputs for policies. On the other hand, we notice that in
many cases, in everyday practice, policies ignore the findings of research and academia, not to
mention that sometimes they even ignore the basic laws of economics.
At the other end of the transmission mechanism, the citizens grow increasingly dissatisfied with
policy-making  and  become  detached  from  their  leaders’  actions.  The  gap  is  then  filled  by
extremism and populism, two evolving diseases of societies today.
Moreover,  despite  an  immense  stock  of  knowledge  that  is  accessible  to  an  unprecedented
number  of  people,  we  notice  a  lack  of  appetite  for  this  knowledge,  most  surprisingly  among
younger generations. Therefore, it appears that our real problem is not the lack of knowledge, but
the lack of interest for knowledge.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
I have to tell you that the National Bank of Romania has established 9 years ago its activity of
financial  education  and  last  year  we  created  a  specialized  department  for  this  purpose.  This
conference  is  organized  under  the  umbrella  of  our  broader  project  Academica,  meant  to
stimulate the contacts between the academic world, our central bank experts and the public.
With this triangle of knowledge, we hope to become more and more successful in reaching the
hearts and minds of citizens, but also of policymakers and company managers. We have a long
way to go in both directions.
We  still  see  large  groups  of  population  that  have  insufficient  or  zero  knowledge  about  the
economy and the risks to their economic life. The last survey on financial literacy in Romania
revealed that only 22% of the adult population could be considered financially literate. This means
that the rest of respondents have problems in understanding the perils of inflation or the risks
associated with a bank credit.
Therefore, it goes without saying that in order to have successful policies, we have not only to
integrate  more  knowledge  in  our  policy  design,  but  also  to  convince  people  to  integrate  more
knowledge in their financial decisions. And this is twice as hard to achieve.
These facts oblige us to realize that challenging the status quo means in the end challenging
mentalities, both those of policymakers and of citizens.
It  is  a  very  complex  process,  but  we  see  it  as  an  opportunity  as  well.  We  can  transform
education and awareness in very effective policy tools, to everybody’s benefit. We can surpass
the objective limits of our policy actions, by making people more aware of these very objective
limits.
Bridging  the  knowledge  gap  can  lead  to  more  financial  inclusion,  to  more  access  to  finance,
which is good news for banks, companies, citizens and public authorities alike.
Ladies and gentlemen,
My conclusion and my message for you, distinguished participants to this conference, and I do
not  want  to  sound  old  fashioned,  is  that  we  need  research  and  economic  analysis  that  is
practical and can fill the real deficits of our society.
And if you really want to challenge the status quo, my advice is to have in mind also the way your
research will be disseminated and materialized in real life.
On the other hand, let’s not forget to preserve what is valuable in the current establishment. As
an  old  word  of  wisdom  is  saying,  we  need  courage  to  change  the  things  which  should  be
changed, serenity to accept the things that cannot be changed, and the wisdom to distinguish the
one from the other.
I wish you success with the debates!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
