Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus: Innovation in a disruptive era
Remarks by Ms Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara Malaysia), at the Malaysian Insurance Institute (MII) Summit "Innovation in a Disruptive
Era", Kuala Lumpur, 28 September 2018.
 I would like to congratulate the Malaysian Insurance Institute for organising this summit. This is
my inaugural engagement with the industry and it gives me great pleasure to be able to address
all  of  you  today.  In  line  with  the  theme  of  this  conference,  my  remarks  today  will  cover  three
things: 
1.  Firstly,  the  role  of  insurance  within  the  context  of  key  developments  that  are  shaping  our
economy;
2.  Secondly, how the Bank views and is responding to innovation in the insurance sector; and
3.  Finally, some perspectives on our regulatory and supervisory focus moving forward.
Role of insurance in an economy
Insurance plays a core function in the modern economy and the financial system. There is a
positive relationship between economic growth and insurance development. This is borne out by
studies which have shown that more developed markets have a higher share of insurance in the
economy.
The  role  of  insurance  in  the  economy  is  worth  restating,  particularly  given  the  economic  and
social challenges that we face today.  A core purpose of insurance is providing protection against
individual and business risks through risk transfer and pooling. This improves individual welfare,
and supports consumption and investment activities.  The effects are more pronounced among
lower income groups and micro- and small businesses that are disproportionately impacted by
events such as the death or incapacitation of a breadwinner, or business disruptions. Insurance
and takaful therefore play a critical role in reducing inequality.  This is key and growing risk can be
seen in economies that are becoming more prosperous, and at the same time more divided.
A well-developed insurance sector also contributes to wider economic efficiency and resilience.
At  a  time  where  global  developments  can  have  a  far  greater  impact  on  domestic  economic
performance, it is important for countries including Malaysia, to continue to develop our growth
potential  through  further  diversification  into  new  and  higher  value-added  economic  activities. 
Insurance  facilitates  this  by  allowing  businesses  to  take  risks,  without  which  we  cannot  have
innovation.  It also enhances access to financing.  This is possible because insurance has the
ability to pool, assess and assume risks that are outside the expertise and capacity of banks or
businesses themselves to bear.  Such examples would be weather-related crop and property
insurance, key people risks or product liabilities. Premiums that are paid for insurance also act
as  strong  incentives  for  businesses  to  improve  risk  management,    which  in  turn,  increases
business resilience.
Of  course,  insurance  also  plays  a  key  role  in  the  development  and  resilience  of  our  financial
markets.    In  these  recent  episodes  of  heightened  market  volatility,  insurance  and  takaful
companies, alongside banks, have had an important stabilising effect on markets.
Placed  in  this  context,  it  is  sobering  to  note  that  for  Malaysia,  insurance  merely  accounts  for
1.7% of GDP and only 5.8% of financial assets.  Clearly, there is significant, untapped potential
for the industry to increase its broader economic impact, and feature much more prominently in
Malaysia’s growth story.  However, this cannot happen unless the industry steps up its game and
takes a more strategic view of its role in the economy – working much more proactively across
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the industry and with relevant bodies and agencies.
Take insurance penetration. It has been sluggish. Over the past few years, penetration (in terms
of total premiums to GDP) for the industry remained low at 4.8%. Less than 40% of Malaysian
citizens own a life insurance or family takaful policy. For the working population aged between 20
and 59 years old, this is higher at about 50%. There are at least another around 8 million working-
age individuals and over 700,000 micro enterprises in Malaysia that need protection. Of these
around 3.7 million are from the Bottom 40 income group.
Another pressing issue is the role of the industry in supporting a sustainable and comprehensive
healthcare system in Malaysia. Health expenditure is around 4.6% of GDP. In fact, the Malaysian
medical  and  health  insurance  market  has  the  highest  average  gross  medical  inflation.  It  was
around 15.4% in 2018. It is expected to continue rising. The industry plays a key role in helping
contain  costs  and  to  align  the  consumers  and  medical  industry  towards  preventive  care
measures. This will reduce the burden of individuals in society, especially those less privileged.
Further, the world’s population is ageing and Malaysia is not far from this. An ageing population
will put pressure on growth and the social protection system. Insurance will have a role to play in
ensuring the life, health and pension needs of society are met in a sustainable manner.
These demands on the industry are far from trivial and will not be met without strong leadership,
a longer-term view on investments in capacity, and a relentless focus on quality standards and
operational efficiency.  Yet, today these conditions remain hampered by what is still a fragmented
industry.    
It  is  therefore  timely,  if  not more urgent, for institutions to consider synergistic partnerships to
achieve the scale and competitive edge to lift performance and break into new markets.  Our
economy is in need of transformational change in the insurance sector – not incremental ones.
To achieve this, we believe there is room for further consolidation in the industry.
Technology and innovation
Let me turn to our views on innovation.
This  industry  has  no  shortage  of  evidence  of  its  ability  to  seize  opportunities  provided  by
technology to improve itself. In the United States in the 1950s, the life insurance industry was one
of the first and largest commercial users of the computer during its formative years. The data
processing  power  of  the  computer  allowed  the  industry  to  design  new  products,  scale  up
operations and increase efficiency.
Fast forward to today, we are at the brink of another great technological revolution and disruption.
Artificial intelligence, big data and robotics will reshape the way we live, work and play. In many
ways,  the  industry  is  in  a  prime  position  to  seize  the  opportunities  arising  from  these
technologies  given  that  the  ability  to  manage  risks  remains  the  single  most  compelling
proposition of insurance.
For example, e-hailing services have become part and parcel of modern life. Many of the drivers
do not benefit from generic motor insurance products. Perhaps usage-based or pay-as-you-drive
insurance policies would be better suited for these consumers. Technology such as telematics
could  also  be  adopted  to  incentivise  drivers  to  good  behaviour.  Artificial  intelligence  and
blockchain can be utilised to enhance the efficiency of the claims settlement process.
As a service industry, it is important for insurance companies to address the user experience.
From  our  extensive  engagements  with  the  public,  many  Malaysians  still  find  purchasing
insurance too much of a hassle. Products are perceived to be too convoluted, complicated and
non-transparent.  We  are  taking  this  very  seriously,  particularly  given  the  measures  we  have
taken  to  encourage  the  use  of  plain  language  coupled  with  clear  and  concise  disclosures. 
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Clearly,  these  measures  have  not  had  the  desired  effect.    There  is  an  urgent  need  for  the
industry to design a more positive customer experience. For example, quality engagements with
first-time buyers and the underserved will go a long way in closing the huge protection gap which
remains our most important priority right now.
We will also be looking more closely at the experience with direct distribution channels to date.
We would like to see greater impact from direct channels, including online or mobile platforms, in
supporting  higher  insurance  penetration.    Today,  the  Millennials  and  iGeneration  expect
significant technological innovations in the entire chain of insurance experience – from product
comparisons, purchase, claims, and customer support.  The industry cannot ignore this fact as
they will become the key customer segment in the near future. Further attention also needs to be
given to the role of shared infrastructure to support insurance undertakings, building further on
the fraud and motor insurance databases.
From the Bank’s perspective, our aim is to facilitate innovation in three main ways. First is by
lowering the barriers to innovation and competition. This is achieved by providing an environment
through the regulatory sandbox for the industry, including non-insurance firms, to test innovations
without  costly  regulatory  reprisals.    It  also  allows  the  Bank  to  appropriately  tailor  our  rules  to
better  suit  innovations  as  we  too,  learn  from  observing  the  solutions  that  are  tested  in  the
sandbox.
Second  is  through  proportionality.    We  aim  to  better  reflect  proportionality  in  our  regulatory
framework. For insurance, we expect that this will be mostly targeted at conduct rules where a
more  proportionate  approach  could  be  taken  to  reduce  compliance  costs  for  insurers  to
introduce innovative solutions in areas where we believe the risks to consumers are low.
The  third  area  of  focus  will  be  to  develop  a  more  coherent  approach,  particularly  across
agencies, for ensuring legal and regulatory compatibility with new innovations in insurance.  This
includes  addressing  issues  that  may  arise  in  legal  constructs,  for  example,  smart  contracts,
liability  issues  associated  with  robo-advice  or  driverless  cars, and  strengthening  defences
against cyber threats and abuses by criminal elements.
Regulatory  framework  and  priorities:  Laying  the  foundation  for  a  stable  and  well-
developed insurance sector
My third message today relates to the regulatory priorities and framework to ensure the stability
and development of the insurance sector. Stability and development are not two contradictory
goals.
Since the supervision of insurance was brought under the Bank’s ambit in 1988, the industry has
come a long way. Building on the stronger foundations in the industry, in the more recent period,
we have embarked on a broad range of reforms to further develop the full potential of the industry
to better serve the economy.
One  of  the  recent  significant  policies  we  have  put  in  place  is  the  Life  Insurance  and  Family
Takaful  Framework  (LIFE  Framework),  which  was  introduced  in  2015.  One  of  the  three  core
pillars of the LIFE Framework is to promote product innovation while preserving policy value.
At its core, the Framework places significant emphasis on product suitability assessments in the
delivery  of  insurance  products.  These  developments  that  we  observe  in  the  offering  of
investment-linked products have at times been at odds with this emphasis. With more than two-
thirds  of  new  premiums  generated  from  such  products  in  2017,  and  an  environment  of
heightened financial market volatility, a key concern for the Bank has been with the complexity of
products offered, and the level of understanding of the investment risk, which is borne entirely by
consumers. From our observations, the safeguards in place within insurers over product design,
disclosure levels and suitability assessments continue to reveal gaps.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In this regard, the Bank has consulted the industry on potential enhancements to be made to our
requirements on investment-linked insurance businesses to address some of these gaps. We
expect to finalise the requirements to the Minimum Allocation Rate (MAR) shortly to protect the
account  value  of  consumers;  more  robust  suitability  tests  to  improve  policy  persistency;  and
enhancements to sales illustrations.
The other key reform has been the Phased Liberalisation of Motor and Fire Tariffs which started
in 2016. The Bank is currently assessing the outcomes of the second phase as we prepare to
launch into the next phase of liberalisation. We are encouraged to see the positive response from
the industry and the positive impact on the diversity of products available to consumers. Over the
coming months, we will be able to form a clearer view on the market impact of premium rate
adjustments.  This will allow us to consider further flexibilities in the pricing bands.  We hope that
this in turn will drive further product innovations in addition to expanding capacity going forward.
Internationally,  developments  in  global  regulatory  and  accounting  standards  will  also  see
corresponding changes in the domestic regulatory environment.   A key development has been
the ongoing work by the IAIS to establish a risk-based global Insurance Capital Standard. It is the
Bank’s  intention  to  align  domestic  regulations  with  international  standards  to  promote  the
resilience  of  the  industry.    However,  we  will  always  do  so  with  a  careful  consideration  of
domestic specificities.
The  Bank  trusts  that  the  industry  will  continue  to  ramp  up  its  preparation  towards  full
implementation  of  the  IFRS  17  in  2021.  In  the  next  two  years,  the  Bank  will  be  reviewing  the
valuation and capital standards for solvency reporting. This will take into account the potential
areas of alignment with international solvency and accounting standards. The results from the
quantitative  tests  and  feedback  from  industry  engagement  will  be  valuable  inputs  for  these
upcoming reviews.
As  you  are  no  doubt  aware,  these  standards  are  inherently  very  complex.    As  the  industry
prepares  for  them,  there  is  a  need  to  strengthen  capacity  and  arrangements  –  both  at  the
institution  and  industry  levels  –  to  support  implementation.  This  includes  ensuring  effective
organisation  and  coordination  of  technical  work  at  the  industry  level  through  the  actuarial  and
industry  associations.    The  Malaysian  Insurance  Institute  also  needs  to  further  develop  its
capacity to support what will almost surely be an increase in demand for effective and relevant
technical training in these areas.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.  The insurance industry is no stranger to innovation. The history of insurance is
a success story of innovation in action. One of the earliest application of insurance is found in the
ancient Code of Hammurabi. Simple insurance contracts were also commonplace in Greek and
Roman civilizations for maritime trade. The insurance premium, a concept at the heart of the
industry, was first observed in historical records in the 14th century in Northern Italy.
The innovative spirit and ingenuity associated with insurance offers great promise for the industry
to remain relevant, flourish and contribute to the development of the nation in the times to come. 
The late Steve Jobs once said that “Innovation distinguishes between a leader and a follower.” 
As our economy continues to grow and transform, I would urge the industry to provide leadership
in demonstrating responsible and inclusive innovation.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
