Yannis  Stournaras:  What  lies  in  store  for  the  eurozone?  An
assessment  of  the  Greek  bailout  programmes:  has  EU  become
wiser?
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at The Economist: Southeast
Europe-Germany Business and Investment Summit "Reassessing Europe's priorities", Berlin, 3
December 2018.
 Over the past eight  years,  Greece  has  implemented  a  bold  economic  reform  and  adjustment
programme that has eliminated flow macroeconomic imbalances, namely the large twin deficits,
and  has  improved  sharply  wage  and  price  competitiveness.  In  addition,  it  consolidated  and
recapitalized the banking system. Still, stock imbalances remain, such as high public debt and a
high non-performing loans ratio. Also, despite the successful conclusion of the third adjustment
programme  in  August,  Greek  government  bonds  are  still  below  investment  grade  and  bond
spreads remain close to 400 basis points. Moreover, the cost of the adjustment programme in
terms of output and unemployment losses has been much higher than in the other euro area
Member States that also implemented adjustment programmes.
I will start today by providing a brief overview of the progress achieved so far. I will then discuss
the  current  economic  conditions  and  prospects,  as  well  as  the  challenges  ahead.  Next,  I  will
highlight  what,  in  my  opinion,  went  wrong  during  the  programme  implementation  in  spite  of
overall  success,  and  I  will  also  refer  to  certain  weaknesses  of  the  EMU  architecture.  Before
concluding, I will present a number of proposals for enhancing the functioning of the EMU.
1. Progress since 2010
Over the past eight  years,  Greece  has  implemented  a  bold  economic  reform  and  adjustment
programme  that  has  eliminated  fiscal  and  external  deficits  and  improved  competitiveness.
However, some crisis legacies remain unaddressed, as I will explain later. In more detail:
• The general government balance recorded a small surplus for a second consecutive year in
2017 (0.8% of GDP) from a deficit of 15.1% of GDP in 2009. The primary fiscal balance as a
percentage  of  GDP  has  improved  by  about  14  percentage  points  since  the  beginning  of  the
sovereign debt crisis outperforming the ESM programme’s fiscal target for three years in a row.
The 2017 primary fiscal outcome (according to ESM programme definition) recorded a surplus of
4.1% of GDP, well above the target of 1.75% of GDP.
• The current account deficit has fallen by 13 percentage points of GDP since the beginning of
the crisis.
• Labour cost competitiveness has been fully restored and price competitiveness has recorded
substantial gains since 2009. This outcome was mainly driven by labour market reforms, which
liberalised  employment  protection  legislation  and  facilitated  a  more  flexible  and  decentralised
wage bargaining system.
•  A  bold  programme  of  structural  reforms  and  privatisations  has  also  been  implemented.
Reforms  cover  various  areas,  such  as  the  pension  system,  the  health  system,  goods  and
services  markets,  the  business  environment,  the  tax  system,  the  budgetary  framework  and
public sector transparency.
As  a  consequence  of  the  above,  openness  has  improved  substantially  and  the  economy  has
started to rebalance towards tradable, export-oriented sectors. The share of total exports in GDP
increased from 19.0% in 2009 to 34.2% in 2017. Exports of goods and services excluding the
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
shipping sector have increased by 54% in real terms since their trough in 2009, outperforming
euro area exports as a whole. The share of tradable goods and services in the economy has
increased by 10% relative to non-tradables in terms of real gross value added since 2010. On
account  of  improving  economic  conditions  and  the  reforms  implemented,  the  unemployment
rate, although still quite elevated, declined to 19.0% in the second quarter of 2018from 27.8% at
the end of 2013.
The banking system has been restructured and recapitalised and its corporate governance has
been enhanced. Following three rounds of recapitalisation, Greek banks have capital ratios above
the euro area average and maintain buffers sufficient to absorb additional credit losses, as the
recently completed pan-European stress test indicated. They have also markedly improved their
liquidity  position,  regaining  access  to  the  interbank  market  and  issuing  covered  bonds;  as  a
consequence,  they  have  reduced  their  reliance  on  central  bank  funding.  However,  non-
performing exposures (NPEs), one of the most important legacies of the crisis, remain banks’
most significant challenge. A number of important reforms have been implemented, aiming to
provide banks with a variety of tools to meet this challenge. These reforms include, among other
things,  the  establishment  of  a  secondary  market  for  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  and  the
subsequent licensing of fourteen credit servicing firms, the operation of an electronic platform for
out-of-court settlement, and electronic auctions of real estate collateral.
These  efforts  have  started  to  bear  fruit:  According  to  end-September  2018  data ,  there  is
continued  progress  in  the  pace  of  NPE  reduction  -  the  stock  of  NPEs  decreased  by  4.7%
compared to end-June 2018, reaching €84.7 billion or 46.7% of total exposures. Despite the fact
that this is a very high ratio the reduction amounts to 21% or €22.5 billion compared to March
2016, when the stock of NPEs reached its peak.
1
The  key  driver  of  NPE  reduction  so  far  has  been  write-offs.  Going  forward,  NPL  sales  (incl.
securitisations) will play a more important role, coupled with collections, collateral liquidation and
curing of loans. The pace of NPE reduction is anticipated to accelerate based on the revised and
more ambitious NPE targets submitted by banks and covering the period up to 2021.
2. The current state and the outlook of the economy have both improved 
Following  the  stagnation  of  2015-2016,  GDP  growth  turned  positive  in  2017  (1.5%)  and
accelerated to 2.2% (y-o-y) in the first half of 2018. GDP growth in the first  half  of  2018  was
driven, primarily, by exports of goods and services and, secondarily, by private consumption.
The  continued  economic  expansion  is  reflected  not  only  in  GDP  figures,  but  also  in  the
performance of several key indicators of economic activity, such as: industrial production, retail
sales  and  dependent  employment  flows  in  the  private  sector  as  well  as  in  several  soft  data
2
indicators such as manufacturing PMI, economic sentiment and consumer confidence .
The Eurogroup decision of 21 June 2018 had a positive effect on confidence as it ensured the
sustainability of Greek public debt, at least in the medium term. Moreover, the improved outlook
for the economy boosted economic sentiment leading to an increase in bank deposits by the
non-financial  private  sector,  improved  Greece’s  credit  rating  and  led  to  a  reduction  in  banks’
dependence on central bank financing.
Despite  these  positive  developments,  several  other  banking  and  financial  indicators  provide  a
mixed picture. For example, the annual change of bank credit to the non-financial private sector
remains negative and bank lending rates edged up in September. Moreover, government bond
yields  have  been  volatile  and  rose  further,  amid  broader  investor  concerns  related  to  political
risks in Italy and increased volatility in emerging markets, as well as concerns about possible
reversal  of  legislated  measures  in  Greece  after  the  end  of  the  programme.  Thus,  Greek
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
businesses  and  households  still  face  overly  high  borrowing  costs,  suggesting  that  the  Greek
economy has still not fully overcome the crisis.
Looking forward, the Bank of Greece expects economic activity to pick up in the medium term.
Growth will be driven by robust export performance, benefiting from continued global expansion
and competitiveness gains; solid private consumption growth, supported by rising employment
and gradually rising compensation per employee; and increased investment spending, reflecting
the realisation of new investment projects, thanks to the gradual improvement in both confidence
and financing conditions.
The  outlook  is  subject  to  downside  risks  relating  to  delays  in  reform  implementation  and
privatisations and a possible backtracking from previous commitments, including, in particular,
court  decisions  on  previous  pension  reforms.  There  are  also  external  risks  related  to  the
increased volatility and tensions in international financial markets, an increase in global interest
rates due to monetary policy normalisation, spillover effects from Italy, a slowdown of the global
economy  due  to  the  rise  in  trade  protectionism  worldwide,  geopolitical  developments  and  a
possible resurgence of refugee flows.
3. Crisis legacies and challenges ahead
Despite the progress of the Greek economy since 2010 and the debt relief measures decided by
the Eurogroup, there are still important crisis-related legacies, such as high public debt, the high
stock of non-performing loans, high unemployment, a brain drain, a large investment gap, and
relatively high poverty rates in the population. Moreover, non-price or structural competitiveness
is  still  low  compared  with  our  European  peers  and  has  receded  over  the  past  two  years,
according to the Doing Business report of the World Bank and the Global Competitiveness index
3
of the World Economic Forum .
Domestic saving is insufficient to meet the investment needs of the Greek economy; hence, it is
crucial to attract foreign direct investment by cutting red tape and accelerating the privatisation
programme.
In  the  long  term,  the  projected  demographic  decline  (due  to  population  ageing  and  outward
migration) will exert downward pressure on potential growth, which could, however, be offset by
high  investment  and  total  factor  productivity  growth,  as  well  as  by  raising  labour  force
participation (especially female) and reducing structural unemployment. It is therefore crucial to
continue implementing the necessary structural reforms to boost TFP growth.
Nonetheless,  the  main  challenge  for  the  Greek  economy  in  the  immediate  future  is  the
sustainable  return  to  financial  markets.  Despite  the  successful  conclusion  of  the  ESM
programme last August and the Eurogroup debt relief measures, Greek government bonds have
still not obtained investment grade status and yields remain elevated and volatile, affected by the
recent turbulence in international financial markets and in Italy in particular.
4. Missteps and delays
Greece had to remain in an adjustment programme for eight years, unlike Cyprus, Ireland and
Portugal,  that  completed  their  respective  programmes  much  earlier,  despite  having  entered
these programmes later than Greece. Moreover, despite the implementation of three economic
adjustment programmes over the past eight years, Greece has still not managed to return to
international financial markets on sustainable terms.
In  addition,  the  economic  cost  of  the  adjustment  effort  is  unprecedented  during  peacetime.
Between  2008  and  2016,  Greece  lost  over  one  fourth  of  its  GDP  at  constant  prices,  and  the
unemployment  rate  rose  by  nearly  16  percentage  points.  Furthermore,  GDP  per  capita  at
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
purchasing power parity declined to 68% of the EU average in 2016, down from 93% in 2008. A
number of Greek-specific and European factors account for this large economic cost and the
lagging behind other euro area countries:
First,  the  size  and  speed  of  the  fiscal  consolidation  were  unprecedented,  explaining  why  the
recession was so deep compared with other programme countries. This primarily had to do with
the  fact  that  the  initial  macro  imbalances  were  much  higher  in  Greece  than  in  those  other
countries.
Second, the fiscal multipliers turned out to be higher than initially anticipated, implying that the
reduction in primary deficits had a larger recessionary impact on the economy. As a result, the
economy soon became trapped in a vicious circle of austerity and recession.
Third, there were certain mismatches in the design of the economic adjustment programmes.
Given the size of the fiscal imbalances back in May 2010, when the first economic adjustment
programme  was  initiated,  more  emphasis  was  placed  on  tax  rate  increases,  pension  reform,
streamlining budgetary procedures, increasing fiscal transparency, as well as on financial sector
restructuring. Less emphasis was placed on growth-enhancing reforms, tax collection and tax
evasion, and on reorganising the public sector.
Fourth, the idiosyncratic sequencing of structural reforms led to real wages declining more than
initially  planned,  deepening  the  recession.  In  particular,  more  emphasis  was  placed  on  labour
market than on goods and services market reforms. Hence, prices declined both at a slower
pace and by a smaller degree than nominal wage costs did. As a result, households experienced
a massive drop in purchasing power, which had not been foreseen. This, in turn, constrained
personal consumption and deepened the recession.
Fifth,  the  non-performing  loans  (NPL)  problem  proved  more  difficult  that  initially  anticipated.  It
was  mainly  the  outcome  of  economic  contraction,  but  it  was  also  propagated  by  legislative
changes such as the blanket moratorium on auctions and the abuse of protection law 3869/2010.
Several  other  legal  and  judicial  impediments  exacerbated  the  NPL  problem . A  more  forceful
reaction during the first years of the crisis by implementing the required legislative changes much
earlier and introducing a centralised asset management framework for NPEs as other Member
States  had  done  could  have  reduced  the  problem  we  are  facing  today.  The  Bank  of  Greece
believes that there is still ample scope for introducing such a systemic solution now and has
recently  presented  a  scheme  to  deal  with  the  high  volume  of  NPEs,  in  addition  to  banks’
endogenous  efforts,  in  order  to  achieve  a  rapid  convergence  of  the  Greek  NPE  ratios  to  the
European average.
Sixth,  certain  reforms  fell  behind  the  agreed  time  schedule  due  to  several  factors,  including:
insufficient ownership of the necessary reforms; populist rhetoric, rivalry and failure to reach an
understanding among political parties; and the various – small and large – vested interests that
resist reform.
4
Seventh, at the same time, political economy deliberations in the euro area have played their
part in delaying the recovery of the Greek economy. The Eurogroup decision of November 2012
to grant further debt relief was put off for several years and was actually implemented only in
June 2018. This was partly due to delays and to mixed signals occasionally received from Greek
political  parties  on  the  commitment  to  reform.  However,  and  rather  more  importantly,  it  also
reflects  forthcoming  elections  and  populist  voices  in  a  number  of  euro  area  Member  States.
Overall, this development undermined the growth prospects of the Greek economy and extended
the duration of the crisis.
Eighth, at the start of the Greek sovereign debt crisis in 2010 the euro area authorities objected
to any type of intervention to contain the rapidly rising Greek government debt. Instead, emphasis
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
was placed on drastically correcting fiscal imbalances. Hence, on account of all this, the much
larger than initially anticipated recession over the programme years and the rather unorthodox
negotiations of the first half of 2015 that led to the third economic adjustment programme, the
Greek  debt  rose  to  176.1%  of  GDP  at  the  end  of  2017  from  126.7%  of  GDP  in  2009,  thus
requiring further debt relief, which was actually provided in June 2018. If, for instance, this kind of
debt relief was given in the beginning of the first adjustment programme, it would have had a
more positive impact on the economy, possibly limiting output and employment losses.
Last, but not least, the Stability and Growth Path (SGP) failed to avert the soaring public debt in
the  pre-crisis  period.  Furthermore,  there  was  no  monitoring  and  control  over  macroeconomic
imbalances, such as the evolution of the current account and the private debt.
When the Greek crisis broke out in 2010, euro area crisis management and resolution tools were
rather non-existent on account of moral hazard concerns and in the absence of the appropriate
institutional  setting.  Moreover,  there  was  no  provision  for  risk-sharing  in  the  initial  EMU
architecture. Instead, the ECB stepped in to contain the spill over risk to the rest of the euro area.
5. EMU: past reforms and some proposals for improving the euro area architecture
A lot has been done in recent years following the Greek crisis to improve the functioning of EMU.
Key initiatives were the provision of intergovernmental loans to Greece, the establishment of the
EFSF, and its successor the ESM, the creation of the (still incomplete) Banking Union and the
application  of  stricter  rules  on  banking  regulation  and  supervision,  the  establishment  of  the
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  the  development  of  appropriate  macro-prudential
instruments which allowed greater emphasis on identifying and addressing system-wide risks.
The  ECB  developed  new  monetary  policy  instruments  to  deal  with  the  very  low  inflation  and
growth, and the SSM assumed responsibility for all systemic banks, thus addressing the home
bias issue in supervision.
More recently, the European Commission, in view of the Multiannual Financial Framework for the
period 2021-2027, tabled proposals to establish a Reform Support Programme and a European
Investment  Stabilisation  Function.  The  new  EU  budgetary  tools  aim  at  supporting  stability  in
times  of  stress  through  investment  continuity  and  providing  incentives  for  domestic  structural
reforms.
Nonetheless, the architecture of EMU is still incomplete in many respects and euro area policy
makers  cannot  rely  solely  on  ECB  interventions.  It  is  essential  to  ensure  that  the  economic
rebalancing  mechanism  (i.e.  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure)  operates  more
symmetrically,  i.e.  both  for  member-states  with  external  deficits  and  for  those  with  external
surpluses. Up to now, the burden of adjustment has fallen, to a very large degree, on Member
States  with  current  account  and  budget  deficits  (like  Greece  on  the  eve  of  the  crisis),  while
Member States with high (compared to the Macroeconomic Imbalances procedure limits) current
account surpluses could have responded more appropriately.
After the crisis, we have seen a home bias in investment and a flow of euro area excess savings
towards the rest of the world rather than within the EU (from higher to lower GDP per capita
countries).  This  has  also  led  to  a  reversal  of  the  degree  of  financial  integration  and  income
convergence among the euro area Member States. Therefore, there is a priority to complete the
Banking  Union  with  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  and  the  Capital  Markets  Union  in
order to restore intra-European financial flows, to improve stability in the banking sector and to
promote  private  risk-sharing  in  the  EU.  In  this  context,  the  role  of  the  ESM  could  be  further
enhanced, and among other things, to support Banking Union with a backstop facility.
EMU should also enhance public sector risk-sharing by creating a centralised fiscal stabilisation
tool. The European Investment Stabilisation Function, once fully and efficiently operative, could
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
be transformed into such a tool. Other proposals involve a European unemployment insurance
scheme and the issuance of European “safe” bonds. These proposals deserve our attention.
As regards Member States, national ownership and credible implementation of country-specific
recommendations  is  crucial  both  for  promoting  economic  policy  coordination  and  for  risk
reduction. Therefore, national policies should focus on: a) structural reforms aimed to improve
the flexibility of domestic markets and to reduce vulnerabilities in the financial sector in order to
facilitate  the  adjustment  of  the  economies  to  future  shocks;  and  b)  sound  pro-growth  fiscal
policies that allow for stabilisation over the business cycle and, at the same time, ensure debt
sustainability.
6. Conclusions and policy lessons
In conclusion, the main policy messages from the Greek crisis are the following:
•  Delaying  the  needed  adjustment  only  magnifies  the  problem,  which  will  then  have  to  be
addressed later on less favourable terms.
•  The  proper  sequencing  of  the  reform  programme  as  well  as  ownership  mainly  by  the
government but also the main opposition parties, is key to its success.
• Greater risk-sharing in the euro area to address large asymmetric shocks and political solidarity
in  the  EU  to  help  countries  in  difficulty  rather  than  pointing  the  finger  at  them  (which  in  fact
propagates  populist  voices  in  both  camps)  are  of  utmost  importance  in  order  to  ensure  the
success of our common European endeavour.
• In this regard, private and public risk-sharing should be enhanced by moving forward with the
Banking and the Capital Markets Union, and by creating a centralised fiscal stabilisation tool. To
avoid moral hazard, risk-sharing should go hand-in-hand with risk reduction and close economic
policy  coordination.  Moreover,  we  need  to  improve  income  convergence  and  to  ensure  that
economic rebalancing operates symmetrically.
•  Last  but  not  least,  a  final  point  on  Greece:  in  order  to  bolster  investors’  confidence  in  the
prospects of the Greek economy and to be able to refinance maturing debt on sustainable terms,
Greek  governments  must  continue  the  implementation  of  reforms  and  avoid  reneging  on
programme-related commitments.
 
Sources:
Bank of Greece (2018), Monetary Policy 2017-2018.
https://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/PressReleases/DispItem.aspx?Item_ID=6112&
57fb-4de6-b9ae-bdfd83c66c95&Filter_by=DT.
Bank  of  Greece,  (2018), Report  on  Operational  Targets  for  Non-Performing  Exposures,  6
September.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/PressReleases/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=6170&List_ID=1af869f3-57fb-4de6-b9ae-bdfd83c66c95&Filter_by=DT
Cahen, D & de Larosière J. (with the support of Lucie Truchet) (2018) “Ensuring a viable EMU:
are we on the right track?” Eurofi Regulatory Update, September 2018.
www.eurofi.net/wp-
content/uploads/2018/09/EUROFI_REGULATORY_UPDATE_VIENNA2018.pdf.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Cœuré, B., (2018), Interview with the newspaper Kathimerini (Eirini Chrysolora),  5  September
2018.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2018/html/ecb.in180905.en.html
Draghi, M., (2018) “The Benefits of European Supervision”, Speech at the ACPR Conference on
Financial 
2018.
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180918.en.html
Supervision, 
September 
Paris, 
18 
Draghi,  M.,  (2018)  “Monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area”, Speech  at  the  ECB  Forum  on  Central
Banking, 
2018.
June 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180619.en.html
Sintra, 
19 
Draghi, M., (2018), Introductory Statement, Hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 9 July 2018.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180709.en.html
Draghi,  M.,  and  L.  de  Guindos,  (2018),  Introductory  Statement  to  the  press  conference.  13
September 2018. www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2018/html/ecb.is180913.en.html
de  Guindos,  L.,  (2018).  “The  euro  area:  current  status  and  challenges  ahead,  Speech  at  La
Granda 
August
2018.https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180831.en.html
courses, 
Asturias, 
31 
European  Commission 
(2018),   Deepening  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,
 Commission Note ahead of the European Council and the Euro Summit of 28-29 June 2018.
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/euco-emu-booklet-june2018_en.pdf
European  Commission  (2017).  Commission  sets  out  Roadmap  for  deepening  Europe's
Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  6  December  2017 europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-17-
5006_en.htm
European Commission (2015), Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union. Report by
Jean-Claude Junker in close cooperation with Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi
and Martin Schulz. 22 June. 
Juncker, J.C., 2018. The hour of European sovereignty, State of the Union Address, 2018. 12
September 2018. ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/soteu2018-speech_en.pdf
OECD (2013, 2015, 2017), Going for Growth, Paris. http://www.oecd.org/eco/going-for-growth-
2017/
http://www.oecd.org/eco/growth/going-for-growth-2015.htm
http://www.oecd.org/eco/growth/going-for-growth-2013.htm
Stournaras Y., (2018) Monetary policy and bank supervision in Europe after the last financial and
sovereign debt crisis, and challenges for the future, Speech at the Economic history conference: 
“The  birth  of  inter-war  central  banks:  building  a  new  monetary  order” Athens,  November  2-3
2018.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=547&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05-4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras  Y.,  (2018)  Interview  with  the  newspaper  “Fileleftheros”  (Konstantinos  Mariolis),  14
September 2018.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=537&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05-4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b 
Stournaras Y., (2018)Interview with the newspaper “Kathimerini” (Eirini Chrysolora), 19 August
2018.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=536&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05-4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras, Y., (2018) Interview with the Japanese newspaper NIKKEI (Shogo Akagawa), 4 June
2018.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=531&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05-4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras,  Y.,  (2018),  “Greece  and  the  global  economy:  Prospects  and  main  challenges
ahead”,  Speech at an event on the occasion of Accenture’s 25th anniversary in Greece ", 28
March 2018.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=517&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05-4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
 1
2
3
4
Greek commercial and cooperative banks on a solo basis.
The Greek manufacturing PMI has been in expansionary territory over the past seventeen months, by far the
longest period since 2007. Economic sentiment has been on an upward trend since mid-2015, reaching a 3-
year high in 2017, and it now stands close to pre-crisis levels. Consumer confidence has been increasing since
early 2017, reaching in October 2018 its highest level since March 2015.
According to the latest Doing Business Report of The World Bank (31 October 2018) Greece ranked 72nd
among 190 countries, down from 67th in 2017 and 61st in 2016. According to the latest Global Competitiveness
Index of World Economic Forum (17 October 2018), Greece ranked 57th among 140 countries down 4 positions
from the previous year.
Legal and judicial obstacles relate to the lengthy legal procedures, issues related to the legal liability of bankers,
the preferential claims of the State, the absence of specialised courts, the lack of adequate corporate insolvency
procedures.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
