Benoît Cœuré: Monetary policy and climate change
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at a
conference on "Scaling up Green Finance: The Role of Central Banks", organised by the Network
for  Greening  the  Financial  System,  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  the  Council  on  Economic
Policies, Berlin, 8 November 2018.
 2018 has seen one of the hottest summers in Europe since weather records began.  I would like
to  thank  Torsti  Silvonen,  Fabio  Tamburrini  and  Sam  Langfield  for  their  contributions  to  this
speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.
1
Increasing  weather  extremes,  rising  sea  levels  and  Arctic  melting  are  now  clearly  visible
consequences of human-induced warming.  Climate change is not a theory. It is a fact.
2
While only one dimension of the human cost, the consequences in macroeconomic terms look
set  to  be  large.  Without  further  mitigation,  cumulative  emissions  pose  significant  risks  of
3
economic disruption.
While there is a wide recognition that environmental externalities should be primarily corrected by
first-best  policies,  such  as  taxes   ,  all  authorities,  including  the  ECB,  need  to  reflect  on,  and
consider, the appropriate response to climate change.
4
In recent years, central bankers, led by Bank of England Governor Mark Carney, have started
discussing  the  financial  stability  implications  of  climate  change.   The  first  tangible  results  are
trickling in. The Financial Stability Board’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures
published its first status report just a few weeks ago. Only last week, ECB Banking Supervision
communicated to banks that climate-related risks have been identified as being among the key
risk drivers affecting the euro area banking system.
5
And, of course, the Central Banks and Supervisors Network for Greening the Financial System
published its first progress report just a few weeks ago, reasserting that climate-related risks fall
squarely within the supervisory and financial stability mandates of central banks and supervisors.
An area that has received less attention though, both in policy and in academia, is the impact of
climate change on the conduct of monetary policy. Today I would like to contribute to this debate
and  offer  a  way  of  thinking  about  how  climate  change  fits  into  our  current  monetary  policy
framework – the way we react to shocks and the way we think policy propagates through the
economy – and how it may affect our monetary policy implementation.
I will argue that climate change can be expected to affect monetary policy one way or the other.
That is, if left unchecked, it may further complicate the correct identification of shocks relevant for
the medium-term inflation outlook, it may increase the likelihood of extreme events and hence
erode  central  banks’  conventional  policy  space  more  often,  and  it  may  raise  the  number  of
occasions on which central banks face a trade-off forcing them to prioritise stable prices over
output.
In the more desirable scenario in which humankind rises to the climate change challenge, the
implications for monetary policy could be equally far-reaching, in particular if the associated shift
in  the  energy  mix  changes  relative  prices  to  an  extent  that  risks  destabilising  medium-term
inflation expectations.
I  will  also  argue  that  there  is  scope  for  central  banks  themselves  to  play  a  supporting  role  in
mitigating the risks associated with climate change while staying within our mandate.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Climate change and the monetary policy strategy
To appreciate how climate change may affect monetary policy, it is useful to first recall the basic
principles of how central banks decide on their actions.
Broadly  speaking,  implementing  monetary  policy  is  the  practice  of  identifying  the  nature,
persistence and magnitude of the shocks hitting our economy.
Policymakers typically differentiate between two broad categories of shocks.
The  first  is  demand  shocks.  These  are  shocks  that  are  “benign”  or  manageable  from  the
perspective of monetary policy because they pull inflation, growth and employment in the same
6
direction – a “divine coincidence” which does not pose a dilemma to central banks.
The  second  category  relates  to  supply-side  shocks.  These  shocks  are  less  easy  to
accommodate  for  central  banks  as  they  pull  output  and  inflation  in  opposite  directions.  This
generates  a  trade-off  for  central  banks  between  stabilising  inflation  and  stabilising  output
fluctuations.
Climate-related shocks – and this is my first corollary – typically fall into this second category of
7
shocks.
8
Droughts  and  heatwaves  often  lead  to  crop  shortfalls,  putting  upward  pressure  on  food
prices.   Hurricanes  and  floods  destroy  production  capacity,  thereby  raising  input  and  output
prices. And unusually cold winters can be seen as malign productivity shocks – that is, they may
raise input prices for the same level of output.
So, much like other supply shocks, weather-related disturbances typically pose a dilemma for
central banks, which may then have to choose between stabilising inflation or economic activity.
Policymakers have usually resolved this trade-off by calibrating their response to a supply-side
shock according to its estimated persistence and size.
If the shock is thought to be short-lived, and unlikely to affect the medium-term inflation outlook
relevant  for  monetary  policy,  we  usually  “look  through”  the  shock  –  that  is,  we  tolerate  its
temporary effects on inflation without taking any action.
If the effects prove more persistent, however, and are at risk of spreading more widely through
the economy, monetary policy action may be warranted.
The impact of climate change on monetary policy
It is fair to say that most weather-related shocks have been short-lived and contained – at least
so far. This year’s extremely hot and dry summer, for example, meant smaller harvests for many
European farmers. But its overall price effects have been limited to vegetable prices, and will
probably  prove  to  be  temporary.  Similarly,  although  the  flooding  in  June  2013  was  the  most
severe in Germany since the 1950s, its macroeconomic impact was limited.
As a result, the ECB, in its short history, has never yet been compelled to take action in response
to  climate-related  shocks.  So  far  their  largely  temporary  effects  on  output  and  inflation  have
allowed us to look through them. This meant that central bankers thought the horizon of climate
change was extending well beyond the one of monetary policy.
But this may change. Indeed, I would argue that the horizon at which climate change impacts the
economy  has  shortened,  warranting  a  discussion  on  how  it  affects  the  conduct  of  monetary
policy. That is, climate change is likely to affect monetary policy one way or the other – whether it
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
is  left  unchecked  or  humankind  rises  to  the  climate  change  challenge.  This  is  my  second
corollary.
Let me start with the more disturbing scenario in which both the private and the public sector fail
to take prompt action to cut CO2 emissions in line with the COP21 commitments.
On  this  trajectory,  climate  change  is  likely  to  affect  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  three
important ways.
The first relates to our ability to correctly identify the shocks hitting the economy.
In recent years, for example, we have repeatedly observed an unusual blip in economic activity in
the United States in the first quarter. This has often been attributed to a harsh winter, despite
best efforts to seasonally adjust the data.
But  causality  is  inherently  difficult  to  establish.  Indeed,  statistical  analysis  has  challenged  the
9
hypothesis that cold temperatures are behind the observed deceleration in first-quarter growth.
Similarly, last month, we saw a puzzling persistence in petroleum prices in Germany despite a
parallel fall in oil prices. One hypothesis is that this year’s hot summer caused the water levels in
German rivers to fall to levels that only allow petrol tankers to carry half their capacity, creating
supply bottlenecks.
Uncertainty also extends to the effects of regulatory responses by governments to the growing
challenges posed by climate change. German growth in the third quarter is currently projected to
have stalled or even contracted, probably largely due to bottlenecks in the testing process under
the new Worldwide Harmonised Light Vehicles Test Procedure.
But we cannot be sure. Given the current global environment, growth may have slowed for other
reasons. Or the recent emission scandal may have led to a more fundamental shift in consumer
preferences.
All this means that, to the extent that climate change can be expected to amplify the frequency of
adverse  weather  shocks,  and  evidence  to  this  effect  is  mounting,  it  will  become  increasingly
difficult for central banks to disentangle the variation in the data relevant for the assessment of
the  medium-term  inflation  outlook.
  It  will  cause  the  signal-to-noise  ratio  to  deteriorate  and
thereby increase the risk that central banks take action when in fact they shouldn’t, or vice versa.
10
The second implication relates to the distribution of shocks.
Put simply, the longer the risks of climate change are ignored, the higher the risks of catastrophic
events, possibly with irreversible consequences for the economy. In other words, the distribution
of shocks may become more “fat-tailed”.
11
 
This raises one question and one concern for monetary policy. The question is whether central
banks themselves should hedge against such tail risks by taking pre-emptive measures. I will
turn to this in the second part of my remarks.
The  concern  is  that  monetary  policy  may  be  more  often  forced  to  adopt  non-standard  policy
measures. The global financial crisis has shown that extreme events can quickly erode central
banks’ conventional policy space. Catastrophic climate change could thus test the limits of how
far monetary policy can go and, in the extreme, force us to rethink our current policy framework.
The third and final implication relates to the persistence of shocks and the inflation-output trade-
off central banks may face.
Climate change, for example, will make some areas of the world less habitable, which can be
 3 / 9
12
BIS central bankers' speeches
expected  to  increase  the  frequency  and  intensity  of  international  migration.
  The  events  of
recent years, though different in nature, highlight how migration can have long-lasting effects on
broader labour market dynamics and, ultimately, wage developments.
 There is evidence that
migration has contributed to dampening wage growth in Germany in recent years, thereby further
complicating our efforts to bring inflation back to levels closer to 2%.
13
14
12
Similarly,  in  the  absence  of  clear  and  tangible  evidence  that  the  demand  for  fossil  fuels  will
decline,  and  with  existing  conventional  oil  fields  depleting  rapidly,  persistent  energy  shocks
cannot be ruled out.
15
There is no shortage of examples in history of this causing material disruptions to growth and
employment.
 In the late 1970s and early 1980s, major central banks raised interest rates to
prohibitive  levels  to  avoid  what  central  banks  call  “second-round  effects”  –  that  is,  oil  price
shocks feeding into core inflation.
16
Central banks, including the ECB, were forced to take similar action more recently.
 I will come
to this in a minute. But the point is that, although the “medium term” notion offers central banks
flexibility  that  caters  for  different  shocks,  there  is  a  limit  to  how  much  they  can  look  through
persistent supply shocks. The horizon of monetary policy is stretchable but it is not infinite. Policy
needs to act before risks of broad-based second-round effects materialise. Climate change may
raise the odds of this happening.
Relative  prices  and  inflation  expectations  in  the  transition  towards  a  low-carbon
economy
17
This brings me to the second scenario in which humanity succeeds in accelerating the transition
to renewable sources of energy. Although clearly more desirable for society, it may also create
trade-offs for central banks.
Along  this  trajectory,  the  marginal  cost  of  harvesting  renewable  energy  may  become
considerably lower and more stable than in the current regime, in which changes in the effective
supply of oil have been a recurrent source of disruption.
 In other words, a lasting shift in the
energy  mix  can  be  expected  to  persistently  change  relative  prices. Although  such  a  change
should in principle not bear consequences for monetary policy, if large and persistent enough, it
could feed into expectations and affect aggregate inflation.
18
To see the consequences for monetary policy, consider the events of recent years.
A sharp fall in commodity prices pushed headline inflation into negative territory towards the end
of  2014.  But  because  the  fall  in  commodity  prices  proved  so  persistent  –  headline  inflation
remained close to zero until late in 2016 – we saw growing signs that firms, households and
financial  market  participants  had  started  revising  down  their  medium  to  long-term  inflation
expectations,  away  from  the  levels  we  consider  as  being  consistent  with  price  stability.  The
prevalence of substantial economic slack fed this process further.
Strong and far-reaching monetary policy action, including the purchases of government bonds
and the introduction of negative rates, was needed to arrest a fall in inflation expectations that, in
an environment of weak aggregate demand, might otherwise have led to a downward spiral in
prices and wages.
A  faster  transition  towards  renewables,  coupled  with  technological  breakthroughs,  may  pose
similar challenges. It may make it more difficult for central banks to attain inflation just below 2%
should firms, households and financial markets expect aggregate medium-term inflation to fall as
a result of a change in the energy mix.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
These risks are exacerbated by the fact that a successful energy transition is unlikely to happen
in isolation. It will rather be an integral part of a much broader change in the economic structure
linked to the fourth industrial revolution.
The  shift  towards  electric  vehicles,  for  example,  may  go  hand-in-hand  with  increased
autonomous driving, revolutionising the transport industry. Big data analytics will help in mining
climate  data  and  facilitating  climate  adaption.
 And  artificial  intelligence  is  increasingly  being
used to increase energy efficiency.
19
20
Together,  and  if  adopted  wisely,  these  trends  and  innovations  have  the  potential  to  be  an
incredible  force  for  good  as  they  will  help  revert  the  secular  fall  in  productivity  growth.  For
monetary policy, however, they are akin to a series of persistent positive supply shocks that may
force central banks into action should these shocks cause a more general and broad-based re-
appraisal by the public of the medium-term inflation outlook.
Greening monetary policy implementation
21
So, the implications for the conduct of monetary policy could be substantial. The question, then,
is whether central banks themselves should be doing more to prevent climate change in the first
place.
22
Some argue we have an obligation to act, since the EU Treaty states that “without prejudice to its
primary  objective,  the  ECB  shall  support  the  general  economic  policies  in  the  Union”,  which
include  a  high  level  of  protection  and  improvement  of  the  quality  of  the  environment,  and
mandates  environmental  protection  requirements  to  be  integrated  into  the  definition  and
implementation  of  the  Union's  policies  and  activities.
  Certainly,  the  protection  of  the
environment is not the only transversal objective assigned to EU institutions and hence to the
ECB. Under the Treaty one could equally ask, for example, why the ECB should not promote
industries  that  promise  the  strongest  employment  growth,  irrespective  of  their  ecological
footprint.
23
24
But equally importantly, the ECB is subject to the Treaty requirement to “act in accordance with
the principle of an open market economy with free competition”.
In  the  end,  the  Treaty  grants  the  ECB  a  high  degree  of  independence  and  it  enjoys  broad
discretion  in  implementing  its  policies.  We  thus  need  to  carefully  weigh  all  relevant
considerations  and  determine  the  actions  that  would  be  both  legal  and  effective  in  promoting
environmental protection without interfering with the main objective of the ECB’s monetary policy
under the Treaty, which is price stability.
Views  and  opinions  certainly  differ  here.  But  I  would  argue  that  the  ECB,  acting  within  its
mandate, can – and should – actively support the transition to a low carbon economy, in two
main ways: first, by helping to define the rules of the game and, second, by acting accordingly,
without prejudice to price stability.
25
Our actions to protect the environment begin with reducing our own ecological footprint. In 2007
we  adopted  an  environmental  policy  and  registered  with  the  European  Eco-Management  and
Audit  Scheme.  For  more,  see  ECB  (2018),  “2018  update  of  the  ECB’s  Enviornmental
Statement”, October.
Much of this is already happening, although I have no doubt it will intensify in the future.
The ECB, together with other national central banks of the Eurosystem, is actively supporting the
European Commission’s sustainable finance agenda.
26
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
We are doing this by supporting ongoing work in various international and European fora aimed
at enhancing the pricing of climate change and transition risks and promoting the reorientation of
financial flows towards sustainable investment products.
27
A  tangible  side  effect  of  these  measures  is  that,  once  adopted,  they  will  automatically  be
reflected in our collateral framework. That is, once markets and credit risk agencies price climate
risks properly, the amount of collateralised borrowing counterparties can obtain from the ECB will
be adjusted accordingly.
We  have  also  joined  the  Central  Banks  and  Supervisors  Network  for  Greening  the  Financial
System.  ECB  staff  are  contributing  in  all  three  work  streams.  My  presence  here  today
emphasises that we take our membership seriously. The Network will play an important role in
coordinating work among central banks and in defining and promoting best practices.
Finally, we are also supporting work on sustainable finance-related topics at the level of the G20.
Central bank asset portfolios differ in their ability to support sustainable investment
The second step relates to incorporating these best practices into our own activities.
Most  central  banks  typically  own  and  manage  three  different  types  of  asset  portfolios:  one
dedicated  to  pension  funds,  a  second  related  to  the  central  bank’s  own  funds,  and  a  third
covering foreign exchange reserves. More recently, some central banks, including the ECB, have
also  built  up  separate  monetary  policy  portfolios,  resulting  from  the  need  to  preserve  price
stability  when  the  room  for  manoeuvre  with  conventional  policy  instruments  had  become
constrained.
Not all of these portfolios are, however, equally suited to promoting green finance.
For  our  pension  fund  portfolio,  we  have  already  taken  concrete  steps.  The  broad  investment
universe and longer-term investment horizon allow us to pursue a sustainable investment policy
based on selective exclusion and proxy voting guidelines.
We delegated proxy voting for equity investments to investment managers that have signed up to
the  United  Nations  Principles  for  Responsible  Investment,  requiring  them  to  incorporate
environmental, social and corporate governance (ESG) standards into their voting policies. And,
together with our external asset managers, we are considering broadening the options for ECB
staff to invest in sustainable financial products.
For our own funds portfolio, which consists of the ECB’s paid up capital and general reserve
fund, we have started an internal investigation on how ESG criteria could be implemented in the
future.
28
Purchasing green bonds from a number of eligible issuers could be an option, as long as the
markets are deep and liquid enough. And we could potentially expand our investment universe to
other asset classes where the ESG-compliant investment space is broader. Work conducted
under the first work stream – that is, the development of a clear and transparent taxonomy – will
help accelerate progress on this front.
Now, when it comes to our policy portfolios, our objectives are different.
The main purpose of our foreign reserves is to ensure that the ECB, at any given point in time,
has sufficient liquidity in foreign currency to conduct foreign exchange operations if needed. Our
portfolio is therefore composed of the most liquid and creditworthy fixed income assets in a few
major currencies, leaving little room for climate-related objectives.
29
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
This much is probably uncontroversial. But a more contentious debate has emerged over the
potential  use  of  our  asset  purchases  to  pursue  climate-related  goals.  Our  corporate  sector
purchase  programme  in  particular  has  come  in  for  criticism  as  it  includes  emission-intensive
sectors, such as manufacturing and utilities.
30
In this debate, it is important to recall that the ECB decides on and calibrates its monetary policy
measures  with  a  view  to  achieving  its  price  stability  objective  under  the  Treaty.  As  a
consequence,  more  than  80%  of  the  €2.5  trillion  of  securities  purchased  under  our  Asset
Purchase Programme were issued by governments or their agencies.
The  remaining  share  consists  of  purchases  of  covered  bonds,  corporate  bonds  and  asset-
backed  securities.  For  these  assets,  the  Governing  Council  concluded  that  the  best  way  to
achieve its monetary policy objective was to follow the principle of market neutrality.
32
This principle does not preclude supporting environmental objectives, however.
 The ECB has
purchased  “green  bonds”  both  under  its  public  sector  and  corporate  sector  purchase
programmes. Under the former, we currently hold around 24% of the eligible “green” universe,
estimated to amount to some €48 billion. Under the latter, we hold close to 20% of the eligible
“green” corporate bond universe, which currently has an outstanding volume of €31 billion euros.
Under both programmes, the share we hold in “green” eligible bonds mirrors, by and large, the
share of our holdings of the entire eligible universe.
31
This also means that, at this stage, the best the ECB can do is to  concentrate  its  efforts  on
creating the right conditions for supporting the flow of capital into sustainable sectors. In this way,
it will remain faithful to its primary objective of price stability and the Treaty requirement of an
open market economy with free competition, while supporting environmental objectives.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
More  frequent  climate-related  shocks  may  increasingly  blur  the  analysis  of  the  medium-term
inflationary  pressures  relevant  for  monetary  policy.  More  fat-tailed  shocks  may  erode  central
banks’  conventional  policy  space  more  often  in  the  future. And  uncertainties  surrounding  the
speed  and  scope  of  the  transition  towards  a  low-carbon  economy  can  potentially  impact
medium-term  inflation  expectations,  posing  challenges  to  central  banks  as  the  horizon  of
monetary policy is stretchable but not infinite. These and other questions deserve further careful
analysis.
More  imminently,  the  ECB  will  concentrate  its  efforts  on  supporting  market  participants,
legislators and standard-setting bodies in identifying the risks emerging from climate change and
providing  a  clear  framework  to  reorient  financial  flows  and  reduce  such  risks.  A  unified
framework is the gravitational force needed to finance the greening of our economy. And it is the
precondition for central banks themselves to expand the use of ESG criteria in the build-up and
management of their own asset portfolios.
Thank you.
1
2
3
I would like to thank Torsti Silvonen, Fabio Tamburrini and Sam Langfield for their contributions to this speech. I
remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.
See IPCC (2018), “Global warming of 1.5 °C”, an IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C
above  pre-industrial  levels  and  related  global  greenhouse  gas  emission  pathways,  in  the  context  of
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to
eradicate poverty, 6 October.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
See Stern, N. (2007), “The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review”, Cambridge University Press.
Estimating the economic damage requires assumptions on society’s time preference which are controversial.
Discussing these assumptions is beyond the scope of this speech.
See Nordhaus, W. D. (2007), “To tax or not to tax: Alternative approaches to slowing global warming”,  Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy, 1(1), pp. 26–44.
See Carney, M. (2015), “Breaking the tragedy of the horizon – climate change and financial stability”, speech
given at Lloyd’s of London, 29 September.
The global financial crisis of 2008 is a good example. As house prices fell and firms struggled to access
external finance, consumption and investment collapsed while unemployment rose, pushing down prices and
wages.
See also McKibbin et al. (2017), “Climate change and monetary policy: Dealing with disruption”, CAMA Working
Paper, No. 77/2017, December. Some climate-related shocks may also turn into adverse demand shocks.
Rising sea levels, for example, could lead to abrupt repricing of real estate prices in some exposed regions,
causing large negative wealth effects that, if uninsured, may weigh on demand and prices. Also, climate-related
shocks  have  uneven  macroeconomic  effects,  with  adverse  consequences  concentrated  in  countries  with
relatively hot climates, such as most low-income countries. See IMF (2017), “The Effects of Weather Shocks on
Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?”, World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, October.
For price effects, see also Parker, M. (2018), “The impact of disasters on inflation”, Economics of Disasters and
Climate Change, Vol. 2(1), pp. 21–48.
See, for example, Gourio, F. (2015), “The effect of weather on first-quarter GDP”, Chicago Fed Letter, No 341.
Academic studies project that the risks of extreme heatwaves and floods will increase by around another 50%
this century. See Mann et al. (2018), “Projected changes in persistent extreme summer weather events: The role
of  quasi-resonant  amplification”, Science Advances, Vol 4(10). And evidence of such an increase is already
visible. According to the European Academies’ Science Advisory Council, the number of global floods and other
hydrological events has quadrupled since 1980 and doubled since 2004. See European Academies’ Science
Advisory Council (2018), “Extreme weather events in Europe – Preparing for climate change adaptation: an
update on EASAC’s 2013 study”, March; and Stott, P. (2016), “How climate change affects extreme weather
events”, Science, Vol 352(6293), pp. 1517–1518.
See,  for  example,  Weitzman,  M.  (2011),  “Fat-Tailed  Uncertainty  in  the  Economics  of  Catastrophic  Climate
Change”, Review  of  Environmental  Economics  and  Policy,  5  (2),  pp.  275–292;  and  Weitzman,  M.  (2009),
“Additive damages, fat-tailed climate dynamics, and uncertain discounting”, Economics — The Open-Access,
Open-Assessment E-Journal 3: 1–29.
See, for example, Stapleton et al. (2017), “Climate change, migration and displacement – The need for a risk-
informed  and  coherent  approach”,  report  by  the  Overseas  Development  Institute  and  the  United  Nations
Development Programme, November.
See ECB (2018), “Labour supply and employment growth”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 1.
See Bundesbank (2018), “Wage growth in Germany: assessment and determinants of recent developments”,
Monthly Report, April.
The International Energy Agency estimates that, by 2025, there will be a shortfall of more than 20 million barrels
per day. Recent marked oil price increases suggest that the advent of unconventional oil extraction technologies
has not yet sufficiently changed supply dynamics to contain sharp increases in prices. One reason may be that
the market share of shale producers, despite having expanded considerably in recent years, may still be too low
to affect aggregate figures. See, for example, Bjørnland, H., F. M. Nordvik and M. Rohrer (2017), “How Flexible is
US Shale Oil Production? Evidence from North Dakota”, Centre For Applied Macro – And Petroleum Economics
(Camp) Working Paper Series, No 2/2017.
The pass-through of oil price shocks is one of the most well studied phenomena in monetary economics.
Google Scholar currently shows around 28,800 academic papers containing the exact phrase “oil price shock”.
Of those, some 11,600 also contain the exact phrase “monetary policy”.
This is despite oil price shocks having had on average much less impact on the economy, largely thanks to the
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
enhanced credibility central banks have gained over time. See, for example, Choi et al. (2017), “Oil Prices and
Inflation Dynamics: Evidence from Advanced and Developing Economies”, IMF Working Paper No 17/196.
See, for example, Bielen et al. (2017), “The Future of Power Markets in a Low Marginal Cost World”, Resources
for the Future Working Paper 17–26; and Archer, C. and M. Z. Jacobson (2005), “Evaluation of global wind
power”, Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 110, pp. 1-20.
See, for example, the Platform for Climate Adaptation and Risk Reduction on www.placard-network.eu.
Google, for example, managed to reduce its energy consumption by more than a third by optimising its cooling
system through artificial intelligence controlled systems.
On the positive side, however, the associated increase in the economy’s trend growth rate will help lift the
natural rate of interest, thereby increasing the policy space available for central banks to manage fluctuations in
the business cycle. See also Cœuré, B. (2018), “Scars that never were? Potential output and slack after the
crisis”, speech at the CEPII 40th Anniversary Conference, Paris, 12 April.
See the European Parliament resolution of 29 May 2018 on sustainable finance (2018/2007(INI)).
See Articles 11 and 127(1) TFEU and Article 3 TEU.
In addition, there are other structural forces, such as population aging, that may impact bond markets and,
hence, the transmission of monetary policy. See, for example, Praet, P. (2018), “Economic policymaking under
uncertainty", speech at the “la Caixa” Chair for Economics and Society conference, Madrid, 17 October.
Our actions to protect the environment begin with reducing our own ecological footprint. In 2007 we adopted an
environmental policy and registered with the European Eco-Management and Audit Scheme. For more, see
ECB (2018), “2018 update of the ECB’s Enviornmental Statement”, October.
See, for example, Villeroy de Galhau, F. (2015), “Green Finance – A New Frontier for the 21st Century”, speech
given  at  the  international  climate  risk  conference  for  supervisors, Amsterdam,  6 April;  and  Knot,  K.  (2017),
“Sustainability: a role for central banks?”, speech at the CEP/DNB workshop ‘Central banking & Green Finance’,
Amsterdam, 28 November.
For example, we are part of the Financial Stability Board’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures.
The  ECB  is  also  a  member  of  a  technical  expert  group  that  is  assisting  the  European  Commission  in
establishing an EU-wide classification system, or taxonomy, for green assets. This taxonomy has the potential
to increase transparency, discourage “greenwashing” and improve market pricing of both climate and transition
risks. See European Commission (2018), “Action plan: financing sustainable growth”, March.
For a more general overview, see ECB (2006), “Portfolio Management at the ECB”, Monthly Bulletin, April.
Requirements in terms of liquidity may differ across the national central banks of the Eurosystem.
See, for example, Matikainen, S., E. Campiglio and D. Zenghelis (2017), “The climate impact of quantitative
easing”, Policy Paper, Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, London School of
Economics and Political Science.
For  details  of  the  corporate  sector  purchase  programme,  see  ECB  (2017),  “The  ECB’s  corporate  sector
purchase programme: its implementation and impact”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, p. 40–45.
See ECB (2018), “Purchases of green bonds under the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme”, Economic
Bulletin, Issue 7.
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
