Jens Weidmann:: From extraordinary to normal - reflections on the
future monetary policy toolkit
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the European Banking Congress,
Frankfurt am Main, 16 November 2018.
 1 Introduction
Dear Mr Sewing,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is always a pleasure to be here at the European Banking Congress; thank you for having me
back.
In October 1929, the great US economist Irving Fisher declared that stock prices had reached
1
what looked like a permanently high plateau. Just days later, the stock market crashed.
This vividly underlines that the present can be a poor guide to the future. When thinking about an
economic “new normal”, we should always be mindful of possible pitfalls like this one.
The  lead  question  of  today’s  conference  –  “Back  to  normal  –  what  does  it  mean?”  –  can  be
applied  to  various  aspects  of  monetary  policy.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  focus  on  the
Eurosystem’s future toolkit, the instruments designed to enable us to achieve price stability.
Where do we come from? Where are we going?
Dan Brown has written a suspense-packed novel of 500 pages around these questions. Within
the operational framework of monetary policy, I will stay on this thread for the next quarter of an
hour.
In Brown’s novel “Origin”, the character who set out to answer these questions in a presentation
was  assassinated  right  after  the  salutation.  Thankfully,  I  seem  to  have  already  cleared  that
particular hurdle.
2 Where do we come from?
Prior to the financial crisis, the Eurosystem’s framework was based on refinancing operations
with  competitive  bidding  procedures  and  limited  allotment  volumes,  a  wide  and  symmetric
2
standing facilities corridor around the main policy rate and a relatively small balance sheet.
Then the financial crisis occurred, and in its wake a sovereign debt crisis ensued, followed by a
period of subdued inflation. 
The  monetary  policy  response  to  these  challenges  was  unprecedented.  It  entailed  not  only  a
series of interest rate cuts, which eventually moved the deposit rate into negative territory, but
also the introduction of a broad range of non-standard measures. The Eurosystem switched into
3
crisis mode.
The  most  recent  and  most  significant  of  these  measures  is  certainly  the  so-called  Asset
Purchase Programme (APP). In the opinion of the Governing Council, the APP was warranted by
the risks implied by an overly prolonged period of low inflation.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today, ten years after the financial crisis escalated, policy rates are still at historic lows. The
Eurosystem  has  accumulated  a  huge  portfolio  of  securities  of  various  kinds,  and  refinancing
operations offered to banks have remained more than generous.
As a result, excess liquidity stands at a level nine times higher than after the Lehman collapse,
and  monetary  policy  is  roughly  as  expansionary  as  it  was  when  the  crisis  was  raging.  Put
differently, the remaining policy space is rather limited.
3 Where are we going?
Given where we are now, a well-known joke comes to mind: A tourist in a big city asks one of the
locals for directions to the train station. The local replies, “Well Sir, if I were you, I wouldn’t start
from here”.
But where are we going? Or to be more precise, where should we be going?
To some observers, our destination, the “new normal”, should not look that different from the
status  quo. Among  other  things,  they  argue  that  non-standard  measures  such  as  large-scale
asset  purchases  proved  their  worth  during  the  crisis.  Therefore,  they  should  remain  in  the
monetary policy toolbox and be applied under normal conditions as well.
3.1 Guiding principles
Ladies and gentlemen,
The Scottish philosopher David Hume postulated that we cannot derive the “ought” from the “is”,
the so-called Hume’s law. Admittedly, we all know that “the normative force of the factual” can be
strong. But this force arises from a general acceptance of the current state.
Instead of pre-determining details of the new normal or ruling out potentially relevant alternatives
based on the status quo, we need to resort to guiding principles which are well-established and
generally agreed upon.
Admittedly, acting in accordance with a principle should not be viewed as an end in itself. But at a
time when many European citizens seem to be falling prey to scepticism about the historical
project of European integration, I would like to highlight the positive and optimistic guidance that is
laid out in the European Treaties.
The  European  Union  aims  at  promoting  the  well-being  of  its  citizens,  ensuring  economic  and
social progress, and improving the living and working conditions of our peoples. To achieve these
broader aims, the Treaties provide guidance for policymakers by setting objectives and principles
such as price stability, sound public finances, and market orientation.
In particular, the Treaties set two essential cornerstones for the design of the monetary policy
framework.
The first cornerstone is the mandate. The primary objective of the Eurosystem is to maintain
price  stability.  This  establishes  the  criterion  of  effectiveness,  as  it  implies  that  the  monetary
policy toolkit has to be designed in a way that allows the Eurosystem to achieve its goal.
Aiming at other objectives would risk blurring responsibilities and overburdening monetary policy.
Moreover,  central  banks  have  been  granted  independence  only  with  a  view  to  achieving  price
stability. Thus, independence also calls for a narrow interpretation of the mandate. Otherwise,
this would undermine the principle of democracy and, ultimately, call independence into question.
In addition, the Treaties set a second cornerstone for the Eurosystem: It has to act in line with the
principle of an open market economy with free competition. The Treaties even provide a reason
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
why – because respecting market principles favours an efficient allocation of resources, helping
to promote prosperity and achieve the broader aims of the European Union.
When it comes to evaluating the appropriateness of monetary policy measures, this means that
effectiveness is the primary criterion. But the set of monetary policy instruments we use has to
leave enough room for private sector market activities.
I would formulate that in the following rule: The balance sheet should be as large as necessary to
give monetary policy sufficient power to ensure price stability and as lean as possible so that, in
pursuit of its goal, it does not overly impede market activity.
From my point of view, therefore, the pre-crisis framework represents a normative orientation in
the normalisation process. Under normal monetary policy conditions, it struck a sound balance
between the effectiveness of instruments and the efficiency of markets.
3.2 Changing environment
Of course, the immediate question then is: Can we expect to return to the pre-crisis environment
– or have the events of the past few years changed the environment fundamentally?
Some  are  concerned  that  monetary  policy  may  not  be  sufficiently  effective  if  the  Eurosystem
reverts towards the pre-crisis approach of a lean central bank balance sheet and steering only
short-term rates. Such concerns are primarily based on the assumption that structural changes
and frictions in financial markets call for a broader toolkit in order to maintain monetary policy
4
effectiveness.
In particular, it is argued that the so-called natural real rate of interest has fallen significantly over
the past decade. If this were true, it would imply a higher probability of hitting the lower bound of
short-term interest rates. The room for manoeuvre for conventional monetary policy would thus
be  narrowed.  In  addition,  fragmented  interbank  markets  could  hamper  the  pass-through  from
conventional policy rates to longer-term interest rates.
Another  argument  points  to  non-banks  playing  a  more  important  role  in  the  transmission  of
monetary policy and highlights the divergence of short-term rates for banks and non-banks. And,
finally, the demand for safe assets is said to have risen markedly.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I  do  not  rule  out  the  possibility  that  structural  shifts  and  frictions  in  financial  markets  and  the
broader economy may require some tinkering with the operational framework. But it is too early
to draw such conclusions now at the beginning of the normalisation process.
It is quite obvious that the non-standard monetary policy measures themselves have created – or
at  least  added  to  –  the  perceived  challenges  I  have  just  highlighted.  Let  me  give  you  three
examples.
With the APP, the Eurosystem itself reduced the amount of safe assets in the hands of the non-
bank private sector. Secondly, by creating large quantities of excess liquidity, the Eurosystem
has contributed to persistently weak interbank market activity. And, thirdly, the ultra-expansionary
monetary policy compressed long-term interest rates for a prolonged period of time, which may
also feed into natural rate estimates. Apart from that, a Bundesbank analysis has stressed – and
other  studies  have  come  to  the  same  finding  –  that  those  natural  rate  estimates  are  highly
5
uncertain.
For a figurative comparison, let’s look at hospitals. Critically ill patients often receive mechanical
ventilation. After some time, this can weaken their respiratory muscles. In order to prevent this,
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
best practice suggests not prolonging support unnecessarily, as it involves increasing risks for
the patient and a reduced quality of life. Instead, physicians apply a gradual liberalisation from
6
mechanical ventilation, the so-called “weaning”.
Admittedly,  medical  reality  is  much  more  complex  than  economists  and  bank  managers  may
think.  Hence,  my  wife  –  a  practising  physician  –  has  advised  me  to  refrain  from  medical
analogies because we are prone to misinterpreting them.
Thus, I risk trouble at home – kind of disregarding her advice –, but I think you get the point. 
3.3 Reconciling effectiveness and efficiency
It goes without saying that monetary policy implementation should not ignore relevant changes in
its  environment  but  may  have  to  adapt  to  new  economic  and  financial  market  conditions,
digitalisation, or changes in the regulatory framework.
However, I am not convinced that monetary policy should routinely respond to changes in the
environment by intervening in a growing number of market segments.
If  and  how  monetary  policy  should  adapt  its  toolbox  can  only  be  assessed  after  we  have
progressed on the path of normalisation. And even if a problem should persist, it would have to
be  demonstrated  that  central  bank  intervention  was  superior  to  other  solutions.  Finally,  any
intervention must be covered by our mandate.
For example, I would not consider the provision of safe assets a task for monetary policy. I would
like  to  suggest  that  it  is  up  to  governments  to  make  sovereign  bonds  safe  assets  again,
especially by reducing the heavy burden of public debt in the euro area.
In  a  monetary  union  with  independent  national  fiscal  policies,  a  clear  separation  between
monetary  and  fiscal  policy  is  particularly  important.  As  I  have  stressed  many  times  before,
sovereign bond purchases blur the line between the two policy areas. Their risks and side effects
need to be taken into account when considering whether to add them to the regular toolkit.
In my view, sovereign bond purchases are – if rightly designed – a legitimate instrument, but in
the  specific  context  of  the  euro  area  an  instrument  which  should  only  be  used  in  exceptional
cases to fend off a deflationary spiral.
A  lean  balance  sheet  in  normal  times  would  also  help  the  Eurosystem  to  retain  or  regain
sufficient policy space for cases of future need, i.e. future emergencies.
4 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
“It’s hard to make predictions, especially about the future.” – This is a truism that is so full of
common sense that it has been attributed to personalities as diverse as Niels Bohr, Mark Twain,
and the legendary US baseball player Yogi Berra.
Economic cycles progress, trends can shift, and markets evolve. We cannot know what lies in
store for monetary policy once non-standard measures have been cut back.
However,  our  monetary  union  should  rest  on  sound  principles  that  will  guide  us  on  our  way
forward.
For  me,  a  monetary  policy  framework  that  achieves  effectiveness  in  reaching  our  primary
mandate  and  that,  at  the  same  time,  leaves  enough  room  for  market  activities  is  the  most
desirable. Until it is proven that a return to the pre-crisis framework constrains effectiveness of
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary policy in a non-trivial way, I see no reason to depart from the pre-crisis framework.
Thank for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See, for example, R. W. Dimand (2007), Irving Fisher and Financial Economics: The Equity Premium Puzzle, the
Predictability  of  Stock  Prices,  and  Intertemporal Allocation  Under  Risk,  Journal  of  the  History  of  Economic
Thought, 29, pp. 153–166.
The framework was mainly in accordance with the international consensus among central banks on monetary
policy  implementation.  See  U.  Bindseil,  Evaluating  Monetary  Policy  Operational  Frameworks,  Jackson  Hole
Symposium, 2016.
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Implications  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  operations  during  the  financial  crisis,
Monthly Report, April 2014, pp. 37–59.
For an overview of the various arguments, see B. Bernanke, “Should the Fed keep its balance sheet large?”,
Bernanke’s Blog at Brookings, 2 September 2016; M. T. Kiley and J. M. Roberts, Monetary policy in a low interest
rate world, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 48(1), 2017, pp. 317–396; D. Quint and P. Rabanal, Should
conventional monetary policies become conventional?, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 28/2017.
C. Borio, P. Disyatat, M. Juselius and P. Rungcharoenkitkul (2017), Why so low for so long? A long-term view of
real interest rates, BIS Working Papers, No 685; Deutsche Bundesbank, The natural rate of interest, Monthly
Report, October 2017, pp. 27–42.
P. A. F. Magalhaes, C. A. Camillo, D. Langer, L. B. Andrade, M. do Carmo M. B. Duarte and R. Gosselink (2018),
Weaning failure and respiratory muscle function: What has been done and what can be improved?, Respiratory
Medicine, 134, pp. 54–61.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
