Yi Gang: Deepen reform and opening-up comprehensively. Create
new prospects for financial sector
Speech  by  Mr  Yi  Gang,  Governor  of  the  People's  Bank  of  China,  to  commemorate  the  40th
anniversary of China's economic reform and the 70th anniversary of the People's Bank of China
(PBC), Beijing, 17 December 2018.
 This year marks the 40th anniversary of the reform and opening-up and the 70th anniversary of
the  founding  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC).  As  components  of  China’s  tremendous
achievements in the progress of the reform and opening-up,  historic changes in the financial
sector have taken place in the past four decades, and a modern financial market system has
been  broadly  established  which,  adapting  to  the  socialist  market  economy  with  Chinese
characteristics,  is  vital  and  internationally  competitive. And  over  the  past  70  years,  under  the
leadership of the Communist Party of China (CPC), the PBC has made extensive exploration
and  innovation,  overcome  formidable  obstacles,  pioneered  in  the  promotion  of  financial
development,  reform  and  opening-up  at  different  times,  kept  creating  new  prospects  for  the
financial sector, and made significant contributions to China’s economic and social development.
Financial Adjustment and Macro Prudential Management Framework Gradually Improved
The monetary policy framework has been established and improved. After the founding of new
China,  the  country  adopted  a  mono-bank  system  compatible  with  the  planned  economy,
wherein the PBC functioned as a central bank and a unique commercial bank as well. Following
the introduction of the reform and opening-up policy, the PBC gradually split off its industrial and
commercial credit and savings businesses, and exclusively performed the functions of a central
bank  since  1983,  with  primary  responsibility  lying  in  the  implementation  of  macro  financial
policies. Amid the steady progress in reform and opening-up and the transition from the planned
economy  to  the  socialist  market  economy  with  Chinese  characteristics,  the  monetary  policy
regulatory  mechanism  was  gradually  shifted  from  direct  adjustment-oriented  to  indirect
adjustment-oriented.  First,  the  Law  of  the  PRC  on  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  specified  that
the ultimate objective of monetary policy is “to maintain the stability of the value of the currency
and thereby promote economic growth”. Second, measures were taken to reform the credit plan
management system which featured “centralized management on deposits and loans”, eliminate
caps  on  credit  scales,  gradually  establish  the  M2  money  supply  as  the  intermediate  target  of
monetary policy, and develop in due time indicator of aggregate financing to the real economy
(AFRE)  as  an  important  source  of  reference  for  monetary  policy.  Third,  the  monetary  policy
instruments  including  required  reserve,  central  bank  lending,  central  bank  discount  and  open
market  operation  have  been  created  and  improved.  In  order  to  meet  the  actual  demands  of
economic  and  financial  development,  monetary  policy  tools  such  as  open  market  short-term
liquidity adjustment instruments have been launched in succession.
Monetary  policy  macro  adjustment  has  been  strengthened.  At  different  stages  of  economic
development,  the  PBC  has  always  made  timely  and  proper  adjustments  in  monetary
policies  according  to  the  changes  in  financial  and  economic  landscape.  Here  are  several
examples.  In  the  late  1980s,  China  experienced  serious  economic  overheating  and  inflation.
Under  the  leadership  of  the  central  government,  the  PBC  strengthened  control  over  the  total
supply of money and credit, stepped up efforts to rectify financial governance, and managed to
effectively curb fast growing investment and soaring prices in a relatively short time. Following
the year of 2003, China’s economy entered another upward cycle and the next five years saw 15
rises in required reserve ratio. In 2007 alone, the required reserve ratio was increased on ten
occasions, and the benchmark interest rates for deposits and loans were raised six times. In
2008, the US sub-prime mortgage crisis spread worldwide and escalated into a global financial
crisis,  significant  changes  took  place  in  the  economic  and  financial  landscapes  at  home  and
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
abroad. The PBC resolutely implemented the decisions of the CPC Central Committee and the
counter-crisis  package  plan  developed  by  the  State  Council,  made  timely  adjustments  to  the
direction,  priority  and  intensity  of  monetary  policy,  reduced  the  benchmark  interest  rates  for
deposits  and  loans  five  times  and  the  required  reserve  ratio  four  times  so  as  to  ensure  an
adequate supply of liquidity and eventually make China’s economy among the first in the world
stabilize and rebound in 2009. Then in the second quarter of 2009, following the solid recovery of
China’s economy, the PBC made prompt reverse adjustments by increasing required reserve
ratio three times, hence effectively undermining the influence of policy overshooting. After 2015,
and especially since the beginning of 2018, faced with the cyclical downward pressure emerging
in  economic  structural  adjustment,  the  PBC  has  remained  steadfast  in  pursuing  its  policy,
conducted  pre-adjustment  and  fine-tuning  at  appropriate  junctures,  proactively  enhanced  its
support for the supply-side structural reform and high-quality economic development, especially
for private enterprises and small and micro enterprises, and alleviated the downward pressure
on the real economy.
The  two-pillar  regulatory  framework  of  monetary  policy  and  macro  prudential  policy  has  been
established. After the outbreak of the global financial crisis in 2008, the international community
recognized that macro imprudence was a crucial cause of the crisis. The PBC spearheaded in
the innovative exploration of counter-cyclical macro prudential management. In the second half of
2009,  as  RMB  loans  grew  rapidly,  it  proposed  to  develop  new  counter-cyclical  measures
under the macro prudential policy framework. In 2010, the PBC explored the practice of macro
prudential  management  by 
introducing  dynamic  adjustments  of  differentiated  reserve
requirements,  associating  credit  expansion  with  capital  adequacy  level  required  by  the  macro
prudential 
Economic  Work
Conference  explicitly  instructed  to  use  well  of  the  macro  prudential  tool. After  that,  the  PBC
continuously 
the  dynamic  adjustment
mechanism  for  differentiated  reserve  requirements  into  the  Macro  Prudential  Assessment
(MPA)  system,  and  took  gradual  steps  to  include  more  financial  activities,  asset  expanding
behaviors, and all-system cross-border financing in its macro prudential management. In 2017,
“improving  the  framework  of  regulation  underpinned  by  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential
policy” was formally written in the report of the 19th CPC National Congress.
improved  macro  prudential  policies,  upgraded 
management. 
end-2010, 
Central 
the 
At 
Battle for forestalling and defusing major risks has progressed. In the report to the 19th CPC
National Congress, General Secretary Xi Jinping noted that we must fight three critical battles
and the first of which is to take tough steps to forestall and defuse major risks. The PBC has
proactively  fulfilled  the  responsibilities  of  the  General  Office  of  the  Financial  Stability  and
Development  Committee  under  the  State  Council,  taken  the  lead  in  developing  the  three-year
action plan to forestall and defuse major risks, launched new asset management regulations and
supporting  policies,  strengthened  regulation  of  financial  holding  groups,  improved  regulatory
regimes  for  systematically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs)  and  financial  infrastructures,
and  shored  up  weak  links  in  the  system.  Measures  have  been  taken  to  promote  structural
deleveraging in an active and prudent manner, properly manage money supply, tighten asset and
debt constraints for state-owned enterprises, rigorously implement differentiated housing credit
policies, and strictly curb the excessive growth of household debt as well as local governments’
hidden debt and leverage ratio. Meanwhile, the PBC has also rectified various financial chaos in a
well-regulated  way,  resolutely  resolved  risks  of  some  high-risk  financial  holding  groups,
intensively rectified the financial order and conducted the special program on addressing Internet
financial risks.
Financial Institutional Reform Continuously Deepened
Remarkable  achievements  have  been  made  in  the  reform  of  large  state-owned  commercial
banks. In 1979, in order to support “loans for government grants” reform, the central government
established  various  state-owned  specialized  banks,  gradually  discarded  the  division  of  work
among these banks, split off their policy-related businesses, and transformed them into market
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
competitors. However, due to deficiencies in financial standards and rules, imperfect corporate
governance structure and inadequate capital, as well as the impact of the 1997 Asian financial
crisis, there was a massive build-up of non-performing loans in the banking sector. At that time,
some scholars at home and abroad believed China’s large state-owned commercial banks were
on  the  brink  of  “technical  bankruptcy”.  In  response,  the  Chinese  government  issued  special
treasury bonds and established four asset management companies that specialized in receiving
and disposing non-performing loans of RMB 1.4 trillion hived off from state-owned commercial
banks.  However,  deeper  reforms  like  the  institutional  reform  of  large  state-owned  commercial
banks remained untouched.
In February 2002, it was clarified at the Second National Financial Work Conference that large
state-owned commercial banks should be transformed into joint-stock companies and those with
appropriate conditions could get listed. In 2003, the central government decided that the PBC
should take the lead in researches on the reform of large state-owned commercial banks. The
PBC  then  proposed  creatively  to  inject  the  state’s  foreign  exchange  (FX)  reserves  into  large
commercial banks, and designed a four-step reform program which included writing off actual
capital  losses,  splitting  off  and  disposing  of  non-performing  assets,  injecting  FX  reserves  and
getting  listed  on  domestic  or  foreign  markets.  In  September  2003,  upon  the  deliberation  and
approval  of  the  CPC  Central  Committee,  the  State  Council  approved  the  general  plan  for
transforming large state-owned commercial banks into joint-stock banks, of which the drafting
was  led  by  the  PBC.  According  to  the  plan,  Bank  of  Communications  (BOCOM),  China
Construction  Bank  (CCB),  Bank  of  China  (BOC),  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of
China  (ICBC)  and  Agricultural  Bank  of  China  (ABC)  successively  underwent  shareholding
reforms,  stripped  off  non-performing  assets,  significantly  shored  up  their  capital  base,  and
eventually  went  listed.  During  the  process,  they  gradually  established  relatively  well-regulated
corporate  governance  structure  and  notably  enhanced  their  internal  management,  risk  control
capability and market constraint mechanism, with their assets and profitability leaping into the
front ranking of the world. Since 2011, BOC, ICBC, ABC and CCB were successivelyincluded in
the list of global systemically important banks (G-SIBs). Past experience has demonstrated that
it was through reforms that we could achieve a leap forward in the soundness of large financial
institutions and that China’s financial system was able to withstand the severe blow of the 2008
global financial crisis.
Continued advances have been made in the reform of rural credit cooperatives. In 1996, rural
credit cooperatives were decoupled from the ABC and administered by the PBC. After 1998, the
State Council set up first the rectification group and then the reform & research group, in a bid to
regulate  and  consolidate  rural  credit  cooperatives.  Though  the  move  enhanced  their  strength,
the  rural  credit  cooperatives  still  faced  such  problems  as  unclear  property  relationship,
inadequacy  in  management  systems,  heavy  historical  burdens  and  poor  asset  quality.  By  the
end of 2002, the non-performing loan ratio of rural credit cooperatives in China was as high as
around 50%, and 97.8% of rural credit cooperatives were insolvent. After the Second National
Financial Work Conference held in 2002, the State Council established the task force, which was
led by the PBC, for deepening reforms of rural finance and rural credit cooperatives. And the
overall requirements for reform and development of rural credit cooperatives including “property
relationship to be clarified, constraint mechanisms to be strengthened, services to be improved,
appropriate  support  to  be  provided  by  the  state  and  local  governments  to  be  held
responsible”  were  specified.  In  June  2003,  the  reform  of  rural  credit  cooperatives  was  piloted
in  Zhejiang  and  seven  other  provinces  and  then  applied  nationwide  in  a  phased  manner.  By
issuing  special  central  bank  bills  and  special  central  bank  lending,  the  PBC  managed  to  help
rural credit cooperatives in pilot areas to reduce historical burdens. Meanwhile, in formulating the
requirements for the issuance and redemption of special lending and special bills as well as the
evaluation procedure, the PBC closely integrated financial support into the process of rural credit
cooperative  reform,  so  as  to  gradually  bring  them  “to  a  new  stage”.  Under  the  positive
mechanism  of  constraints  and  incentives,  the  asset  quality,  profitability,  funding  to  support
agriculture  and  business  sustainability  of  rural  credit  cooperatives  have  been  significantly
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
improved.
like  ambiguous  boundaries  of  business  and 
The reform of development-oriented and policy-backed financial institutions has been proceeding
in  an  orderly  manner.  To  tackle  the  problems  of  the  indistinction  between    policy-oriented
businesses  and  commercial  businesses  in  state-owned  commercial  banks  and  their  severe
moral  hazards,  the  Chinese  government  established  three  policy  banks,  namely  China
Development Bank (CDB), Export-Import Bank of China (CEXIM) and Agricultural Development
Bank  of  China  (ADBC)  in  1994.  They  grew  over  the  decade  but  were,  to  varying  degrees,
troubled  by  problems 
imperfect
governance structure. According to the reform principles of targeted guidance and “one policy for
one bank” specified on the National Financial Work Conference in 2007, the PBC worked with
relevant authorities to first commercialize the CDB, replenishing its capital base and building up a
sound corporate governance structure. Since the outbreak of the international financial crisis in
2008,  it  has  clearly  proved  that  letting  development-oriented  and  policy-backed  financial
institutions  serve  national  strategies  is  crucial  and  necessary.  By  injecting  FX  reserves  and
specifying bond credit policies, the PBC provided funding support for the reform of development-
oriented and policy-backed financial institutions to improve their capital adequacy, and formulated
charters  of  CDB,  CEXIM  and  ADBC 
their  corporate
governance structure and risk prevention and control system. Through a series of reforms, the
PBC further enhanced the policy-related functions of CEXIM and ADBC, clarified CDB’s position
as  a  development-oriented  financial  institution,  significantly  strengthened  the  capital  base
and resilience of the three institutions, and remarkably improved their governance structure and
constraint mechanism.
Reforms of Market-based Interest Rate and Exchange Rate Steadily Promoted
improvements 
facilitate 
to 
to 
Market-based interest rate reform has made significant breakthroughs. Back in 1993, the Third
Plenary  Session  of  the  14th  CPC  Central  Committee  proposed  that  “the  central  bank  should
make timely adjustment of benchmark interest rates based on market supply and demand while
allowing deposit rates of commercial banks to fluctuate within limits”. Since then, the conditions
for marketizing interest rate became mature with the successive implementation of the Law of
the PRC on the People’s Bank of China and the Law of the PRC on Commercial Banks. On June
1, 1996, the PBC officially eased restrictions on interbank offered rate, marking an important step
towards market-based interest rate. Later, the PBC steadily promoted market-based interest rate
reform  under  the  principle  of  “domestic  currency  after  foreign  currency,  deposits  after  loans,
short-term  after  long-term”,  and  gradually  realized  market-based  interest  rates  in  the  bond
market and in the deposits and loans of foreign currencies. China eased most of the interest rate
restrictions by gradually expanding the floating range of deposit and loan rates after the global
financial crisis in 2008, by completely removing restrictions on loan rates of financial institutions
in  July,  2013  and  by  lifting  the  cap  of  deposit  rates  in  October,  2015,  all  of  which  marked
significant breakthroughs in China’s market-based interest rate reform.
Market-based exchange rate reform has been steadily advanced. Since the reform and opening
up,  China  started  to  facilitate  foreign  trade  system  reform  by  implementing  foreign  exchange
retention system, establishing foreign exchange swap market afterwards, and easing restrictions
on individual use of foreign exchange, which led to the coexistence of official exchange rate and
market-based  exchange  rate.  On  January  1,  1994,  the  reform  of  RMB  exchange  rate  regime
achieved a breakthrough in the unifying of official exchange rate and that in the foreign exchange
swap  market,  resulting  in  a  single,  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime  based  on  market
demand and supply, and a tiered and unified foreign exchange market. On July 21, 2005, the
PBC relaunched the reform of RMB exchange rate regime, with a managed floating exchange
rate regime based on market demand and supply with reference to a basket of currencies. With
three successive adjustments in 2007, 2012 and 2014, the daily trading band for the USD/CNY
has been widened from 3‰ to 2%, indicating that the PBC has basically withdrawn from regular
intervention  of  the  exchange  market  and  that  the  flexibility  of  RMB  exchange  rate  has  been
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
significantly enhanced. In the past decade, especially after the exchange rate reform initiated on
August 11, 2015, RMB exchange rate formation mechanism has become increasingly market-
based.  By  now,  the  flexibility  of  the  two-way  floating  of  the  RMB  exchange  rate  has  been
enhanced significantly, with a steady exchange rate expectation. RMB exchange rate remained
basically stable at a reasonable and balanced level.
Financial Market System Established and Improved
The bond market has achieved leapfrog development. During the period of resuming government
bond  issuance  in  1981  to  establishing  China  Central  Depository  &  Clearing  Co.,  Ltd  in  1996,
China’s bond market undergone twists and turns featuring seven years of “bond supplied without
demand”,  and  the  closing  of  treasury  futures  market  due  to  the  “3.27  incident”  after  two-year
operation from 1993. After the First National Financial Work Conference in 1997, all commercial
banks withdrew from the exchange bond market and started to conduct bond repurchase and
spot trading in the interbank market. This marked the beginning of a diversified and tiered bond
market system which includes exchange market and the over-the-counter (OTC) retail market
(commercial  bank  OTC  market)  and  was  mainly  dominated  by  OTC  block  trading  market
(interbank  bond  market).  Since  2000,  under  the  basic  approach  of  “easing  administrative
regulations, serving for qualified institutional investors and relying on OTC market”, the PBC has
been actively promoting the development of reforming the bond market’s role and structure. It
has propelled the establishment and improvement of the systems such as market maker rule,
settlement  agent  system,  currency  broker  system,  information  disclosure  system,  and  credit
rating  system.  It  has  improved  systems  for  bond  issuing,  exchange,  trust  and  clearing,
established  Shanghai  Clearing  House,  facilitated  the  establishment  of  National Association  of
Financial  Market  Institutional  Investors  and  China  Bond  Insurance  Co.,  Ltd.  To  accelerate
innovation of financial products, the PBC launched subordinated bonds, ordinary financial bonds,
short-term financing bills and medium-term notes. Besides spot exchange and bond repurchase,
the PBC also offers bond lending, bond forward and credit risk mitigation (CRM) instruments.
The category of basic products is almost the same with developed bond markets. At the end of
October, 2018, China ranked as the world’s third largest bond market behind the United States
and Japan, with outstanding bonds almost hitting RMB 84 trillion. Besides, China’s bond market
also served the role of extending direct financing channels for the real economy, improving social
financing structure, enhancing transmission efficiency of monetary policies,  lowering  financing
costs, and strengthening financial stability. In October 2018, the PBC set up support instrument
of bond financing for private enterprises, which is to give credit support to private enterprises with
temporary  difficulties  via  various  market-oriented  approaches  such  as  the  sale  of  CRM
instruments. And it has made positive progress.
The  coordinated  development  of  the  financial  market  has  been  advanced.  The  money  market
has developed in an innovative way. Since interbank lending was approved among specialized
banks  in  China  in  1984,  interbank  lending  market  emerged  across  China.  In  1993,  the  PBC
fostered the establishment of a national interbank lending market. In 2007, when the Measures
for the Administration of Interbank Lending was issued, the PBC launched Shanghai Interbank
Offered Rate (Shibor) and advanced the reform and opening of the money market. In addition,
the  bond  repurchase  market  kept  growing  and  the  bill  market  developed  in  a  well-regulated
manner.  China’s  bill  business  started  in  the  1970s,  while  the Law  of  the  PRC  on  Negotiable
Instruments was released in the late 1990s. Since 2000, the PBC has been promoting the use of
electronic commercial draft to facilitate the development of commercial acceptance bill. In 2016,
the PBC pushed forward the establishment of a national bill transaction platform and Shanghai
Commercial  Paper  Exchange  Corporate  Ltd,  which  marked  the  expansion  and  function
enhancement of bill market. Moreover, the gold market has grown fully fledged in its functions.
After gold jewelry market was opened in China in 1982, the PBC issued Regulations of the PRC
on  the  Control  of  Gold  and  Silver.  In  2002,  the  founding  of  Shanghai  Gold  Exchange  (SGE)
started the movement towards market-oriented gold market of China. By now, SGE has become
largest exchange for physical gold bullion. 
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
RMB Internationalized on a Market-oriented Basis
RMB internationalization is an inevitable trend and natural result of the deepening of reform and
opening-up  in  China’s  economic  and  financial  sector.  During  the  2008  global  financial  crisis,
RMB gained unexpected popularity among the international community. A number of countries
proactively set up currency swaps with China. Amid an increasing demand for RMB and China’s
deepening opening-up, the PBC built on the sound momentum generated to gradually make the
RMB a fully convertible currency by further eliminating unnecessary administrative controls and
policy restrictions and by constantly improving policy framework for cross-border use of RMB for
the real economy. In July 2009, the PBC launched the pilot program of RMB settlement in cross-
border trade in several cities such as Shanghai and Guangdong. Later, the coverage of cross-
border trade settlement in RMB was extended to the entire nation. After that, the PBC launched
various  institutional  arrangements,  including  RMB  Qualified  Foreign  Institutional  Investors
(RQFII), RMB Qualified Domestic Institutional Investors (RQDII), Shanghai-Hong Kong Connect,
Shenzhen-Hong Kong Connect, Mutual Recognition of Funds and Bond Connect, to improve the
infrastructure  system  for  RMB  internationalization.  As  China  experienced  greater  economic
growth  and  an  elevating  international  status  of  RMB,  a  growing  chorus  of  international  voices
appeared, calling for RMB’s inclusion into the Special Drawing Rights (SDR) currency basket.
Since the IMF reviews the SDR basket of currencies every five years, the 2015 Review offered a
historic opportunity for RMB to be included into SDR basket. Under the strategic guidance of the
CPC Central Committee, the PBC proactively fostered the inclusion process. On November 30,
2015,  the  Executive  Board  of  the  IMF  acknowledged  RMB  as  a  freely  usable  currency  and
decided that it will be included in the SDR currency basket, effective October 1, 2016. It was an
important milestone in RMB internationalization, which reflected that the achievements of China’s
reform and opening up were highly recognized by the international community.
According to the SWIFT data, RMB ranked fifth worldwide as a global currency of payment at the
end of August 2018, accounting for 2.12% of the global market. In Q2 of 2018, RMB reserves
held  by  countries  that  report  to  the  IMF’s  Currency  Composition  of  Official  Foreign  Exchange
Reserves  (COFER)  system  stood  at  USD  193.38  billion.  Over  60  foreign  central  banks  and
monetary authorities have included RMB in their official FX reserves.
Opening up of the Financial Sector Steadily Expanded
The financial sector has been further opened up. In the early days of China’s reform and opening
up, foreign banks were allowed to be established only in the Special Economic Zones (SEZs).
They  mainly  offered  services  to  three  types  of  foreign-funded  enterprises  with  credit
funds basically coming from overseas. After Deng Xiaoping’s Southern Inspection Tour Talks in
1992, more openings were extended to foreign banks by removing geographical restrictions for
setting up institutions and by allowing foreign banks to conduct pilot operations of RMB business
in Shanghai. Since the accession to the WTO, China has been constantly expanding the opening
of the financial sector in aspects of the establishment of financial institutions, the business scope
and foreign ownership. As a result, a number of foreign financial institutions set up operations in
China, which formed a financial service network with certain coverage and market depth. Foreign
strategic  investors  were  also  invited  to  participate  in  the  transformation  of  large  state-owned
commercial banks into joint-stock companies. Since 2018, the PBC has resolutely implemented
major  state  policies  announced  by  General  Secretary  Xi  Jinping  at  the  Boao  Forum  for Asia
Annual  Conference  to  further  reform  and  open  up  the  financial  sector,  for  which  the  PBC
formulated  relevant  measures  and  timetable.  In April,  the  PBC  announced  eleven  reform  and
opening-up  measures,  seven  of  which  have  been  implemented  up  to  present.  Meanwhile,  the
PBC is also promoting reform and opening up of the financial sector in areas such as payment
and clearing, bond market, credit-rating and credit reference.
New achievements have been scored in international policy coordination and cooperation. In line
with  China’s  overall  diplomatic  strategy,  the  PBC  carried  out  financial  exchanges  and
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
cooperation  in  an  all-round,  multi-tiered,  flexible  and  pragmatic  manner.  Firstly,  the  PBC  has
actively  participated  in  global  economic  governance  and  policy  coordination,  which  include
fulfilling the tasks of the G20 Finance Track especially those of 2016 G20 Hangzhou Summit;
taking an active role and promoting the IMF Quota, Governance and Surveillance Reform, with
China’s IMF quota ranking third in the world and Chinese staff appointed to management posts of
the  IMF;  and  working  with  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  Basel  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision  (BCBS)  to  develop  standards  and  rules  and  promote  alignment  of  domestic
standards  with  international  standards.  Secondly,  the  PBC  has  strengthened  cooperation  and
innovation in the multilateral development sector by joining, since 1980, various regional and sub-
regional multilateral development banks such as the African Development Bank, Inter-American
Development  Bank  and  the  European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development.  Thirdly,  the
PBC took deep participation in the investment and financing cooperation under the Belt and Road
Initiative  by  encouraging  financial  institutions  to  conduct  overseas  fund  business  in  RMB,
promoting the establishment and expansion of the Silk Road Fund and advancing the network
building of financial institutions and services. Fourthly, the PBC has strengthen regional financial
cooperation  through  platforms  such  as  ASEAN  Plus  Three  Cooperation,  the  Shanghai
Cooperation  Organization  and  South  East Asian  Central  Banks.  Fifthly,  the  PBC  has  steadily
advanced  the  development  of  RMB  business  in  Hong  Kong  and  Macao,  consolidated  Hong
Kong’s  position  as  an  international  financial  center  and  established  a  cross-Straits  currency
clearing mechanism.
Major changes have been realized in foreign exchange administration. On December 1, 1996,
China formally accepted the obligations of Article VIII of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement. Since
then the RMB had been fully convertible on current accounts. After that, China started to promote
RMB  capital  account  convertibility.  However,  it  was  slowed  down  by  the  1997 Asian  financial
crisis and by severe economic and financial hardships. Since China’s accession to the WTO,
the PBC has been steadily enhancing capital account convertibility through deepening reforms in
line with the principle of “prioritizing inflow over outflow, long-term over short-term, direct over
indirect, and institutions over individuals”. According to the IMF’s classification of capital account,
37 out of all 40 items have already achieved full or partial convertibility, accounting for 92.5%,
leaving only 3 items to be opened. Meanwhile, the PBC has accelerated the reform in foreign
exchange administration, loosened its grip, streamlined administration and delegated power to
substantially  reduce  exchange  restrictions  on  cross-border  capital  and  financial  transactions,
pursue  balanced  management  of  capital  inflows  and  outflows  and  promote  an  equilibrium  in
balance of payments.
liquidity  and  asset  value  preservation  and  appreciation”,  under 
Foreign  exchange  reserve  management  has  been  constantly  improved.  Since  the  reform  of
foreign exchange management system in 1994, China has achieved a substantial increase in
FX reserves. The PBC holds, manages and operates China’s FX reserves in accordance with
the law. Since 2001, FX reserves have been managed and operated following the principle of
“safety, 
the  guidance
and  supervision  from  all  levels  of  the  three-tiered  approval  system  consisting  of  the  State
Council, the PBC and the SAFE. By building a diversified portfolio, China has gradually expanded
its  FX  reserves  to  cover  more  than  30  currencies,  50  types  of  asset  products  and  6,000
investment  targets  with  continuous  operation  24  hours  a  day  globally,  and  has  constantly
improved  frameworks,  approaches,  instruments  and  means  of  risk  management  and  internal
control. All this made it possible for China to withstand the challenges of financial crises such as
the Asian financial crisis, the US sub-prime mortgage crisis and the European sovereign debt
crisis and to achieve steady growth in the operation performance.
Financial Infrastructure Continuously Reinforced
The  rule  of  law  in  financial  sector  has  made  solid  headway.  The  institutional  framework  of
financial laws has been established with the fundamental laws including the Law of the PRC on
the People’s Bank of China, the Law of the PRC on Commercial Banks, the Securities Law, and
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  Insurance  Law at the core and relevant administrative rules and  regulations,  departmental
rules  and  regulatory  documents  as  important  components.  Laws  and  regulations  have  been
released  such  as  the Anti-Money  Laundering  Law,  the  Administrative  Rules  for  Financial
Statistics, the Regulation on the Administration of Credit Investigation Industry, and the Deposit
Insurance  Regulation.  The  formulation  and  amendment  of  financial  regulations  including  the
Regulation  on  Non-depository  Lending  Organizations  and  the  Interim  Regulation  on  Cash
Management have  picked  up  pace.  The  reform  to  transform  the  government’s  functions  has
been continuously deepened. The online platform for administrative approval has been built up.
We’ve  further  streamlined  administration  and  delegated  powers  while  improving  the  policy
transparency.
New  breakthroughs  have  been  made  in  financial  statistics.  A  nationwide  financial  statistics
information  system  has  been  established  to  realize  the  concentration  and  sharing  of  financial
statistics. A series of indicators of aggregate financing to the real economy (AFRE) has been
formulated, specifying that the management targets for the aggregates of monetary policy are
provided  by  the  asset-holding  financial  institutions.  The  indicators  now  serve  as  an  important
reference for macro analysis and decision-making. A comprehensive financial statistics system
has been formed while the asset management products have been innovatively incorporated in
the  statistics.  The  macro-oriented  specialized  statistics  and  credit-policy  statistics  have  been
strengthened to serve financial regulation and prevent and control systemic financial risks.
The construction of a modern payment and clearing system has been accelerated. Since the
reform and opening-up, the payment and clearing system in China has achieved leap forward
development: from the reform of interbank system to the successive establishment of High Value
Payment  System  (HVPS),  Bulk  Electronic  Payment  System  (BEPS),  Cheque  Image  System
(CIS) and Electronic Commercial Draft System (ECDS) as well as the launch of the Second
Generation of China National Advanced Payment System (CNAPS), Accounting Data Centralized
System (ACS), and the RMB Cross-border Interbank Payment System (CIPS). China UnionPay
has been founded to facilitate the nationwide bankcard interoperability. The real-name system of
bank  account  has  been  in  place  with  reform  of  classified  management  of  personal  bank
accounts completed. Guidance has been given to non-bank payment institutions for their healthy
development.  Mobile  payment  in  China  has  played  the  leading  role  in  the  world  in  terms  of
business volume, processing efficiency and coverage.
The  credit  information  system  has  gradually  improved.  In  the  second  half  of  1990s,  the  PBC
started  to  build  the  credit  information  system  of  enterprises  and  individuals.  Based  on  that,  a
database of financial credit information system has been built up and now plays a significant role
in  improving  the  social  credit  system  and  preventing  credit  risks.  Meanwhile,  the  conditional
easing  of  market  access  leads  to  the  growing  overall  competence  and  competitiveness  of
market-based credit information institutions, which thus enables its development different from
and complementary with the national financial credit information system database. The PBC has
fully  advanced  the  building  of  the  social  credit  system  and  participated  in  establishing  the
mechanism of collective punishment for deception and collective incentives for honesty.
The service efficiency of currency and coins has continuously improved. Since its inception, the
PBC  has  consecutively  designed  and  printed  five  series  of  RMB  banknotes.  The  printing
techniques and anti-counterfeit level of China’s banknote printing and minting have reached the
world’s advanced standards. The large-value cash management and services in terms of RMB
notes with small denominations have been improved with a constantly raising capacity and level
of cash management. The efforts to prevent and crack down counterfeiting banknotes have been
stepped up into the stage of systematic, scientific and refined management. The Digital Currency
Research Institute has been set up for in-depth digital currency R&D.
The  modern  treasury  system  has  been  continuously  improved.  The  PBC  has  performed  its
function of managing the treasury since its foundation. With the release and implementation of
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
the Regulation of the PRC on State Treasury and the Budget Law, the treasury management has
grown  towards  law-based,  scientific  and  regulated  procedures.  The  constant  advancement  in
treasury  system  and  IT  application  has  played  a  crucial  role  in  safeguarding  the  security  of
treasury and the execution of fiscal budgets at all levels. The launch of the Treasury Information
Process  System  (TIPS)  in  2006  in  particular  has  provided  solid  safeguard  for  the  fiscal  fund
security and efficient operation.
Efforts in the area of anti-money laundering (AML) have been continuously strengthened. In 2004,
the State Council Inter-Ministerial Anti-Money Laundering Joint Meeting system was initiated, with
the  PBC  taking  the  lead,  for  better  regulatory  framework  and  strengthened  coordination  and
collaboration. The AML supervision has covered the full range of banking, securities and futures,
insurance  and  key  special  non-financial  sectors.  China  has  been  deeply  engaged  in  the
international exchanges, cooperation and policy-making of AML.
The  working  mechanism  for  the  protection  of  rights  and  interests  of  financial  consumers  has
taken  initial  shape.  In  2012,  the  bureau  for  protecting  the  rights  and  interests  of  financial
consumers was set up to foster and reinforce the mechanism and measures, and to draft the
policies, laws and regulations concerned. The PBC has organized various education activities for
financial consumers while exploring to incorporate financial knowledge into the national education
system. Vigorous efforts have been devoted to financial inclusion, with China’s inclusive financial
indicator system formed and improved and the coverage expansion of basic financial services
prioritized.
Intrinsic Logic and Experience Summing-up for the Reform and Development of China’s
Financial Sector
Since  the  introduction  of  the  reform  and  opening-up  policy,  Chinese  financial  reform  and
development 
achievements,  which
has  undergone  formidable  and  complex  process,  providing  us  with  a  rich  legacy  of
experiences worthwhile to sum up.
has  made 
hard-earned 
tremendous 
and 
Letting the market play decisive role in resource allocation shall be upheld at all times. In the early
days of reform and opening-up, the PBC was the sole bank in China bearing high monopolistic
power.  After  the  reform  was  initiated,  a  large  number  of  banks  were  established,  including
hundreds  of  city  commercial  banks,  thousands  of  rural  commercial  banks  and  rural  credit
cooperatives.  As  many  of  these  banks  completed  shareholding  reforms  and  went  listed,
their  business  efficiency  was    greatly  elevated  with  the  property  rights  clarified  and  a  marked
reduction  of  state  shareholding  in  the  banking  sector.  Banks  used  to  be  the  cashier  of  the
government  and  the  state  finance  in  the  early  days  of  reform  and  opening-up,  whereas  they
exercised  independent  operation  after  the  reform  and  thereby  became  market  entities  in
resource  allocation.  In  line  with  the  requirements  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision, the banking sector has built up an asset-liability constraint mechanism with capital
adequacy ratio at its core, as well as a market-based loss absorbency and risk prevention and
control  mechanism. At  the  beginning  of  the  reform  and  opening-up,  bank  employees  got  the
same  compensation  regardless  of  their  performance,  whereas  a  market-based  performance
evaluation  system  and  a  salary  system 
linked  employees’  remunerations  with
their contributions were established after the reform. The deepened reform and opening-up has
further  improved  the  accounting  standard  and  information  disclosure  policy,  and  enhanced
external  supervision  and  market  discipline.  Now  that  the  problems  have  been  addressed  in
flawed  financial  institutions  among  securities  companies,  insurance  companies  and  financial
holding  companies,  the  implicit  repayment  guarantees  are  in  turn  unwound  and  the  exit
mechanism is gradually built up. We are now steadily promoting the deposit insurance system,
expecting the orderly building of a financial risk resolution framework based on deposit insurance.
that 
Law-based administration and fulfillment of duty shall be ensured at all times. It is a basic code
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
that the functions of the PBC is designated by law and carried out in accordance with the law.
Since  the  foundation  of  the  Government  Administration  Council  of  the  Central  People’s
Government  in  1949,  the  PBC  has  been  one  of  the  Council’s  composing  institutions  and
precisely  practiced  its  functions  in  accordance  with  law.  In  1982,  the  State  Council  further
emphasized  that  “the  People’s  Bank  of  China  is  the  central  bank  of  the  People’s  Republic  of
China,  and  it  is  a  government  agency  responsible  for  supervising  the  financial  industry  of  the
country under the leadership of the State Council”. In 1983, the State Council decided that the
PBC should exclusively perform the function of the central bank and specified its ten functions. In
1995, the Law of the PRC on the People’s Bank of China was enacted, which confirmed the law-
granted status of the PBC as the central bank through state legislation. Revised in 2003, the Law
further stipulated that “as a composing department of the State Council, the People’s Bank of
China  is  the  central  bank  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  and  serves  as  a  regulatory
department  at  macro  level  to  formulate  and  implement  monetary  policies,  maintain  financial
stability and provide financial services”.
Firm  actions  shall  be  constantly  taken  to  advance  the  opening-up  of  financial  sector.  It  was
through  opening-up  and  a  thorough  study  of  the  international  standard  of  financial  supervision
and  regulation,  that  we  could  have  a  realistic  picture  of  how  far  we  lagged  behind,  and  we
brought  in  better  technology  and  management  skills  as  well  as  competition  mechanism.  The
mechanism 
governance,
reducing external administrative intervention, and promoting the reform of intermediary services
such  as  accounting  standard,  transparency,  credit  rating,  etc.  The  opening-up  has  also
advanced the reforms in related fields at home. For instance, the inclusion of RMB in the SDR
basket  required  China,  as  a  reserve  currency  issuer,  constantly  to  improve  its  macro  policy
framework, so as to boost the world’s confidence in RMB.
contributes 
especially 
improving 
corporate 
to 
Safeguarding economic and financial stability shall be deemed as an important target at all times.
A  sound  economic  and  financial  environment  is  essential  for  the  successful  advancement
of each financial reform. Therefore, flexible and appropriate accommodation of macro regulation
and  adjustments,  especially  monetary  policy,  should  be  pursued  in  line  with  the  changing
economic landscape, and counter-cyclical regulation should be enhanced as well. In times of an
overheated  economy  or  asset  bubbles,  proper  instruments  should  be  used  to  achieve  a
“controllable pressure-relieving” and a “soft landing”, so as to secure a stable adjustment. When
an economic recession or external economic shocks occur, timely measures should be taken to
stabilize the financial market and enhance public confidence. Meanwhile, a healthy relationship
should  be  maintained  among  financial  reform,  development  and  stability.  The  financial  market
shall  be  developed  with  financial  reform  forging  ahead  and  opening-up  expanded,  while
maintaining the stability of the financial system and provision of continual financial services and
holding the bottom line of preventing systemic financial risks.
The role of a central bank shall be set from a forward-looking perspective. In order to better adapt
to the changing environment and demands, the PBC’s role and its functions have been adjusted
and  refined  many  times  since  the  reform  and  opening  up.  In  a  bid  to  fulfill  new  functions  in
financial  reform,  development  and  financial  stability,  the  PBC  set  up  several  specialized
departments  in  2003,  including  the  bureaus  of  financial  markets,  financial  stability,  credit
information system and anti-money laundering, after the three professional regulatory agencies
were established, namely, China Banking Regulatory Commission, China Securities Regulatory
Commission  and  China  Insurance  Regulatory  Commission.  In  2005,  the  PBC  set  up  its
Shanghai  Head  Office  for  better  executing  macro  regulation  and  adjustment  functions  as  the
central bank and improving the decision-making and operation system. In 2009, a specialized
department was set up to push forward the reform of RMB exchange rate formation mechanism
and  cross-border  use  of  RMB.  In  2012,  it  established  the  specialized  bureau  of  financial
consumer  protection.  In  August  2013,  upon  the  requirement  of  the  State  Council,  the  PBC
initiated  the  establishment  of  the  Inter-Ministerial  Joint  Meeting  for  Financial  Regulation  and
Coordination. In July 2017, the Fifth National Financial Work Conference decided to set up the
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial  Stability  and  Development  Committee  under  the  State  Council,  in  which  the  PBC
serves its General Office and takes the lead in preventing and defusing systemic financial risks.
In  2018,  the  third  plenary  session  of  the  19th  CPC  Central  Committee  adopted  the  reform
scheme of Party and state institutions, which stipulated that the PBC should be responsible for
drafting important laws and regulations concerning banking and insurance sectors and designing
the fundamental prudential regulation system.
Looking  forward,  as  the  socialism  with  Chinese  characteristics  has  entered  a  new  era,  the
principal contradiction facing Chinese society has evolved. The country’s economy has shifted
from  fast  growth  to  high-quality  growth,  but  there  remain  many  challenges  and  tasks  to  be
addressed in the reform and development of the financial system. It is our firm belief that, under
the strong leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Xi Jinping at its core, the giant ship
symbolizing China’s financial cause will continue moving steadily forward into a promising future
with prospects of new achievements in the financial development and reforms!
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
