Mario Draghi: The outlook for the euro area economy
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Frankfurt European
Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 16 November 2018.
 The euro area economy has now been growing for five years, and we expect the expansion to
continue in the coming years. Yet we have recently seen a loss in growth momentum. In both of
the last two quarterly ECB growth projections, our staff has revised down its estimates. Actual
data have also been weak. The flash estimate for euro area growth in the third quarter was just
0.2%.
The slowdown has raised questions about the strength of the growth outlook and, in turn, about
whether the ongoing convergence of inflation towards our objective will be sustained. I would like
to address these questions in my remarks this morning.
The  key  issue  at  stake  is  as  follows:  are  we  witnessing  a  temporary  “soft  patch”  or  a  more
lasting deterioration in the growth outlook?
There is certainly no reason why the expansion in the euro area should abruptly come to an end.
A gradual slowdown is normal as expansions mature and growth converges towards its long-run
potential. But the expansion in the euro area is still relatively short in length and small in size.
Since 1975 there have been five periods of rising GDP in the euro area. The average duration
from trough to peak is 31 quarters, with GDP increasing by 21% over that period. The current
expansion in the euro area, however, has lasted just 22 quarters and GDP is only around 10%
above the trough. In contrast, the expansion in the United States has lasted 37 quarters, and
GDP has risen by 21%.
In  light  of  this,  it  is  important  to  understand  the  sources  of  the  growth  slowdown  we  have
witnessed this year. At present there are two main sources.
The first is one-off factors, which have clearly played an important role in the underperformance
of growth since the start of the year. In the first half of 2018, weather, sickness and industrial
action affected output in a number of countries. And in the third quarter, we saw a significant
disruption of car production created by the introduction of new vehicle emissions standards on 1
September.
Production slowed as carmakers tried to avoid building up inventory of untested models, which
weighed  heavily  on  economies  with  large  automobile  sectors,  such  as  Germany.  Indeed,  the
German  economy  actually  contracted  in  the  third  quarter,  removing  at  least  0.1  percentage
points from quarterly euro area growth.
But this effect should be temporary. As the testing backlog clears, car production should return to
normal by the end of the year and the effect on output should dissipate.  The latest data already
show production normalising.
1
The second source of the slowdown has been weaker trade growth, which is broader-based. Net
exports contributed 1.4 percentage points to euro area growth in 2017, while so far this year they
have removed 0.2 percentage points. World trade growth decelerated from 5.2% in 2017 to 4.6%
in the first half of this year.
We  are  witnessing  a  long-term  slowdown  in  world  trade.  Some  of  the  factors  that  previously
drove its rapid expansion, such as trade liberalisation and the creation of global value chains,
have waned since the financial crisis. We are also witnessing a cyclical correction from the very
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
strong trade growth recorded last year. Trade dynamics are now normalising as global growth
retreats towards potential.
Insofar as world trade stabilises at a lower level, its drag on growth could also be temporary. But
there are two conditions that could make it longer-lasting.
The first is if trade uncertainty rises and dampens euro area export performance, in particular
owing to protectionism.
The preliminary trade agreement reached between the US, Canada and Mexico reduces some
uncertainty,  but  other  disputes  remain.  Some  indicators  suggest  this  is  feeding  into  the  trade
outlook. The manufacturing PMI for the euro area fell to a two-year low in October, with export-
oriented economies recording particularly large drops. New export orders contracted for the first
time since 2013.
The second condition is if uncertainty about external demand spills over into domestic demand
through confidence and investment channels.
For  now,  there  is  little  tangible  evidence  that  the  moderation  in  growth  has  affected  business
investment.  But  there  is  some  evidence  that  those  euro  area  firms  that  are  most  likely  to  be
affected by proposed tariffs have reduced their rate of capital spending. Moreover, the slowdown
in imports has particularly affected capital and intermediate goods, which might signal that firms
are scaling back their investment decisions.
So we need to monitor these trade risks very carefully over the coming months. However, we still
see  the  overall  risks  to  the  growth  outlook  as  broadly  balanced,  in  large  part  because  the
underlying drivers of domestic demand remain in place.
Most  important  is  the  virtuous  circle  between  employment,  labour  income  and  consumption,
which  has  been  the  motor  of  growth  throughout  the  recovery.  Various  indicators  suggest  this
cycle has not been disrupted by the loss of growth momentum this year.
Employment  growth  remains  relatively  strong,  even  though  the  latest  data  suggest  some
slowdown. The contribution of labour income to household income growth in the first half of this
year  was  the  strongest  in  a  decade.  And  consumer  confidence  remains  above  its  long-run
average in the euro area and across most economies. Perceptions about the general economic
climate  have  declined  somewhat  this  year,  but  consumers’  assessments  of  their  personal
situation – which tend to be more correlated with consumption – have remained steady.
There are three considerations that underpin our view that this cycle is resilient.
First, an important force behind employment growth in the euro area is longer-term structural
changes, and these are less sensitive to cyclical swings.
Over the past five years, employment has increased by 9.5 million people, rising by 2.6 million in
2
 This growth is similar to
Germany, 2.1 million in Spain, 1 million in France and 1 million in Italy.
the  five  years  before  the  crisis,  when  employment  grew  by  10  million  people.  In  that  period,
however, close to 70% of employment growth was “prime age”, meaning it came from the 25-54
age group. But since 2013 more than 70% of employment growth has come from those aged 55-
74. This partly reflects the impact of past structural reforms, such as to pension systems.
Indeed, the participation rate of people aged 55-74 has almost doubled, from around 20% in 1999
to 38% in 2017. The share of women in work has also risen by more than 10 percentage points
since the start of EMU to almost 60% – its highest level ever. In addition, countries that have
implemented structural reforms have in general seen a rise in labour demand in recent years
compared with the pre-crisis period. Germany, Portugal and Spain are all good examples.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  second  consideration  that  points  to  the  resilience  of  domestic  demand  is  the  strong  link
between consumption and job growth in the euro area. Consumption is much more conducive to
jobs  than  exports,  reflecting  the  higher  labour-intensity  of  services,  which  are  the  bulk  of
consumers’ expenditure. In contrast, exports have a higher manufacturing content and are less
labour intensive.  This is one reason why the labour market recovery was not affected by the
contraction in world trade in 2015-16.
3
In  fact,  the  continued  strength  of  consumption  may  explain  why  firms  are  still  hiring  even  as
growth  slows,  with  permanent  contracts  accounting  for  the  vast  majority  of  the  increase  in
employment this year. But clearly this could change if firms start to see the slowdown as more
persistent.
The  third  consideration  is  the  still  very  favourable  financing  conditions  in  the  euro  area,
underpinned by our accommodative monetary policy.
The cost of bank borrowing for firms fell to record lows in the first half of this year across all large
euro area economies, while the growth of loans to firms stood at its highest rate since 2012. The
growth rate of loans to households is also the strongest since 2012, with consumer credit now
acting  as  the  most  dynamic  component,  reflecting  the  ongoing  strength  of  consumption.
Household net worth remains at solid levels on the back of rising house prices and is adding to
continued consumption growth.
But there are some risks to financing conditions as well.
Lack of fiscal consolidation in high-debt countries increases their vulnerability to shocks, whether
those shocks are autonomously produced by questioning the rules of EMU’s architecture, or are
imported  through  financial  contagion.  So  far,  the  rise  in  sovereign  spreads  has  been  mostly
restricted to the first case and contagion across countries has been limited.
Such  developments  feed  into  tighter  bank  lending  conditions  for  the  real  economy.  To  date,
though some repricing in bank lending is happening where the rise in spreads has been more
significant, overall bank funding costs remain near historical lows in all large countries, thanks to
a steady deposit base.
To protect their households and firms from rising interest rates, high-debt countries should not
increase their debt even further and all countries should respect the rules of the Union.
Other risks stem from the possibility of a disorderly increase in global risk premia. The reaction
of  asset  prices  to  surprise  inflation  in  other  jurisdictions  at  a  more  advanced  stage  in  the
business cycle, a return to the financial deregulation that was the primary cause of the financial
crisis, and fragilities in several emerging market economies exposed to currency mismatches,
are all risks that warrant close monitoring.
Outlook for inflation and monetary policy
So, how is the growth picture affecting the outlook for inflation? Here we need to assess to what
extent  wage  growth  will  be  robust  to  slowing  growth  momentum,  and  to  what  extent  wage
increases will pass through to prices.
The link between output growth and wage growth in the euro area has strengthened compared
with recent years. As the domestic expansion continues, wage pressures have started to build
and  have  surprised  on  the  upside  this  year.  Annual  growth  in  compensation  per  employee
reached  2.3%  in  the  second  quarter.  This  increase  is  broad-based  and  present  across  most
sectors and euro area economies.
Two factors suggest wage growth should be resilient to a period of slower growth.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The first is that the labour market is already showing signs of tightness, and this should remain
the  case  so  long  as  growth  continues  at  or  above  potential.  Labour  shortages  have  become
more prominent and widespread across the euro area. Broader measures of slack – that include
underemployed  workers  –  have  also  fallen  substantially,  although  there  is  still  some
heterogeneity across countries.
The second factor is the changing composition of wage growth. The initial pick-up in wages from
the trough in 2016 was driven by wage drift, which includes components such as bonuses and
overtime and tends to react more quickly to the cycle. But more recently negotiated wages have
strengthened, rising from the trough of 1.4% in mid-2016 to 2.2% in the second quarter of 2018.
Negotiated wage agreements frequently last two or three years, suggesting that higher rates of
wage growth are likely to persist.
However,  the  next  leg  of  the  inflation  process  –  the  pass-through  of  wage  growth  to  prices  –
remains  relatively  muted.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation,  such  as  core  inflation,  continue  to
hover around 1% and have yet to show a convincing upward trend.
To  some  extent,  this  lagged  response  is  in  line  with  the  standard  pattern  of  demand-driven
expansions  in  the  euro  area.  As  demand  picks  up,  employment  initially  reacts  slowly,  which
boosts overall productivity and lifts margins. Firms therefore have little need to increase prices.
But as the expansion matures, businesses increase wages more strongly to attract labour, and
unit labour costs rise, squeezing margins and putting upward pressure on prices.
4
This pattern has been visible in the euro area since the start of 2017. Unit labour cost growth fell
initially last year, but rose measurably this year to reach 1.6% in the second quarter, its strongest
rate since the start of 2013. There is evidence that margins are now being squeezed, with unit
profit  growth  decreasing  substantially  from  2.7%  in  the  third  quarter  of  2017  to  0.7%  in  the
second quarter of 2018. We should therefore expect price pressures in the euro area to mount.
However, the speed of this process is state-dependent. Preliminary ECB research finds that the
recent  history  of  inflation  is  a  key  factor  in  the  speed  and  strength  of  the  pass-through  from
wages  to  prices. The  pass-through  is  systematically  faster  and  stronger  in  periods  of  higher
5
inflation than in periods of lower inflation.
 Thus, following several years of low inflation in the euro area, a more tentative pass-through of
wages to prices is understandable. But as labour costs rise, the buffer room for absorbing cost
increases through margins will eventually vanish. As price increases become more widespread
and firms become more confident about their pricing power, we should see a higher degree of
pass-through.
That  said,  if  firms  start  to  become  more  uncertain  about  the  growth  and  inflation  outlook,  the
squeeze  on  margins  could  prove  more  persistent.  This  would  affect  the  speed  with  which
underlying inflation picks up and therefore the inflation path that we expect to see in the quarters
ahead.
When  the  Governing  Council  met  in  October,  we  confirmed  our  confidence  in  the  economic
outlook. The underlying strength of domestic demand and wages continues to support our view
that the sustained convergence of inflation to our aim will proceed. But in the light of the lags
between  wages  and  prices  after  a  period  of  low  inflation,  patience  and  persistence  in  our
monetary policy is still needed.
With monetary policy providing a significant degree of stimulus through our interest rate policy,
stock of acquired assets and reinvestments of maturing bonds, the Governing Council assessed
that  inflation  convergence  could  be  maintained  even  after  a  gradual  winding-down  of  our  net
asset purchases. Subject to incoming data confirming this assessment, we anticipate that net
asset purchases will come to an end in December.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
However,  the  Governing  Council  also  noted  that  uncertainties  surrounding  the  medium-term
outlook have increased. When the latest round of projections is available at our next meeting in
December,  we  will  be  better  placed  to  make  a  full  assessment  of  the  risks  to  growth  and
inflation.
We have conveyed that we expect interest rates to remain at their present levels at least through
the summer of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure that inflation continues
to  move  towards  our  aim  in  a  sustained  manner. And  we  have  stated  that  reinvestments  will
continue for an extended period of time after the end of net purchases, and in any case for as
long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary
accommodation.
The nature of this forward guidance is contingent on economic developments and therefore acts
as an automatic stabiliser. If financial or liquidity conditions should tighten unduly or if the inflation
outlook should deteriorate, our reaction function is well defined. This should in turn be reflected in
an adjustment in the expected path of future interest rates.
Our  forward  guidance  has  been  effective  in  anchoring  expectations  about  the  future  path  of
interest  rates  and  preventing  an  undue  tightening  of  monetary  policy  caused  by  premature
expectations of policy normalisation. It has also helped shield financial conditions in the euro area
from policy changes in other jurisdictions.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I want to emphasise how completing Economic and Monetary Union has become
more urgent over time not less urgent – and not only for the economic reasoning that has always
underpinned my remarks, but also to preserve our European construction.
This  is  my  last  speech  at  this  conference  as  President  of  the  ECB,  and  in  preparing  for  it,  I
looked back at the speech I gave here in November 2011. There I lamented that the economic
crisis would require a faster pace in strengthening the Monetary Union, especially for decisions
6
that had already been taken.
This perhaps has a familiar ring today. Since then, the work has been remarkable, but it is still far
from finished.
The completion of the banking union in all its dimensions, including risk reduction, and the start of
the capital markets union through implementing all ongoing initiatives by 2019, have now become
as urgent as the first steps were in euro area crisis management seven years ago.
These are urgent today not because of an economic crisis that we have successfully addressed,
but  because  they  are  the  best  response  to  the  threats  that  are  being  levied  at  our  monetary
union: to these threats, more Europe is the answer.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2018.
Data for France and Italy are only available up to the second quarter of 2018.
See Anderton, R., Aranki, T., Bonthuis, B. and Jarvis, V., “Disaggregating Okun’s law − Decomposing the impact
of the expenditure components of GDP on euro area unemployment”, Working Paper Series, No 1747, ECB,
Frankfurt am Main, December 2014.
See Gumiel, J. and Hahn, E., “The role of wages in the pick-up of inflation”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB,
2018.
Bobeica, E., Ciccarelli, M. and Vansteenkiste, I., “The link between labor costs and price inflation in the euro
area”, paper prepared for the XXII Annual Conference at the Central Bank of Chile, Santiago, 26 October 2018. 
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
See Draghi, M. (2011), “Continuity, consistency and credibility”, speech at the 21st Frankfurt European Banking
Congress “The Big Shift”, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2011.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
