Denis  Beau:  Digital  finance,  market  disruption,  and  financial
stability
Speech by Mr Denis Beau, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the Bank of France -
Toulouse School of Economics joint conference, Paris, 12 November 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I am very pleased to welcome you all today, for the tenth edition of the Banque de France and
Toulouse School of Economics joint conference. This year, we have decided to shed light on
how digital-based financial innovations are affecting the robustness and efficiency of the financial
system.
It is a good time to talk about digital finance and market disruption for at least two reasons:
-  2018  is  both  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  Lehman  bankruptcy  and  that  of  Nakamoto’s  paper
underlying Bitcoin.
- those events have unleashed regulatory and market developments and innovations  that should
contribute to both strengthen and change the role and structure of financial intermediation.
As a result, we see a complex set of interactions, involving competition and cooperation, which
are  developing  between  “old”  and  “new”  players  and  which  are  likely  to  coexist  in  the
intermediation space going forward.
“What  does  that  mean  in  terms  of  financial  stability?”  and  “how  does  this  coexistence  affect
central banking?” are two questions open for discussion at today’s conference. But for the time
being, let me quickly follow two leads.
I. Promises of digital finance: redefining financial intermediation?
First point: The digitalization of finance is prospering on the ground of cutting-edge technologies.
The combination of big data analytics, cloud computing, artificial intelligence and blockchain is
transforming  the  way  financial  products  are  designed  and  distributed.  For  its  proponents,  this
transformation is promising better consumer experiences, a better financing of the economy and
a better efficiency of the financial system.
Beyond  those  promises, cutting-edge technologies also lower the barriers to entry into
the financial sector for Tech firms and make it possible to unbundle financial services into an
array of distinct core functions such as channeling payments and money, providing financing,
sharing risk and allocating capital.
This new competition also implies that incumbents’ business model should be prepared
to adapt: the unbundling of services will challenge business models built around the logic of an
exclusive  and  comprehensive  customer  relationship  possibly  involving  elements  of  cross
subsidization; more mobile customers could limit the ability to cross-sell products; and higher
deposit volatility may unbalance the funding of maturity transformation.
That said, FinTechs are the talk of the town but BigTechs are the real deal.
On  the  one  hand,  frankly,  FinTechs  already  had  a  huge  and  positive  impact  on  the  financial
sector by developing new solutions and proving that these solutions bring value.
However, overall, with a market capitalization of $125 bn worldwide, Fintech start-ups have been
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
so far more a complement to existing financial actors, through integration or partnership, than
irresistible rivals to incumbents. 
On the other hand, the market capitalization of the GAFA – Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple –
is 25 times higher than that of the whole FinTech universe. The BigTechs already have a material
footprint in financial services  and competitive advantages to expand their activities further in this
area.
1
On top of massive financial resources able to support investment at scale and an undeniable
digital agility, they benefit from strong brand recognition, worldwide customer base on which they
have accumulated proprietary database and privileged access to forefront technologies.
In  that  context, BigTechs  more  than  FinTechs  have  the  potential  to  fundamentally
redefine financial intermediation beyond the universal banking model toward integrating
financial services within a universal ecosystem.
Such a move is already gaining considerable traction in China. And it is raising very fundamental
questions to which I will come back.
To conclude my first point, digital finance may not lead to a more decentralized system as the
centripetal  forces  of  network  effects  may  profit  most  to  large  conglomerates. Rather  than
eliminating  intermediation,  if  left  on  its  own,  digital  finance  will  more  likely  lead  to
reshuffling the cards with the most digitally agile incumbents and the most financially
able challengers becoming the new dominant (and potentially systemic) intermediaries.
II. A common challenge: Rethinking old issues, investigating new ones
This leads me to my second point. The digitalization of finance forces us to revisit old regulatory
and supervisory questions and to face new ones.
Among old issues to revisit, I would like to highlight two of them.
First,  the question  of  the  financial  regulation  perimeter.  Consider  for  instance  ICOs  and
crypto-assets:  even  though  they  don’t  bring  something  new  in  terms  of  types  of  risks ,  the
existing  regulatory  framework  may  be  inadequate  to  address  the  challenges  they  raise.  The
classification  of  tokens  into  existing  legal  categories  proves  very  challenging  and  the  internet-
based crypto-intermediary activities facilitate regulatory arbitrage.
2
The same issue applies to 3rd party dependency risk. Just to pick an example, cloud computing
market is highly concentrated and Amazon Web Services has built a dominant position. As the
core financial functions lift and shift to the cloud, the risk of a single point of failure will emerge,
but yet, cloud providers are unregulated and to a large extent out of the reach of supervisors.
Second, the  question  of  conduct.  Our  regulation  embeds  a  judgment  of  things  that  are
acceptable and some that are not. Technological developments are making it possible to use
information  that  was  previously  out  of  reach  of  a  financial  intermediary.  This  would  potentially
allow a more accurate assessment of risk or a more “responsive” pricing of service. But what is
possible  may  not  be  (socially)  acceptable  –  to  take  one  example,  the  current  development  of
“social network informed credit scores” raises privacy concerns. In that context, the regulator (in
some cases, the legislator) could have to revisit its stance on conduct issues.
Let me now turn to new risks which are non-financial in nature but highly intertwined with the
digitalization of finance. Two in particular merit scrutiny.
First,  the  question  of strategic  independence  of  incumbents.  If  incumbents  depend  on
BigTechs for key infrastructure such as cloud computing, if they rely on the same BigTech to
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
distribute  their  products  through  their  platforms  and  then  compete  with  BigTechs  on  certain
segments,  they  see  their  strategic  independence  challenged  in  the  same  way  as  hotels  and
retailers  did.  This  process  of  commoditization  of  incumbents  may  lower  credit  standards  to
compensate for higher pressure on margin and exacerbate the funding gap because of lower
customer stickiness.
Second, the question of cyber-risk. With greater interconnections between technologies and
the  financial  system,  cyber-risk  is  moving  from  an  idiosyncratic  risk  to  a  potential  source  of
systemic risk.
Whether and how to address the type of issues I just mentioned is a challenging task
from a regulatory and supervisory standpoint, as it involves an assessment of both the potential
risks and benefits brought to the financial system and the economy more largely, which are by
nature uncertain. It may give rise to a significant array of alternative courses of actions to
meet  two key imperatives: ensure an adequate level of protection for participants and
preserve the potential benefits brought by innovation.
Let me illustrate this with crypto-assets. Because of incomplete information, a lack of data and
the novelty of these monetary and financial objects, four options to tackle them from a public
policy standpoint can be considered and have actually been under consideration to drive action:
monitoring, isolating, regulating or banning.
Vibrant economic research is needed to help us dealing with these challenges, notably in three
key areas.
The first relates to the economics and implications of blockchain and crypto-assets, and will be
the topic of David Andolfatto’s keynote lecture and of the concluding panel discussion: What are
the  implications  for  the  financial  system  in  general,  and  for  central  banks  in  particular?  Will
Central  banks’  monetary  policy  become  less  effective  and,  if  so,  are  Central  Bank  Digital
Currencies a way to restore their effectiveness?
The  second  one,  which  will  be  addressed  by  several  research  papers  today,  relates  to  the
financing  of  the  economy:  Do  alternative  and  innovative  ways  to  finance  the  economy
(marketplace lending, ICOs, alternative scoring models) perform better than traditional financial
intermediation  without  increasing  the  risks?  What  roles  can  incumbent  banks  play  if  financial
services are to be driven by data?
The third one is not on the agenda for today’s conference, but should be on the research agenda,
relates  to  the  use  of  artificial  intelligence  in  finance:  What  would  be  the  dynamics  of  financial
markets if most participants were to rely on AI and machine learning techniques? How should
regulation  and  supervision  practices  adapt  to  ensure  that  AI  behaves  in  accordance  with  a
financial and social optimum?
Conclusion
I would like to conclude my intervention by quoting Bill Gates himself: “We always overestimate
the change that will occur in the next two years and underestimate the change that will occur in
the next ten. Don’t let yourself be lulled into inaction”.
The  Banque  de  France  tries  to  follow  this  piece  of  advice.  To  do  so,  we  have  adapted  our
organization  and  our  governance  structure  with  the  creation  of  a  Fintech  hub  within  our
supervisory function (which has already supported more than 300 FinTechs), the appointment of
a Chief Digital Officer and the launch of a Lab to foster innovation within the Banque itself. We
are experimenting with new technologies: the Banque de France has been the first central bank
to implement a fully-fledged project based on DLT which is now fully operational  and we have
successfully  ran  8  artificial  intelligence  projects.  We  are  also  hosting  discussions  between
3
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
regulators  and  the  industry:  the  latest  working  group  on  artificial  intelligence  will  deliver  its
conclusion by end of this year. Finally, as we are doing with today’s conference, we are seeking
insights from economic research and trying to be a platform for open debate.
I wish you fruitful discussions, and now give the floor to David Andolfatto, Vice President at the
Federal Reserve of Saint-Louis, for his keynote lecture.
1
2
3
Exemples: Ant Financial (Alibaba Group’s financial services), Tencent, Amazon, Apple, Facebook. See Ztezsche,
Buckley, Arner, Barberis 2017, “From FinTech to TechFin : The regulatory challenges of data-driven finance”
E.g.: financial conduct, price manipulation, market integrity risks or money-laundering.
Madre
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
