  2018 NATIONAL BUSINESS CONFERENCE DINNER 
 Transition to High Income Status – The Role of Monetary 
Policy and Communication 
 Welcome Remarks 
 by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor, Bank of Botswana 
 September 9, 2018 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, good evening. 
 It  is  my  honour  to  welcome  you  to  this  Dinner  hosted  by  the  Bank  of 
Botswana on the eve of the National Business Conference here in the City 
of  Francistown.    On  behalf  of  the  Board,  Management  and  Staff  of  the 
Bank  and  on  my  own,  I  thank  you  all  for  honouring  the  invitation;  your 
presence here tonight is valued and highly appreciated.  
 Role of National Business Conference and Theme 
 The Bank of Botswana is privileged and accepts the honour to host this 
Welcome Dinner to the 15th National Business Conference, organised by 
Business  Botswana,  in  collaboration  with  the  Government  under  the 
theme, “Breaking through to a High-Income Botswana - The Role of the 
Private Sector in Charting the Path”.  This should provide an opportunity 
to  evaluate  prospects 
for  Botswana,  with  respect 
to  structural 
transformation,  policies,  strategies  and,  especially, 
implementation 
frameworks  that  would  enhance  international  competitiveness  of  local 
firms and support the transition to high-income status in line with Vision 
2036.    I  am  reliably  informed  that,  His  Excellency  the  President  of  the 
Republic  of  Botswana,  Mr  Mokgweetsi  Eric  Keabetswe  Masisi  will,  in 
  addition  to  performing  the  official  opening,  actively  participate  in  this 
Conference  and,  in  particular,  share  his  thoughts  on  the  growth  of 
business in Botswana in one of the sessions, tomorrow. 
 Background and Broad Structural Issues 
 Distinguished guests, it is common cause that the economy of Botswana 
has,  over  the  last  52  years,  recorded  impressive  growth  and  structural 
transformation,  leading  to  the  country  attaining  upper  middle  income 
status, currently with a per capita annual income of approximately USD 8 
000.  Similarly, over the years, the country has enjoyed relatively sound 
and stable macroeconomic and financial conditions.  Despite episodes of 
terms-of-trade  shocks  and  volatile  commodity  prices  during  this  period, 
the  economy  has  been  largely  characterised  by  relatively  low  and 
predictable levels of inflation; balance of payments surpluses; substantial 
foreign exchange reserves; stable real effective exchange rate; low public 
debt; and continued pursuance of prudent fiscal policies.  However, as we 
are well aware, in the last decade or so the country’s growth momentum 
seems to have lost steam.  Evidently, this is constrained by several factors 
including  the  narrow  economic  base,  high  levels  of  unemployment, 
insufficient  innovation  and  private  investment  spending,  infrastructure 
constraints, thin and fragmented markets as well as low level of financial 
sector development and, relative to other upper middle-income countries, 
less inclusive growth. 
 Distinguished  Guests,  the  IMF  Executive  Board,  on  August  31,  2018, 
completed the 2018 Article IV Consultation with Botswana, and as usual, 
the  Botswana  authorities  were  commended  for  a  track  record  of  sound 
policies  that  has  supported  strong  growth  and  macroeconomic  stability.  
However,  it  is  considered  opportune  to  leverage  on  the  favourable 
2 
 prospects to accelerate implementation of structural reforms to unlock the 
country’s  growth  potential.    The  specific  areas  highlighted  by  the  IMF 
include preserving priority infrastructure and social spending, restructuring 
and privatisation of parastatals, promotion of private sector development 
and  economic  diversification,  sustained  efforts  to  improve  the  business 
climate, including facilitating foreign direct investment as well as skills and 
realignment of education policies to eliminate existing skills mismatches.    
 The Bank’s Role in Supporting Economic Activity and Growth 
 As a contribution to the theme of this National Business Conference my 
remarks,  this  evening,  will  focus  on  the  role  of  monetary  policy  and 
communication  in  transiting  to  high-income  status  and,  also,  take  the 
opportunity  to  launch  the  Bank’s  maiden  Monetary  Policy  Report.  
Therefore, in a broad sense, the intent is to project the relevance and role 
of  the  Bank  of  Botswana  in  contributing  to  the  journey  towards  high-
income status for Botswana.  
 To  give  perspective,  you  will  be  aware,  Distinguished  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen, that the Bank exists to protect the value of the local currency, 
the Pula and thebe, through currency management operations, monetary 
policy, exchange rate management, regulation and supervision of relevant 
financial  institutions  and  facilitating  sound  payments  and  settlement 
frameworks.  Essentially, the Bank promotes the desire and willingness to 
hold  the  local  currency,  as  well  as  to  transact  and  save  locally  in  Pula 
premised on the quality and durability of the banknotes and coin; stable, 
predictable domestic price changes; safety and soundness of the financial 
system  and  reliable  payment  infrastructure.    Inevitably,  where  central 
banks  fail  to  achieve  these  outcomes,  or  are  constrained  by  political 
interference, 
economic 
performance 
and 
development 
suffer 
3 
 considerably;  recent  examples  include  Venezuela  and  Zimbabwe.  
Overall,  by  fostering  appropriate conditions, the  Bank of Botswana  has, 
throughout  its  43  years  of  existence,  contributed  to  stability  of  the 
macroeconomic environment and financial system, as well as integrity and 
reliability  of  payments  and  settlement  platforms;  therefore,  enabling 
economic  activity,  as  manifested  in  the  ability  to  transact  and  access 
financial services. 
 Distinguished Guests, we are, however, collectively looking ahead and, in 
this regard, there are several aspects of mandates and operations of the 
Bank that require modernisation and upgrading in order to remain relevant 
and  contribute  to  national  development  aspirations  and  objectives.  
Indeed,  monetary  policy  and 
the  various 
instruments, 
including 
communication,  can  only  be  effective 
if  undertaken  alongside 
improvements  in  other  operations  of  the  Bank  and  policy  transmission 
channels.  AlIow me to highlight four relevant areas in this regard. 
  Modernisation and Adaptation of the Bank’s Functions 
 First, there is a need to adapt to changing domestic and global conditions 
and, also, to ensure that the Bank of Botswana is appropriately positioned 
to adequately address new developments and related challenges. Some 
of these include fintechs, digital currencies and similar innovations as well 
as adopt best practice, to sustain national development.  In this regard, 
there is ongoing review of the Bank of Botswana Act, the Banking Act and 
proposals  to  promulgate  a  national  payments  law.    The  intention  is  to 
enhance  operational  capability,  predictability  and  integrity  of  policy  and 
regulatory frameworks, as well as to clarify institutional relationships and 
promote  accountability  and  transparency.    Furthermore,  one  of  the  key 
4 
 lessons from the 2008/9 global financial crisis is the need for joint, speedy 
and coordinated response, by all relevant stakeholders, to any substantial 
systemic risks emanating from any parts of the financial sector.   
 As part of the broader financial development architecture, there is a need 
to re-configure institutional arrangements for the financial sector oversight 
to  achieve  greater  focus  on  macro-prudential  dimensions  of  financial 
stability policy and financial safety nets. The recent establishment of the 
Financial  Stability  Council  is  a  significant  step  towards  protecting  the 
viability,  integrity  and sustainability  of  relationships  and cross-holding  of 
exposures within the financial sector and with other economic sectors.  As 
I  mentioned,  this  enables  coordinated  and  decisive  response  when 
needed;  ultimately  safety  of  savings  and  investments  and  prospects for 
attracting more.  Also, one of the key tenets, in this respect, include the 
need for legislation for the establishment of a deposit protection scheme, 
to  further  encourage  patronage  of  the  domestic  financial  system,  in 
particular broader financial inclusion.  
 Monetary Policy Framework 
 Distinguished Guests, the second area of continuing improvement that I 
want to highlight relates to the role of the monetary policy framework in 
facilitating  a  conducive  environment  for  private  businesses  to  thrive.  
Broadly,  an  appropriate  policy  framework  should  encompass  definition 
and clarity of objectives and instruments, understanding and calibration of 
transmission  channels  and, 
therefore,  predictability  and, 
in 
turn, 
accountability.  It is for these reasons that the Bank’s primary mandate of 
price stability, is clearly defined as a sustainable level of annual inflation 
that is within the medium-term objective range of 3 – 6 percent.  The policy 
is also formulated with a view to safeguarding the stability of the financial 
5 
 system.  In essence, protection of the value of the Pula and integrity and 
safety  of  channels  and  platforms  for  holding  money  and  transacting  in 
local currency. 
 Let me, once again, underscore the point that  low and predictable level 
of  inflation  and  a  conducive  financial  environment  foster  savings 
mobilisation, productive investment and international competitiveness of 
domestic producers which, in turn, contribute towards the broader national 
objectives  of  sustainable  economic  development  and  employment 
creation.    Equally  important  is  a  sound  and  stable  financial  system 
particularly the banking sub-sector, as it serves as the main transmission 
channel  for  monetary  policy  signals  and  facilitating  economic  activity 
through the provision of liquidity and risk mitigation.   
 It  is  also  apparent  to  the  markets  and  general  public  that  the  key 
instruments  of  policy  are  the  Bank  Rate  and  the  Bank  of  Botswana 
Certificates.    The  former  relates  to  the  cost  of  money  and  decisions  to 
save or borrow, while the latter influences the quantity of loanable funds 
in the banking system.  In both cases, the operation of these instruments 
affects prospects for demand and, in turn, its influence on the rate of price 
changes,  with  the  Bank’s  focus  being  to  maintain  inflation  within  the 
defined objective range of 3 – 6 percent.  
 The policy is predictable in the sense that the Bank publishes the medium 
term inflation outlook, which informs the policy response.  For example, a 
forecast  for  sustained  inflation  above  the  objective  would  imply  an 
increase  in  interest  rates  and  tightening  of  financing  conditions,  to  help 
moderate inflation.  On the other hand, sustained lower inflation than the 
objective  range  implies  subdued  economic  performance  and  would 
require reduction in interest rates to raise demand and stimulate economic 
6 
 activity. However, for policy transmission to be effective it requires a sound 
and  responsive  banking  system.    Thus,  banks  should  cut  interest  rates 
and  increase  lending  when  the  Bank  Rate  is  reduced,  and  accordingly 
raise them when monetary policy is tightened and not be constrained by 
internal  and  structural  weaknesses.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  is  always 
available  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  and  to  solvent 
individual  banks,  as  needed,  to  ensure  market  sustainability  and 
appropriate policy transmission.   
 Market Development and Financial Inclusion 
 Aligned thereto is the third developmental area, which is the Bank’s role 
in  promoting  the  growth,  spread  and  deepening  of  money  and  capital 
markets and, also, financial inclusion.  The development of a wide range 
of  money  and  capital  markets  institutions  and  instruments  enables 
substitution and access to a variety of purpose-fit saving and investment 
channels as monetary policy and conditions change; therefore sustained 
effectiveness of policy transmission in affecting market activity.  A diverse 
and deep market also allows banks to better manage liquidity positions, 
hence the ability to effectively transmit policy.  In addition, with enhanced 
financial  inclusion,  changes  in  monetary  policy  are  more  effective  as  a 
greater number of businesses, institutions and households, hold and have 
exposures that are directly affected by the direction and level of interest 
rates and availability of loanable funds and market liquidity.  
 Communication 
 Distinguished Guests, the fourth area of focus for the Bank, as we look 
ahead, is communication.  The Bank considers and uses communication 
as  a  direct,  practical  and  potent  instrument  of  policy.    It  is,  therefore, 
7 
 important that in order to generate the desired response, communication 
is recognised and acknowledged by the market and general public as a 
policy instrument.  However, this is to the extent that such communication 
is  backed  by  durable  integrity  and  reliability  of  the  Bank  of  Botswana, 
premised on predictability and transparency.  Public trust and reputation 
of the Bank are essential elements for policy effectiveness.  Central banks 
such  as  the  Bank  of  England,  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  US 
Federal  Reserve  demonstrate  such  effectiveness  where,  for  example, 
issuance  of  forward  guidance  statements  (without  immediate  actual 
change  in  interest  rates),  generate  market  reaction;  thus  change  in 
economic behaviour and activity. 
 More generally, communication works best in an environment of economic 
and policy awareness by the public as well as informed policy and market 
analysis and commentary.  The combination of economic developments 
and  dissemination  of  policy  analysis  and  economic  projections  by  the 
Bank helps the public and economic agents to anticipate policy action; the 
so-called  expectations.  For  example,  expectations  about  future  inflation 
and,  therefore,  interest  rates,  are  a  key  determinant  in  formulating 
investment  and  consumption  decisions,  hence  economic  activity.  
Communication  also  facilitates  accountability  and  various  platforms  and 
media  are  used  in  this  regard.    Overall,  increased  transparency  and 
communication, regarding the policy framework, objectives and strategy, 
as well as decisions and progress in meeting the objectives of the Bank 
can contribute to desired market responses and policy effectiveness.   
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  at  the  launch  of  the  Bank’s 
Monetary  Policy  Statement,  in  February  this  year,  I  outlined  the 
refinements  that  the  Bank  continues  to  make  to  the  monetary  policy 
framework  relating  to  communication.    I  indicated  that,  the  more  recent 
8 
 innovations  that  started  in  2017  included  the  pre-announcement  of  the 
dates for the Monetary Policy Committee meetings for the year ahead and 
media briefings that follow each meeting to announce and engage on the 
policy  decision.    I  also  indicated  that,  going  forward  and  in  an  effort  to 
further  improve  on  communication  and  transparency  on  economic  and 
policy analysis and implementation, the Bank will publish four Monetary 
Policy  Reports  each  calendar  year,  including  the  Monetary  Policy 
Statement.  I am happy to announce that tonight the Bank is launching the 
first  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  be  published  on  the  Bank’s  website 
tomorrow morning.  The Report is also available on the Bank of Botswana 
branded memory sticks that will be distributed to the invited guests tonight.  
There is also a limited number of hard copies. 
 The Report will be the main medium through which the Bank will inform 
the public about the formulation and implementation of monetary policy.  
It serves to meet the public’s expectation of a transparent and accountable 
central  bank  in  fulfilling  the  monetary  policy  mandate.    The  Monetary 
Policy  Reports  in  April,  August  and  October  will  be  preceded  by  the 
Monetary Policy Statement in February each year. 
 Distinguished Guests, as I conclude, I would like to assure you that the 
Bank’s  implementation  of  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  focus  on 
entrenching  expectations  of  low,  predictable  and  sustainable  inflation, 
through timely responses to price developments.  At the same time, the 
Bank will contribute to effective oversight of the financial system to ensure 
sustained  financial  stability  and  integrity  of  the  payments  system,  while 
promoting  market  development  and  financial  inclusion;  as  a  growth 
imperative and also important for policy transmission.  Essentially, this is 
the  enduring  contribution  of  the  Bank  to  an  enabling  environment  for 
private  sector  growth  and  greater  participation  in  economic  activity; 
9 
 therefore,  enhanced  prospects  for  economic  diversification  efforts, 
employment  creation,  inclusive  growth,  and  transition  to  high-income 
status.   
 Let me wish you a fruitful conference and deliberations for the next two 
days.    Please  enjoy  your  dinner.  However,  to  conclude  the  formal 
proceedings, allow me to call upon the Director of Research and Financial 
Stability Department, Dr Tshokologo Alex Kganetsano to present a brief 
outline of the Monetary Policy Report and also highlight its relevance in 
influencing expectations and economic activity. 
 I thank you for your kind attention. 
  10 
