    
 
A ‘D to Z’ of current issues in Insurance Supervision 
 
Speech given by 
David Rule, Executive Director of Insurance Supervision 
 
  
Bank of America Merrill Lynch 23rd Annual Financials CEO Conference, London 
26 September 2018 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
   Today I want to take you on a quick tour of a number of live issues in our supervision of insurers.  
Why a ‘D to Z’ and not an ‘A to Z’?  Because I am not going to talk about ‘A’ for assets as I gave a speech 
earlier this year on the use of illiquid assets and particularly equity release mortgages to back annuities. I am 
not going to talk about ‘B’ for Brexit.  And I am not going to talk about ‘C’ for Climate Change, on which the 
Bank is today releasing our banking climate change review.  I will though:  
   update on progress towards a global Insurance Capital Standard;  
  talk about the fledgling UK market for Insurance-Linked Securities and our own new insurers unit;  
reiterate the messages on underwriting and reserving in wholesale insurance and reinsurance 
markets from Anna Sweeney’s Dear CEO letter earlier this year;  
  discuss capital management, building on a Supervisory Statement we published in May;  
 share some data we collect on the sensitivity of the capital surpluses of UK life insurers to various 
market movements and 
  encourage greater consistency in disclosure of such sensitivities by insurers as well as of the drivers 
of changes in their capital positions over time. 
 Update on progress towards an International Capital Standard 
 The International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) began work on an international capital 
standard (ICS) for Internationally-Active Insurance Groups1 in 2014.  A third consultation paper on ICS 
version 2.0 will close on 30 October.   I encourage UK insurance groups to take part in this consultation and 
in the final round of field testing next year.  The Standard will then be finalised ahead of a five-year 
monitoring period starting in 2020.  During this period Internationally-Active Insurance Groups will report a 
reference ICS confidentially to their group-wide supervisors, including for discussion in regulatory colleges.  
But it will not be the basis of their regulatory capital requirements. Calculation of the reference ICS and the 
additional reporting is not meant to be burdensome.  Groups will be permitted to use simplifications, 
simplifying assumptions and proxies, although we would expect that need to reduce as the monitoring period 
progresses.   
 The Bank of England supports the development of international regulatory standards, such as the ICS.   
As both a home supervisor of UK insurance groups with businesses around the world and a host supervisor 
of branches and subsidiaries of insurance groups from many different countries, I also welcome the 
monitoring period approach.  It will give regulatory colleges a common language for measuring group risk 
and defining capital.  No capital framework is perfect and ICS will be no different.  But having agreement on 
common metrics will be a big step forward.  It should further enhance supervisory cooperation and help build 
trust. Over time, it might reduce the need for multiple overlapping practices in measuring the same risks and 
help to limit fragmentation of capital requirements. 
                                                      
1 The IAIS identifies an Internationally-Active Insurance Group as being an insurance group that has total assets of at least  
USD 50 billion or gross written premiums of at least USD 10 billion (on a rolling three year average basis). In addition, its premiums are 
written in three or more jurisdictions and at least 10% of the group’s total gross written premium is written outside the home jurisdiction. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
  Part of the case for an international capital standard is that insurance markets have become more global 
over the past few decades, even if that trend appears to have steadied after the financial crisis (Chart 1).  
This is most obvious in wholesale general insurance and reinsurance, where the underlying rationale for 
insurance provision arises from the law of large numbers and the benefits from pooling and diversifying 
across risks. Recent cross border mergers and acquisitions, and with talk of more to come, suggests the 
increase in the amount of business written by overseas companies might resume. 
 Chart 1: business written by overseas insurers 
 Source: OECD and Bank calculations 
 Mergers and acquisitions are in part a response to the prolonged period of soft conditions in wholesale 
general insurance and reinsurance markets.  For many insurers underwriting returns are now below the 
levels required to achieve sustained profitability, even in years of ‘normal’ natural catastrophe activity.  
Our sense is that until this year, many had thought that market conditions would improve cyclically: for 
example, following a large loss event.  They had therefore sought to maintain their market position and wait 
for better times.  The limited increase in market prices following the losses from the 2017 hurricanes in the 
US and Caribbean has, however, caused a number of boards to look more fundamentally at the 
sustainability of their current businesses. 
 Insurance linked securities and new insurers 
 One response has been to move in the direction of introducing and managing rather than providing risk 
capital.   Insurance-linked securities and other forms of alternative insurance capital, such as sidecars and 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
  the like, allow insurers to transfer risks to capital markets.  These markets have been growing for some time, 
forming an increasing share of global reinsurance capital (Chart 2).  They seem to have absorbed losses 
from the 2017 hurricanes without major hiccups.  With the continuing search for yield and diversification by 
institutional investors, growth seems likely to continue.  
 Chart 2: Share of alternative capital in global reinsurance capital 
Source: Aon: ILS Alternative Capital Fortifies Its Position September 2018  
   Last year the government established a tax and regulatory framework for Insurance-Linked Securities in the 
United Kingdom.  It is intended to help cement London’s position at the forefront of global reinsurance 
business.  The PRA has since authorised a number of Insurance Special Purpose Vehicles, which can either 
be for one transaction or multiple transactions from one or more cedants.  We are taking a proportionate 
approach to their supervision, consistent with the risks posed to our objectives and compliance with  
Solvency II requirements. We are keen to work with the industry to ensure we capture any learning as we 
both develop our experience of operating the new regime. I encourage any potential issuers to look at the 
page on our website2 and speak to us at an early stage. 
 More generally, jointly with FCA and consistent with our secondary competition objective, we recently 
launched a new insurer start-up unit as the sister of our new bank start-up unit, which has been around since 
2016.  It gives prospective UK insurers the information and support needed to apply for authorisation, 
covering the early stages of thinking about becoming an insurer, what you need to get an application started, 
the application process and life as a new insurer.  Again, I point anyone interested to the pages on our 
website, including our helpful new guide3.   We recognise that insurers can have very different business 
models and corporate forms.  Our initiative is not just targeted at innovative Insurtech firms but equally at 
                                                      
2 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/authorisations/insurance-special-purpose-vehicles 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
  prospective firms with more traditional business models.  We see that many start-ups find it more efficient to 
operate as an agent and obtain capacity through an existing insurer or reinsurer, piggy backing on existing 
scale and diversification.  But for those that do chose to be independent, our message is clear: our door is 
open and we welcome applications from new UK insurers.  
 Pricing, underwriting and reserving in wholesale general insurance and reinsurance markets 
 Our primary prudential concern about current market conditions is that pressure on pricing will lead to 
weakening of underwriting standards, under-reserving against risks and insurers being tempted to take short 
cuts on capital.  On underwriting and reserving, Anna Sweeney’s ‘Dear CEO’ letter4, published a few months 
ago, set out nine areas where our supervisory review work had suggested weaknesses, including: 
   Formulating business plans based on loss ratio (and future reserving assumptions) which appear 
optimistic given current market conditions and historical performance.  In particular, we have seen a 
number of examples of insurers expecting improvements in claims experience due to portfolios 
changes, leading them to exclude historical years of poor performance from reserving benchmarks 
without good supporting evidence.   
 Insufficient use of technical pricing models, even for lines of business where such models are 
generally considered to be more developed and reliable.  
  Slow reaction to emerging loss development, with insurers taking false comfort from reserving 
benchmarks which appear to show business as still profitable despite emerging underwriting results. 
  Diversifying into new lines of business (for example, casualty classes) despite insufficient 
underwriting expertise or oversight. 
 Aggregate analysis for a sample of London Market insurers suggests that initial estimates of reserves were 
inadequate for more recent years of account, with insurers needing to strengthen reserves over the past 
couple of years.   
                                                                                                                                                                                        
3 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/prudential-regulation/new-insurer/new-insurer-start-up-unit-
guide.pdf?la=en&hash=310E7B09C241113F97CDDCC36F339DAF90911057 
4 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/letter/2018/market-conditions-facing-specialist-general-insurers-feedback-from-
recent-pra-review-work 
 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
  Chart 3: Progression of claims by accident or underwriting year 
   Responses to Anna’s letter have acknowledged almost universally the concerns raised about the wider 
market. The quality of insurer’s individual responses has, however, been more variable.  Where we have 
concerns over a firm’s response to our Dear CEO letter, we will follow these up, including with the Board 
where appropriate. Insurers must have effective controls to assess and monitor pricing and reserving 
adequacy.  We also expect boards to consider seriously the sustainability of their business plans. 
 Capital management, market risk sensitivities and disclosure 
 A further concern for prudential regulators is that insurers will take more risks with capital, seeking to improve 
‘return on equity’ by lowering equity if they cannot boost returns.  Of course, that can be perfectly legitimate if 
insurers genuinely reduce risks.  But amber lights flash when I read stories about brokers setting up teams to 
help insurers ‘optimise’ capital, including through ‘innovative’ use of reinsurance.  We will also be alert to 
insurers seeking to reduce capital requirements through aggressive changes to internal models or  
over-optimistic business plans.  This includes using our internal model output data to compare across 
insurers and monitoring model ‘drift’ indicators, such as the ratio of internal model to standard formula capital 
requirements. 
 The PRA also expects insurers to set a risk appetite for the levels of capital that are to be maintained in 
reasonably foreseeable market conditions: for example, as assessed through stress and scenario tests, or 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
  through some suitable alternative approach, to provide no more than a 1 in X probability that Solvency 
Capital Requirement (SCR) coverage might fall below 100%.5   We published Supervisory Statement 4/18 on 
Financial Management and Planning by Insurers earlier this year.   It explained that if an insurer’s capital 
management policies are calibrated such that frequent or foreseeable breaches of SCR are likely to occur, 
the PRA may consider whether the insurer is meeting the requirement to have in place an effective system of 
governance.   Similarly, if the level of capital of an insurer regularly or persistently falls outside of its risk 
appetite, or an insurer makes frequent changes to its risk appetite for its planned levels of capital, the PRA 
may consider whether this indicates failings in the governance process by which the insurer sets its risk 
appetite.  
 That Supervisory Statement also set out some of the factors we expect boards to take into account in setting 
a risk appetite for capital, including: the quality of capital resources;  the results of stress and scenario 
testing; levels of uncertainty in forecast earnings;  inherent uncertainty in the technical provisions;  credit 
ratings and market reputation; any non-linearities and discontinuities that may arise due to combinations of 
adverse events; recovery options available; and the potential impact of firm failure on policyholders.   
 Central to setting capital risk appetite is the sensitivity of the balance sheet to changes in key risk drivers, 
including changes in market and underwriting conditions, and the emergence of large claims.   Since the 
introduction of Solvency II, the PRA has been collecting data from large UK life insurers on the sensitivity of 
their capital positions to movements in key UK market variables, including interest rates, credit spreads, 
credit rating downgrades and property prices.6   Chart 4 below shows the averages of these sensitivities 
across firms at year-ends 2016 and 2017.7   Individual insurers’ positions fall in a range around these 
averages. 
 The most material sensitivity is to changes in interest rates.    A large fall in interest rates would lead to a 
reduction in capital surplus over the SCR.   Other significant market movements leading capital positions to 
deteriorate include a fall UK property prices, downgrades in credit ratings of corporate bonds8, a fall in UK 
equity markets and widening in the spread between sterling interest rate swap and gilt yields.  But life 
insurers’ capital positions are not especially exposed to a widening of credit spreads, partly because of the 
insulating effect of the Solvency II Matching Adjustment. 
 The interest rate sensitivity is primarily due to the risk margin.  Risk margins for annuity writers increase by 
40%-50% for a 100bps fall in interest rates, which the PRA believes to be excessive.  Insurers do not 
                                                      
5 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2018/financial-management-and-planning-by-insurers-ss 
6 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2017/solvency-2-data-collection-of-market-risk-sensitivities-ss 
7 The aggregate solvency ratio (defined as aggregate Own Funds of the firms in this survey as a percentage of aggregate SCR) was 
150% as at YE2016 and 156% as at YE2017.  For definitions of the market variables, see  https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
/media/boe/files/prudential-regulation/regulatory-reporting/insurance/market-risk-sensitivities-instructions.pdf. 
8 More specifically, the impact of 20% of assets by market value downgrading from the current Credit Quality Step (CQS) to 
the next CQS.  A CQS refers to rating agency ratings.  
 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
  typically hedge the risk margin.  For insurance liabilities written before the introduction of Solvency II, the risk 
margin can however be offset by Transitional Measures on Technical Provisions (TMTP), which allow any 
increases in reserves due to the introduction of new Solvency II requirements, such as the risk margin, to be 
phased in over sixteen years.  Insurers can therefore partially reverse any deterioration in their capital 
position due to a higher risk margin if interest rates fall by applying to the PRA to recalculate their TMTP 
upwards. For example, TMTP recalculation would have reduced the decrease in aggregate capital surplus 
following a 100bps fall in interest rates by about two thirds as at end-2017.   Conversely, if the risk margin 
falls because of an increase in interest rates, the PRA may require recalculation so that TMTP is not 
overstated.  
 Chart 4: Aggregate market risk sensitivities for UK life insurers 
Aggregate market risk sensitivities for UK life insurers 
YE16
YE17
50%
25%
0%
-25%
-50%
 n
o
i
t
a
u
c
l
l
a
c
e
r
   P
T
M
T
y
n
a
g
n
d
u
c
x
e
(
 
l
i
l
s
u
p
r
u
s
n
 i
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
%
 Source: Aggregated UK life insurers market risk sensitivity submissions 
 Some individual insurers have published many of these market risk sensitivities.   But the pattern is 
inconsistent across firms.  I held a roundtable with insurance analysts and investors on disclosure around a 
year ago.9   I took away that they find Solvency II disclosures more useful than accounting disclosures, at 
least in the current state of insurance accounting.  And a consistent set of such sensitivities was near the top 
of their disclosure wish list.  I hope insurers and industry groups will work towards an industry standard in this 
 area, perhaps drawing on what they report to us.   
                                                       
9 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2017/solvency-2-solvency-and-financial-condition-report-
roundtables 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
  Another key area where investors and analysts want better and more consistent disclosure is the drivers of 
the change in insurer’s SCR coverage ratio from one reporting date to another.   I think of this as the 
‘Solvency II P&L’.  But Solvency II itself does not address measurement of changes in capital position over 
time.   There is a reporting gap and insurers are closing it with their own content, leading to a mixed picture 
across the sector.  Again, this is an area where insurers and industry groups could usefully develop some 
template approaches.   
 As supervisors, we are also keenly interested in understanding how insurers generate capital, now and in the 
future.  This is at the core of our analysis of the sustainability of an insurer’s business model.   In particular, 
we want see the change in the SCR coverage ratio due to the risks and returns in the business split out from 
the effects of changes in broader market and economic variables and changes in modelling approach or 
assumptions or management actions.  I have set out more detail in the Appendix. 
 I have mentioned two areas – market risk sensitivities and a Solvency II ‘P&L’ – where insurers could 
improve the quality and consistency of disclosures.  It is a concern that we still see evidence of analysts and 
investors not fully understanding insurers’ Solvency II balance sheets.  In more stressed market conditions 
complexity and lack of transparency might lead investors to turn away from regulatory measures of risk and 
rely on simpler but cruder approaches.  Progress towards an International Capital Standard should help.  
More generally, it is vital that insurers maintain discipline in underwriting, reserving and capital management, 
notwithstanding tough trading conditions in some parts of global insurance markets.   
                     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
  Appendix:  Breakdown of insurer capital generation used for PRA business model analysis 
 This Appendix sets out a generic break-down of the change in an insurer’s capital surplus over the Solvency 
Capital Requirement (SCR) from one reporting date to the next, used by the PRA to understand how an 
insurer generates Solvency II capital.  The example shown is for a life insurer.  
 Separate reporting of capital generated from new business as opposed to existing business is key.  
Supervisors also find it valuable to see this split by material product line. 
 Separating out the effect of the Risk Margin and Transitional Measures on Technical (TMTP) provisions 
means supervisors can see the underlying business returns.    
 Experience variations and changes in operating assumptions are combined into one line item, alongside the 
line for economic variance.  Each combines several possible items to show the result of market factors or 
those items under management control.  Here this also includes the insurance assumptions built into the 
pricing of business and feeds into the assessment of management forecasting.  This item could sensibly be 
split further at the cost of simplicity. 
 The position of the interest expense line is a deliberate choice to split the returns from business and the 
outflows to capital providers. This could be included in other lines to reflect the business funding model in 
order to support understanding of individual business lines economic returns however this tends to obscure 
our analysis and therefore supervisors prefer this approach.   
                   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
10 
 
10 
  Item# 
Description 
Calculation 
I001 
Existing business Own Funds generation, excluding Risk Margin and TMTP from 
current back book 
TMTP run-off 
Existing business Risk Margin run off from current back book 
Existing business SCR run off from current back book 
Total Existing Business Excess Capital Generation from current back book 
= Sum I001 to 
I006 
Existing business Own Funds generation excluding Risk Margin and TMTP from 
planned new business 
Existing business Risk Margin run off from planned new business 
Existing business SCR run off from planned new business 
Total Existing Business Excess Capital Generation  from planned new business 
 I002 
I003 
I004 
I005 
I007 
I008 
I009 
I010 
I011 
I012 
I013 
I015 
I016 
I017 
I018 
I019 
I020 
I021 
I021 
I022 
I023 
I024 
I025 
I027 
I028 
  New business Own Funds generation, excluding risk margin 
New business risk margin 
New business SCR 
Total New Business Excess Capital Generation 
Experience variance and change in operating assumptions 
Economic variance 
Other 
Total organic excess capital generation 
Excess capital generation arising from model changes 
Excess capital generation arising from other management actions 
Portfolio and business transfers 
Shareholder transfers from with-profit funds 
Debt raise 
Debt repayment 
Net equity issuance 
Interest expense  
Dividends 
Total change in excess capital 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
     I004 
   I006+I007+I008 
    I010+I011+I012 
   = I005+I009 + 
Sum I013 to 
I017 
         = Sum I018 to 
I028 
11 
 
11 
