Philip Lowe: Trust and prosperity
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of Australia,  at  the  CEDA Annual
Dinner, Melbourne, 20 November 2018.
 I would like to thank Andrea Brischetto for assistance in the preparation of this talk.
Thank you for the invitation to address CEDA's annual dinner. It has become a tradition at these
dinners for the Governor of the RBA to talk about how we secure Australia's continued economic
prosperity. I would like to continue that tradition tonight.
My focus is going to be on the importance of trust as an essential building block of economic
prosperity.
This focus is a bit different from the normal turf of economists: things like productivity, investment
and capital accumulation. Of course, we need to keep a close eye on these issues, but in doing
so we should not lose sight of the fact that our economy, and our society, works best when there
are high levels of trust. And those in whom trust has been placed need to do their best to be
worthy of that trust.
There is an element of trust in all economic transactions. Without it, commerce can't flourish.
But the nature of trust in our society is changing. We can all think of recent examples where trust
in our institutions and organisations has been severely tarnished. At the same time, changes in
technology  mean  that  we  are  increasingly  trusting  the  wisdom  of  the  crowd  on  our  preferred
online platforms, rather than our traditional institutions. As some have argued, trust is now more
likely  to  be  distributed,  rather  than  to  flow  vertically  from  our  institutions.  This  is  a  significant
change. But regardless of how that trust is earned and retained, we all have a strong interest in
living in a high-trust society.
I would like to use this theme of trust to talk about three broad issues this evening.
The first is the role of trust in finance.
The second is the importance of the community having trust that living standards will improve
over time.
And the third is trust in institutions. Here, naturally enough, I will focus on the central bank and the
importance of accountability and transparency. In this context I will end with a few words about
current monetary policy.
Trust in Finance
Finance is all about trust. When a deposit is placed in a bank, we trust it will be repaid. We also
trust financial institutions to invest our hard-earned savings for us. And we trust them to provide
us with sound advice. Without this trust, the financial system cannot operate properly and the
economy cannot prosper. As the first line of the Banking and Finance Oath says: ‘Trust is the
foundation  of  my  profession’.   I  encourage  everybody  in  the  finance  sector  to  read  this  oath
regularly and to live by it.
1
Australia's banks have a strong record of being worthy of the trust that is placed in them to repay
deposits. The last bank failure in Australia that resulted in a loss to depositors was almost 90
years ago, back in 1931, and it was a very small bank and depositors lost only a small fraction of
their  deposits.   This  is  a  positive  record  that  few  countries  can  match.  This  strength  was
apparent during the financial crisis a decade ago and has served Australia well. The Australian
2
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
banks are strongly capitalised and have considerable liquidity buffers. On the whole, they have
also  managed  credit  risk  effectively,  reporting  few  problem  loans  by  global  standards.  This
means that we can have a high level of trust in the ability of Australia's banks to repay depositors.
Indeed, our strong and stable banking system is one of the Australian economy's strengths.
It  is  in  other  areas,  though,  where  trust  has  been  strained.  It  is  clear  that  the  behaviours
highlighted by the Royal Commission have dented the community's trust in parts of our financial
sector.
The case studies used by the Commission have put the spotlight on three important issues:
1.  the inadequate way in which banks have dealt with conflict of interest issues;
2.  the way that poorly designed incentive systems can distort behaviour – promoting a sales
culture at the expense of a service culture, and promoting the short term at the expense of
the long term; and
3.  the fact that the consequences for not doing the right thing have, in some cases, been too
light.
Strengthening trust in our financial institutions requires all three issues to be addressed.
Central to this task is creating a strong culture of service within Australia's financial institutions.
Too often our financial institutions prioritised sales over service. Correcting this starts with the
system of internal reward established by the board and management. The vast bulk of the people
who work for Australia's financial institutions do want to do the right thing, and they do want to
serve their customers as best they can. But, like everybody else, they respond to the incentives
they face. If they are rewarded on sales or short-term objectives, it should not come as a great
surprise that that's what they prioritise. So establishing the right incentives is key.
One of the things that influences incentives is the consequences and penalties that apply when
something  goes  wrong.  Strong  penalties  can  play  an  important  role  in  incentivising  good
behaviour, and this is an area we should be looking at. But we do need to get the balance right as
there can be unintended consequences.
In my view, it is worth making a distinction between the penalties that apply for poor conduct and
those that apply for making loans that ultimately cannot be repaid. On conduct issues, we should
set our expectations and standards high, and if they are not met the penalties should be firm. On
lending,  matters  are  more  complex.  Even  when  banks  lend  responsibly,  a  percentage  of
borrowers will end up in financial strife and be unable to meet their obligations. We need banks to
be prepared to make loans in the full expectation that some borrowers will not be able to pay
them  back.  Banks  need  to  take  risk  and  manage  that  risk  well.  If  they  become  afraid  to  lend
simply because of the consequences of making a loan that goes bad, our economy will suffer.
So a balance needs to be struck here.
More  broadly,  having  clear  lines  of  accountability  can  help  build  trust.  The  Banking  Executive
Accountability  Regime  (BEAR)  is  helpful  here.  This  regime  is,  however,  largely  limited  to
authorised deposit-taking institutions and to prudential matters. It is worth thinking about how the
same  focus  on  accountability  can  be  applied  to  a  broader  range  of  financial  services  and  to
conduct issues as well. As we do this, though, we should not lose sight of the fact that it is the
banks' boards and management that are ultimately responsible for the choices that banks make.
It  is  unrealistic  to  expect  that  an  appropriate  culture  can  be  created  through  regulation  and
penalties. Creating the right culture is a core responsibility of boards and management.
Changes  that  are  now  taking  place  within  the  financial  sector  should,  over  time,  help  restore
trust,  although  it  is  likely  to  be  a  gradual  process.  The  Royal  Commission  will  have
recommendations  that  should  assist  with  this.  One  thing  that  would  help  is  for  financial
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
institutions  to  have  a  long-term  focus  and  reflect  that  in  their  internal  incentives.  Managing  to
short-term targets might boost the share price for a while, but this short-termism can weaken the
long-term franchise value of the bank. We have seen evidence of this recently.
I would argue that the franchise value is more likely to be maximised if our financial institutions
have  a  long-term  perspective,  treat  their  customers  well,  reward  loyalty  rather  than  take
advantage of it, and invest in systems and technology that deliver world-class financial services
for Australians. Doing this would not only be good for bank shareholders, but also for the broader
community.
Trust That Living Standards Will Improve over Time
I would now like to turn to a slightly different concept of trust, but one that is no less important:
that is, the community's trust that real living standards will improve over time.
On many accounts, the Australian economy has performed very well over recent times. Over the
past  year  it  has  grown  by  close  to  3½  per  cent,  inflation  has  been  low  and  stable  at  around
2 per cent, employment has grown quite strongly and we are getting closer to full employment
(Graph 1). Business conditions are positive and government finances have improved and are in
reasonable shape. There is a lot of investment in infrastructure taking place and the number of
job vacancies is at a record high. So, overall, it is quite a positive picture.
Yet, despite how often this story is told, not everybody shares this positive assessment.
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
This next graph helps explain why this is so (Graph 2). It shows how average hourly earnings in
Australia,  adjusted  for  inflation,  have  changed  over  time.  The  picture  is  pretty  clear.  Over  the
period from 1995 to 2012, we witnessed a substantial lift in real hourly earnings; on average real
wages  increased  by  almost  2  per  cent  per  year.  This  occurred  alongside  inflation  averaging
around the midpoint of the 2–3 per cent target range and strong growth in corporate profits. Since
2012, though, it has been a different story: over these six years, there has been little change in
average  real  hourly  earnings.  The  wage  increases  that  have  occurred  have  been  broadly
matched by inflation.
 This is quite a change and it is having significant effects. On the positive side, flat real wages
have supported the substantial gains in employment that we have seen. So they have benefited
many  people. At  the  same  time,  though,  flat  real  wages  are  diminishing  our  sense  of  shared
prosperity.  The  lack  of  real  wage  growth  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  some  in  our  community
question whether they are benefiting from our economic success.
This  is  not  a  uniquely  Australian  story.  A  similar  thing  has  happened  across  most  of  the
advanced economies. As a result, too many citizens around the world have diminished trust in
the idea that the policies that have underpinned growth over the past 30 years are working for
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
them. They feel more uncertain about the future and, in some countries, are also having to deal
with very high housing prices. This unease is despite unemployment rates in many advanced
economies being the lowest in many decades.
The  diminished  trust  in  the  idea  that  living  standards  will  continue  to  improve  is  a  major
economic, social and political issue. It underlies some of the political changes we are seeing
around the world. It is also making it harder to implement needed economic reform. It is in our
collective interest that this trust is restored.
This is a challenging task, but it is not an impossible one. Part of the solution is for the labour
market to tighten further and for this to lead to a pick-up in household income growth. The current
setting of monetary policy is encouraging this. As the labour market has tightened in Australia
over  the  past  year,  there  has  been  a  modest  lift  in  wages  growth.  We  received  further
confirmation  of  this  last  week  with  the  publication  of  the  wage  price  index.  The  RBA  also
continues to hear reports of larger wage rises in areas where there is strong demand for labour
and workers are in short supply. We expect to hear more such reports over time.
From  a  longer-term  perspective,  another  part  of  the  solution  is  to  boost  our  productivity.  The
factors that are contributing to flat real wages for many workers are complex, but many of them
are linked to globalisation and technology. The best way of dealing with this is not to ignore these
forces,  but  to  do  what  we  can  to  capitalise  on  them.  This  means  government  and  business
having a sharp focus on the question of how we can best flourish in this world of global markets
and continuing improvements in technology.
An important part of the answer must be investment in education and skills, and in research and
development. We need to be thinking long term here. Realistically, more investment in human
capital will not make much difference to real wages this year or next. But over the next decade or
two, it is crucial to raising real wages and living standards. Increasingly, our prosperity rests on
the ideas that we have, how we can take advantage of those ideas, and how we can capitalise
on new technologies. This means that having a strong culture of innovation in our businesses is
important. With the right investments, Australians can enjoy high and rising real wages in a highly
competitive and technically sophisticated world.
There  are  other  elements  to  lifting  productivity:  the  design  of  our  tax  system,  the  quality  and
pricing of our infrastructure and the strength of competition in our markets.
The key point here is that raising productivity and ensuring a strong economy will, over time, help
deal  with  the  diminished  trust  that  people  have  in  the  idea  that  their  real  living  standards  will
improve.  We  all  have  a  strong  interest  in  that  trust  being  restored.  Without  it,  a  lot  of  things
become more difficult.
Trust in the Central Bank
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  a  third  aspect  of  trust  –  that  is  trust  in  public  institutions.  One  of
Australia's strengths is that we have strong and stable public institutions. We can sometimes
take this for granted. But strong public institutions are one of the foundations upon which our
economic  prosperity  is  built.  They  help  support  the  public's  trust  in  the  development  and
implementation  of  economic  policy,  and  in  the  fair  and  effective  administration  of  laws  and
regulation. They can also help society balance some of the difficult trade-offs that we sometimes
face.
I  hope  you  see  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  as  one  of  those  institutions.  We  have  been
entrusted  with  important  responsibilities  by  the  Australian  parliament  and  the  government:
determining  Australia's  monetary  policy;  issuing  Australia's  currency;  operating  the  core  of
Australia's  payment  system;  acting  as  the  banker  for  the Australian  Government;  and  having
broad  responsibilities  for  financial  stability  and  for  competition,  efficiency  and  stability  in  the
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Australian payments system.
As  we  carry  out  these  responsibilities,  I  am  very  conscious  that  as  central  bankers  we  are
unelected officials acting on the public's behalf. Reflecting this, the first of our internal values at
the RBA is to act in the public interest. We work hard to be worthy of the trust that has been
placed  in  us.  We  seek  to  do  this  by  speaking  and  acting  independently,  consistent  with  our
mandate, by being analytical and pragmatic in our approach to policy and by being accountable
and transparent.
One  element  of  transparency  is  the  release  of  minutes  on  monetary  policy  shortly  after  each
monthly  board  meeting.  The  latest  minutes  were  released  this  morning.  These  contain  our
assessment that the Australian economy has been doing well recently. It is growing a bit faster
than average, the unemployment rate is trending lower and inflation is low and stable. We expect
this  to  continue  for  a  while  yet.  This  is  evident  in  this  next  chart,  which  shows  our  central
forecasts of GDP growth and inflation over the next few years (Graph 3). Growth this year and
next is expected to exceed 3 per cent, before easing in 2020 as the boost from the large increase
in liquefied natural gas exports tapers off. Inflation is expected to pick up gradually, but to remain
low. The graph also shows the range of uncertainty, based on historical experience. While the
public focus is normally on the central scenario, it is important to recall that the range of possible
outcomes is quite large.
  6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  the  minutes  discuss,  one  of  the  current  sources  of  uncertainty  is  the  pace  of  growth  in
consumer  spending.  Over  the  past  couple  of  years,  consumer  spending  has  been  growing
reasonably  firmly  and  faster  than  disposable  income.  Our  central  scenario  is  for  household
spending to continue growing at around its current rate and for income growth to pick up to be in
line  with  spending  growth.  But  there  are  conflicting  forces  at  work.  The  strong  employment
growth is positive for income and consumption growth. But working in the other direction are flat
real wages at a time when debt levels are high and housing prices are falling in our largest cities.
We are continuing to assess the balance of these forces.
As  we  do  this,  we  are  watching  the  housing  market  closely.  There  has  recently  been
considerable  public  attention  paid  to  declining  housing  prices  in  Sydney  and  Melbourne.  It  is
important to remember that these declines come after very large run-ups in housing prices in
these  two  cities,  which  made  purchasing  a  home  difficult  for  a  significant  number  of  people
(Graph 4). It is also worth pointing out that this adjustment is taking place against the backdrop of
a strong world economy, a positive Australian economy, low unemployment, low interest rates,
strong population growth and only limited pockets of excess housing supply. This is a reasonably
favourable backdrop against which to be having an adjustment in the housing market. But we do
need to watch things closely.
  7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The minutes also report that the Board evaluated the forecasts made by the Bank this time last
year. The Board does this type of evaluation exercise annually. Over the past year, the economy
performed more strongly than expected a year ago and the unemployment rate came down by
more than expected. At the same time, though, the stronger growth and labour market did not
translate  into  more  inflation;  wages  growth  and  inflation  turned  out  to  be  pretty  close  to
expectations.The  fact  that  growth  was  stronger  than  expected  is  largely  accounted  for  by  a
positive  surprise  on  both  mining  and  non-mining  investment.  The  terms  of  trade  were  also
stronger than expected, which, combined with a lower exchange rate, helped too. The positive
story  for  non-mining  investment  can  be  seen  in  this  next  graph,  which  shows  the  Bank's
successive forecasts over the years as well as the actual outcomes – the black line (Graph 5).
For a number of years we were forecasting a lift in investment that did not come. During this
period of flat business investment, Glenn Stevens gave speeches bemoaning the lack of animal
spirits in the business community. But over the past couple of years, things finally turned around.
The long-forecast pick-up in investment finally arrived and it has been stronger than expected.
We expect this upswing in investment to continue for a while yet.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The fact that growth was stronger than expected is largely accounted for by a positive surprise
on both mining and non-mining investment. The terms of trade were also stronger than expected,
which,  combined  with  a  lower  exchange  rate,  helped  too.  The  positive  story  for  non-mining
investment can be seen in this next graph, which shows the Bank's successive forecasts over
the years as well as the actual outcomes – the black line (Graph 5). For a number of years we
were  forecasting  a  lift  in  investment  that  did  not  come.  During  this  period  of  flat  business
investment, Glenn Stevens gave speeches bemoaning the lack of animal spirits in the business
community.  But  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  things  finally  turned  around.  The  long-forecast
pick-up  in  investment  finally  arrived  and  it  has  been  stronger  than  expected.  We  expect  this
upswing in investment to continue for a while yet.
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
 In the context of its forecast evaluation, the Board at its recent meeting also reviewed the various
arguments that have been made by commentators for alternative courses of monetary policy.
The timing of this review has no particular policy significance. It is good practice to consider the
issues and arguments from all angles, and we do this as part of our regular processes.
As you know, following its deliberations at the November meeting, the Board again decided to
maintain the cash rate at 1.5 per cent, where it has been since August 2016.
The central messages also remain the same.
First, the economy is moving in the right direction and further progress is expected in lowering
unemployment and having inflation consistent with the target.
Second,  the  probability  of  an  increase  in  interest  rates  is  higher  than  the  probability  of  a
decrease. If the economy continues to move along the expected path, then at some point it will
be appropriate to raise interest rates. This will be in the context of an improving economy and
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
stronger growth in household incomes.
Third, the Board does not see a strong case for a near-term change in interest rates. There is a
reasonable probability that the current setting of monetary policy will be maintained for a while
yet. This reflects the fact that the expected progress on our goals for unemployment and inflation
is likely to be gradual. The Board's view is that it is appropriate to maintain the current setting of
policy while this progress is made.
Thank you for listening. I look forward to your questions.
1
2
See the Banking and Finance Oath website at <www.thebfo.org/home>.
The Primary Producers Bank was wound up in 1931. The bank accounted for less than 0.5 per cent of Australian
banks’ deposits at the time, and the bank’s customers lost just 1.25 per cent of their deposits. See Fitz-Gibbon
B and M Gizycki (2001), ‘A History of Last-resort Lending and Other Support for Troubled Financial Institutions in
Australia’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2001–07.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
