   STANDARD CHARTERED BANK  
 OFFICIAL OPENNING OF NEW HEADQUARTERS BUILDING 
 ADDRESS BY DR. ERNEST ADDISON, GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA  
 ACCRA, OCTOBER 3, 2018 
           1 
  Your Excellency the President of the Republic: Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-
Addo, 
Honorable Ministers, 
The Board Chairman and Directors of Standard Chartered Bank Limited, 
Distinguished Executives of the Banking Industry, 
Invited Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 1. 
It gives me great pleasure to be here today for the official launching 
of this new ultra-modern head office for Standard Chartered Bank (Ghana) 
Limited, and for the opportunity to make a few remarks on this occasion.  
 2. 
Standard  Chartered  bank  has  been  a  very  successful  Bank  with  a 
great tradition as a financial institution. Established as the Bank for British 
West  Africa  (BBWA)  during  the  colonial  era,  it  predates  all  existing  banks 
including  the  Bank  of  Ghana  itself.  The  Bank’s  slogan  “Here  for  Good” 
provides  a  deep  historical  perspective  to  banking  in  Ghana  and  indeed  in 
the  entire  West  African  sub  region.  The  Bank  has  also  been  managed 
 2 
 largely  by  a  Ghanaian  workforce  and  it  is  a  Ghanaian  Bank  by  every 
standard.  
 3,   Mr.  Chairman,  the  overall  contribution  of  Standard  chartered  to  the 
banking industry in Ghana is not in doubt. Its history is intertwined with the 
socio-economic development of Ghana. It remains one of the top tier banks 
in  terms  of  total  assets  and  deposits  of  the  industry.  The  Bank  has  also 
contributed  churning  out  of  astute  professional  bankers  who  have  moved 
on to serve other institutions in the industry. It has also supported lending 
to  various  sectors  of  the  economy  such  as  mining,  utilities,  construction, 
agriculture, manufacturing, and services. More recently, the bank has gone 
through  some  transformation  based  on  its  business  model  re-engineering 
to reposition itself as a major player in the industry. 
 4. 
 Mr.  Chairman, 
financial  services  remain  crucial 
in  promoting 
economic growth and reducing poverty. It is in this regard that the Bank of 
Ghana  has  established  as  a  major  policy  priority,  the  development  of  a 
sound  financial  system  with  strong  individual  component  institutions.    The 
idea  is  to  position  the  sector  as  a  major  growth  driver,  to  support  an 
inclusive broad based economy with the full implementation of new higher 
minimum capital requirements by the end of this year.  We know that banks 
are working strenuously to meet this requirement and we may end the year 
 3 
 with many more banks meeting the minimum capital requirement than was 
originally  anticipated.  This  will  help  ensure  a  banking  industry  that  is  well 
capitalized  and  well-positioned  to  support  the  much  needed  economic 
transformation Ghana needs. 
 5. 
 We  have  been  working  with  the  fiscal  authorities  and  other 
stakeholders  to  create  the  enabling  environment  to  support  growth  and  I 
am happy to report that we are beginning to see good results.  At the last 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  meeting,  we  observed  that  economic  activity 
continued  to  strengthen  with  robust  export  growth,  higher  industrial 
electricity  consumption  and  higher  tourist  arrivals.  Overall,  the  country 
remains  on  a  steady  growth  path  with  the  first  quarter  2018  GDP  outturn 
estimated at 6.8 percent, compared with 6.7 percent in the same period of 
2017.  Also,  the  Bank’s  updated  Composite  Index  of  Economic  Activity 
(CIEA) showed a strong pickup in the year to July. Ghana recorded a trade 
surplus  of  $1.4  billion  at  the  end  of  August.    Headline  inflation  broadly 
declined  and  has  ranged  between  9.6  and  9.9  percent  over  the  past  five 
months,  despite  the  marginal  upticks  occasioned  by  adjustments  in 
administered prices.  
 6. 
The  Cedi’s  strong  performance  against  the  major  international 
currencies in the first quarter of 2018 weakened in the subsequent  quarters 
 4 
 as  the  currency  came  under  pressure,  mainly  from  emerging  and  frontier 
market contagion effects. Factors such as the US Fed rate increases due to 
continued  monetary  policy  normalization,  strengthening  of  the  US  dollar, 
rise in US yield rates, and the escalating trade tensions have all taken a toll 
on emerging market and frontier economy assets. 
 7.    The  combination  of  these  factors  have  resulted  in  a  tight  financing 
conditions,  reverse  capital  flows  and  exchange  rate  pressures  in  most 
emerging  market  and  frontier  economies,  including  Ghana.  However, 
different countries have responded differently depending on the strength  of 
their underlying macroeconomic fundamentals. The impact on the exchange 
rate in Ghana has been somewhat moderated compared to other EMs and 
frontier  economies—a  testament  to  the  gains  in  macroeconomic  stability 
achieved  over  the  past  18  months.  While  currencies  in  other  EMs  are  still 
under stress, Ghana’s currency has recently regained some stability and the 
local  currency  is  gradually  becoming  more  stable.  Indeed  Ghana  has 
recently  received  an  upgrade  by  Standard  and  Poor’s  to  her  sovereign 
credit  rating  on  the  back  of  improved  monetary  policy  effectiveness  and 
improved banking sector stability. 
 8.     Our banking system is becoming stronger with capital adequacy ratio 
reported at 19.1 per cent at the end of August, significantly above prudential 
requirement of 10 percent. Non-performing loans of the industry continue to 
 5 
 decline and we expect a major reduction as banks begin to implement write 
off policies, in line with approvals received from Bank of Ghana to address 
the  legacy  loans  that  have  been  fully  provisioned  for.  We  have  also 
observed a return to efficiency in the industry as operating expenses across 
banks  are  beginning  to  reduce,  which  should  ultimately  result  in  declining 
interest rates. With the increased capitalization of banks, declining levels of 
non-  performing  loans,  and  better  credit  risk  assessment  in  the  banking 
system,  we  should  expect  the  pricing  of  credit  to  reflect  these  trends. 
Interest rates and spreads that have been slow to adjust should move in line 
with inflation.  
 9.        These  are  the  conditions  which  would  lead  to  improved  access  to 
credit  for  small  and  medium  enterprises  to  financial  services.  They 
constitute  the  largest  population  where  the  benefits  of  access  to  credit 
touch  directly  on  the  fabric  of  the  society  and  income  security,  and  the 
ultimate good of raising living standards. 
 10.  As  the  Bank  of  Ghana  continues  to  strengthen  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  frameworks  to  restore  confidence  and  promote  stability  and 
integrity of the banking sector, it is important that we do not overlook cyber 
security measures to combat financial crime. As part of the National Cyber 
Security  Awareness  Month  (NCSA)  in  October,  which  was  launched  two 
 6 
 days ago, the Bank of Ghana will inaugurate its Security Operations Centre 
(SOC)  on  the  22nd  October  and  also  launch  the  cyber  and  information 
security  directive  for  the  industry.  Subsequent  to  the  issuance  of  the 
directive, banks would be required to follow an implementation schedule to 
ensure  that  effective  cyber  security  controls  are  in  place  to  counter  any 
form of cybercrime.  
 11.  Through  the  Bank’s  monitoring  systems  we  have  observed  the  daily 
attempts  by  cyber  criminals  to  bypass  security  controls  and  exploit 
vulnerabilities  within  the  cyber  and  information  security  defenses  of 
financial  systems.  To  counter  these,  we  are  strengthening  and  increasing 
the scope of Anti-Money Laundering risk-based supervision and collaborate 
with the Financial Intelligent Centre (FIC), Economic and Organized Crime 
Office  (EOCO)  and  other  law  enforcement  agencies  to  reduce  the 
incidence of cyber-attacks on the financial sector.  
 12.        Mr  Chairman,  the  common  good  is  a  healthy  financial  system 
founded  on  strong  individual  banks  and  financial  institutions.  To  achieve 
this  common  good,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  is  strengthening  its  risk-based 
supervision  framework  and  will  continue  to  count  on  the  cooperation  of 
banks. This transition puts more emphasis on capital efficiency.  As banks 
 7 
 accumulate  more  capital  they  have  to  find  the  most  efficient  use  of  this 
capital to support its business mix. This calls for the fluid use of resources 
to  capture  the  appropriate  return  on  equity.  The  challenge  will  call  for  a 
diverse repertoire of competencies, the diagnostic ability to be innovative or 
what things should be unlearned, and the behavioural flexibility to be able 
to change. 
 13.  Mr. Chairman, there are a number of factors that explain the success 
of  Standard  Chartered  Bank  in  the  market:  the  provision  of  better  quality 
products  and  services,  competitive  pricing  and  enhanced  access  by 
customers on terms structured to meet their needs, and a culture rooted in 
uncompromising  respect  for  the  highest  standards  and  integrity  that  are 
essential  for  public  confidence.  And  they  are  doing  so,  we  believe,  in  an 
atmosphere  of  fair  competition  and  in  a  stable,  predictable  and  liberal 
regulatory  framework.  We  urge  other  banks  as  well  as  the  locally  owned 
Ghanaian  Banks  to  emulate  these  strong  standards,  especially  the 
strengths of its corporate governance. 
 14.    As  I  have  highlighted  earlier,  the  financial  sector  in  Ghana  is  solid, 
well-capitalized, and healthy. And, over the last year, we have seen further 
improvements as the reforms begin to take shape. 
  8 
 15. However, we have a few institutions in the sector that have come under 
stress  in  both  banks  and  specialized  deposit  taking  institutions.  What  are 
common among these institutions are unsustainable business models and 
poor corporate governance practices which has led to the misapplication of 
depositors  funds  and  pushed  them  to  the  threshold  of  insolvency  with 
liquidity  shortages.  And,  we  have  all  been  witnesses  to  how  customers  of 
these institutions have reacted. These developments are not a reflection of 
the  industry.  We  have  very  strong  banks  and  Savings  and  Loans  that  are 
doing  well.  However,  we  are  working  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  on  a 
recovery plan which we expect to be implemented soon.  
 16.  We  urge  Stanchart  to  continue  to  draw  on  its  strengths,  knowledge  of 
the  local  market,  professionalism  and,  above  all,  a  customer-focused 
culture to develop products and services to meet the banking needs of the 
public.  Whilst  they  may  target  the  blue-chip  companies  in  the  system  for 
good  reasons,  there  is  a  clear  need  to  also  give  the  small  business 
enterprise sector a focus and to provide services to meet the needs of this 
relatively neglected sector of the banking market.   
 17.  On this note, Mr. Chairman, let me once again congratulate the Board, 
Management and Staff of Standard Chartered Bank on the opening of this 
new Headquarters building. 
 9 
  Thank you all for the attention. 
  10 
