Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Speaking through
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), delivered by Ms Maria Almasara Cyd N Tuano-Amador, Deputy Governor
of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, BSP Christmas Program, Manila, 12 December 2018.
 Fellow  members  of  the  Monetary  Board—Secretary  Sonny  Dominguez,  MBM  Philip  Medalla,
MBM Jun de Zuñiga, MBM Peter Favila, MBM Tony Abacan, and MBM Bruce Tolentino who is
celebrating his first Christmas here in the BSP.
Our  diligent  and  reliable  Sector  Heads–  DG  Diwa  Guinigundo,  DG  Chuchi  Fonacier,  DG  Cyd
Amador, and Senior Assistant Governor Dahlia Luna.
Family, friends, fellow BSPers, magandang hapon sa inyong lahat!
This afternoon, I am so happy to be here amongst all of you. From the PICC entrance proceeding
to where I am now sitting, along the way, I was able to greet those nearby to exchange smiles
and nods even from afar I was able to acknowledge and let you know through simple gestures
that I truly appreciate each of you.  I appreciate you individually, and collectively as part of this
group that comprises the BSP family. Team BSP.
For several events now, I have, for health reasons, requested BSP Officers to deliver messages
on my behalf. 
I have allowed others to speak for me and I have spoken through others.
This is not an easy thing for me to do, as I am by heart, a speechwriter and am mindful of the
power of the podium. 
I must admit that allowing myself to speak through others can be a humbling experience as it
reminds me of my own limitations.  But there are two things that also make it a very powerful
exercise.
Allowing myself to speak through others emphasizes the value of giving them full and complete
trust.    Designating  others  to  give  messages  on  my  behalf  is  accompanied  by  complete
confidence that the Officers I have requested to do so will not only read from a sheet of paper.
Rather, they do so, fully believing in the messages as well.  In so doing, they are not only echoing
my words, but are ambassadors and staunch advocates of the BSP’s best interests.
When I took a two-week medical leave last September, it was with full confidence that the BSP
will continue even in my temporary absence, to work together to carry on with its many projects
and to fully implement and sustain the Continuity plus plus strategic agenda. I believe I left the
BSP in very capable hands.  And so it was.  For this, let me express how profoundly thankful I
am, to you, my BSP family.
Let me add too that I am glad to be celebrating my second Christmas with you as your Governor!
The exercise of reposing full trust in the BSP’s officers and in each of you — reminds me that as
every person here works to fulfill the institution’s mandates of price stability, financial stability and
an  efficient  payments  and  settlements  system  —  each  one  becomes  a  spokesperson,  an
ambassador  and  an  advocate  of  our  core  values,  of  our  strategic  direction  of  continuity  plus
plus.  We speak through our work and commitment!
This empowers me now and it empowers you.  I am buoyed by the palpable energy in this room.
I contemplate this and am filled with joy as I celebrate the season with you all, and even with
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
those in the regions and branches through digital means. 
It  is  through  our  cooperative  and  collaborative  efforts  through  the  years  and  decades  that  we
celebrate our 25th Christmas at the BSP with a sterling reputation that remains untarnished.  We
are steadfast in our commitment to our mandates.
For the past 25 years, through many trials, external disruptions, and challenges to our mandate,
the BSP has provided  economic  stability. Along  with  other  agencies  of  Government,  we  have
achieved for the Philippines, 79 consecutive quarters of uninterrupted GDP growth!
To  manage  inflation  expectations,  and  address  possible  second  round  effects  of  inflation,  we
proactively adjusted our monetary policy rates five times this year for a cumulative rate increase
of 175 basis points.  This is to help ensure that inflation reverts to within target range next year. 
And this is what we expect.
We have not wavered in our commitment to price stability. Even as we deal with disruptions from
external and domestic factors affecting the supply side, we have put to good use the monetary
tools at our disposal. We will continue to keep our ears to the ground, remain vigilant and prepare
to face challenges ahead.
Our  banking  system  remains  one  of  our  strengths,  continuing  to  strongly  support  economic
growth.
Our payments system has been growing steadily in scope, allowing for more efficient processing
of financial transactions, spurring more economic activities and development.
With all these, I can confidently say that the BSP through the years has firmly demonstrated its
staunch commitment to its mandates—our three pillars of central banking. And I attribute this to
our dynamic leaders AND TO YOU ALL, my dearest colleagues in the BSP (Applause).
Earlier, I mentioned that allowing myself to speak through others is a powerful exercise. 
Aside from it being an avenue to demonstrate full trust in others.It is also powerful as it multiplies
and  amplifies  the  channels  of  communication.    For  instance,  as  Cyd  delivers  this  message,
there are now two speakers heralding its points and reinforcing its value.
Come to think of it, the Christmas season is one such event where our Lord himself speaks
through another.  By sending His one and only Son to earth to deliver the message of Salvation,
of Love, of Hope and Peace. His message has become the most powerful narrative of all.  It is
spoken through the decades and generations.  It is attested to through transformed lives.
For this reason, for the first Christmas, and for the wonderful opportunities it brings to gather and
share our blessings with others we are truly grateful.
We thank the Lord for speaking through His Son and we keep in our hearts the message of hope
and salvation it brings. 
And let this be your take-away.
Let me remind you then that to those whom much is given, much is expected. And in the spirit of
Christmas, I enjoin you to share these blessings with those we serve.  Let us allow love, hope
and peace to speak through us on a daily basis.
Once again, on behalf of the Monetary Board and the BSP Management team, I wish everyone a
meaningful Christmas and an abundant new year.
From my family—my wife Tess, our children and our dear apo— sa buong BSP at sa inyong
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
mga pamilya—Maligayang Pasko at Masaganang Bagong Taon
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
