Nor  Shamsiah  Mohd  Yunus:  Mastery,  adaptability  and
perseverance
Remarks by Ms Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  2018  Kijang  Emas  Scholarship  Award  “Mastery,  adaptability  and
perseverance”, Kuala Lumpur, 21 September 2018.
 When  I  entered  university  in Australia  many  years  ago,  the  Times  named  the  Computer  the
‘Man (or in this case, Machine) of the Year’. It was a significant signal in public consciousness
on the importance of the computer. The byline was, “The Computer moves in”.
The  world  then,  as  is  now,  was  a  world  in  a  state  of  constant  change.  Today,  we  see  that
technology is at the forefront in transforming almost every aspect of our lives. It is doing so at an
unprecedented and relentless pace. This is exciting, but also for many, it brings about the feeling
of trepidation, discomfort and uncertainty.
Therefore, as both of you begin your next chapter of your life, I encourage you to make the most
of your years in university, to not only excel in your chosen discipline, but also to absorb lessons
that  will  serve  you  well  in  life.  Let  me  just  mention  three  today:  mastery,  adaptability  and
perseverance.
First,  on  mastery.  Even  in  a  world  where  knowledge  decays  quickly,  mastering  a  field  of
knowledge is the foundation in building one’s expertise and credibility.
Mastery  is  not  mere  information  accumulation.  It  is  the  ability  to  understand  the  inter-linkages
between  complex  and  evolving  situations.  It  means  being  able  to  integrate  and  think  critically
when there are only pieces of information. It means being able to provide breadth of perspective
anchored by depth.
For us in Bank Negara Malaysia, mastery of economics and finance is what helps us differentiate
the ‘signal’ and the ‘noise’ in economic policymaking and financial regulation. It also helps us to
differentiate the symptom and the root cause in the supervision of financial institutions. It also
means learning the lessons from history and avoiding the same mistakes within the context of
our operating environment. Thus, I encourage you to focus and follow your curiosity in exploring
the depths of your field of study. There is no end to learning, and may your thirst for knowledge
drive you on. Have the humility to recognise that we never stop learning. As a Chinese proverb
goes, “Learning is a treasure that will follow its owner everywhere.”
Second, on adaptability. Charles Darwin famously reminded us that, “It is not the strongest of the
species that survives, nor the most intelligent, it is the one that is most adaptable to change.” 
This means one must be able to constantly learn new things. One must also unlearn things that
have become outdated.
No one can really be certain on the precise impact of automation, artificial intelligence and the
new  industrial  revolution  4.0  on  future  jobs  and  the  complexion  of  society.  But  it  is  our  own
individual  responsibility  if  we  want  to  be  relevant  and  useful  to  society,  to  learn  new  skills,
knowledge  and  behaviours.  In  central  banking,  we  are  also  preparing  for  a  future  where  the
landscape of the financial sector will be dramatically different. In the medical field, which both of
you are in, the role of the various medical professionals will change as we strive to continuously
improve the quality of care with new technologies. The world’s greatest innovations have been
born out of a willingness to embrace change, adapt and push the boundaries for a better future.
Third, on perseverance. When speaking of perseverance, I am reminded of a Japanese proverb
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
that says, “Fall down seven times, get up eight”. Both of you have a long journey ahead of you.
Do not be surprised, there will be many challenges, hurdles and speed bumps in your journey.
Life does not progress in a linear fashion. Each time you face a challenge and fall, do not be
afraid to get up, adapt, improve and try again.
The fact that you have come this far is a testament that there are more than a few people who
believe in you and are rooting for you to succeed. Take encouragement from that and nurture and
develop  your  ability  to  persevere.  This  can  be  nurtured  and  developed  from  facing  and
overcoming hard knocks and refusing to be defeated by them. It is the single most important
virtue that will enable you to achieve great things and do great works. As the great English writer
Samuel  Johnson  famously  said,  “Great  works  are  performed  not  by  strength  but  by
perseverance.”
As I conclude, it is our great privilege to be able to support and be part of your life journey. Both of
you and the other scholars are the future of our country. With your tenacity and guidance from
your  parents,  lecturers,  mentors  and  friends,  I  am  confident  that  both  of  you  will  enjoy
tremendous  success  in  life.  May  you  pursue  excellence,  mastery,  adaptability  and  persevere
through every circumstances in life.
In this regard, we look forward to your many future and excellent contributions to build Malaysia to
be a prosperous, inclusive and vibrant nation.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
