Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Luis
de  Guindos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  13  December
2018.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,
which was also attended by the President of the Eurogroup, Mr Centeno.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at their present levels at least
through the summer of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued
sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term.
Regarding non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  our  net  purchases  under  the  asset
purchase programme (APP) will end in December 2018. At the same time, we are enhancing our
forward  guidance  on  reinvestment. Accordingly,  we  intend  to  continue  reinvesting,  in  full,  the
principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of
time past the date when we start raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long
as  necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation.
While incoming information has been weaker than expected, reflecting softer external demand
but also some country and sector-specific factors, the underlying strength of domestic demand
continues  to  underpin  the  euro  area  expansion  and  gradually  rising  inflation  pressures.  This
supports our confidence that the sustained convergence of inflation to our aim will proceed and
will be maintained even after the end of our net asset purchases. At the same time, uncertainties
related to geopolitical factors, the threat of protectionism, vulnerabilities in emerging markets and
financial market volatility remain prominent. Significant monetary policy stimulus is still needed to
support the further build-up of domestic price pressures and headline inflation developments over
the  medium  term.  Our  forward  guidance  on  the  key  ECB  interest  rates,  reinforced  by  the
reinvestments  of  the  sizeable  stock  of  acquired  assets,  continues  to  provide  the  necessary
degree of monetary accommodation for the sustained convergence of inflation to our aim. In any
event,  the  Governing  Council  stands  ready  to  adjust  all  of  its  instruments,  as  appropriate,  to
ensure  that  inflation  continues  to  move  towards  the  Governing  Council’s  inflation  aim  in  a
sustained manner.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area  real  GDP  increased  by  0.2%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  third  quarter  of  2018,  following
growth  of  0.4%  in  the  previous  two  quarters.  The  latest  data  and  survey  results  have  been
weaker  than  expected,  reflecting  a  diminishing  contribution  from  external  demand  and  some
country and sector-specific factors. While some of these factors are likely to unwind, this may
suggest  some  slower  growth  momentum  ahead. At  the  same  time,  domestic  demand,  also
backed  by  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  continues  to  underpin  the  economic
expansion  in  the  euro  area.  The  strength  of  the  labour  market,  as  reflected  in  ongoing
employment  gains  and  rising  wages,  still  supports  private  consumption.  Moreover,  business
investment is benefiting from domestic demand, favourable financing conditions and improving
balance  sheets.  Residential  investment  remains  robust.  In  addition,  the  expansion  in  global
activity is still expected to continue, supporting euro area exports, although at a slower pace.
This assessment is broadly reflected in the December 2018 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
projections for the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.9% in
2018, 1.7% in 2019, 1.7% in 2020 and 1.5% in 2021. Compared with the September 2018 ECB
staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised slightly down
in 2018 and 2019.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook can still be assessed as broadly balanced.
However,  the  balance  of  risks  is  moving  to  the  downside  owing  to  the  persistence  of
uncertainties related to geopolitical factors, the threat of protectionism, vulnerabilities in emerging
markets and financial market volatility.
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  declined  to  2.0%  in
November  2018,  from  2.2%  in  October,  reflecting  mainly  a  decline  in  energy  inflation.  On  the
basis  of  current  futures  prices  for  oil,  headline  inflation  is  likely  to  decrease  over  the  coming
months. Measures of underlying inflation remain generally muted, but domestic cost pressures
are continuing to strengthen and broaden amid high levels of capacity utilisation and tightening
labour  markets,  which  is  pushing  up  wage  growth.  Looking  ahead,  underlying  inflation  is
expected to increase over the medium term, supported by our monetary policy measures, the
ongoing economic expansion and rising wage growth.
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  December  2018  Eurosystem  staff
macroeconomic projections for the  euro  area,  which  foresee  annual  HICP  inflation  at  1.8%  in
2018, 1.6% in 2019, 1.7% in 2020 and 1.8% in 2021. Compared with the September 2018 ECB
staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised slightly up for
2018 and down for 2019.
Turning  to  the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth stood at 3.9% in October 2018,
after 3.6% in September. Apart from some volatility in monthly flows, M3 growth continues to be
supported  by  bank  credit  creation.  The  narrow  monetary  aggregate  M1  remained  the  main
contributor to broad money growth.
In line with the upward trend observed since the beginning of 2014, the growth of loans to the
private sector continues to support the economic expansion. The annual growth rate of loans to
non-financial corporations stood at 3.9% in October 2018, after 4.3% in September, while the
annual growth rate of loans to households remained unchanged at 3.2%. The pass-through of
the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 continues to significantly support
borrowing conditions for firms and households, access to financing – in particular for small and
medium-sized enterprises – and credit flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities.
The  implementation  of structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially
stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost  euro  area
productivity and growth potential. Regarding fiscal policies, the Governing Council reiterates the
need for rebuilding fiscal buffers. This is particularly important in countries where government
debt  is  high  and  for  which  full  adherence  to  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  critical  for
safeguarding sound fiscal positions. Likewise, the transparent and consistent implementation of
the EU’s fiscal and economic governance framework over time and across countries remains
essential  to  bolster  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  economy.  Improving  the  functioning  of
Economic and Monetary Union remains a priority. The Governing Council welcomes the ongoing
work and urges further specific and decisive steps to complete the banking union and the capital
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
markets union.
Further information on the technical parameters of the reinvestments will be released at 15:30
CET on the ECB’s website.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
