Jack  Gutt:  Opening  remarks  -  Demographics  are  Not  Destiny:
Fostering Conditions to Advance Latino Business Growth
Opening remarks by Mr Jack Gutt, Executive Vice President and Head of the Communications
and  Outreach  Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  "Demographics  are  Not
Destiny: Fostering Conditions to Advance Latino Business Growth", New York City, 13 November
2018.
As prepared for delivery
 Good  morning  and  welcome  to  the  New  York  Fed  for  this  important  conversation  on
“Demographics are not Destiny: Fostering Conditions to Advance Latino Business Growth.” My
name  is  Jack  Gutt  and  I  am  fortunate  to  head  the  New  York  Fed’s  Communications  and
Outreach group.
I’d like to thank all of my colleagues and our partners from the Stanford Latino Entrepreneurship
Initiative (SLEI) and Interise for their efforts in developing the report, “Latino Owned Businesses:
Shining a Light on National Trends,” issued today, and for organizing this conference.
I’d also like to thank all of you for joining us and our panelists for their participation. This is an
impressive group and I, and my colleagues, very much look forward to hearing and learning from
you.
Before going any further, I need to point out that what I say here today reflects my own views and
not necessarily that of the New York Fed or the Federal Reserve System.
As I said at the outset, this is an important conversation. Why? Because, for the first time since
launching  the  Small  Business  Credit  Survey,  we  are  able  to  identify  and  discuss  the  specific
experiences  of  Latino  small  business  owners.  And  that,  in  turn,  matters  as  Latinos  are  the
fastest growing demographic in our nation and Latino-owned businesses are growing in number
and importance.
The total Latino population in the United States was around 18 percent in 2017 and that number
is expected to rise  significantly  in  the  coming  decades. Amid  lagging  business  start-up  rates,
immigrant  and  Latino  business  expansion  has  bolstered  small  business  growth  nationally,
outpacing that of other demographic groups.
Between 2014 and 2016, Latino-owned businesses grew by 13% compared with less than 3%
for  non-Latino  businesses.  Today,  one  in  four  new  businesses  is  Latino  owned,  contributing
more  than  $700  billion  in  annual  sales  and  employing  millions  of  workers.  On  top  of  that,  the
Latino population is among the youngest of all demographic groups and its entrepreneurial class
is equally young. In fact, nearly half of Latino owned businesses were started less than six years
ago, all of which points to the continued growth and importance of this entrepreneurial sector.
But why do we care about small business in the first place? Well, it’s quite simple. The Federal
Reserve  System,  as  the  nation’s  central  bank,  has  important  roles  to  play  in  supporting  the
vitality  of  our  economy  and  promoting  community  development.  Small  businesses  are  the
primary  driver  of  job  growth  in  the  United  States,  they  create  economic  opportunity  in  local
communities, and they help drive innovation across the economy.
The  New  York  Fed  and  fellow  Reserve  Banks  are  supporting  small  business  in  a  number  of
ways. First, by producing the annual Small Business Credit Survey, which is fielded by all 12
Reserve Banks, to provide timely information on the sector, how they are doing, their financing
needs and their access to credit. Second, by providing a one-stop resource of all of our insights
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
and analysis to policymakers, community leaders, and service providers through the Fed Small
Business website. Third, through regular meetings of our small business advisory councils, to
get  an  understanding  of  real  conditions  on  the  ground.  Fourth,  through  our Access  to  Capital
Workshops,  which  provide  technical  assistance  on  access  to  credit  for  small  businesses,
covering topics like traditional lending, alternative and emerging sources of capital, and export
financing. And, finally, through meetings like these.
So,  since  small  businesses  matter  to  the  health  of  our  economy,  and  Latino-owned  small
businesses are the fastest growing, what do we know about them? The report, which will help
inform  much  of  today’s  discussion,  combines  the  results  from  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Small
Business Credit Survey, SLEI’s Survey of US Latino Business Owners and interviews conducted
by SLEI and Interise, to offer a unique and unprecedented perspective into this entrepreneurial
class.  The  report  examines  the  business  conditions  and  credit  environment  for  Latino-owned
businesses, and compares Latino firms to non-Latino firms, as well as how their experiences
vary across major metro areas.
While I don’t want to get ahead of my colleague, Claire Kramer, and our partners from SLEI and
Interise who will present the results of the report shortly, there are a couple of themes that caught
my attention.
First, Latino small business owners face significant financial barriers even after accounting for
performance factors, including a disproportionate reliance on high-interest credit products. Those
impediments manifest themselves at all stages of the business growth, from start-up to scale-up
and beyond.
Second,  Latino  small  businesses  are  more  concentrated  in  a  few  industries  and  significantly
underrepresented in the professional, scientific and technical services sectors, which also tend
to be the most lucrative.
Third, the size of the Latino population in a given metro area does not mean that there is a larger
share of Latino-owned businesses in the same—which is, to me, somewhat counterintuitive.
Digging into and understanding the causes of these issues and identifying possible paths forward
is not only an imperative but an opportunity, and of course the focus of much of today’s agenda. It
is  clear  that  there  is  a  pressing  need  for  expanding  technical  support,  diversifying  sources  of
financing, especially at the micro level, and, in the case of the geographic conundrum, further
collaborating on policy and community advocacy.
I very much look forward to today’s discussion and thank you again for your participation.
It is now my pleasure to introduce Nancy Lee of Interise, Marlene Orozco from SLEI, and Claire
Kramer from the New York Fed.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
