Ed  Sibley:  Report  on  Local  Public  Banking  and  work  of  Central
Bank of Ireland
Introductory statement by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor (Prudential Regulation) of the Central
Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Joint  Committee  on  Finance,  Public  Expenditure  and  Reform,  and
Taoiseach (Head of Parliament), Dublin, 23 October 2018.
Good afternoon Chairman, Committee Members.
 Thank you for the invitation to appear today to discuss the recent Report on Local Public Banking
in Ireland  (the report) and related matters. I am joined today by Patrick Casey, the Registrar of
Credit Unions, and Anna Marie Finnegan, Head of Policy, Registry of Credit Unions.
1
In my brief remarks today, I will address three topics that intersect between the scope of the
report  and  the  work  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  (Central  Bank).  Firstly,  I  will  provide  an
overview  of  the  process  for  bank  authorisation;  secondly,  I  will  outline  developments  in  the
provision  of  credit  to  the  SME  sector  in  Ireland;  and  thirdly,  I  will  discuss  the  regulation  and
supervision of the Credit Union sector.
1.Authorisation
Since  the  commencement  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  in  late  2014,  the
European Central Bank (ECB) has been the competent authority for the authorisation of banks in
Ireland and across the Eurozone. This means that applications for bank authorisation are dealt
with in a consistent manner across the entire Eurozone.
In  practical  terms,  the  local  national  competent  authority  (i.e.  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  for
Ireland) assesses applications in consultation with the ECB, prior to a recommendation being
made through the SSM’s governance processes on whether to approve the application or not. To
this  end,  the  Central  Bank  has  dedicated  authorisation  teams  following  processes  that  are
transparent, predictable and consistent.
The assessment of an application will consider, inter alia: the financial resources the firm has
available  (including  under  a  plausible  stress);  the  sustainability  of  its  business  model;
governance  and  risk  management  arrangements;  and  its  ability  to  recover  if  it  gets  into
difficulty. Applicants that can meet the requisite standards in these areas will be approved.
2.Provision of credit to the SME sector in Ireland
The Central Bank understands the importance of SMEs to the Irish economy. SMEs account for
the  vast  majority  of  active  enterprises  by  number  and  employ  about  two  thirds  of  the  Irish
2
workforce.
In  Ireland,  the  majority  of  SME  investment  is  financed  through  internal  funds.   For  external
financing,  bank  lending  and  leasing  are  the  two  largest  sources  of  funds.   Recognising  the
challenges  faced  by  the  SME  sector,  the  Central  Bank  has  issued  regulations  that  aim  to
strengthen  protections  while  also  facilitating  access  to  credit,  by  introducing  specific
5
requirements that regulated lenders must comply with.
4
3
The  provision  of  credit  to  SMEs  in  Ireland  was  undoubtedly  severely  affected  by  the  financial
crisis. Default rates remain elevated, the most recent SME market report shows default rates
across all sectors are on average 22.6%.   The total credit outstanding to non-financial, non-real
estate SMEs stands at €16.2 billion in Q1 2018.  Today, the provision of bank credit to SMEs in
6
7
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ireland is very concentrated. Three banks had an 87% market share of all new SME loans issued
in the first quarter, 2018.   This concentration, together with the higher historic levels of default in
Irish  SME  lending  are  contributory  factors  in  interest  rates  for  Irish  SMEs  being  higher  than
9
average interest rates for SMEs operating in other countries in the Eurozone.
8
Nonetheless, there have been improvements in the provision of Irish SME credit in recent years.
Annualised new bank lending to non-financial, non-real-estate SMEs has risen from €2bn in late
2013 to €3.75bn as of the first quarter of this year.
 This recovery has been broad-based across
industrial sectors, but two sectors are predominant: the agricultural and
10
Wholesale, Retail Trade and Repairs sectors account for 42% of the new bank lending.
11
Overall, as reported in the Department of Finance SME Credit Demand Survey, the credit market
has shown a reduction in the application rate for bank financing from March 2012 to March 2017
but has since stabilised and increased moderately in the period to March 2018.
 Demand for
financing  is  most  common  among  medium  size  firms  and  lowest  among  micro  sized  firms
(those with less than 10 employees). The rejection rates shows a steady decline from March
2012 to March 2016 and have stabilised in 2017 and 2018.  The survey also shows micro firms
experience significantly higher rejection rates than other SME types.
12
13
The  range  of  funding  available  to  the  SME  sector  has  expanded  in  recent  years.  The
establishment  of  the  Strategic  Banking  Corporation  of  Ireland  (SBCI)  has  provided  a  further
source of funding to Irish SMEs. Total SBCI loans drawn down from inception to end-March 2018
stood  at  €952  million.
 A  range  of  asset-based  financing  firms,  peer-to-peer  lenders,  invoice
discounters,  leasing  firms  and  other  types  of  non-bank  financiers  have  entered  the  domestic
market  in  recent  years  and  provide  a  significant  potential  alternative  source  of  financing  for
SMEs.
3.Credit Union Sector
14
Credit  unions  play  an  important  role  in  Irish  society  and  in  the  financial  system.  The  role  and
ethos of the sector reflect the primary objectives and purpose of credit unions - to promote thrift
among their members by the accumulation of their savings and the creation of sources of credit
for members' mutual benefit at fair and reasonable interest rates. Our role in relation to credit
unions is reflected in our statutory mandate to regulate with a view to ensuring the protection by
each credit union of the funds of its members and the maintenance of the financial stability and
well-being of the sector.
The Central Bank is supportive of further development of Credit Union business models.  The
consolidation  and  strengthening  of  the  sector  has  seen  improved  standards  in  the  running  of
credit  unions  and  their  financial  resources  but  further  progress  is  required  on  embedding
governance,  risk  management  and  operational  capability.  The  emergence  of  larger  and  more
sophisticated credit unions presents additional opportunities.
Credit  unions  are  already  permitted  to  provide  “commercial”  loans  but  are  not  currently
particularly active in this type of lending. The Central Bank will shortly be consulting on proposed
changes  to  the  lending  framework  for  credit  unions.  The  proposed  revisions  also  provide
increased capacity to engage in both home mortgages and commercial lending for those credit
unions with the financial strength, competence and capability to do so.
Should credit unions wish to become involved in a local public banking model, they will need to
ensure the continued protection of members’ funds and comply with the legislative and regulatory
framework  that applies to credit unions.
15
I hope the above has been useful in terms of the topics that the Committee wishes to discuss.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Department  of  Finance  and  Department  of  Rural  and  Community  Development  Report  on  Local  Banking
available here.
For further information on the role of the SME sector in the Irish Economy. see Address by Philip R. Lane,
Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Irish  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  Association  Annual
Conference 2016, Royal Dublin Society Available here.
See Carroll, James et al (2016) Irish SME Investment in Economic Recovery. In Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly
Bulletin 02, April 2016. Available here. 
See footnote (iii) page 88.
See Central Bank (Supervision and Enforcement) Act 2013 (Section 48) (Lending to Small and Medium Size
Enterprises) Regulations 2015. Available here.
See SME Market Report 2018. Available here.
See footnote (vii) page 1.
See footnote (vii) page 1.
See footnote (vii) page 18. Figure 29.
See footnote (vii) page 2. Figure 1.
See footnote (vii) page 2. Figure 2. The Wholesale, Retail Trade and Repairs sectors includes businesses such
as cash and carry wholesalers, all retail shops and also includes car sales. 
See Department of Finance SME Credit – Demand Survey October 2017 – March 2018 page 1. Available here.
See footnote (xiii) page 59.
See Strategic Bank Corporation of Ireland, 2018 progress update. Available here.
The  Credit  Union  Act,  1997  (‘the  1997  Act’)  and  the  Credit  Union  Act  1997  (Regulatory  Requirements)
Regulations 2016 (‘2016 Regulations’) set out the services that a Credit Union may provide to its members and
the  investments  that  a  Credit  Union  may  undertake  with  members’  funds  taking  account  of  the  overriding
requirement not to put members savings at undue risk.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
