John  Iannis  Mourmouras:  Monetary  policy  and  global  capital
markets - an update
Address by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the
launch of the second edition of his book at the NYU Stern School of Business, New York City, 28
September 2018.
 Introduction
Dear Vice Dean,
Dear President Barroso,
Dear Governor King,
Distinguished panellists and esteemed Professors of NYU, Yale and Princeton,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am very delighted to be here at NYU. I would like first of all to thank Stern Business School for
hosting my book launch event and all the team who worked and made this happen. I am truly
honoured by the presence of Prime Minister Barroso, a true European statesman with a long
tenure as President of the European Commission, the government of the European Union, who
left his mark on Europe in unprecedented and difficult times. He personally worked hard to keep
my country within the eurozone, quite often at a personal cost for him against stiff opposition by a
number  of  core  European  countries.  President  Barroso,  the  whole  Greek  nation,  including
myself, will always be grateful to you for this.
The presence of such a strong panel is a great honour for me as a central banker and academic.
Professor the Lord King, one of the world’s leading central bankers of modern times, among only
a handful, still sets the standards high for all those involved with global monetary affairs, well-
known  also  for  his  passion  for  cricket!  Both  these  two  distinguished  gentlemen,  Barroso  and
King, have something in common: their common feature, although one was in politics and the
other in central banking, is, by pure coincidence, that they both held the top position in their field
for two full successive terms, a total of ten years each, Barroso from 2004 to 2014, and King
from 2003 to 2013, in the same turbulent period. History pays tribute not only to achievements,
what one has done after all during one’s tenure, but also to the longevity of one’s time in office.
I would also like to thank Professor Robert Engle for finding time to be here with us, a leading
figure in finance, a Nobel laureate who has rightfully gained a place in the pantheon of great men
and  women  in  Economics  for  his  work  of  modelling  time-varying  volatility,  his  famous ARCH
model is used extensively not only by academics, but also by analysts of financial markets who
use it in asset pricing and in evaluating portfolio risk.
And  of  course,  I  am  very  grateful  to  the  two  colleagues,  one  from  finance  and  one  from
economics,  Professor  Richardson  and  Professor  White,  both  distinguished  experts  in  their
respective fields, for being here today.
I will focus only on monetary policy and capital markets. I fully subscribe what President Barroso
said in his opening remarks on European developments. He said it all! Instead, I will make a short
reference to my own country, Greece. This is a fortunate moment for my country. After 8 years of
hardship and 3 adjustment programmes, Greece is emerging with renewed optimism from this
difficult time and is finally returning to European normality.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
A. Monetary policy
Global  economic  activity  in  advanced  economies  has  expanded  in  a  robust  manner  in  recent
years, however, due to a persistently low inflation, most of the unconventional tools of monetary
policy are more or less still in place, especially in Europe. To give you an idea of the extraordinary
circumstances that we experienced since 2008, in Britain, the Bank of England’s base rate had
historically remained above 2 per cent for 315 years, from its foundation in 1694 until 2009. It was
in response to the severity of the crisis that Governor King had to cut the base rate below 2 per
cent and to take it even to the level of half a percentage point in March 2009 in an MPC meeting
which also launched the BoE’s QE programme (amounting to $575 billion or 22% of the UK’s
GDP).
Today, although much of the excitement comes from the uncertainty surrounding the timing of
the  expected  rate  hikes  by  the  Fed,  and  developments  in  emerging  economies  (Argentina,
Turkey, etc.), I propose to focus, as a Eurosystem central banker, on ECB’s monetary policy.
The global monetary policy outlook continues to diverge. At one end of the spectrum is the US
Federal Reserve, which is likely to continue to tighten policy (only two days ago we had another
quarter rate hike) ; at the other end, is the People’s Bank of China, likely to keep gradually easing
monetary conditions, and the Bank of Japan, which is expected to stick to its yield curve control
for the foreseeable future. At the same time, the European Central Bank and the Bank of England
are somewhere in the middle. Both seem to want to normalise policy gradually.
In  the  euro  area,  following  21  consecutive  quarters  of  expansion,  including  the  last  five  with
vigorous GDP growth, economic momentum moderated in the first half of the year. The euro
area is expected to grow at a modest rate of 2.1% this year (down from 2.4% in 2017) and to
moderate to 1.9% in 2019.
Headline inflation is forecast to an average of 1.7% over both 2018 and 2019. Core inflation is
estimated  to  remain  around  1%.  Recent  Phillips  curve  analysis  by  the  IMF  indicates  a  strong
backward-looking element in the euro area inflation process, suggesting significant sluggishness
in the face of what will be a positive euro area output gap.
At the Governing Council in Frankfurt two weeks ago, the ECB continued its enhanced forward
guidance  towards  normalisation  of  its  monetary  policy  and  confirmed  that  it  will  reduce  the
monthly pace of its net asset purchases to €15 billion starting next month and until December
2018, and then end them. Up to now, the ECB has bought around €2.5 trillion under the APP
programme. It is estimated that the APP purchases will rise near 23% of euro area’s GDP in
December  2018  [this  compares  to  the  quantitative  easing  programmes  of  the  US  Fed:  $4.2
trillion  or  21%  of  GDP,  of  the  Bank  of  Japan:  $5  trillion  or  97%  of  GDP,  and  of  the  Bank  of
England: $575 billion or 22% of GDP].
So the excitement most likely left for the Governing Council meeting on 25 October, where it is
widely expected that the so-called QE reinvestment policy will be discussed and announced.
Here  are  my  own  insights  on  the  ECB’s  reinvestment  policy.  QE  reinvestments  have  already
started in the euro area. In 2017, the ECB re-purchased about €47 billion this way. With the ECB
conducting only reinvestments, its gross asset purchases will fall from €465 billion in 2018 to
€165 billion in 2019.
The ECB has clarified that during the period of net asset purchases, principal redemptions of
public  sector  securities  will  be  reinvested  in  the  jurisdiction  in  which  the  maturing  bond  was
issued. An open issue remains – and this is my own personal view – that is, whether the ECB
would reinvest maturing bonds introducing a new twist while respecting the capital key?
Let me explain. Maintaining a high maturity would ensure that the term premium and yields for
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
longer-dated bonds stay low. By investing cash from maturing bonds into bonds with a maturity
of,  say,  at  least  ten  years,  such  an  operation  twist  could  be  potentially  useful  during  the
reinvestment period, since it can be used as a vehicle for differential stimulus across countries.
This fine-tuning of the maturity of assets is nothing unprecedented. In 1961, the Fed sold short-
term T-bills and replaced them with longer-dated government bonds, while in the period between
September 2011 and December 2012, the Fed replaced $667 billion in securities with maturities
below three years with longer-dated assets.
In terms of challenges ahead, beyond the reinvestment period i.e. beyond 2020, let me focus on
a pivotal issue.
Question: Is there an optimal central bank’s balance sheet size?
An important issue is how long it will take for the ECB to reduce the balance sheet to its original –
or another predetermined – level. My personal view is that there is no need for the ECB to rush to
reduce the size of its balance sheet, as one needs to take into account the uncertainty created
among  market  participants  and  to  avoid  any  potential  market  disruptions.  There  are  other
(conventional)  tools  to  use  if  tightening  is  deemed  necessary,  including:  raising  interest  rates
even with a large balance sheet, increasing reserve requirements, using reverse repo operations
to  drain  excess  liquidity.  What  is  important  is  to  make  sure  predictability  is  safeguarded  by
presenting  a  normalisation  sequencing  roadmap,  which  allows  the  balance  sheet  to  shrink
passively by holding the assets purchased to maturity. There are pros and cons of a large central
bank  balance  sheet  (from  the  standard  monetarist  argument  that  points  to  excess  liquidity
originating a rapid inflation to financial stability considerations). No matter what this optimal size
is,  it  is  important  for  the  central  bank  to  communicate  with  the  markets  what  will  be  the  new
‘normal’ balance sheet size. In other words, central banks should define clearly the framework, in
which they intend to implement monetary policy at the end of the normalisation period.
Let me now briefly turn to developments in and prospects for financial markets.
B. Global markets
 Our Research and Financial Operations Department and the Asset Management Committee,
which I chair, at the Bank in Athens, share the widely held view that the US dollar will remain
strong in the months ahead [by midyear about 6% above its low point against other currencies in
February], vis-à-vis other major global currencies, while in the fixed income, again the US will
continue to offer one of the highest interest rates in the developed world. For example, US 2-year
Treasury yields are the most attractive among the G10 economies, a situation highly unusual and
unprecedented since the turn of this century. The main driver behind this is US economic policy,
which  –  if  you  allow  me  to  use  a  catch  phrase–  may  be  described  as  follows:  “Fed  up,  with
tariffs”, plus of course the drop in tax rates.
 In the eurozone financial markets, the normalisation of ECB’s monetary policy remains the main
driver of the still fragmented euro area government bond market. The core euro area countries
form a rather homogeneous group; the europeriphery, by contrast, is less homogeneous. The
diversity is due to recent developments in Italy, headed by a fragile, populist coalition government.
Indeed,  as  a  result  of  the  latest  political  turmoil  over  immigration  and  the  budget  debate,  the
Italian  10-year  yield  has  reached  3%  and  remains  in  this  area  since August.  Other  peripheral
countries such as Spain and Portugal remain resilient and contagion remains limited.
Italy is not Greece. It is too big to ignore, as the eurozone’s third largest economy and the world’s
third largest, after the US and Japan, sovereign debt market with total public debt of more than
€2.3  trillion,  of  which  more  than  36%  is  held  by  foreigners,  and  the  political  uncertainty  could
generate severe spillover effects to the global sovereign markets. There is a nightmare scenario
which I do not share, of which markets are of course aware and already factor it in. This political
tit-for-tat  between  the  populist  government  of  Italy  and  Brussels  may  escalate  into  a  genuine
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
diplomatic war (for some people, what is at stake here is the next Italian Prime Minister) and this
would lead to a downgrade of Italy’s credit rating (currently at BBB), and a potential loss of its
investment grade, which would force the ECB not to accept Italian bonds as collateral for the
provision of liquidity and to stop buying Italian government bonds under its PSPP. Taking into
account that QE ends next December, borrowing costs in some euro area countries could surge
to more than 5%, near 2013 levels. The worry then would be that this could perhaps trigger the
next eurozone crisis: a remote, unthinkable scenario. Enter Italy’s most famous personality after
Julius Caesar (as you know, famous for his quote “veni, vidi, vici”), with his world-famous quote,
“whatever it takes”; it is far from clear that the “only game in town” WOULD be enough to save
the euro this time.
Before  closing  with  my  comments  on  my  country,  Greece,  only  a  very  brief  comment  on
populism. Next May’s elections for the new European Parliament are going to be a big test of
populist strength in Europe. If populist/nationalist parties do well next year, they might be setting
the agenda in European politics as an unofficial alliance against pro-European forces. Populism
may have disastrous effects for independent institutions and civil peace.
The rise in populism might have significant effects on growth, as populists opt for protectionist
and  anti-market  measures  and  less  prudent  economic  policies  having  the  potential  to  lead  to
slowing  or  backtracking  of  growth-promoting  reforms.  Lacking  the  pragmatism  of  mainstream
parties, populists risk shifting away from the pro- business, pro-market policies towards some
form of “big government”.
C. Greece
Greece, last month, exited successfully an 8-year strict surveillance period, during which it has
received  about  €240  billion  from  our  European  partners  and  the  IMF  in  the  context  of  three
adjustment programmes. During this period, Greece experienced a dramatic fall in output (more
than 25% in GDP), the unemployment ratio almost tripled from 9% in 2008 to 26% in 2015, a
huge  fall  in  the  standards  of  living  and  valuations  of  assets  (real  and  financial)  and  another
mountain of private debt had been built up (around €220 billion in 7 years). This is not the venue
and time to ask what went wrong in Greece. I have written extensively on this topic with my two
previous hats.
What is more important is that the country is finally out of the woods and we have to make sure
that past mistakes are not repeated and to create the conditions so that the Greek people are in a
position to look into the future with optimism.
Now  that  expectations  have  been  stabilised  and  public  debt  dynamics  are  under  control,  it  is
important  for  the  Greek  authorities  to  focus  on  the  agenda  to  achieve  a  sustainable  return  to
capital markets. I have recently proposed elsewhere what could make such a return feasible in
the near future.
Briefly, (a) No return to the markets can be permanent and hence credible with capital controls
still  imposed  on  the  economy.  The  full  lifting  of  capital  controls,  signalling  also  the  end-date
(which could be Q1 next year) would be the catalyst for the full recovery of trust of depositors, but
also boost investor confidence in the prospects of the economy.
(b) Regaining the investment grade held in 2008 is as important as ensuring debt sustainability.
This should be at the top of Greece’s policy agenda over the next year or so, we are only two
notches far away. Its significance is comparable to meeting the Maastricht nominal criteria that
allowed the country to enter the euro area.
(c)  Given  the  prolonged  fiscal  consolidation  and  private  disinvestment  that  took  place  (2007:
investment was 27% of GDP, today it is 11% of GDP, the lowest level since 1960), the country
needs an investment shock. Reviving domestic and foreign investment is crucial to supporting
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  economic  recovery.  That  is  why  it  is  important  for  the  government  to  speed  up  the
privatisation agenda, not so much as a revenue exercise, but as a great opportunity to attract FDI
in key sectors of the economy, such as transport, energy, logistics and tourism.
I would recall a proposal I made in the summer of 2014, which links reduced primary surplus
targets with a drastic gradual reduction of corporate tax rates in line with the fiercely competitive
corporate tax rates applied by Greece’s neighbours in the Balkans.
If such steps are taken and there is no slackening of effort, no reform fatigue, no complacency,
etc., I am pretty confident that my country will soon no longer bean outlier of the eurozone and
become a normal south European country.
Thank you very much for your attention.
I am really honoured to be here today among such clever people!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
