Donald Joshua Jaganathan: Digitization of remittances for migrant
workers in Malaysia
Welcoming remarks by Mr Donald Joshua Jaganathan, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank
of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Project Greenback 2.0 Kota Kinabalu Dinner, Kota
Kinabalu, 3 November 2018.
 Yang Berbahagia Datuk Yeo Boon Hai, Datuk Bandar, Dewan Bandaraya Kota Kinabalu,
Dr. Firas Raad, Country Manager for Malaysia, World Bank Group,
It is a pleasure for me to be here this evening. On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia, I would like to
express my appreciation to Dewan Bandaraya Kota Kinabalu for hosting Project Greenback 2.0
in  this  beautiful  city;  our  Project  partner,  the  World  Bank,  for  your  continued  support  and
commitment to this important initiative; and to all of you who are gathered here today, for your
hard work and dedication to ensure the Project achieves its objectives. I am also delighted that
we have representatives from Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and Bank Indonesia with us tonight.
Migrant remittances and Project Greenback 2.0
Mr. Juan Somavia, the former Director General of the International Labour Organization based in
Switzerland once said “migrants are an asset to every country, where they bring their labour. Let
us  give  them  the  dignity  they  deserve  as  human  beings  and  the  respect  they  deserve  as
workers”.
Malaysia is a land of opportunity for many. Close to 1.8 million foreign workers, men and women,
have left their loved ones behind to earn better income here. For many, they are simply chasing
the “Malaysian dream”. Often, the money they send home is a critical lifeline for their families.
Malaysia is also a major remittance sending country to other ASEAN nations. Last year, migrant
workers in Malaysia sent 2 billion USD to Indonesia and the Philippines alone. For the recipient
countries, these funds lifted many households out of poverty. In a way, they also supported the
countries’ socio-economic developments.
A new game plan: Digitalisation as gateway to greater financial inclusion
This is where our work in Project Greenback 2.0 comes in. We started Project Greenback here
in  Sabah  8  months  ago,  with  a  new  game  plan  –  digitalisation.  We  considered  the  following
factors – around 70% of the migrants here work in the agriculture and plantation sectors; they are
scattered  across  the  remote  areas;    but  one  good  thing  is  that  majority  of  them  own
smartphones. With this, we knew that it was an opportune time to go all out on digitalisation of
remittance  services.  The  implementation,  however,  will  be  an  uphill  task  because  of  the
geographical barriers we face in East Malaysia.
To ensure we reach out to as many migrants as possible, we collaborated with the plantation
companies  and  organised  remittance  talks  and  fairs  in  the  plantations  themselves.  The
participating  banks  facilitated  the  migrants  to  open  bank  accounts;  and  remittance  service
providers taught the migrants how to register and to use their e-remittance services. We also
encouraged the plantation companies to pay the migrants’ salaries into their bank accounts to
eliminate the use of cash for remittance transactions. Of course, digitalisation would not work
without  good  internet  connections.  We,  therefore,  engaged  Malaysian  Communications  and
Multimedia  Commission  (MCMC)  on  possibility  of  boosting  internet  connections  in  the  areas
where we held the Greenback activities. With digitalisation, migrants can now send money home
anywhere, anytime. This eliminates the need to travel great distance to the nearest town, which
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
can be costly and risky at times. The Project team experienced first-hand the numerous logistical
challenges just to get into the plantations. A single journey can take about a 3-hour drive from
town.
Today, I am happy to note that Project Greenback in Sabah has produced encouraging results. 
We have sensitised close to 5,000 individuals.
More than 1,600 of them have registered to use e-remittance channels.
A  total  of  RM6.9  million  equivalent  worth  of  remittances  were  sent  from  Sabah  using  e-
channels.
The  most  encouraging  result  is  that  average  remittance  cost  in  Sabah  has  reduced
significantly, to below 3%. 8 months ago, it was much higher.
Although there is much to be done to increase the numbers, the outcomes are testament that
our hard work and perseverance have paid off. We have reached an important milestone and this
tells us that technology can be the gateway to financial inclusion. Technology has the potential to
be a game changer.
Industry players need to step up to next level to enhance consumer experience
The Project Greenback initiative in Sabah will lay a strong foundation for industry players to take
the digitalization agenda to the next level. We must remember that disruptive technologies can
radically change the way things are done. The old ways may not work anymore. Consumers are
increasingly looking for convenience, speed, and low cost remittance services. Most importantly,
they are looking for service providers they can trust. Competition is getting more intense.
To illustrate this, let me share with you a CNN article on Amazon Go. Amazon Go is the future of
retail  shopping.  You  can  walk  into  the  convenience  store,  grab  what  you  need,  and  you  will
receive a message that your credit card is charged for your purchase. The question is, what will
be the future of the remittance sector?
For  the  industry  players, y o u can  re-shape  the  remittance  landscape.  Use  technology  to
eliminate  the  major  pain  points  in  remittance,  to  better  understand  consumer  behavior  and
needs,  and  to  offer  consumers  a  positive  remittance  experience  from  the  start.  Within  the
migrant communities, words travel fast. We know that word-of-mouth is the most effective form
of  marketing.  Although  I  believe  that  the  brick-and-mortar  stores  are  here  to  stay  with
digitalization, the savings incurred from not having to pay for overheads can translate to lower
remittance costs for consumers. Ultimately, when there is greater use of authorised remittance
channels, we can reduce remittances that are transferred through illegal operators.
Currently,  we  have  21  remittance  service  providers  offering  digital  remittance  services,  more
than double the number 3 years ago. With the implementation electronic know-your-customer or
e-KYC, consumers will be able to experience end-to-end digital remittance transactions. These
are positive and exciting developments happening in our remittance market.
Better public-private sector alliance to strengthen compliance
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  continue  to  work  closely  with  the  industry  to  promote  financial
inclusion and this will be done primarily through the digitalization of remittance. Regulators also
need to keep up with the times. We are taking a different approach this time – from ‘regulator
instruct, industry do’ and ‘regulator knows best’, to creation of public-private sector alliance. It is
vital  to  leverage  on  each  other’s  strengths  and  resources,  not  only  to  reap  the  benefits  of
technology, but also to overcome the emerging threats. We are all in this together.
Greater  harmonisation  of  regulatory  framework  on  the  remittance  industry  at  the  regional  and
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
global levels is required to increase consistency in standards and reduce regulatory burdens on
industry players. As a start, we have shared with other central banks on how we regulate the
money services industry in Malaysia. This includes the transformation journey of MSB industry in
Malaysia, our approach to innovation and technology, as well as monitoring of the whole industry.
I believe that in the long term, harmonisation of rules will also foster innovation and spur regional
expansion  amongst  industry  players,  while  upholding  the  highest  ethical  and  professional
standards.
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude  with  the  words  of  Nobel  Laureate  George  Bernard  Shaw  –  “Progress  is
impossible without change, and those who cannot change their minds cannot change anything”.
Project  Greenback  has  initiated  a  change  in  Sabah’s  remittance  landscape.  Let  us  keep  the
momentum  going.  Sabah can  be  the  model  state  to  promote  the  use  of  technology  for
remittance. Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, in particular, is exploring to implement a similar initiative
in the Philippines and we would be happy to share our experience.
On that note, I wish you a fruitful event tomorrow.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
