   Remarks by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the Finovate Conference 
The Westin Cape Town, Cape Town 
27 November 2018 
 Fintech: reflections on the phenomenon and its future potential 
 
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
There is no doubt that we are facing a period of rapid technological advancement and 
innovative  disruption,  not  least  in  the  area  of  financial  services,  with  financial 
technology (fintech) likely to disrupt and redefine both payments and banking value 
chains. 
 
Given these rapid advancements of fintech, I would like to focus my remarks on two 
areas. 
 
The  first  is  an  appraisal,  from  a  central  banking  perspective,  on  the  fintech 
phenomenon, given that we as the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) have been 
closely observing what has been happening in this space. 
 
Second,  I  would  like  to  reflect  on  fintech’s  potential  to  advance  our  South  African 
migration towards a digital economy by reviewing some select examples from a few 
countries. I firmly believe that fintech has the potential to meaningfully contribute to 
the growth of our economy. 
 
 
  Page 1 of 9 
Fintech: 10 years on 
 
It  has  been  10 years  since  Satoshi Nakomoto  published  his  famous  paper  titled 
‘Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system’. The paper was both timely and ironic, 
in that we had just begun to experience the impact and unintended consequences of 
innovation  in  financial  services  that  had  largely  escaped  the  regulatory  radar. 
Over-the-counter derivatives such as credit default swaps exposed the impact of the 
types of innovation where there are information asymmetries, misaligned incentives 
and  opportunistic  behaviour,  highlighting  what  can  go  wrong  systemically  when 
financial  engineering  and  innovation  is  not  subjected  to  appropriate  regulatory 
oversight. 
 
The results included failure by lenders to robustly assess whether borrowers had the 
ability  to  meet  their  obligations.  Furthermore,  risk  transfer  through  the  so-called 
originate-to-distribute  models  resulted  in  severe  consequences,  amplified  by  the 
interconnectedness of our financial system. Yet, the solutions that are so often touted 
by  proponents  of  an  alternative  to  the  ‘traditional’  financial  system  suggest  that 
peer-to-peer exchange largely outside of the regulatory purview is the way to prevent 
future financial crises. 
 
So,  what  have  we  observed  as  central  bankers  as  we  critically  reflect  on  what’s 
happened over the last decade? And how can these insights assist us as we move 
towards an efficient and safe digital economy? 
 
The three defining fintech trends: teaming up, new threats, and trials by central 
banks 
 
I have three observations from the perspective of central bankers related to fintech 
trends. I position these as ‘the 3 Ts’: teaming up among authorities, the new threats 
arising from fintech, and lastly trials by central banks. 
 
 
  Page 2 of 9 
Teaming up 
 
First, the fintech phenomenon has brought central banking and the larger regulatory 
community closer in working together on analysing and appraising new innovations. 
We have a long history of working together. This collaboration is strengthened as a 
result  of  the  nature  of  the  technology-inspired  innovations  not  bound  by  physical 
topographies. This is the age of platforms. These can be centralised, as in the case of 
online peer-to-peer lending or some mobile payment platforms. Platforms can also be 
decentralised and distributed, as in the case of crypto-assets and initial coin offerings. 
They can scale with ease using technology such as cloud-computing, and adoption 
across geographies can happen rapidly. Some can on-board customers due to their 
digital on-boarding in a matter of minutes. Download an app, upload your payment 
details, and you could be hailing a taxi anywhere in the world. 
 
Collaborating and working together to understand the impact of innovations that can 
scale  services  across  borders  is  important  to  ensure  that  there  are  harmonised 
approaches and that a regulatory ‘race to the bottom’ is prevented. This collaboration 
by  central  bankers  through  bodies  such  as  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements 
(BIS), the Financial Stability Board, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the 
World  Bank  has  produced  significant  analysis  in  the  fields  of  crypto-tokens, 
central-bank-issued digital currencies (CBDCs), artificial intelligence and distributed 
ledger technologies, to name a few. There have also been contributions on fintech 
more broadly, raising awareness of the fact that fintech is not just crypto-assets. Such 
work  has  also  drawn  out  both  the  monetary  policy  and  the  financial  stability 
implications of fintech innovation and the issues that merit regulatory attention. 
 
So, as central banks, we have not been sitting idle in the face of these technological 
advancements. Whereas in the past regulators often played catch-up, this time around 
it is noticeable that regulators have adopted a far more collaborative and proactive 
approach. We see partnerships like Project Stella between the Bank of Japan and the 
European Central Bank exploring the impact of distributed ledgers. Just recently, the 
Bank  of  Canada,  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  and  the  Bank  of  England 
released a report on alternative models that could enhance cross-border payments 
 Page 3 of 9 
and settlements.1 This teaming up and collaboration will stand us collectively in good 
stead  as  robust  analysis  is  conducted  on  complex  issues,  not  least  due  to  the 
cross-border implications of many of these developments. 
 
In  South  Africa,  a  FinTech  Unit  has  been  established  within  the  SARB.  National 
Treasury,  along  with  the  SARB,  the  Financial  Sector  Conduct  Authority  and  the 
Financial  Intelligence  Centre  (FIC),  have  jointly  established  an  Intergovernmental 
Fintech  Working  Group.  These  are  evidence  of  the  importance  being  attached  to 
staying close to and leveraging the fintech phenomenon. 
 
And  this  will  continue  to  happen  in  a  responsible  and  proactive  manner.  We  will 
continue to strive to keep abreast of fintech developments and endeavour to apply a 
balanced analysis to the fintech phenomenon, thus contributing towards a conducive 
environment  in  which  fintech,  regtech  and  suptech  can  thrive  in  support  of  our 
country’s progress and economic development for the benefit of all South Africans. 
 
New threats 
 
My second observation is that it has become clear to central bankers that the fintech 
phenomenon is not a passing fad and that it does hold significant transformational 
potential. 
 
However, while there may be benefits, new risks may also manifest. On the positive 
side, fintech firms are often obsessed with being customer-centric, focusing on the 
needs and pains of the customer, and providing simplified, convenient, on-demand 
digital  services.  As  has  been  noted  by  Professors  Chuen  and  Teo,  given  their 
‘legacy-free  and  asset-lite’  operating  models,  fintech  firms  can  innovate  speedily 
through agile approaches.2 And while there are inefficiencies in any financial service 
value chain, fintech firms can address these by applying exponential technologies and 
finding new and innovative ways of providing services. 
 
                       
1 http://www.mas.gov.sg/News-and-Publications/Media-Releases/2018/Assessment-on-emerging-opportunities-
for-digital-transformation-in-cross-border-payments.aspx 
2 H  M  Treasury,  2016,  UK  FinTech,  ‘On  the  cutting  edge:  an  evaluation  of  the  international  FinTech  sector’, 
available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-fintech-on-the-cutting-edge  
 Page 4 of 9 
On the other hand, new threats can be introduced through fintech-inspired innovations. 
Loans can be issued in a matter of minutes using, for example, new scoring techniques 
by fintech platforms. They leverage social media and apply new techniques such as 
network analysis, sentiment analysis and natural language processing to unstructured 
data sources to assess default risks differently. 
 
However,  in  applying  new  artificial  intelligence  and  machine-learning  techniques, 
concerns arise about the reliability, validity and transparency of the decision-making 
process. What goes on inside the so-called ‘black box’ of new computational learning 
algorithms?  We  have  all  heard  about  the  significant  failures  of  Internet  finance 
companies  such  as  Ezubao  in  China.  Ezubao  had  been  set  up  as  an  online 
peer-to-peer lending scheme in July 2014. It attracted funds of about 50 billion yuan 
(US$7.6 billion) from 900 000 investors. It ceased to trade in December 2015, just a 
year and a half later.3 We have to be vigilant of the new threats that may arise as a 
result of the application of novel technologies. 
 
Turning  to  other  innovations  such  as  crypto-assets,  there are  numerous  examples 
over the last few years of exchanges being hacked and invested funds being lost. As 
has been reported to the Japanese regulator, 5 966 bitcoins were stolen and hackers 
managed  to  steal  5 billion yen  (about  US$44.5 million)  of  crypto-tokens.4 We  have 
recently seen increased attention by South Korean and Japanese regulators to this 
domain as a result of these ever-increasing cyber-incidents. With initial coin offerings, 
the lack of clarity and transparency, with numerous White Papers attempting to raise 
funds quickly through token sales, is another area of concern. 
 
So  while  these  new  business  models  may  bring  benefits,  their  longevity  may  be 
challenged if financial, business and/or operational risks materialise. The provision of 
financial services is a heavily regulated industry. The main reason for this is not just 
the  protection  of  consumers.  As  services  and  systems  evolve  and  become  more 
interconnected, the spillover effects of risks to the financial sector and ultimately to the 
real economy increase. We’ve seen these contagion issues during the global financial 
crisis. I would therefore encourage that our assessment of both the potential and the 
                       
3 Gough Neil, 1 February 2016, The New York Times 
4 https://cointelegraph.com/news/japanese-cryptocurrency-exchange-hacked-59-million-in-losses-reported  
 Page 5 of 9 
new risks be both honest and realistic. And while innovators put forth the benefits of 
their innovations, let’s engage in a truthful and sober reflection on the familiar and new 
threats being introduced.  
 
Trials by central banks 
 
My third observation is that central banks are not immune to the impact of fintech. Our 
role  as  operator  or  provider  of particular  services,  as  well  as  how  we  conduct  our 
supervisory roles, will be affected by the advancement of exponential technologies. 
 
On  the  provision  of  services,  such  as  a  platform  for  high-value  payments  typically 
processed  through  a  real-time  gross  settlement  system,  we  have  seen  waves  of 
experimentation  by  central  banks.  Projects  such  as  Jasper  in  Canada,  Ubin  in 
Singapore, and our own Project Khokha have been initiated to understand the impact 
of new technologies on such service provision. Some of these projects are in their third 
phase, trialling securities and cross-border payments on a blockchain. Other central 
banks,  such  as  the  Swedish  Riksbank  and  the  Bank  of  Uruguay,  have  already 
experimented  with  CBDCs,  or  are  considering  a  more 
retail-focused  or 
general-purpose CBDC.  
 
Of course, as each of these central banks has noted, the issues are much broader 
than just technological considerations. The policy considerations are weighty. As the 
BIS has indicated, careful consideration needs to be given to the impact on financial 
intermediation and financial  stability,  and to  the unintended  consequences  of  such 
solutions.  
 
To stay on the front foot, so to speak, the SARB is considering hosting a focused 
workshop on CBDCs in the coming year. We aim to attract the world’s leading thinkers 
on the topic to inform our own policy thinking on CBDCs. Also, several stakeholders 
are enquiring about Project Khokha’s Phase 2, and many have submitted suggestions. 
We  are  giving  careful  consideration  to  all  of  this,  and  hope  to  make  a  definitive 
announcement early next year. 
 
 
  Page 6 of 9 
Conclusion: the fintech potential going forward (digitally) 
 
To conclude, I’d like to share a few thoughts on the potential of fintech, looking forward. 
 
The emergence of fintech, the Fourth Industrial Revolution and the continuing shift 
from an industrial to a digital economy affords us, as a country, the opportunity to 
leverage these innovations towards lifting the growth potential of our economy. There 
are anecdotal estimates that such efforts could contribute 0.5 - 1.5% to gross domestic 
product (GDP). 
 
Digitisation, for example, has reshaped financial services in countries such as China, 
Estonia  and  Singapore.  Less  than  a  decade  ago,  the  Chinese  e-commerce  retail 
transaction value accounted for less than 1% of the global value. This figure has risen 
to nearly 40% today and, in 2016, mobile payments for goods and services in China 
totalled US$790 billion – 11 times more than in the United States. Research by the 
IMF shows that a 1 percentage point growth in the digitisation of China’s economy is 
associated with a 0.3 percentage point growth in its GDP. 
 
Estonia is a small country, with minimal natural resources, but it is leading the charge 
in embracing digital enablers across various sectors. An astounding 99% of Estonian 
companies are established online, reducing the time it takes to establish a business 
from 5 days to 18 minutes. In Estonia, 97% of healthcare patients have country-wide 
accessible digital records, with 99% of all prescriptions issued digitally. At least 2% of 
Estonia’s GDP is saved due to the collective use of digital signatures.  
 
In Singapore, citizens have the ability to store their basic identification such as their 
unique identification number, name, gender, age etc. electronically on a one-stop data 
repository  known  as  MyInfo.  This  enables  faster  completion  of  online  information 
requirements such as e-Government or banking services.  
 
The  examples  from  China,  Estonia  and  Singapore  demonstrate  the  potential  of 
technological innovation and fintech. If South Africa had to adopt a similar technology, 
it could be used to administer social grants and could potentially result in significant 
 Page 7 of 9 
cost  savings.  A  further  application  could  see  the  simplification  and  streamlining  of 
compliance with the FIC Act.  
 
As the SARB, we have kept a close eye on fintech developments as we appreciate 
the developmental potential they hold. There is, for example, sufficient evidence to 
suggest that the pursuance of common infrastructure such as digital identity platforms, 
or basic citizen demographics being housed digitally (such as MyInfo in Singapore), 
can promote progress towards electronic transactions and financial inclusion.  
 
In  India,  their  unified  payments  interface  allows  one  to  make  payments  simply  by 
knowing a person’s unique yet simple proxy address.5  
 
All these capabilities have demonstrated that digital authentication platforms form the 
foundation for other financial services. In moving towards a digital economy, identifying 
new threats, including cyberspace threats, becomes increasingly important. This is 
why  two-factor  authentication  is  mandatory  in  many  jurisdictions  for  transactions 
performed online, as is the case for transactions in South Africa. A national digital 
identity  platform  enables  multi-factor  authentication  and  reduces  the  cost  for  each 
provider doing so on their own.  
 
In closing, fintech holds great potential which can meaningfully lift the growth potential 
of our economy and significantly improve efficiencies. To nurture this technology, we 
would, however, need to be alive to the new threats that it may introduce. Hence, we 
need to team up and collaborate, especially given the cross-border implications of 
many of these services.  
 
Furthermore, as the SARB, we are committed to ensuring that we make a concerted 
effort to understand technological changes in an effort to regulate smartly. We will 
continue to conduct further trials. We will also continue to create an ever more enabling 
environment by creating innovation facilitators.  
 
                       
5  E.g. ‘francois@abc’ 
 Page 8 of 9 
As a central bank, we are therefore committed to contributing and being part of this 
journey towards a more inclusive and digitally enabled economy while ensuring that 
financial stability is maintained. 
 
Thank you. 
 Page 9 of 9 
