    Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Banca d’Italia 
Post crisis financial regulation: 
Experiences from the two sides of the Atlantic 
Keynote address by Valeria Sannucci 
Deputy Governor of Banca d’Italia 
New York, 30 November 2018 
     Ten years have passed since the default of Lehman Brothers, which was 
a turning point in the global financial crisis that had started earlier on, in the 
summer of 2007. The crisis spread rapidly from the structured products market 
linked to US subprime mortgages to all financial markets, and ultimately to 
the real economy, sparking the worst global recession since World War II. 
The policy  makers’ reaction to these extraordinary developments was 
quick  and  remarkably  well-coordinated.  Central  banks  around  the  world 
rapidly lowered official interest rates, and injected liquidity in unprecedented 
quantities and through a wide range of monetary policy instruments. Fiscal 
policies became expansionary and supportive of the real and financial sectors, 
and more serious negative consequences were avoided. 
Although some of the long-lasting consequences of those events are still 
apparent today in many economies – in Italy, for instance, GDP as of last 
December was still 5 per cent lower than in 2007 – a decade later we are finally 
exiting from the exceptional policy measures taken since then. Central banks 
in the major advanced economies have gradually started to normalize their 
monetary policy stance, albeit with different timing reflecting the differences 
in cyclical conditions across the major economies. 
The response to the crisis has led to important changes in the rules of 
the game for banks and financial firms, which are the subject of the analyses 
presented in the two workshop sessions today. In the immediate aftermath of 
the crisis, the G20 Leaders established the Financial Stability Board (FSB), 
building upon its predecessor, the Financial Stability Forum, to promote the 
repairing of the financial system through a broad agenda of reforms of the 
international regulatory framework. The  reforms were intended  to address 
the imbalances that had gradually been accumulating in the global financial 
system  well  before  2007,  by  strengthening  the  resilience  of  financial 
intermediaries, markets and infrastructures, tackling moral hazard issues and 
reducing procyclicality in the financial system. In particular, for institutions 
which pose systemic risks, reforms were aimed at enhancing their capacity 
to absorb shocks and, in the event of failures, making their resolution easier. 
To date, substantial progress has been made towards a more stable and 
resilient global financial system. First, banks’ capital has been substantially 
increased, and ad hoc capital buffers have been built by systemically important 
banks. Second, banks’ liquidity positions have also been strengthened with 
the introduction of rules such as the Liquidity Coverage Ratio and the Net 
Stable  Funding  Ratio.  Third,  the  vulnerability  of  the  financial  system  to 
contagion  on  a  global  scale  has  been  curtailed,  by  providing  incentives to 
clear over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives centrally. And fourth, the market 
for complex and opaque securitizations – a form of financial intermediation 
which  played  an  important  role  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis  –  has  virtually 
disappeared. In Europe, new rules have been approved in order to promote 
simple, transparent, and standardized securitizations.1 However, cases such 
as the recent strong growth of the collateralized loan obligation  market in 
the United States need to be kept under strict scrutiny to avoid repeating past 
errors. 
In spite of such progress, significant challenges remain ahead of us and 
we must maintain the momentum of reform. 
A  significant  source  of  potential  vulnerability  concerns  the  non-bank 
financial sector. Post-crisis reforms of the regulatory framework have been 
much less advanced in this sector than in the banking sector. Perhaps also 
as a consequence of this, the share of non-bank financial intermediation has 
grown seamlessly since the end of the last decade, with non-bank financial 
intermediaries  often  performing  functions  typically  carried  out  by  banks, 
without  being  subject  to  comparably  stringent  regulation  and  supervision. 
According to the Financial Stability Board, at the end of 2016, non-bank fi- 
nancial intermediaries held $160 trillion in total assets, about one and a half 
times the level at the end of 2008, while over the same period banks’ assets 
have risen only marginally. The non-bank financial intermediaries perform- 
ing bank-like functions in 2016 held $45 trillion of assets. The asset manage- 
ment industry, the largest sector of non-banking intermediation, has almost 
doubled in size over the past decade. 
The  growth  of  non-bank  financial  intermediation  is  increasing  the 
sources of finance for the economy, reducing dependence on bank lending 
1 
Regulation (EU) 2017/2402 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2017 lays 
down a general framework for securitization and creates a specific framework for simple, transparent 
and standardized securitization. 
4 
     and  strengthening  the  financial  system’s  resilience.  In  this  respect,  it  is  a 
welcome complement to bank intermediation, in particular in many European 
economies, including Italy, which have traditionally been characterized by 
a bank-centric financial system, with limited room for market-based finance 
and non-bank financial intermediaries. 
At the same time, we cannot neglect the risks it may create for financial 
stability.  Some  risks  are  similar  to  those  faced  by  banks,  as  non-bank 
financial  institutions are  also  exposed  to  risks related  to  liquidity/maturity 
transformation and leverage.2
 
Other risks, however, are of a different nature. The spread of high-frequency, 
quantitative/automated trading and passive management strategies contributes 
to  making  the  highly  concentrated  asset  management  industry  vulnerable 
to  procyclical  behaviour,  which  in  turn  has  the  potential  to  amplify  market 
reactions to macroeconomic news, sometimes in destabilizing ways. A case in 
point is what happened at the beginning of last February, when some apparently 
innocuous news on US wage growth led to a stock market crash, with a sudden 
unwinding  of  crowded  trades,  and  hugely  negative  consequences  for  some 
market players (who had bet on low volatility). Fire sales and contagion can 
take place during this kind of events, which could end up having unsettling 
effects on financial stability, to the extent that they could threaten the resilience 
of financial intermediaries. 
Other significant developments that need to be monitored closely due 
to possible financial stability implications concern technology and financial 
innovation. The profound changes in financial technology are enabling new 
institutions,  often  operating  outside  the  banking  system,  as  well  as  large 
technology  corporations  to  offer  services  which  challenge  the  traditional 
role of bank intermediaries. These changes blur the distinction between the 
financial and technology sectors, raise questions concerning the perimeter of 
current financial regulation, and give rise to new risks, such as those deriving 
from an increasing dependency on third-party service providers. 
As  the  adoption  of  digital  technologies  for  the  provision  of  financial 
services spreads, policy makers need to continue monitoring the risks from 
a  financial  stability  perspective,  and  consider  whether  FinTech  should  be 
2  A  preliminary  initiative  on  this  front  is  the  FSB  Policy  Recommendations  to  Address  Structural 
Vulnerabilities from Asset Management Activities, 12 January 2017. 
5 
      regulated, who the regulator should be, and what type of regulation would be 
appropriate. In addressing these issues, we should be guided by the principle 
of  ‘same  business,  same  risks,  same  rules’.  In  Italy,  the  banking  law  has 
recently been updated in order to bring the regulatory framework for finance 
companies,  investment  firms  and  other  non-bank  finance  intermediaries 
more in line with the regime applicable to banks.3  The rationale behind this 
reform was, among other things, to avoid new forms of potential regulatory 
arbitrage  stemming  from  the  differences  in  the  regulatory  frameworks  for 
institutions with similar types of business. 
A  related  area  is  that  of  crypto-assets.  Their  financial  stability 
implications are currently limited given the size of the market, as observed 
by  the  FSB  report  published  in  October.  However,  this  assessment  could 
change over time, as suggested by some experiences, such as the very large 
swings in their prices, the very rapid expansion in some countries of initial 
coin  offerings,4 the  growth  of  crypto-asset  exchanges,  and  the  emergence 
of  crypto-asset  funds,  futures  and  similar  financial  products.  Wider  use 
and  greater  interconnectedness  with  the  core  financial  system  could  pose 
financial  stability  risks if  they  occurred without  material  improvements  in 
the resilience of crypto-asset markets. 
To support a timely identification of emerging financial stability risks 
and to explore the possible policy options to pre-empt the build-up of risk 
and  to  ring-fence  the  financial  system  if  risks  from  crypto-assets  become 
significant, a strengthening of the analysis of the crypto-asset market structure 
is necessary. 
Yet the challenges that are facing us today are not only about dealing 
with  the  new  risks  (and  opportunities)  of  financial  innovation.  After  the 
intense, prolonged reform effort, we need to ensure that the new framework is 
effectively implemented, thereby providing regulatory certainty and stability 
so that the financial system can operate in support of economic growth. 
3  The reform is based on Legislative Decree 141/2010, which amended the TUB (Consolidated Law on 
Banking); it was completed by Ministerial Decree 53/2015, which identified the activities subject to 
reserve. Supervisory regulations for financial intermediaries and groups of financial intermediaries are 
set out in Banca d’Italia Circular No. 288 of 3 April 2015. 
Initial  coin  offerings  (ICOs)  are  public  offerings  of  crypto-assets  in  exchange  for  sovereign  fiat 
currencies or popular private crypto-currencies (e.g. bitcoin) through which companies raise capital to 
fund the early stage development of projects or businesses. ICOs are conceptually analogous to initial 
public offerings for stocks. 
4 
6 
     A  key  issue  concerns  the  need  for  consistent  implementation  by  all 
jurisdictions,  in  order  to  prevent  fragmentation  of  the  financial  system.  In 
principle, rules commonly agreed upon by the FSB and the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision (BCBS) should lead to a more stable and resilient 
financial  sector  and  to  a  better  integrated  financial  system.  However, 
differences  in  reform  implementation  across    countries    might    increase 
the  fragmentation  of  financial  systems.  An  example  taken  from  banking 
supervision concerns ring-fencing practices adopted by host authorities on 
banks’  international  branches.  This  is  rational  from  the  single  regulator’s 
perspective but could lead to more fragmented global banking and liquidity. 
Hence,  efforts  should  also  be  made  in  the  direction  of  assessing  reform 
implementation, with the aim of achieving a more homogenous application 
of the agreed rules across regions, including through truly open cooperation 
and coordination. 
The  large  scale  of  the  post-crisis  reforms  requires  a  thorough  and 
honest  assessment  of  their  effects  and  of  the  possible  implementation 
challenges. Work on this front is ongoing in several forums. The FSB has 
recently prepared two different reports to evaluate the effects of reforms on 
infrastructure finance and on incentives to clear OTC derivatives centrally. 
A  new  project  has  been  started  to  assess  the  effects  of  reforms  on  SME 
financing and another is planned to evaluate the implications of the reforms 
aimed  at  addressing  the  systemic  and  moral  hazard  risks  associated  with 
global systemically important banks (G-SIBs). The FSB is also planning an 
initiative to explore ways to address the risk of market fragmentation. 
Reform  evaluations  naturally  entail  an  appraisal  of  their  unintended 
consequences. For instance, analyses of the effect of the leverage ratio on 
banks’  provision  of  client  clearing  services  have  been  carried  out  by  the 
Financial Stability Board together with the relevant standard-setting bodies, 
and  are  informing  the  ongoing  effort  by  policy-makers  to  improve  the 
regulatory framework. 
Implementation  challenges  can  also  arise  in  relation  to  what  I  see 
as  a  trade-off  between  the  ex-ante  desire  for  perfection  and  the  ex-post 
effectiveness of new regulations. Let me give you two examples. 
We  have  had  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD) 
in  Europe  since  2014.  In  the  spirit  of  the  Key  Attributes  for  Resolution 
Regimes agreed by the FSB, this directive aims to strengthen and harmonize 
7 
     bank  crisis  management in  the  EU,  as  well  as to  minimize  the  cost  to  the 
taxpayers.  Among  other  provisions,  the  new  directive  sets  a  ‘minimum 
requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities’ (MREL) – similar to the 
Total Loss-absorbing Capacity (TLAC) requirement for global systemically 
important banks – to ensure that, in the event of resolution, banks will have 
sufficient  own  funds  and  other  liabilities  to  absorb  losses  and  reconstitute 
capital.  At  the  same  time,  its  introduction  could  substantially  raise  bank 
funding costs and reduce bank lending. While estimates of these costs are 
highly uncertain, there are risks of a non-negligible impact on GDP growth. 
Banca  d’Italia  has  stressed  the  need  to  alleviate  the  adverse  effects  of  the 
rules  on  banks’  loss-absorbing  liabilities  by  ensuring  that  the  amount  and 
quality of funds are proportionate to the actual demands of the resolution, 
and that the transition period is long enough to allow the banks to build up 
the requirement gradually. Yet when looking at the initial experiences with 
the application of the new bank resolution regime in Europe, it is clear that 
more flexibility in applying the available tools would help make the crisis 
management  framework  more  effective  in  dealing  with  problem  banks.  A 
useful lesson in this regard can be that of the United States, where flexibility 
and  pragmatism  are  key  ingredients  of  the  policy  decisions  in  this  realm. 
However, for the lesson to be learned, the members of the European Union 
–  a  relatively  young  union  –  need  to  reinforce  mutual  trust,  which  is  the 
essential glue of any union, but that nevertheless has recently been weakened 
more  than  once.  All  in  all,  implementation  challenges  could  well  lead  to 
some regulations being reconsidered. 
A second example of the trade-off between an ex-ante desire for perfection 
and  ex-post  effectiveness  is  given  by  looking  at  specific  components  of 
the  banks’  capital.  Capital  is  a  key  element  of  bank  regulation  and  it  has 
therefore been a main target of the post-crisis reform, as will be discussed 
in the second session of today’s workshop. A major innovation of Basel III 
is  the  possibility  granted  to  banks  to  compute  the  Contingent  Convertible 
bonds  (CoCos)  as  ‘Additional  Tier  1’  capital.  The  favourable  regulatory 
treatment of this instrument has spurred a very strong growth in the CoCo 
market in Europe. However, while CoCos are designed to strengthen bank 
solvency  on  a  going  concern  basis,  their  use  may  ultimately  come  at  the 
cost of increasing financial stability risks. Recent research by Banca d’Italia5
 
5  Bologna, P., Miglietta, A., and Segura A., Contagion in the CoCos market? A case study of two stress 
events. Banca d’Italia Working Papers (Temi di Discussione), 1201, November 2018. 
8 
   has shown that the adverse dynamics of the CoCo market that occurred in 
2016  following  worrying  news  about  an  issuer  cannot  only  be  explained 
by the banks’ fundamentals and hence that CoCos might in fact themselves 
be  a  source  of  financial  instability.  Although  some  of  the  instability  may 
have been transitory, the analysis suggests that this market should be closely 
monitored and that authorities may need to rethink the role of CoCos, should 
they prove unable to provide for a smooth bank recapitalization. 
This  brings  me  to  my  final remark.  There  is  a  concrete  risk  of  losing 
the  reform  momentum  and  conceding  ground  to  calls  that  are  not  always 
disinterested and to mounting pressure to roll back the existing regulations. 
As  recently  pointed  out  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  this  pressure 
should  be  resisted.  We  need  to  learn  from  the  past.  Each  and  every  time 
either regulation or supervision has become lax, excessive risks have been 
taken and leverage has increased, often leading to abrupt and recessionary 
swings in the financial cycle. So, during economic expansions we should be 
aware of the possible illusory perception of things looking more benign than 
they actually are. 
To conclude, central banks have emerged from the trial of the financial 
crisis  with  a  strengthened  responsibility  in  the  area  of  financial  stability, 
which needs to be honoured. High quality analyses and meetings like this 
one  represent  a  unique  opportunity  to  compare  experiences  and  continue 
the  debate,  thus  helping  policy  makers  to  carry  out  their  mandate  more 
effectively. 
9 
     Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy 
