Ahmed Naseer: The need to regulate virtual currency
Keynote speech by Mr Ahmed Naseer, Governor of the Maldives Monetary Authority, at the 5th
Maldives Islamic Banking &amp; Finance Industry Conference, Malé, 27 November 2018.
 Chairperson,  Distinguished  Speakers,  Distinguished  guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen, Assalam
Alaikum. Good Morning.
I am deeply honored to speak at this important and significant Conference, one which is very
relevant and important in the development of the financial sector of the Maldives. As the regulator
of banks, and financial institutions in the country, Maldives Monetary Authority is grateful to the
organizers of this Conference, and congratulate you all for completing five years of this series.
MMA is proud to be a partner in promoting and developing Islamic finance in the Maldives, and
assure you that we will continue this journey together with all our stake holders.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
Bitcoin, the world’s first cryptocurrency (or virtual currency), long obscured with a reputation as a
fringe economic phenomenon, has gone mainstream. The skyrocketing price in late 2017 has
made Bitcoin a household name. Proposed in a 2008 white paper by software developer Satoshi
Nakomoto, Bitcoin was an attempt to enable peer-to-peer “electronic cash” as an alternative to
conventional banking in the wake of the global financial crisis. When released in 2009, the virtual
currency had a value of less than one U.S. penny per “coin.” However, just nine years later, one
bitcoin  reached  $  17,900  in  the  middle  of  December  2017,  and  the  cryptocurrency’s  market
capitalization is now over $200 billion.
One might think this as a normal product circle, but the reality is, cryptocurrency has been a
favorable  payment  instrument  over  the  decade. And  the  usage  of  cryptocurrencies  will  be  as
common as the use of normal bank notes and payment instruments. Just recently, Canada’s
first Bitcoin-backed loan has been issued during the first week of November this year.
It  is  not  a  false  assumption  that  some  of  the  Maldivians  even  own  cryptocurrencies  such  as
Bitcoin. We have already seen some business entities even trying to introduce cryptocurrency
wallets into Maldives. It is just a matter of time before someone starts mining cryptocurrency in
the Maldives. Therefore, it would be unwise not to consider the emergence of cryptocurrency in
Maldives  as  an  acceptable  payment  instrument.  Likewise,  as  policy  makers,  we  should  not
ignore financial technology and regulatory technology in our future economic and monetary policy
implementation.  More  importantly,  we  should  not  discourage  technology  and  innovation  in  our
financial sectors.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
What are cryptocurrencies? I have been asked several times over the past one year. Well, it is a
technological  development  that  utilize  a  technique  better  known  as  cryptography. And  what  is
cryptography?  The  technique  of  protecting  information  by  transforming  it  (encrypting)  into
unreadable format, that can only be deciphered (decrypted) by someone who possess a secret
key.  Cryptocurrencies  such  as  Bitcoins  are  secured  via  this  technique  using  an  ingenious
system of public and private keys.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
Let  me  take  a  step  back  and  talk  a  little  bit  about  the  Cyberspace,  the  vast  new  domain  of
interaction, where we are all connected in the modern world. A place where we are all unified,
and totally free. A place where we now spend increasing hours of our day. Where we do more of
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
our  shopping.  More  of  our  dating.  More  of  our  learning.  Commerce,  Broadcasting,  and  news
making. Selling of goods and services, and ideas.
A place where we are all unified, and totally free. Free from filters. Free from values. And free
from true governance.
Sometimes  some  of  us  act  as  though,  no  one  is  watching  in  the  cyberspace,  with  tweets
trashing  people,  hate  speech,  gambling,  pornography,  and  other  cybercrimes,  it  has  become
important for us to pause a little bit for some moral reflection.
As Tom Friedman puts it in his recent book, we need to balance technological progress with a
sense of humanity, and moral values.
As Former US President Obama said when he visited Hiroshima in May 2016,
“Technological progress without an equivalent progress in human institutions can doom us. The
scientific revolution that led to the splitting of an atom requires a moral revolution as well”.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
Cryptocurrency, like any other payment instrument poses, a variety of risks to the economy, and
more  importantly,  to  the  financial  sector  of  any  country.  The  risk  factor  is  heightened  now,
because the use of cryptocurrency, has expanded to mortgage and security lending.
Due to the nature and the specific features of cryptocurrency, it has long been understood that
cryptocurrency  has  been  a  somewhat  attractive  form  of  payment  instrument  for  money
laundering, terrorist financing and tax evasion.
Now, what are those features?
Anonimity: The anonymity surrounding cryptocurrencies, prevents transactions from being
adequately monitored, allowing shady transactions to occur outside the regulatory perimeter.
Cross-border nature: Transaction occur cross-border, and are nearly instant in the network
and  are  confirmed  in  a  couple  of  minutes.  Since  they  happen  in  a  global  network  of
computers, they are completely indifferent of any physical location. There are no third parties
involved in verification or validation.
No  gatekeeper:  The  software  that  everybody  can  download  is  for  free  and  there  is  no
centralized coin issuer or an intermediary to oversee the coin trading activities. Anyone can
receive and send cryptocurrencies as soon as a cryptocurrency software is installed without
being monitored by a central government authority.
Due to these factors, countries are concerned about the misuse of cryptocurrency, especially to
launder proceeds of crime, fund terrorist activities and evade taxation. In a recent report by a data
security company, CipherTrace, $761 million has already been laundered via cryptocurrencies
so far this year.
Therefore,  international  organizations  such  as  the  IMF  and  EU  are  advocating  for  regulating
cryptocurrency,  despite  challenges  such  as  anonymity,  cross-border  nature  of  use
cryptocurrency,  lack  of  central  intermediary  to  regulate,  etc.  In  February  2018,  Ms.  Christine
Lagarde,  head  of  IMF  said  in  an  interview  on  CNN  that  due  to  the  potential  illicit  use  of
cryptocurrency, cryptocurrency regulations are inevitable. Her remarks echoed the initiatives of
countries to bring cryptocurrency into a regulatory framework to combat money laundering and
terrorism financing.
In April 2018, the Parliament of the European Union passed changes to anti-money laundering
legislation  that  will  impose  new  regulations  on  cryptocurrency  exchanges  and  custodians
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
operating  in  Europe.  The  US  has  already  extended  its  AML  regulatory  framework  to
cryptocurrency. Other countries include, Australia, Canada, Japan, Mexico and Switzerland.
Therefore, it is important to recognize the role cryptocurrencies play in the financial markets, and
to  start  thinking  about  allowing  emerging  technologies  to  have  a  level  playing  field  in  these
markets.
To conclude, I would like to stress on the importance of allowing financial technologies into our
financial markets and at the same time implementing proper regulatory regimes to ensure such
technologies, market players and our economy is not abused for illicit purposes.
Blockchain technology, if properly used, can be applied in a large variety of sectors, including,
trade,  commerce,  healthcare  and  governance.  It  could  be  used  in  pledging  of  collateral,
registration of shares, bonds and other assets, and operation of land registers, and many more.
I wish you all a successful Conference.
Thank you. Wassalam Alaikum.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
