Yves Mersch: Europe: a work in progress - political integration and
economic convergence in Monetary Union
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Banking and Corporate evening, organised by the Hauptverwaltung in Bayern der Deutschen
Bundesbank, Munich, 22 November 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Europe has no problem with identifying the issues it faces; it has a problem with implementing
solutions.
Many of the weaknesses and shortcomings of the European framework have long been known.
And the measures required to address these issues have repeatedly been discussed for some
time  now.  Unfortunately,  national  interests  and  complacency  have  consistently  dampened  the
momentum  that  Europe  needs  to  become  a  true  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  Electoral
machinations  extending  to  the  regional  level  and  rising  populism  have  recently  added  to  the
problem.
The latest proposal was in June. At a meeting in Meseburg Palace, the leaders of France and
Germany issued a joint declaration in which they stated their objective “to strengthen and deepen
the euro area further, and make it a genuine economic union”.
Their  statement  that  sharing  the  same  currency  entails  specific  needs  in  terms  of  economic
coordination and integration  is correct – and it is something that has long been known.
1
As far back as 1970, the committee of experts chaired by the then Luxembourg Prime Minister
Pierre Werner, which drew up the first meaningful plan for a European monetary union, stressed
that insufficient economic convergence and the absence of a common fiscal policy would give
rise to the need for greater economic policy coordination.
Later proposals, including the Maastricht Treaty of 1992, unfortunately failed to sufficiently tackle
the inherent tensions of a currency without a state.
The spirit of Meseberg stems from the original European idea and the pledge of prosperity that
brought the single currency into being: the euro benefits Member States. They profit from having
a credible and stable currency and a larger, competitive market.
But the crisis demonstrated that the euro area is susceptible to negative shocks and that greater
economic and political convergence is needed.
Today, I would like to focus on three areas in which it is vital to make progress.
First, we have to more actively pursue fiscal and structural reforms. Second, we need to further
reduce risks and fragmentation in the financial sector. And third, we must decisively strengthen
the institutional architecture of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).
Structural reforms and fiscal policy
Unlike countries that have their own currency, euro area members cannot use the exchange rate
to tackle asymmetric shocks.
Instead,  they  must  undertake  structural  adjustments  to  ensure  that  their  economies  are
competitive and resilient.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
If  some  Member  States  adjust  more  slowly  than  others,  economic  differences  may  become
permanent. And to the extent that this endangers the effectiveness of monetary policy and the
cohesion of the Union, it has potentially damaging consequences for all Member States.
It is thus vital that Member States push ahead with structural reforms to make labour and product
markets more flexible, thereby enabling the factors of production to move more quickly between
sectors.
To  this  end,  national  reform  requirements  are  determined  in  the  context  of  the  European
semester  with  a  view  to  strengthening  the  coordination  of  economic  policies  at  the  EU  level.
Country-specific recommendations need to be implemented in the interests of all parties to avoid
persistent imbalances.
the  overwhelming  majority  –  meaning  more 
But progress in implementing the reforms has been slow. The European Commission concluded
that 
than  90%  –  of  country-specific
recommendations had only been implemented to “some” or a “limited” extent in 2017, similar to
2
the previous year.
The  European  Commission  suggests  supporting  countries’  reform  efforts  through  the  EU
budget. In principle, this could create positive incentives to implement reforms. However, for that
to  work  in  practice,  the  Commission  proposal  would  need  to  be  significantly  strengthened  in
three ways.
First,  reforms  should  be  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  implications  for  macroeconomic
prospects. Second, the funding should be distributed on the basis of a quality assessment rather
than  in  proportion  to  a  country’s  entitlement  to  a  “slice  of  the  pie”.  Third,  powerful  clawback
3
mechanisms should be built in so that funds could be recuperated if reforms are reversed.
The  implementation  of  structural  reforms  is  only  one  of  the  factors  that  helps  strengthen  the
resilience of Member States. Another factor is sound fiscal policy.
Here common fiscal rules are important to ensure that Member States do not take on excessive
levels of debt, because low levels of debt and larger buffers give countries greater fiscal space to
mitigate economic downturns.
Aggregate  debt  and  deficit  ratios  in  the  euro  area  are  currently  lower  than  those  in  any  other
major economy, which demonstrates that our common fiscal rules are having a certain effect.
But  the  rules  have  repeatedly  been  called  into  question  in  recent  months,  in  particular  by
countries with high levels of debt.
To  this  one  can  only  say  that  consistently  breaching  the  rules  will  not  only  make  them  less
effective in the long run, it could also worsen financing conditions for some or all Member States.
It is thus imperative that countries, especially those with the highest debt levels, use the ongoing
expansion to build up fiscal buffers and reduce debt.
This  is  not  only  crucial  to  strengthen  resilience,  it  is  also  a  precondition  for  strengthening  the
solidarity between Member States in times of crisis.
As such, the Meseburg declaration represents a turning point, as the German government is now
recognising the need, in principle, for a stabilisation facility at the European level.
The recent proposal for  an  EU  unemployment  insurance  scheme  put  forward  by  the  German
finance minister, Olaf Scholz, is also to be welcomed. The fund, which the Member States would
pay  into,  would  grant  loans  to  particularly  crisis-stricken  social  security  systems,  without  any
transfer payments taking place.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition, the European Commission is proposing a European investment stabilisation function
to mitigate large asymmetric shocks in the euro area.
And a few days ago, France and Germany agreed on a proposal for a limited euro area budget by
2021.
Two  elements  are  essential  for  the  effectiveness  of  such  instruments.  First,  a  central  fiscal
capacity  should  be  designed  to  increase  the  euro  area’s  ability  to  counter  severe  area-wide
recessions, thereby supporting monetary policy. Second, it should set appropriate incentives for
sound fiscal and economic policymaking.
On both counts, the proposals made so far fall short. They are limited in size and designed to
counter asymmetric shocks. However, asymmetric shocks are extremely rare, and there is a
lack  of  analytical  concepts  and  normative  answers  to  help  distinguish  between  difficulties
affecting a country through no fault of its own (bad luck) and those that are the result of the wrong
economic  policy  choices  (bad  policies).  What’s  more,  existing  EU  Treaty  provisions  already
4
allow for financial assistance to a Member State threatened with severe difficulties.
“Where a Member State is in difficulties or is seriously threatened with severe difficulties caused
by natural disasters or exceptional occurrences beyond its control, the Council, on a proposal
from  the  Commission,  may  grant,  under  certain  conditions,  Union  financial  assistance  to  the
Member State concerned. […]” Article 122.2, Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
In addition, the proposals do not sufficiently counteract moral hazard.
The recent Franco-German proposal takes some of these issues into account, for example by
suggesting that the euro area budget only be made available to countries that fully respect the
European  framework,  including  the  fiscal  rules.  It  also  explicitly  states  the  aim  of  fostering
competitiveness  and  economic  convergence.  At  the  same  time,  any  attempt  to  set  up  an
intergovernmental  decision-making  structure  to  manage  a  federal  sub-budget  is  likely  to  be
difficult to implement in practice, and the effectiveness of a financial transaction tax as the central
source of funding is overrated.
However, I don’t want to pick too many holes in the idea – indeed, I warmly welcome the fact that
the European debate is picking up speed again.
Reducing risks and fragmentation in the financial sector
Let me now turn to the second set of challenges faced by the euro area: risks in the financial
sector.
The  financial  crisis  demonstrated  that  an  unstable  and  highly  fragmented  financial  sector
represents an existential threat to Monetary Union.
Europe has translated key lessons of the crisis into a more solid framework by establishing the
banking union. The euro area’s largest banks are now supervised at the EU level and their failure
is addressed centrally.
The improved regulatory and supervisory framework has allowed considerable progress to be
made in terms of reducing risks. The Common Equity Tier 1 ratio of large banks has increased
from 9.7% in 2008 to over 14% today. Leverage ratios have risen from 3.7% to 5.8%. And banks
have much more stable liquidity and funding.
At the same time, insufficient progress has been made in creating a European banking market.
Euro area banks largely operate in their home markets, leading to overcapacity and making the
Union more susceptible to fragmentation.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Fragmentation along national lines and overcapacity are also visible at the aggregate European
level if we compare some key figures for the sector with those of other currency areas. From
2013 to 2017, the average return on equity for the euro area banking sector was 4.5%, while it
was 9% in the United States. Over the same period, European banks had a cost/income ratio of
69%,  while  that  of  US  banks  was  just  60%.  The  euro  area  had  44  bank  branches  for  every
100,000 inhabitants, almost twice as many as in the United States, which had 26. In the euro
area, only 52% of banks’ total assets are publicly traded, while the figure is close to 80% in the
5
United States.
An  integrated  financial  market  offers  risk-sharing  mechanisms  that  can  be  used  to  mitigate
country-specific  shocks.  Banks  that  have  more  geographically  diversified  loan  and  deposit
portfolios are more resilient to local shocks and can keep their lending activity more stable.
We must hence continue enhancing the conditions for cross-border banking in the euro area.
The first step is to reduce the legacy non-performing loans on banks’ balance sheets which have
6
hampered cross-border lending and M&A transactions over the past few years.
That  would  then  pave  the  way  for  the  completion  of  the  banking  union,  which  we  need  to
reinforce in order to boost confidence in the resilience of the whole financial sector.
Financial market fragmentation may be exacerbated by perceived or actual differences between
the  national  safety  nets  for  banks  which  undermine  the  banks’  capability  and  willingness  to
expand their cross-border activities.
The  introduction  of  a  common  and  credible  fund  for  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)
would inspire confidence that banks can be resolved more efficiently, regardless of their location.
Likewise, the creation of a European deposit insurance scheme (EDIS) would enhance depositor
confidence throughout the euro area and create a level playing field for banks. The main benefit
of EDIS is that it will generate confidence in the financial system as a whole. Provided that the
standards  on  minimum  requirements  for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities  (MREL),  total  loss-
absorbing capacity (TLAC) or other risk reduction measures are not eroded, EDIS will probably
never be deployed at all. At the same time, we should not fail to mention that especially smaller
institutions have next to no experience in accessing capital market funding. This makes it more
difficult to rigorously apply the MREL requirements.
Moreover, the introduction of such security mechanisms at European level could give national
governments  less  incentive  to  restrict  the  free  flow  of  capital  and  liquidity;  this  would  in  turn
promote cross-border activity.
But  EDIS  must  be  incentive-compatible.  Its  introduction  must  not  result  in  any  retrospective
sharing of the burden of legacy non-performing loans.
And in order to avoid systematic transfers between banking sectors, the banks’ contributions to
the fund should be structured to reflect banks’ risk appetites.
Strengthening the institutional architecture of Economic and Monetary Union
These economic and fiscal reforms are essential in order to make the euro area more resilient.
However, they cannot fully prevent the risk of severe economic shocks.
In the future too, effective crisis management will be indispensable to protect the Member States
from serious imbalances.
In  this  respect,  I  am  very  much  in  favour  of  strengthening  the  European  Stability  Mechanism
(ESM). However, the reorientation of the ESM should be coupled with its integration into EU law.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
If  the  ESM  were  to  remain  an  intergovernmental  institution,  any  transfer  of  tasks  must  be
consistent with the allocation of responsibilities between the EU and its Member States as laid
down in EU law, as a transfer of powers from the European level (European Commission) to the
intergovernmental  level  (ESM)  would  amount  to  a  throwback  to  national  models  and  self-
interests. By analogy, this also applies to a Euro area budget.
We also need more clarity with regard to the political framework for Monetary Union.
We must identify problems with countries’ debt sustainability at an earlier stage. The ESM needs
to be able to distinguish between liquidity and solvency problems early on.  That would allow us
to pick up the can early rather than kicking it down the road.
7
Similarly,  we  need  to  do  more  to  break  the  bank-sovereign  nexus.  We  need  regulatory
instruments  to  curb  the  excessive  accumulation  of  sovereign  risks  on  bank  balance  sheets
without triggering market disruptions.
In that sense, ensuring the adequate regulatory treatment of sovereign risk and facilitating orderly
debt restructuring are two sides of the same coin.
We should be aware that market-imposed discipline often comes suddenly, creates cliff-edge
effects and can have negative consequences for financial stability. The recent Franco-German
proposal to introduce single-limb collective action clauses and moves to align the roles of the
ESM  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  in  debt  restructuring  negotiations  are  sensible  first
8
steps towards creating a more reliable framework for orderly debt restructuring.
This brings me to my final point: democratic control.
Progress  in  completing  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  needs  to  evolve  in  lock-step  with
appropriate democratic control to meet the test of constitutionality.
What  matters  is  that  liability  and  control  are  aligned.  When  taxpayers’  money  is  involved  at
European level, a European control function is called for.
Any confusion over the assignment of responsibilities and accountability arrangements threatens
the efficiency and legitimacy of European measures.
The  task  is  complicated  by  the  particular  architecture  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  The
distinction  between  the  euro  area  and  the  EU  means  that  it  is  more  difficult  to  fully  tailor
accountability to euro area tasks. In particular, the European Parliament does not sit in euro area
composition  when  discussing  euro  area  matters. And  of  course  it  leaves  a  sour  taste  when
representatives of countries that neither belong to the euro area, nor will remain in the EU in the
long term, actively fill central positions in the European Parliament or its committees.
At the same time, responsibilities and accountability also need to be proportionate in areas of
shared competence between the EU and Member States. This holds true for the ESM and for
fiscal policies, where the situation is more complex and blurred.
The  ESM,  for  example,  was  created  on  the  basis  of  intergovernmental  arrangements  and  for
tasks where the EU only has a coordination role, and where the European Parliament is not yet a
counterpart in terms of accountability.
We need to strike a balance here. On the one hand, accountability should be assigned to national
parliaments for decisions that are fully in the hands of national authorities.
On  the  other  hand,  the  ESM  needs  to  be  equipped  with  swift  and  credible  decision-making
procedures. This will never be fully possible in an intergovernmental setting that is hampered by
national vetoes and operates outside the constitutional safeguards of the acquis.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Against this backdrop, the ESM should be turned into a body that is governed by EU law and is
accountable to the European Parliament. This would ensure that the ESM is better placed to act
in the sole interest of the euro area.
A  similar  logic,  necessitating  Treaty  change,  must  be  applied  in  any  further  discussions
regarding a euro area fiscal capacity and the possible introduction of an EU investment facility or
a European finance minister.
If a euro area budget is established, it should be part of an ongoing debate on a euro area finance
ministry and a euro area composition of the European Parliament.
We  should  avoid  undermining  established  Union  methods.  This  also  holds  true  for  parallel
financial structures aiming to bring separate funds under the same umbrella, in case they would
hamper the efficiency of established federal institutions.
We  should  neither  succumb  to  the  appeal  of  relying  on  secondary  legislation  in  areas  where
primary  law  is  unambiguous,  nor  use  semantic  tricks  to  subjugate  the  letter  and  spirit  of  the
Treaty to secondary legislation. The central bank must keep its distance from politics rather than
constantly pushing its way into new fields of action under cover of financial stability.
Conclusions
The euro area is a special construct. 19 countries share a common currency, but responsibility
for their economic and fiscal policies still lies in national hands.
Convergence  in  these  areas  is,  however,  crucial  for  the  success  of  Monetary  Union.  So  it  is
imperative for all Member States to adhere to the common rules.
The resilience of the euro hinges on the implementation of the necessary economic and fiscal
reforms. And further steps must be taken to boost private and public risk-sharing.
At the same time, as we progress towards completing Economic and Monetary Union, we should
keep in mind two principles that are at the heart of effective policy in a democratic society.
First, liability and control must be aligned, with important decisions taken only by those who will
bear their consequences.
Second, the discharge of democratic control must lie at the level at which policy decisions are
taken.
Given the current state of our Economic and Monetary Union, further efforts to deepen it through
political and economic convergence are clearly indispensable.
1
2
3
4
5
6
archiv.bundesregierung.de/archiv-de/meta/startseite/meseberg-declaration-1140806
www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-bulletin/focus/2018/html/ecb.ebbox201805_06.en.html
While the Commission mentions such a mechanism, the identification of reversals is left overly vague.
“Where a Member State is in difficulties or is seriously threatened with severe difficulties caused by natural
disasters or exceptional occurrences beyond its control, the Council, on a proposal from the Commission, may
grant, under certain conditions, Union financial assistance to the Member State concerned. […]” Article 122.2,
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
Restoy, Fernando (2018), “The European banking union: what are the missing pieces?”; Public lecture at the
International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, Switzerland, 16 October 2018.
www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/fsr/shared/pdf/ecb.sfbfinancialstabilityreview201711.en.pdf?
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
bc1a2e57de30c0b2cee99fbd4ae141a5;
7
8
See Y. Mersch (2016), “Reflections on the feasibility of a sovereign debt restructuring mechanism in the euro
area”, ESCB Legal Conference 2016.
See Benassy-Quere et al., “Reconciling Risk Sharing with Market Discipline”,CEPR Policy Insight, No 91, Centre
for Economic Policy Research.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
