 
Central Bank of Barbados 
Tom Adams Financial Centre, Spry Street, Bridgetown 
P.O. Box 1016 
Telephone: (246) 436-6870: Fax. (246) 436-7836 
E-Mail Address: info@centralbank.org.bb  
Website: www.centralbank.org.bb 
 
Mr. Cleviston Haynes, Governor, Central Bank of Barbados  
Opening Remarks 
at the 
50th Annual Monetary Studies Conference 
Hilton Barbados Resort 
Tuesday, November 6, 2018 
  Good morning.  
On  behalf  of  the  Management  and  staff  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  I  am  delighted  to 
extend a warm Bajan welcome to all of you, as we recognise and celebrate the 50th anniversary 
of  this  Annual  Monetary  Studies  Conference.  We  are  honoured  to  jointly  host  this  landmark 
conference  with  our  colleagues  at  the  Caribbean  Economic  Research  Team  (CERT),  the  new 
entity established to carry on the rich tradition of its forerunners, beginning with the Regional 
Programme  for  Monetary  Studies,  Caribbean  Centre  for  Monetary  Studies  and  the  most 
recently the Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance.  
In  recognition  of  this  historic  landmark,  today  we  have  the  rare  opportunity  of  having  in  our 
presence  at  this  truly  regional  meeting,  several  of  the  Governors  of  CARICOM  Central  Banks 
who have reorganised their schedules to enable this conference to overlap with their bi-annual 
meeting.  Moreover,  they  have  consented  to  participate  in  today’s  deliberations  via  a  panel 
discussion  during  which  they  will  reflect  on  and  discuss  some  of  the  critical  economic  and 
financial challenges we are currently facing as a region under the theme “Rebuilding Caribbean 
Economies:  A  Regional  Perspective  on  Emerging  Economic  and  Financial  Issues”.  I  encourage 
you to take advantage of my colleagues’ accumulated knowledge and wisdom. 
The achievement of fifty unbroken years of service is a significant milestone and by no means 
an easy accomplishment. It underscores the unwavering support, dedication, passion and hard 
work  of  the  past  Directors,  Coordinators,  Officers-in-Charge,  research  fellows,  support  staff, 
and  the  academic  and  professional  economics  community  to  keep  the  momentum  going  for 
this  long. I  would  like to  take  this  opportunity to  extend heartfelt thanks  and appreciation to 
 1 
everyone who has contributed to the longevity of this conference and I offer my best wishes to 
CERT, as it continues on the path forged by its predecessors.   
From  its  humble  beginnings,  with  the  first  conference  held  in  1969  at  the  Central  Bank  of 
Trinidad  and  Tobago,  the  Annual  Monetary  Studies  Conference  has  developed  into  the  top 
economic research conference in the region. Over the years, it has played an important role in 
building a body of outstanding Caribbean economics scholarship through on-going collaboration, 
primarily  among  the  CARICOM  central  banks,  the  University  of  the  West  Indies,  the  private 
sector  and  civil  society  organisations.  It  is  no  surprise,  therefore,  that  this  forum  has 
contributed to and honed the economic acumen of some of the more prominent economists of 
our generation, including current Governors of some of our central banks. Indeed, I personally 
recall my first attendance at a Regional Monetary Studies Conference in 1981 where I first came 
face  to  face  with  some  of  the  legends  of  this  region.  The  contribution  of  stalwarts  to  this 
conference  such  as  Professor  C.  Y.  Thomas,  Professor  Compton  Bourne,  Terrence  Farrell, 
DeLisle  Worrell,  the  late  Professor  Roland  Craigwell,  Shelton  Nicholls,  to  name  but  a  few  is 
worthy of  emulation.  It is  my  considered  view that for  young  economists,  the  comments  and 
encouragement provided by persons of this calibre served to strengthen, over time, the quality 
of research produced within the region.  
As policy makers, we recognise that focused, timely and relevant research is important for good 
policy-making.  In  the  region,  we  continue  to  face  many  economic  challenges  in  a  global 
environment  that  is  not  always  favourable.  As  we  speak,  there  is  uncertainty  created  by 
international  developments  such  as  the  discussions  on  Brexit,  protectionism  and  threats  of 
trade  wars,  the  risks  posed  by  geopolitical  risks  to  oil  prices  and  rising  interest  rates.  At  the 
same time, some of our economies, which have had to shift their economies from traditional 
primary  products  to  services  in  an  effort  to  facilitate  growth  and  jobs  and  make  them  more 
resilient to economic and climatic shocks, now face the threats presented by the OECD initiative 
on  Base  Erosion  Profit  Sharing  and the threats  of  EU  blacklisting.  At  the domestic  level,  fiscal 
imbalances and high public sector indebtedness act as a brake on growth, raising the question 
of whether there is an optimal size to government in our economies. There are still constraints 
on the availability of finance for small enterprises and how can we improve the efficiency of the 
financial  system  to  promote  growth.  At  the  regional  level,  we  are  not  as  advanced  in  the 
regional  project  as  we  would  have  wanted  to  be.  These  are  but  some  of  the  challenges  for 
which we require solutions. 
In  this  context  therefore,  while  our  research  techniques  have  become  more  sophisticated 
through the use of the latest in econometric methods, we must not forget that the underlying 
rationale  for  our  research  remains  that  we  need  to  explain  how  our  economies  have  worked 
and to be able to develop strategies to confront the challenges that we face. 
 2 
The theme of this year's conference is "Emerging Economic and Financial Issues in 21st Century 
Economies”.  Judging  from  the  conference  programme,  the  next  three  days  is  expected  to  be 
stimulating,  involving  research  papers  covering  a  variety  of  topics,  including  financial  market 
performance,  financial  regulation,  economic  growth,  tourism  performance  and  banking 
industry issues.  
Today,  we  look  forward  to  the  launch  of  the  Inter-American  Development  Bank’s  ebook 
“Nurturing Institutions For A Resilient Caribbean”, an important publication that provides an 
in-depth analysis of the institutional experiences in the six Caribbean countries that comprise 
the  IDB’s  Caribbean  Country  Department,  namely  The  Bahamas,  Barbados,  Guyana,  Jamaica, 
Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.   
This  year’s  Adlith  Brown  Memorial  Lecture  will  be  delivered  by  Dr.  Arnold  McIntyre,  Deputy 
Division  Chief,  Caribbean  Division  I,  International  Monetary  Fund,  on  the  timely  topic  of 
strengthening  economic  growth  and  resilience  in  the  Caribbean.  Arnold  has  a  great  depth  of 
experience in Caribbean economic research and practice and we are happy he has accepted our 
invitation to deliver the lecture.  
In  closing,  I  am  certain  that,  as  is  usually  the  case,  we  will  have  a  productive  and  successful 
three  days  of  discussion  and  debate.  Special  thanks  to  the  teams  from  the  Central  Bank  of 
Barbados and the CERT Secretariat for organising  what appears to be an excellent conference 
programme. 
For those of you are visiting, do enjoy our hospitality and culture.  
Thank you.  
  3 
