For release on delivery 
10:00 a.m. EST 
November 14, 2018 
 
 
 
   Statement by 
Randal K. Quarles 
Vice Chairman for Supervision 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
before the 
Committee on Financial Services 
U.S. House of Representatives 
November 14, 2018 
 Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, other members of the committee, thank 
you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's regulation and supervision of the 
financial system.  My testimony today covers two main topics: our efforts to improve regulatory 
transparency, including the report accompanying my submission to the committee, and our 
progress in making the post-crisis regulatory framework simpler and more efficient. 
The Role of Transparency in Regulation and Supervision 
I am mindful that this semiannual testimony--like my position as Vice Chairman for 
Supervision--is grounded in Congress’s efforts to strengthen and improve the nation’s regulatory 
framework following the financial crisis.  This testimony reflects a critical element of those 
efforts: the desire, and the need, for greater transparency. 
Transparency is part of the foundation of public accountability and a cornerstone of due 
process.  It is also key to a well-functioning regulatory system and an essential aspect of safety 
and soundness, as well as financial stability.  Transparency provides financial firms clarity on the 
letter and spirit of their obligations; it provides supervisors with the benefit of exposure to a 
diversity of perspectives; and it provides markets with insight into the condition of regulated 
firms, fostering market discipline.  Transparency increases public confidence in the role of the 
financial system to support credit, investment, and economic growth. 
The Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps since my last testimony to further 
increase transparency, and to provide more information about our supervisory activities to both 
regulated institutions and the public. 
- 2 - 
For example, the Board recently improved its supervisory ratings system for large 
financial institutions.1  Ratings are an essential vehicle for supervisory feedback--a clear, concise 
way to convey whether a firm meets expectations, with tangible, predictable consequences for 
those that fall short.  Our ratings system for large institutions had remained unchanged since 
2004, even as our supervision of those institutions evolved significantly after the crisis.  The new 
rating system will better align ratings for these firms with the supervisory feedback they receive, 
and will focus firms on the capital, liquidity, and governance issues most likely to affect safety 
and soundness. 
The banking agencies also recently clarified that supervisory guidance is a tool to 
enhance the transparency of supervisory expectations, and should never be the basis of an 
enforcement action.2  Guidance--a valuable tool for examiners to help evaluate firms and explain 
supervisory findings--should always be based on concerns for safety and soundness or 
compliance at a particular firm.  However, guidance is not legally enforceable, and             
Federal Reserve examiners will not treat it that way.  
Finally, we expect shortly to make final a set of measures to increase visibility into the 
Board’s supervisory stress testing program.  The enhanced disclosures will include more 
granular descriptions of our models; more information about the design of our scenarios; and 
more detail about the outcomes we project, including a range of loss rates for loans held by firms 
subject to the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review.  The disclosures will provide a more 
complete picture of the stress testing process, and facilitate thoughtful comments from academics 
                                                           
1  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Federal Reserve Board finalizes new supervisory rating   
system for large financial institutions,” news release, November 2, 2018, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20181102a.htm. 
2  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 
“Agencies issue statement reaffirming the role of supervisory guidance,” news release, September 11, 2018, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20180911a.htm.  
- 3 - 
and other members of the public, while mitigating the risk of convergence on a single model.  As 
a result, we believe the disclosures will improve our work, making the tests more reliable, 
visible, and credible.  We will continue our efforts toward greater transparency in stress testing 
over the next several years, including by disclosing descriptions of additional material models 
and modeled loss rate disclosures for loan and non-loan portfolios. 
Semiannual Review of the Safety and Soundness of the U.S. Banking System 
The report that accompanies my testimony today is another tool to keep Congress, and 
the public, informed about our work, the banking system, and the role of both in supporting the 
broader economy.3  The report focuses on the Federal Reserve’s prudential supervisory 
activities.4  As the report shows, the banking sector remains in strong condition, in line with 
strong U.S. economic performance, with lending growth, fewer nonperforming loans, and strong 
overall profitability.  
Large institutions are well capitalized and liquid, and their capital planning and liquidity-
risk-management processes are improving.  Ninety-nine percent of regional and community 
banks are currently well capitalized, and supervisory recommendations made to smaller firms 
during the financial crisis have largely been closed.  We are, however, very much aware of the 
dangers of complacency, and our report lists several priority areas of risk we will continue to 
monitor closely in the coming year, including cyber and information technology risks at 
supervised firms of all sizes.  
                                                           
3  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Supervision and Regulation Report,” November 9, 2018, 
www.federalreserve.gov/publications/supervision-and-regulation-report.htm. 
4  The Federal Reserve is also responsible for timely and effective supervision of consumer protection and 
community reinvestment laws and regulations.  More information about the Federal Reserve’s consumer-focused 
supervisory program can be found in the Federal Reserve’s Annual Report to Congress.  See section 5, 
“Consumer and Community Affairs,” at https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/annual-report.htm.  The 
Federal Reserve also publishes the Consumer Compliance Supervision Bulletin, which shares information about 
examiners’ supervisory observations and other noteworthy developments related to consumer protections.  See 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/consumer-compliance-supervision-bulletin.htm. 
Improvements in Regulatory Efficiency 
- 4 - 
Improving regulatory efficiency is another core element of our current regulatory efforts.  
Tailoring regulation and supervision to risk has been a programmatic goal of Federal Reserve 
policy for more than two decades.  The motivations are clear: supervisory resources are not 
limitless, and supervision is not costless, either to the public or to supervised institutions.  
Activities and firms that pose the greatest risk should receive the most scrutiny, and where the 
risk is lower, the regulatory burden should be lower as well.  
This principle guided Congress and the federal banking agencies in designing the post-
crisis regulatory framework, which imposed greater restrictions on larger, more systemically 
important firms and less intrusive requirements on smaller ones.  It has also guided our 
implementation of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act 
(EGRRCPA, or the Act).5 On this front, we have made substantial progress:  
•  expanding eligibility of community banking firms for the Small Bank Holding Company 
Policy Statement, and for longer, 18-month examination cycles;6  
•  giving bank holding companies below $100 billion in assets immediate relief from 
supervisory assessments, stress testing requirements, and some additional Dodd-Frank 
Act prudential measures;7 and 
                                                           
5  EGRRCPA, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018). 
6  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Federal Reserve Board issues interim final rule expanding 
the applicability of the Board’s small bank holding company policy statement,” news release, August 28, 2018, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20180828a.htm.  
7  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Statement regarding the impact of the Economic Growth, 
Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA),” July 6, 2018, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/bcreg20180706b1.pdf.  
- 5 - 
 implementing changes to liquidity regulation of municipal securities and capital 
regulation of high-volatility commercial real estate exposures.8 
The Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and Office of the Comptroller 
of the Currency (OCC) have also continued the work to significantly reduce the reporting burden 
on community banking organizations, altering reporting frequencies, items, and thresholds, while 
preserving the data necessary for effective oversight.9  The agencies recently issued a proposal to 
reduce further reporting requirements for small depository institutions in the first and third 
quarters of the year.  Under the proposal, around 37 percent of data items would not be required 
in those quarters.  
Our most significant step to implement the Act came two weeks ago, when the Board 
issued two proposals to better align prudential standards with the risk profile of regulated 
institutions.10  These proposals implement changes that Congress enacted this spring in the 
EGRRCPA.  One of the proposals addresses the Board’s enhanced prudential standards for large 
banking firms, and the other is an interagency proposal amending the regulatory capital and 
liquidity regulations that apply to large banking organizations.  Both proposals separate large 
banking firms into four categories, using size as a relevant but not sufficient factor for increased 
regulatory requirements.  Among the other factors that will now enter into this assessment are 
nonbank assets, short-term wholesale funding, and off-balance-sheet exposure.  The changes 
                                                           
8  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, “Agencies propose rule regarding the treatment of high volatility commercial real 
estate,” news release, September 18, 2018, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20180918a.htm.  
9  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, “Agencies issue proposal to streamline regulatory reporting for qualifying small 
institutions,” news release, November 7, 2018, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20181107a.htm.  
10 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on 
framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles,” 
news release, October 31, 2018, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20181031a.htm. 
- 6 - 
would significantly reduce regulatory compliance requirements for firms in the lowest risk 
category, including most institutions with between $100 billion and $250 billion in assets.  Firms 
with $250 billion or more in assets, or firms with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion 
that meet a risk threshold, will face reduced liquidity requirements.  The proposals would largely 
maintain existing requirements for the largest and most complex firms.  
These new categories represent a step forward in regulatory efficiency.  They draw on 
our experience administering enhanced prudential requirements and other post-crisis measures.  
They recognize that other indicators of risk beyond size are appropriate to consider when 
determining if more stringent standards should apply to certain firms.  They move toward a more 
risk-sensitive, nuanced framework, where riskier activities and a larger systemic footprint 
correspond to higher supervisory and regulatory requirements.  
Apart from the requirements of the Act, we also recently proposed a new approach to 
calculating credit risk, known as the standardized approach to counterparty credit risk, or SA-
CCR.  The new approach would better account for the risks associated with derivatives 
exposures, including market practices that reduce risk, such as netting and initial margin.11  We 
issued a proposal simplifying and tailoring requirements under the Volcker rule, to ensure that 
the most stringent requirements apply to the firms with the most trading activity, and that 
compliance is as simple and objective as possible.  We also issued a rule limiting the exposure of 
large firms to a single counterparty, addressing a key source of contagion during the financial 
crisis.  We have received thoughtful input from the public that will help inform our 
implementation of all of these measures.  
                                                           
11 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, “Agencies propose rule to update calculation of derivative contract exposure 
amounts under regulatory capital rules,” news release, October 30, 2018, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20181030a.htm. 
- 7 - 
Finally, we have continued to engage with supervisors and central banks overseas.  The 
ultimate goal of having an efficient and transparent regulatory system is to help the American 
economy--to enable banking organizations to offer safe, stable financial services to households 
and businesses around the country.  But American businesses compete in a global marketplace, 
and as the financial crisis showed, when regulatory standards fall in other countries, Americans 
can pay the price.  Engaging overseas, through forums like the Financial Stability Board and the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, helps level the playing field--and it helps ensure that 
all countries, not just the United States, do their part to maintain and protect the global economy.  
Our work to improve regulatory efficiency is not done, and we expect to make additional 
progress in the months ahead on a number of issues.  In particular, we are working with our 
counterparts at the OCC and FDIC on a community bank leverage ratio proposal.  We expect 
that this proposal would meaningfully reduce the compliance burden for community banking 
organizations, while preserving overall levels of capital at small banks and our ability to take 
prompt action when problems arise.  
I look forward to continuing our efforts to make our regulatory framework simpler, more 
transparent, and more efficient--and I look forward to participating in the committee’s oversight 
of those efforts.  As Chairman Powell said at his swearing-in:  “As a public institution, we must 
be transparent about our actions so that the public, through its elected representatives, can hold 
us accountable.”12  We will continue to do so to the best of our ability. 
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions. 
                                                           
12 Jerome H. Powell, “Remarks at the Ceremonial Swearing-in” (speech at the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, 
DC, February 13, 2018), https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20180213a.htm.  
