    LAUNCH OF THE CYBER SECURITY DIRECTIVE FOR FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS 
  A SAFER DIGITAL FINANCIAL INDUSTRY 
      SPEECH BY  
DR. MAXWELL OPOKU-AFARI,  
FIRST DEPUTY GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
       BANK OF GHANA HEAD OFFICE, ACCRA  
OCTOBER 22, 2018 
  Honorable Minister of Communications, Mrs. Ursula Owusu-Ekuful, 
Second Deputy Governor, Bank of Ghana, 
Members of the Board, Bank of Ghana, 
Heads of Banks, 
Members of the Ghana Association of Bankers,  
Members of the Ghana Association of Savings and Loans,  
Members of the Ghana Association of Microfinance Institutions, 
Members of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, 
Staff of Bank of Ghana, 
Distinguished Members of the Press, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, all protocols observed. 
   1 
  1. Good  afternoon  Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  It  is  a  pleasure  to 
welcome  all  of  you  to  the  Bank  of  Ghana  and  I  deem  it  a 
great  honour  for  having  such  august  audience  joining  us  for 
this  special  occasion.    As  we  are  all  aware,  today  marks 
another  significant  milestone  in  the  history  of  Ghana’s 
financial sector as we launch the Cyber Security Directives for 
Financial Institutions.  
 2. After careful consideration on issues regarding cyber security 
and  its  implications  on  financial  intermediation,  the  Bank 
chose the theme “A Safer Digital Financial Industry” to launch 
the Cyber Security Directives  for  two main reasons. First, we 
envisage  that  this  theme  will  shape  the  strategic  direction  in 
terms  of  cyber  security  of  the  banking  industry  and  to  the 
larger  extent,  the  entire  financial  sector.  And  secondly,  it 
signals  the  collective  efforts  of  stakeholders  to  address  the 
2 
  canker  of  cyber  threat  and  all  other  actions  that  exploit 
vulnerabilities of the financial systems and processes. 
 3. Currently, technology is intertwined with our everyday lives. It 
is 
re-defining  business  processes,  promoting  greater 
interconnectedness 
between 
countries 
and 
peoples, 
enhancing  skill  development  and  innovation,  and  more 
broadly, breaking down perceived barriers in every sector.  In 
the  banking  sector,  for  instance,  technology  has  taken  a 
center stage in the financial intermediation process. Recently, 
key  developments  within  the  intermediation  process  include 
the  growing  importance  of  FinTechs  in  delivering  financial 
services  as  well  as  the  introduction  of  electronic  payment 
platforms 
to  enhance 
interoperability. 
In  effect, 
the 
continuous  role  played  by  technology  has  had  considerable 
impact  on  the  operations  of  financial  institutions  and 
3 
  ultimately  driven  policies  aimed  at  promoting  financial 
inclusiveness for growth and poverty reduction.  
 4. In all of these developments, financial services remains critical 
and  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  established,  as  a  major  policy 
priority,  the  development  of  a  sound  financial  system  with 
strong  individual  component  institutions.  The  idea  is  to 
position  the  sector  as  a  major  growth  driver,  to  support  an 
inclusive  broad-based  economy  with  the  full  implementation 
of  new  higher  minimum  capital  requirements  by  the  end  of 
this  year.  We  know  that  banks  are  working  strenuously  to 
meet  this  requirement  which  would  help  establish  a  banking 
industry  that  is  well  capitalized  to  support  the  much  needed 
economic transformation Ghana needs. 
 4 
  5. As  the  Bank  of  Ghana  pursues  this  objective,  alongside 
strengthening  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  environment  to 
restore  confidence  and  promote  stability  and  integrity  of  the 
banking  sector,  it  is  important  that  we  also  take  concrete 
steps  towards  implementing  cyber  security  measures  to 
combat  financial  crime.  Through  the  Bank’s  monitoring 
systems,  we  have  observed  the  daily  attempts  by  cyber 
criminals to bypass security controls and exploit vulnerabilities 
within the cyber and information security defenses of financial 
systems. We cannot ignore the fact that the increasing use of 
technology with its attendant interconnectedness has enabled 
some of these challenges.  
 6. Globally, risks associated with cybercrime on financial systems 
have  increased,  notable  among  them  are  the  financial 
disruptions  arising  from  cyber-incidents  in  Bangladesh  and 
5 
  Malaysia.  Indeed,  cyber-attacks  have  the  potential  to  pose 
systemic  risk  by  disrupting  business  operations  within  the 
financial  sector.  For  Ghana,  the  threat  is  growing.  A  recent 
study  in  2016  disclosed  that  there  were  more  than  400,000 
Malware  incidents,  44  million  Spam  incidents,  and  280,000 
Bot incidents within Ghana’s financial industry. 
 7. With  this  background  and  the  complexities  associated  with 
the advancement of technology, it is imperative that the Bank 
of  Ghana  takes  steps  to  counter  these  threats  to  ensure  the 
integrity and operational security of the financial system. It is 
in  this  regard  that  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  developed  the 
Cyber  Security  Directive 
for  Financial  Institutions.  The 
objectives  of  this  Directive  are  to  ensure  an  uninterrupted 
financial intermediation process through a robust and resilient 
6 
  financial sector and also to boost the trust and confidence of 
consumers in the banking industry. 
 8. Ladies and Gentlemen, we will all agree that the resilience of 
the financial sector is largely dependent on the  soundness of 
financial  institutions  and  the  robustness  of  the  financial 
market  infrastructure.  The  Cyber  Security  Directive  for 
Financial  Institutions  does  not  fall  short  of  addressing  these 
objectives. Among others, the Directive seeks to establish the 
conduct  and  operational  guidelines  for  the  cyber  and 
information  security  environment.  Specifically,  it  sets  out 
procedures  for  governance,  risk  management,  internal  audit, 
asset  management,  cyber  defense,  and  cyber  response, 
among others. 
 7 
  9. All  of  us  in  the  industry  have  key  roles  to  play  in  the 
implementation of this Directive. One unique characteristic of 
this  directive  is  the  required  active  involvement  of  senior 
management  executives  and  boards  of  financial  institutions. 
All  banks  are  to  appoint  a  Cyber  and  Information  Security 
Officer (CISO) who would advise senior management and the 
board  on  cyber  security  issues,  and  also  formulate  adequate 
measures to manage cyber and information security risks.  
 10. 
A key component of the measures to be deployed by the 
CISO  is  the  training  and  education  of  all  stakeholders. 
Colleagues,  it  takes  an  individual  to  click  on  an  email 
attachment for a virus to be introduced into the system of an 
organization,  but  the  whole  organization  and  sometimes  the 
entire nation may also suffer the unintended consequences of 
this singular action. Therefore, another crucial element of the 
8 
   Directive  is  the  creation  of  an  enabling  framework  for  the 
efficient information sharing among stakeholders, for example 
between  financial  institutions  and  regulators,  and  among 
financial institutions as well. 
 11. 
In  line  with  the  National  Cyber  Security  Awareness 
Month  (NCSA)  therefore,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  is  today, 
launching the Cyber and Information Security Directive for the 
financial industry. Subsequent to this launch, banks would be 
required to follow an implementation schedule to ensure that 
effective  cyber  security  controls  are  in  place  to  counter  any 
threats of cybercrime. 
12. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  I  conclude  this  speech,  I 
would  like  to  reiterate  the  need  for  collaboration  among  key 
stakeholders  in  the  fight  against  cyber-crime.  We  need  not 
9 
  only  implement  these  Directives,  but  also  collaborate  with 
each  other  in  the  industry  to  overcome  the  threats  of 
cybercrime. As bankers, we must incorporate cyber security in 
our daily activities and imbibe these Directives in the policies 
and  procedures  of  our  individual  financial  institutions.  Cyber 
threat  is  continuously  evolving,  and  as  custodians  of  the 
financial  sector,  let  us  all  embrace  the  Cyber  Security 
Directive and work assiduously to ensure its success. 
 13. 
Thank you for the attention. 
10 
