Luis de Guindos: Benjamin Moll’s contribution to macroeconomics
Remarks by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion
of  the  award  of  the  Bernácer  Prize  to  Benjamin  Moll,  Professor  of  Economics  at  Princeton
University, organised by the Bank of Span, Madrid, 23 November 2018.
 It is a pleasure for me to celebrate with you the award of the 2018 Bernácer Prize to Benjamin
Moll,  Professor  of  Economics  at  Princeton  University.  Benjamin’s  work  —  on  cross-country
income differences, misallocation of resources, and the role of income and wealth distributions in
macroeconomics — has quickly gained the influence and recognition that other researchers can
only hope to achieve much later in life. This makes him the perfect candidate for the Bernácer
Prize, which is awarded to an outstanding young European economist working in the fields of
macroeconomics and finance.
The  prize  has  specifically  been  awarded  for  Benjamin’s  “path-breaking  contributions  to
incorporate consumer and firm heterogeneity into macroeconomic models and use such models
to study rich interactions between inequality and the macroeconomy.” Traditionally, much of the
macroeconomic  research  disregarded  the  role  heterogeneity  across  households  plays  in
macroeconomic  outcomes,  such  as  aggregate  output  or  inflation.  Under  the  “representative
agent”  paradigm,  it  was  assumed  that  microeconomic  heterogeneity  was  not  important  to
understanding aggregate outcomes.
While this assumption enabled a convenient approximation to be made, for a couple of decades
we have known that it is clearly at odds with reality. For example, extensive empirical literature
has  documented  that  differences  in  disposable  income,  the  available  stock  of  wealth,  or  the
exposure  to  unemployment  risk  have  quantitatively  important  effects  on  households’  choices,
including how much they consume and save and how much labour they supply. This literature
was, however, unable to assess the implications of household heterogeneity for macroeconomic
outcomes.
And this is where Benjamin’s research comes in; it provides a unified theoretical framework for
modelling  interactions  between  individual  households  and  the  macroeconomy,  and  also
accounting for the role of economic policies, including monetary policy.  In this framework, which
he developed jointly with Greg Kaplan and Gianluca Violante, macroeconomic outcomes result
from  the  interaction  of  a  large  number  of  households  characterised  by  a  realistic  degree  of
heterogeneity in their income, and in their consumption and saving decisions.
1
Benjamin’s  framework  allows  for  various  channels  through  which  monetary  policy  can  affect
personal consumption – that is, how a change in the central bank policy rate propagates through
the  economy  and  how  it  affects  individual  households  depending  on  the  structure  of  their
incomes  and  portfolios.  These  channels  include  the  standard  intertemporal  substitutional
channel,  which  has  long  been  the  sole  monetary  policy  channel  in  the  representative  agent
models  often  used  for  policy  analysis.  The  intertemporal  substitution  channel  suggests  that,
following a cut in the policy rate, households increase their consumption and reduce their saving
because  the  return  on  saving  falls.  But  empirical  evidence  on  the  relevance  of  this  channel,
especially evidence based on household-level data, has been rather mixed.
Benjamin’s work also reveals new channels for monetary policy transmission. Changes in policy
interest rates also affect households via an “indirect” channel, which operates as follows. Any
initial  aggregate  demand  stimulus  created  by  a  cut  in  the  policy  rate  propagates  through  the
economy and results in an increase in output, with ensuing upward pressure on employment and
wages. In turn, the increase in employment and in wage income stimulates aggregate demand
further, leading to additional increases in output, further upward pressure on employment and
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
wages, and so on and so forth.
Importantly,  and  in  line  with  established  empirical  evidence,  it  turns  out  that  while  the
intertemporal substitution effect is modest, the indirect effect of monetary policy drives the bulk of
the economy’s total output response. The key reason for the large size of the indirect effect is
that many households’ consumption reacts strongly to transitory shocks to income arising mainly
from higher employment – a result that ties in nicely with separate independent and consistent
evidence from micro data.
These  results  have  important  implications,  not  only  for  monetary  policy  theory  but  also  in
practice.  First,  the  modest  size  of  the  intertemporal  substitution  effect  implies  that  the
macroeconomic effects of monetary policy cannot be studied in isolation. Instead, the strength of
the  indirect  effect  suggests  that  the  transmission  is  always  shaped  by  factors  which  can  be
taken  as  given  in  analyses  based  on  the  representative  agent  assumption. A  key  example  is
fiscal policy, which can  change  aggregate  outcomes  depending  on  how  it  uses  the  proceeds
from the lower cost of servicing the government debt induced by a reduction in policy interest
rates.
Second, Benjamin’s work provides us with a framework for the public debate on the effects of
monetary policy on inequality. This debate has highlighted, for example, that net debtors and net
savers  will  be  affected  in  different  ways  by  monetary  policy  easing.  This  observation  has  led
some people to draw hasty conclusions on the effects of monetary policy on inequality. Under
Benjamin’s  framework,  however,  the  savers  versus  borrowers  split  is  only  one  of  the  many
dimensions  of  heterogeneity  which  characterise  the  data.  Other  important  dimensions  are
related to households’ holdings of liquid assets and their ability to borrow, both of which enable
them to absorb the impact of temporary income shocks. In addition, the borrowers versus savers
difference  is  not  crucially  important  if  the  indirect  channel  plays  a  dominant  role  in  the
transmission of monetary policy.
The  framework’s  capacity  to  model  interactions  between  heterogeneous  households  and  the
macroeconomy in the way I have just described hinges on Benjamin’s innovative and extensive
work on mathematical and computational methods to solve models in continuous time. As these
techniques  have  substantially  enhanced  the  set  of  economic  problems  that  we  are  able  to
address,  we  are  now  able  to  rapidly  solve  and  analyse  models  that  have  realistic  and
quantitatively important features, such as illiquid assets and adjustment costs.
In  addition  to  analysing  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism,  the  continuous-time  solution
techniques Benjamin pioneered can be used to study a wide range of economic questions. For
example,  Benjamin  and  his  co-authors   recently  investigated  which  theories  can  explain  the
substantial rise in inequality in the top tail of the US income distribution in the 1980s and 1990s.
While  most  established  theories  have  difficulties  in  accounting  for  this  development,  theories
allowing  for  “superstar”  phenomena  are  consistent  with  it.  Superstar  phenomena  arise,  for
example, when changes in technology make it possible for entrepreneurs or managers who are
a little better than others at any given task to capture a much higher share of the market and of
income.
2
I  have  spent  much  of  my  time  today  talking  about  the  aspects  of  Benjamin’s  work  that  are
particularly  relevant  for  monetary  policy.  However,  he  has  expanded  our  knowledge  in  an
impressive range of other areas which I did not have time to discuss, including determinants of
incomes across countries, the allocation of resources, human capital accumulation, and saving
and wealth inequality.
Please  join  me  in  congratulating  Benjamin  on  receiving  the  2018  Bernácer  Prize.  Benjamin,  I
wish you continued success and look forward to following your future work.
1
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
For a seminal contribution to this topic, see: Kaplan, G., Moll, B. and Violante, G. L. (2018), “Monetary Policy
According to HANK”, American Economic Review, Vol. 108(3), March, pp. 697–743.
Gabaix, X., Lasry, J.-M., Lions, P.-L. and Moll, B. (2016), “The Dynamics of Inequality”,  Econometrica, Vol. 84, No
6, November, pp. 2071–2111.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
