Øystein Olsen: How does the key policy rate operate?
Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Centre
for Monetary Economics (CME), BI Norwegian Business School, Oslo, 25 September 2018.
Accompanying charts of this speech.
Introduction
 Just  over  a  week  ago,  we  marked  the  tenth  anniversary  of  an  event  that  shook  the  global
economy. The Lehman Brothers bankruptcy added fuel to a smouldering financial crisis, which
gathered  strength  and  spread  quickly.  Financial  market  activity  came  to  a  halt.  Investors
demanded  high  risk  premiums.  Faced  with  a  crisis  that  could  lead  the  economy  into  a  deep
recession, central banks cut policy rates sharply and injected liquidity into the market. It was the
beginning  of  ten  years  of  historically  low  interest  rates  and  the  use  of  unconventional
instruments. It would take a long time to get economies back on their feet again.    
For  Norway,  the  financial  crisis  brought  an  abrupt  end  to  a  three-year  long  period  of  gradual
increases in the key policy rate. In the course of autumn 2008, the key policy rate was lowered
three times, by a total of 2.75 percentage points. By the following summer, the key policy rate
had been lowered further, to 1.25 percent. Even though growth in the Norwegian economy picked
up  fairly  quickly,  Norwegian  interest  rates  over  the  next  few  years  were  influenced  by  a
persistently  low  international  interest  rate  level.  The  fall  in  oil  prices  in  2014  led  to  a  further
reduction in the key policy rate in Norway.
Chart: Gradual normalisation of monetary policy
Last  week,  Norges  Bank  raised  the  key  policy  rate  for  the  first  time  in  seven  years.  If  the
economy evolves as currently envisaged, last week’s decision will be the beginning of a gradual
normalisation of the interest rate level. This is good news. It means that the Norwegian economy
is performing well. The effects of the fall in oil prices in 2014 have unwound. The economy has
shown solid growth in recent years and the labour market has been improving. The upturn in
trading partners’ economies, higher oil prices and low interest rates have lifted growth in Norway.
The outlook for the Norwegian economy implies that the key policy rate will be raised in the years
ahead.  Capacity  utilisation  is  close  to  a  normal  level.  Underlying  inflation  is  close  to  the  2%
inflation  target.  The  key  policy  rate  is  being  raised  to  prevent  pressures  in  the  economy  from
intensifying and triggering a surge in prices and wages. Raising the rate also reduces the risk of
a renewed rapid rise in property prices and debt. High price and wage inflation and a further build-
up of financial imbalances would increase the risk of a sharp economic downturn further out.
There are a number of factors to suggest that the key policy rate should be raised at a gradual
and cautious pace. An environment of low global interest rates limits the room for manoeuvre.
Raising the key policy rate in Norway too rapidly in the period ahead could act as a brake on the
upturn in such a way that unemployment rises and inflation becomes too low. Uncertainty about
the effects of higher interest rates also suggests a cautious approach to interest rate setting. We
have experienced a long period of low interest rates and rising household debt ratios. The effect
of  higher  interest  rates  will  therefore  likely  be  more  pronounced  than  the  effect  of  earlier  rate
increases. I will return to this later.
The  risk  outlook  also  reflects  growing  global  protectionism  and  turbulence  in  some  emerging
economies.  Lower-than-expected  global  growth  will  have  spillover  effects  on  the  Norwegian
economy.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  interest  rate  level  the  Bank  envisages  for  the  years  ahead  is  modest  compared  with
historical interest rate levels. In the Bank’s assessment, the level of the so-called neutral interest
rate has fallen over time (see Brubakk et al (2018) and Norges Bank (2018)). The key policy rate
is therefore not expected to be as high as in earlier upturns.
The objective of monetary policy is to maintain low and stable inflation and contribute to high and
stable output and employment over time. As monetary policy is to be flexible and forward-looking,
the key policy rate is lowered when the economy is entering a downturn. Similarly, the key policy
rate should be raised before the economy overheats.
Monetary policy affects inflation, output and employment through several channels.
One important channel is the exchange rate channel. Changes in the krone exchange rate affect
economic activity in some business sectors and prices for imported goods and services. The
krone exchange rate has acted as a shock absorber, as it did in 2014. A sharp depreciation of
the krone dampened the negative effects of the fall in oil prices on the real economy. A low key
policy rate contributed to underpinning a weak krone. At the same time, the responsible actions
of the social partners restrained domestic cost inflation. The exchange rate and the interest rate
differential will continue to be important factors ahead.
The  key  policy  rate  also  has  a  direct  impact  on  household  and  corporate  demand.  The  rate
reduction  in  2014  stimulated  consumption  and  investment.  Now  that  growth  has  gained  a
foothold, we can take our foot off the pedal a little. Gradually higher interest rates will reduce the
pressure that would otherwise have been generated by higher activity, higher employment and
higher wage growth. 
A  third  channel  is  often  referred  to  as  the  expectations  channel.  For  monetary  policy  to  be
effective,  changes  in  the  key  policy  rate  must  pass  through  to  market  rates.  Monetary  policy
effectiveness increases if changes in the key policy rate influence expectations of future interest
rate  levels. An  investment  is  made  to  provide  a  profit  over  a  number  of  years,  and  mortgage
payments have to be met throughout the term of the loan. So today’s interest rate level is not the
only important factor. The interest rate path we published last week showed that the key policy
rate will probably be raised gradually. When households and firms perceive signals concerning
future interest rate developments as credible, the impact of interest rate increases that lie ahead
may occur earlier.
Communication enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy
Communication  about  the  evolution  of  the  economy  is  therefore  an  important  part  of  Norges
Bank’s monetary policy. We communicate our view of the economic situation and our monetary
policy trade-offs in various ways. The Bank’s most important channel of communication is the
monetary policy report. The report contains a thorough review of new information that is relevant
to the evolution of the Norwegian economy and the background for the interest rate decision. Last
week, the Bank launched a new product – Pengepolitikken kort fortalt [Monetary policy in brief].
[1] We believe there is a need for this. This product is designed for Norwegian readers looking for
a  more  generalised,  brief  description  of  the  background  for  the  interest  rate  decision.  The
fundamental message conveyed is of course the same as in the Bank’s monetary policy report.
Norges  Bank  has  published  forecasts  for  the  key  policy  rate  three  to  four  years  ahead  since
2005. If the economy evolves as envisaged by Norges Bank, this is the Bank’s best forecast for
future key policy rate levels. The interest rate forecast is thus a summary of the message in the
monetary policy report.
It  is  important  to  remember  that  the  interest  rate  forecast  is  a  conditional  forecast  and  not  a
promise. The interest rate path has been revised frequently, and sometimes fairly substantially –
as  during  the  financial  crisis  and  in  the  wake  of  the  oil  price  fall  in  2014.  Nor  are  market
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
expectations of future interest rates necessarily aligned with Norges Bank’s interest rate path. On
the contrary, the two curves have often diverged to some extent, particularly at somewhat longer
horizons.
Norges  Bank’s  analyses  nonetheless  indicate  that  we  are  successful  in  steering  market
expectations in the desired direction (Brubakk et al (2017)), for example by publishing the interest
rate path. The analyses also find that central bank and market revisions of interest rate paths in
the  periods  between  monetary  policy  meetings  are  strongly  correlated.  This  suggests  that
market participants have a good understanding of the central bank’s response pattern and of how
monetary policy will react to new information about economic developments.
Need for alternative reference rates
Chart: From key rate to money market rate …
Market expectations of future interest rates are reflected in the Norwegian monetary market rate
– three-month Nibor. This rate can be decomposed into the average expected key policy rate
over  the  next  three  months  and  a  risk  premium,  usually  referred  to  as  the  money  market
premium. Over time, three-month Nibor has tracked the key policy rate. 
Three-month Nibor is a so-called reference rate, used as a basis for the pricing of many financial
contracts  in  Norway,  such  as  loan  contracts  and  interest  rate  swaps.  In  its  capacity  as  a
reference rate, Nibor is a key element linking the key policy rate with the interest rates facing
households and enterprises.
Chart: … and on to mortgage rates
The interest rates paid by households and enterprises on their bank loans are set to cover banks’
costs as well as to provide a return on equity for the banks’ shareholders. A large share of banks’
costs consists of the cost of wholesale loans to fund retail lending. Prices for these loans will
typically be formulated as a premium on top of three-month Nibor. Changes in Nibor will thereby
affect banks’ funding costs and lending rates for households and enterprises.
Reference rates are used to hedge against future changes in the general interest rate level. The
pricing of bank bonds can serve as an example. When the interest rate on a bond is set at the
reference  rate  plus  a  fixed  risk  premium,  both  the  bank’s  interest  expenses  and  the  bond
purchaser’s interest income will depend on the level of the reference rate – and thereby on the
general interest rate level. When the two parties agree to the contract, they can then focus on the
contract’s specific conditions, such as the credit risk associated with the issuing bank.
Internationally,  Libor  and  Euribor  are  important  reference  rates.  Libor  is  quoted  for  several
currencies, including USD and GBP. Euribor is the reference rate for the euro area. Reference
rates are widely used, particularly in the derivatives market. The total value of contracts linked to
USD Libor is estimated at close to USD 200 trillion. This is around ten times the size of US GDP
(Federal Reserve 2018). [2]  
In the years following the financial crisis, reference rates have been the focus of considerable
criticism,  and  work  is  in  progress  internationally  to  reform  and  improve  them  (Dudley  (2018),
Duffie and Stein (2015), Lund (2018)).
Reference  rates  deserve  critical  attention,  for  a  number  of  reasons.  First,  the  basis  for  the
current  rate-setting  process  has  become  increasingly  inadequate.  Libor  and  Euribor  were
supposed to reflect the price of unsecured interbank loans. But the calculation of reference rates
is  only  to  a  limited  extent  based  on  actual  trades.  This  is  because  the  volume  of  unsecured
interbank  loans  is  very  small  for  maturities  of  more  than  a  few  days.  In  the  years  since  the
financial crisis, activity in this market has declined considerably. Banks quoting money market
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
rates  at  longer  maturities  have  therefore  increasingly  had  to  base  their  submissions  on
judgement and information from other markets. [3]
Second,  some  reference  rates,  in  particular  Libor,  but  also  Euribor,  have  been  the  target  of
manipulation.  Participants  that  were  both  active  in  the  market  and  involved  in  quoting  interest
rates were able to make substantial profits by manipulating rate submissions. Some instances of
misconduct  that  have  been  uncovered  have  also  resulted  in  fines,  legal  proceedings  and
convictions.[4]
Control and monitoring requirements in relation to Libor submissions have been tightened, and a
number of banks have become sceptical of taking on the legal risk involved in being a panel bank.
The  UK  Financial  Conduct  Authority  has  finalised  an  agreement  with  the  Libor  panel  banks
whereby the banks have committed to remain as submitters until the end of 2021 (Bailey (2017)).
After this time, the authorities can no longer guarantee that quotes will be submitted for Libor.
Prospects  that  Libor  may  be  discontinued  in  a  few  years’  time  have  amplified  the  need  to
establish alternatives to today’s reference rates.
Some countries have already published recommendations for alternative reference rates. All the
proposals are based on the shortest rates, ie overnight rates, as the new reference rates are
required to be based on actual, observed transactions.
The  transition  to  new  reference  rates  in  other  countries  also  has  an  impact  on  the  use  of
reference rates in Norway. The removal of foreign ibor rates would change the markets on which
the Norwegian banking sector currently relies.
Norges Bank has, in consultation with Finance Norway, taken the initiative to establish a working
group  with  a  mandate  to  consider  alternative  reference  rates  for  the  Norwegian  market.  The
working  group  comprises  Norwegian  banks  and  branches  of  foreign  banks  with  a  good
understanding  of  the  Norwegian  money  market.  Finance  Norway  and  Norges  Bank  have
observer status, while Norges Bank also provides secretariat support.[5]
Reference  rates  play  an  important  role,  for  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  and  in  financial
contracts. In only a few years’ time, Nibor may be replaced by other reference rates. This may
affect the design of a range of financial contracts. Preparing for new reference rates will require
ample time and planning. When the working group presents its proposals in 2019, an important
first step will also have been taken in Norway.
How will consumption be affected by a rise in interest rates?
Let me return to today’s situation. There are now prospects for a gradual rise in interest rates in
the years ahead.
A  less  expansionary  monetary  policy  aims  to  prevent  the  economy  from  overheating  further
ahead. Households account for a substantial portion of demand in the economy. Households’
response to higher rates will therefore have a considerable impact on the effectiveness of the
interest  rate  increase.  In  the  Bank’s  current  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  the  Norwegian
economy,  it  is  assumed  that  the  gradual  rise  in  interest  rates  will  curb  growth  in  household
consumption somewhat.
Many households have likely become accustomed to a low interest rate level over the past few
years. In the past ten years, the key policy rate has been reduced as many as 13 times. In the
meantime, household debt ratios have increased. Almost one quarter of total debt is now held by
households that have never experienced an interest rate increase. With a higher level of debt, an
interest rate change will have a more pronounced impact. At the same time, uncertainty about
the effect of interest rate changes has increased, suggesting a cautious approach to interest rate
setting.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  rise  in  interest  rates  affects  consumption  through  various  mechanisms.  Some  of  these
mechanisms operate with a lag. Household disposable income will be affected by slightly more
subdued growth in employment and wages. Higher interest rates may also curb the rise in house
prices, resulting in a smaller rise in housing wealth than would otherwise have been the case.
Other  consequences  of  an  interest  rate  increase  will  have  a  more  direct  impact  on  private
consumption.
First,  higher  interest  rates  push  up  the  cost  of  consumption  today  relative  to  consumption
tomorrow.  Debt-financed  consumption  becomes  more  costly,  while  saving  provides  a  higher
return,  pointing  towards  lower  consumption  today.  Credible  signals  that  the  interest  rate  will
remain at a higher level ahead may amplify this effect.   
Second, the interest rate  increase  has  a  direct  impact  on  household  disposable  income.  The
strength of this channel will depend on the overall debt level and the distribution of debt (Gerdrup
et al (2018)).
While higher interest rates means increased expenses for some, interest income increases for
others.  If  housing  wealth  is  disregarded,  Norwegian  households  as  a  whole  are  in  a  net  debt
position. As higher interest rates means higher net interest expenses, a higher interest rate level
will in isolation reduce household purchasing power.
Chart: Household debt has increased
The  elevated  debt  level  has  amplified  this  effect.  Debt  as  a  share  of  household  income  has
increased by 12 percentage points since Norges Bank last raised the key policy rate. Measured
as a share of household income, debt is approaching double its level in 2000. Bank deposits
have risen considerably less than loan debt. The negative effect of an interest rate increase on
household income thereby carries relatively greater weight than previously.
Chart: Greater impact of interest rate increase on disposable income
In  other  words,  an  interest  rate  increase  will  curtail  household  purchasing  power  more  than
previously. In 2000, a one percentage point rise in the key policy rate would have resulted in an
increase  in  net  interest  expenses  equivalent  to  less  than  ½  percent  of  household  disposable
income.  In  2017,  this  share  increased  to  one  percent  of  disposable  income. An  interest  rate
increase therefore probably has a stronger effect on private consumption than previously.
How much stronger the impact of the interest rate is depends on how debt is distributed across
household groups. Changes in the distribution of debt can thereby have consequences for the
effect of monetary policy. Analyses based on microdata for the household sector can provide
useful insight.
International  studies  have  shown  that  households  with  limited  financial  buffers  tend  to  allow
temporary income changes, for example as a result of changes in interest expenses, to impact
fully  on  consumption.  This  is  supported  by  a  study  recently  conducted  on  Norwegian  data
(Fagereng  et  al  (2018)).  This  study  finds  that  the  relative  decrease  in  consumption  after  a
reduction in income, referred to by economists as the marginal propensity to consume, depends
on households’ financial situation.
The  literature  also  refers  to  the  “wealthy  hand-to-mouth”  (Kaplan  and  Violante  (2018)),  ie
households with high incomes, illiquid housing assets and relatively high loan-to-value ratios. In
the  face  of  higher  interest  expenses,  this  group  may  well  react  by  making  a  considerable
adjustment in consumption.
Chart: Debt and wealth vary through the life cycle
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Households’ financial position can largely be inferred from the stage in the life cycle. The chart
shows  how  assets  and  debt  vary  with  age.  On  average,  the  highest  level  of  debt  is  for
households in the 30–40 age group. An interest rate increase will have the greatest impact on
this group, which also has modest financial buffers. [6] This group’s wealth primarily comprises
illiquid housing assets that may be difficult to draw on in hard times.
Debt is lower for the older age groups. These groups include people who entered the housing
market when house prices were lower. Since many have built up liquid wealth in the form of bank
deposits or other kinds of assets, net interest income could increase for some. An interest rate
increase would likely have a smaller effect on consumption in this group than in younger groups.
The oldest age groups are virtually debt-free. Many older households have substantial housing
wealth and money in the bank. Higher interest rates therefore mean higher disposable income
and could provide room for some increase in consumption.
Chart: Higher debt ratios in all age groups
We have experienced a period of sharply rising house prices and debt. The price of entry into the
housing market has increased. The 35–45 age group has shown the largest increase in debt
ratios, measured in percentage points. Debt ratios in both this group and the somewhat younger
groups now average around three times post-tax income. These groups have a high marginal
propensity  to  consume.  The  elevated  debt  level  in  these  age  groups  amplifies  the  cash-flow
channel.
But young and middle-aged households are not the only groups to borrow more than previously.
A somewhat larger share of total household debt is now in fact held by the older age groups.
More debt among the older households reflects the fact that older adults are also active in the
housing market and are taking on more debt.
To the extent an interest rate increase now curbs growth in household consumption more than
previously, it is because many households have taken on substantial debt, not because there
has been a noticeable change in the distribution of debt.
Chart: Higher interest expenses for many households
Since there has been a broad increase in debt ratios across age groups, many households will
feel the effects of higher lending rates. The chart shows the effect of a one percentage point rise
in interest rates on disposable income for the different age groups. In a comparison of the profile
in 2016 with the profile in 2005 and 2010, the most striking feature is that interest burdens rise in
many age groups. The age profile itself is little changed. A similar chart showing the distribution
of higher interest expenses across income deciles would have shown the same picture.
Even though many households will feel the effects of higher interest expenses, the increase will
be manageable for most people. The share of households with high debt relative to income, low
debt-servicing capacity and a high loan-to-value ratio is small, and lower than just a few years
ago (Norges Bank (2017)).
Chart: Higher bank deposits dampen some of the effect of higher debt
How quickly an interest rate increase will lead to lower growth in consumption also depends on
the size of households’ financial buffers. Buffers in the form of bank savings can be drawn down
if  interest  expenses  rise,  reducing  the  need  to  adjust  consumption.  Even  though  some
households have little in the way of financial buffers, many households’ buffers are larger than
just a few years ago. Despite the rise in debt ratios between 2010 and 2016, an interest rate
increase will lay claim to a smaller share of bank deposits, particularly for the groups with the
highest level of net debt. This will counteract some of the effect a higher level of debt has had on
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the impact of an interest rate increase via the cash-flow channel.
Studies of heterogeneity provide new insight into how the key policy rate operates. The use of
different  types  of  microdata  is  therefore  a  priority  for  Norges  Bank.  We  want  to  include  the
knowledge gained from microdata in the Bank’s analytical apparatus, and work is in progress to
develop a general equilibrium model using heterogeneous agents. The model takes into account
that debt ratios depend on the lifecycle stage of the household. The effect of the labour market
situation  also  varies  across  age  groups.  All  these  model  features  influence  the  strength  of
monetary policy’s impact.
The new model has the potential to be a useful supplement to the Bank’s main model, NEMO.
Neither  the  household  debt-to-GDP  ratio  nor  the  distribution  of  debt  and  assets  across  age
groups  are  constant.  Over  time,  changes  in  these  variables  can  influence  the  effect  of  the
interest  rate  on  the  economy.  The  combination  of  an  ample  supply  of  microdata  and  more
complex model analyses will strengthen the analytical basis for monetary policy.
Conclusion
Let me conclude. After a long period of low interest rates, the key policy rate is again on the rise.
The rate increase can be expected to be gradual and is a response to the solid activity we now
see in the Norwegian economy. Solid activity also means higher employment and prospects for
higher wage growth, and Norwegian households will be better off financially despite the rise in
interest rate expenses.
With the high level of household debt, the rate increase will likely have a greater impact on private
consumption  than  earlier.  However,  the  strength  of  this  impact  is  uncertain.  This  suggests  a
cautious approach to interest rate setting – a strategy we are now pursuing.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
