  Central Bank of Barbados 
Tom Adams Financial Centre, Spry Street, Bridgetown 
P.O. Box 1016 
Telephone: (246) 436-6870 : Fax. (246) 436-7836 
E-Mail Address: info@centralbank.org.bb  
Website: www.centralbank.org.bb 
 
 
 
Remarks by Mr. Cleviston Haynes 
Governor, Central Bank of Barbados 
at 
“Debt Exchange – Risks and Opportunities: Leveraging the Jamaican Experience” 
Courtney Blackman Grande Salle 
Thursday, November 15, 2018 
 On  behalf  of  the  Management  and  staff  of  the  Central  Bank,  I  welcome  everyone  to  this  workshop, 
which  is  geared  towards  sharing  insights  on  the  functioning  of  the  money  and  capital  markets  in  the 
aftermath of the restructuring of Barbados’ domestic debt. I take this opportunity to thank NCB Capital 
Markets  Barbados  Limited  for  its  willingness  to  share  with  us  their  experience  and  knowledge  gained 
from the Jamaica Debt restructuring exercise in 2013. 
On  June  1,  2018,  the  newly-elected  administration  announced  the  unprecedented  decision  that 
Barbados  had decided to suspend  the  servicing of commercial foreign debt  payments and restructure 
both  domestic  and  external  debt.  The  purpose  was  to  limit  foreign  reserves  outflows,  while  securing 
meaningful  and  gradual  debt  reduction,  thereby  reducing  financing  needs  and  restoring  debt 
sustainability.  
The subsequent launch of a comprehensive domestic debt restructuring exercise on September 7 2018, 
as  a  critical  component  of  the  Barbados  Economic  Recovery  Transformation  (BERT)  Programme, 
achieved  near  unanimous  acceptance  of  the  debt  exchange  proposals,  with  97%  participation  by 
creditors. The terms of the new instruments involve some sacrifice by all bondholders, as Government 
seeks to balance the fiscal imperatives, including anchoring the BERT programme through a reduction in 
the debt-to-GDP ratio to 60% by 2033, against the need to preserve financial stability and protect the 
long-term interests of small bondholders.  
The restructuring comes in the intermediate aftermath of the adoption of the new accounting standard 
IFRS9. This will have  implications for how financial institutions,  regulators and auditors assess balance 
sheets  going  forward.  From  a  capital  market  perspective,  the  fundamental  question  is  how  will  the 
domestic  capital  market  behave?  Will  activity  decline  and,  if  so,  for  how  long?  Will  investors  be 
predisposed to some instruments over others? 
These  questions  are  relevant  given  the  size  and  comprehensive  nature  of  the  restructuring  and  the 
limited  availability  of  alternative  investment  instruments.  At  the  same  time,  new  instruments  and 
institutional  arrangements  are  likely  to  influence  the  functioning  of  the  market.  The  new  debt 
instruments  are  markedly  different  from  those  that  existed  before.  The  new  coupons  are  lower  and 
maturities are longer, with limited issuance of short-term Treasury bills. In addition, several of the new 
instruments  will  be  redeemed  in  tranches  rather  than  as  bullets,  enabling  a  gradual  reduction  in  the 
debt stock. An added feature of some of the new securities structures is a Natural Disaster Clause, which 
takes account of our nation’s vulnerability to natural disasters by affording Government the option to 
defer debt service payments, on the occurrence of a catastrophic weather event. 
Apart from the passage of the Debt Holder (Approval of Debt Restructuring) Act 2018, which gives effect 
to the debt restructuring, there have been consequential amendments to the existing body of legislation 
governing  public  debt  issuances,  namely  the  Local  Loans,  Treasury  Bills  and  Tax  Certificates  and  the 
Savings Bonds Acts.  In addition, Parliament also passed the Dematerialisation of Government Securities 
Act  2018  to  provide  for  the  issuance  of  statements  rather  than  physical  certificates  for  the  new 
instruments. 
This change to the issue format, as well as in the nature of the securities, has resulted in the need for 
the Bank to alter its pre-existing software to facilitate ease of issue of statements. The process has taken 
somewhat  longer  than  originally  envisaged,  but  our  staff  has  been  working  assiduously  with  our 
software  providers  to  manage  this  transition  in  an  effort  to  enable  the  timely  issuance  of  the  new 
statements. I have been advised that, pending any last minute technical glitches, the process for issuing 
statements in the new format should begin today.   
An important benefit of the issuance of securities in this book-entry format is the resultant settlement 
efficiency  that  can  be  facilitated.  Currently,  the  trading  of  government  securities  on  the  secondary 
capital  market  is characterised  as  thin  and  one  impediment  to  trading  activity is  the  length  of time  it 
takes for securities’ transfers, with respect to the registration of ownership. With securities now being 
issued  in  a  dematerialised,  book-entry  format,  it  is  envisioned  that  secondary  market  activity  will  be 
executed more timely and efficiently, compared to what was feasible with physical certificates.  
The Central Bank is planning to introduce a web-based interface between its bond registry, the brokers 
and the Barbados Stock Exchange, whereby brokers will have read-only access to verify the holdings of 
investors seeking to divest their securities. This will be supported by a messaging facility with the Central 
Bank to ensure that the transfer process is effectively completed.  
At the outset, it is unlikely that there will be any significant issuance of domestic debt in the short-term, 
partly  because  the  fiscal  consolidation  will  remove  the  need  for  Government  to  raise  new  financing. 
However,  institutional  investors  will  continue  to  require  instruments  for  investment  and  an  adequate 
means to facilitate the pricing of these instruments. The newly-issued securities in the format of varying 
maturities  allow  investors to select the maturity desired to satisfy their investment needs. Experience 
shows  that  post  debt  restructuring,  default  risk  spreads  narrow  and  sovereign  credit  ratings  improve, 
enabling reductions in the yields on government paper. The Bank will shortly publish an indicative yield 
 2 
curve  for  domestic  debt to provide  guidance  to the market, and will also use this benchmark to price 
trades with its own account holders.   
We do hope that these initiatives will contribute to the development of an active secondary securities 
market and advance the development of the local capital market.  
Many of you would have observed that during 2017 the Bank increased the securities reserve ratio for 
commercial  banks  as  a  temporary  measure  until  Government  could  strengthen  its  public  finances. 
Before I close, therefore, I want to indicate that the Bank’s Board of Directors has approved a reduction 
in the securities reserve  ratio from 20%  to 17.5%,  effective  November 29, 2018. This decision reflects 
the  Bank’s  commitment  to  reduce  this  ratio  as  Government’s  fiscal  situation  improves,  and  further 
phased reductions are anticipated in the coming months.  
I wish you an informative workshop.  
    3 
