Luis de Guindos: Building a resilient Economic and Monetary Union
Lectio magistralis by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, opening
the XXIX Edition of the Masters Programme in European Union law of the University Carlos III of
Madrid, Madrid, 5 October 2018.
The crisis, its aftermath and the road to recovery
This autumn marks ten years since the start of the global financial crisis.
 It  was  a  seismic  event  that  laid  bare  a  number  of  weaknesses  in  the  international  financial
system – and in the oversight of that system. In its wake, it also revealed profound shortcomings
in  the  architecture  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  which,  ultimately,  resulted  in  the
global financial crisis morphing into a euro area crisis – and pushing many parts of Europe into a
second recession.
Thankfully, the experiences of the past decade have prompted a strengthening of the regulations
and the establishment of institutions with the necessary instruments to ensure stability. At global
level this took the form of stronger regulation and cross-border cooperation. At European level, it
meant a multi-dimensional reform of EMU: financial, fiscal, economic and even political.
As a result, and supported by the ECB’s monetary policy, the euro area returned to growth in
2013, and has created more than nine million jobs since then.
We have come a long way. But there can be little doubt that we are still feeling the effects of the
crisis  and  are  still  addressing  some  of  the  underlying  fault  lines.  It’s  an  important  task,  but  it
seems that it is no longer being pursued with the same sense of urgency.
That is why, today, I want to take this opportunity to highlight areas where we need to continue to
push forward and put EMU on a more sustainable footing.
After  briefly  reviewing  the  progress  already  made,  I  will  argue  that  the  current  debate  on
deepening our monetary union requires three main elements to ensure the long-term viability of
the European project. First, we need to remain ambitious in completing the banking union so as
to  safeguard  financial  stability.  Second,  we  need  to  revamp  our  fiscal  rules  and  create  a
stabilisation instrument to enhance the resilience of the monetary union as a whole. Third, we
need to bolster long-term economic growth by implementing structural reforms and harnessing
the potential of Europe’s Single Market.
Responding to, and learning from, the crisis
In order to get a clearer idea of the next steps it’s worth briefly reviewing those that were taken to
overcome the crisis.
The first part of the response – which was both global and European – entailed immediate crisis-
fighting measures.
Facing unprecedented turbulence in the financial sector, governments in the G20 signalled their
commitment  to  working  together  and  coordinating  their  financial  and  fiscal  policies. And  they
provided substantial state support to stabilise the banking sector and protect deposits.
Central banks also played a key role in responding to the instability in the system, including by
adopting numerous non-standard measures. The ECB started by providing the necessary short-
term liquidity in the form of fixed-rate full allotments, extending longer-term liquidity facilities, and
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
expanding its collateral framework to maintain the transmission of monetary policy throughout the
euro area. It also launched an asset purchase programme to bring the economy onto a path of
inflation leading back to price stability.
Crucially, the action of the central banks was based on the understanding that, without financial
stability, central banks are devoid of the necessary basis to transmit monetary impulses to the
real economy.
The  second  crisis-fighting  measure  was  a  forceful  regulatory  response  to  enhance  banks’
resilience. This started with a reform of the existing international rules agreed in Basel which, in
particular, led banks to increase their levels of capital and liquidity.
To  limit  the  damage  in  the  event  of  another  crisis  and  contain  the  costs  for  sovereigns,  we
introduced resolution frameworks including bail-in tools. The Banking Recovery and Resolution
Directive (BRRD), in force since 2016, is a crucial regulatory change in Europe that ends the
culture of bailouts by the public sector, and introduces the culture of bail-ins. Banks’ capacity to
absorb  losses  has  been  enhanced,  with  minimum  requirement  for  own  funds  and  eligible
liabilities (MREL) being set at EU level, and total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) for large banks
being set at global level. These new rules aim to ensure that banks can fail and be resolved in an
orderly fashion, and to shift the burden of crisis resolution from taxpayers to private creditors.
The crisis also shattered the mistaken belief that an exclusive focus on price stability and the
soundness of individual institutions would be sufficient to safeguard financial stability.
That’s why we expanded the policy toolkit to include instruments designed to address any build-
up of imbalances in certain parts of the system, leading to the birth of macroprudential policy.
Concretely, this means we now have instruments which can be deployed at national, sectoral or
bank  level  in  a  targeted  way.  For  example,  authorities  can  require  banks  to  build  up  a
countercyclical capital buffer in good times so that they can weather bad times. They can also
impose additional requirements on banks to address risks arising in sectors such as the real
estate market.
The third part of the response to the crisis was unique to Europe – setting up new institutions and
frameworks.  Key  to  this  was  the  realisation  that  the  long-term  viability  of  EMU  needed  a
comprehensive approach to address its weaknesses, not a quick fix.
On  the  financial  union  side,  Europe  decided  to  safeguard  financial  stability  by  transferring
responsibility  for  banking  supervision  to  the  European  level.   The  European  supervisory
authorities were set up to make sure that the newly created single rulebook would be uniformly
applied across the EU. The establishment of the banking union with a single supervisor in the
euro area further ensures that banks in the euro area operate under equal conditions regardless
of their location, as the ECB seeks to implement common high standards of supervision, foster a
level playing field and promote financial integration.
1
But common supervision was always just one piece of the puzzle. Indeed, the establishment of
the Single Resolution Mechanism as the second pillar of the banking union addressed the lack of
mechanisms to deal with the failure of cross-border and of significant banks.
Also as regards fiscal and economic policies, the Union drew the lessons from the crisis and
strengthened its frameworks. The Stability and Growth Pact was revised and reinforced by the
fiscal compact. And the macroeconomic imbalance procedure was put in place to monitor and
address the wide variety of economic imbalances that had fuelled the crisis.
Finally,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  was  established  to  support  countries  that  faced
difficulties in accessing markets and to bring them back to a sustainable growth path.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
All in all, the different elements of the response ensured that the crisis was overcome and that
the seeds for longer-term reforms were planted.
I wish I could stop here now and say all is fine. Unfortunately, I can’t. As memories of the crisis
start to fade, so does the sense of urgency which drove EMU’s institutional reform.
Further reforms are needed to ensure that integration in the banking and capital markets leads to
better risk diversification, thus stabilising the financial sector and protecting the economy from
any  future  economic  shocks.   And,  at  the  same  time,  we  need  to  work  on  the  fiscal  and
economic governance to make sure that economic integration doesn’t bring with it an increased
risk of imbalances.
Completing the banking union with confidence-building measures
2
Instead of finalising the banking union to reap all its benefits, we have come to what seems to be
a fork in the road, with some saying we should focus primarily on risk reduction, while others are
emphasising the importance of risk sharing.
Both approaches have valid arguments, and I would argue that both paths can be followed at the
same time.
The  advocates  of  risk  reduction  argue  that  the  underlying  vulnerabilities  in  the  banking  sector
which  triggered  the  crisis  need  to  be  forcefully  tackled.  In  particular,  there  should  be  an
assurance that the resources pooled at EU level in the banking union are not used to pay for the
fallout of past policy mistakes.
And we have made progress on that front: banks are now more resilient due to their increased
levels and quality of capital and liquidity buffers. MREL requirements are gradually being met, as
envisaged.  Progress  in  tackling  legacy  problems,  such  as  the  high  levels  of  non-performing
loans, is ongoing and should continue.
On the other hand, the advocates of risk sharing rightly argue that mechanisms are needed to
build confidence in the resilience of the financial sector as a whole and that such measures are
also indispensable to consolidate trust in the euro area.
Trust that, in turn, is vital to effectively reduce risks.
Cases-in-point include the establishment of a credible backstop for the Single Resolution Fund
(SRF) and of a European deposit insurance scheme (EDIS).
Establishing a credible backstop for the SRF will instil confidence in the markets that resolution
will happen in an orderly fashion, thus helping resolution authorities to perform their tasks while
avoiding financial stability risks.
Similarly, a fully mutualised EDIS would contribute to making sure that bank failures do not trigger
financial instability, as depositors will trust that their deposits are safe, regardless of the location
of the bank in question. EDIS and the backstop for the SRF are thus not only risk-sharing but
also confidence- building mechanisms contributing to risk reduction.
And to foster confidence that funds pooled in EDIS will not lead to systematic transfers between
banking sectors, banks’ contributions to the deposit insurance fund can be designed to reflect the
3
relative riskiness of banks, following a polluter-pays principle.
There are some who believe that public backstops should remain a national responsibility. But for
both institutional and economic reasons this cannot be the answer.
Given  the  reality  of  the  banking  union,  it  would  make  little  sense  for  national  governments  to
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
individually backstop the financial sector without having the responsibility or tools for much of its
supervision and resolution. Moreover, as long as national authorities are responsible for bearing
the  costs  of  crises,  they  will  be  inclined  to  keep  resources  within  their  borders,  or  ring-fence
them, which in turn will undermine cross-border financial integration.
But also economically, the crisis demonstrated beyond a doubt how costly and difficult it is for
national  governments  to  manage  banking  crises  that  are  ultimately  international  in  origin  and
often  beyond  their  control.  Pooling  of  resources  at  European  level  to  deal  with  the  failure  of
cross-border and of significant banks is much more efficient.
Both EDIS and the backstop for the SRF would ultimately increase confidence and reduce the
likelihood and the cost of a bank failure. Risk reduction and risk sharing should thus not be seen
as  contradictions.  They  complement  each  other  and  should  thus  move  forward  in  parallel,
reinforcing each other so as to achieve the common aim of a resilient euro area.
All in all, there cannot be a single “risk reduction” indicator which would prove that we are “safe”
enough  to  complete  the  reforms  of  our  monetary  union.  Similarly,  there  should  be  no  false
expectations that EDIS and the SRF backstop will firmly establish our Economic and Monetary
Union in all its dimensions.
Revamping  the  fiscal  rules  and  creating  stabilising  instruments  to  enhance  EMU
resilience
Private risk sharing through financial markets is essential to absorb shocks. But market-based
adjustment  cannot  properly  cope  with  large  shocks,  when  the  private  sector  as  a  whole
contracts. In such a scenario, fiscal policies have to be activated to maintain stability, without
over-burdening  monetary  policy.  This,  in  turn,  also  ensures  a  stable  macroeconomic
environment for banks.
There can be no question that the top priority in this area is for national policymakers to build up
fiscal buffers to ensure policy space for future downturns, just as bank supervisors now expect
banks to build up capital buffers in good times. This is particularly important in countries where
government debt is high and for which full adherence to the Stability and Growth Pact is critical
for safeguarding sound fiscal positions.
But Europe has a role to play in reinforcing national fiscal policies.
In  contrast  to  the  banking  union,  stronger  integration  in  the  fiscal  realm  did  not  result  in  the
establishment of effective fiscal instruments and institutions at European level to ensure stability.
That’s why, as a second priority, work needs to continue on designing a more complete fiscal
architecture.
Despite  many  reforms,  the  common  fiscal  rules  that  should  deliver  this  outcome  have  lost
traction.  Europe, therefore, needs to regain faith in its fiscal rules by having a frank discussion
on how to make them more effective and anti-cyclical.
4
The rules themselves will, however, not always be enough because sound domestic policies are
not always enough. Markets do at times overreact and penalise sovereigns over and above what
may be needed to restore a sustainable fiscal path. This is why there is also a need for public
risk sharing through a stabilisation capacity.
Designing a stabilisation instrument for the euro area is neither straightforward nor easy. But that
should not be an excuse for avoiding such a discussion and for taking concrete steps towards
establishing it.
Proposals have already been put on the table, for example in the form of a fiscal capacity with a
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
direct focus on stabilisation in the shape of investment protection or an unemployment insurance
mechanism. Other suggestions refer to a common budget that can provide public goods through
spending on joint investment projects or the broader political aims of the European Union, such
as defence.
Regardless of the exact form, it is vital that any euro area fiscal instrument comes with powerful
incentives  to  counteract  moral  hazard,  avoid  permanent  transfers  and  ensure  sound
policymaking at national level.
Bolstering long-term growth through structural reforms and allocative efficiency
The elements I have discussed so far – notably, more stable financial integration and common
fiscal instruments – can provide a shield against events that trap countries in downward spirals.
Long-term economic growth, however, is ultimately derived from increased allocative efficiency
and innovation, which can only be achieved by modernising the euro area’s economies.
Looking at the last 15 to 20 years, euro area countries with sound economic structures from the
outset have shown much higher long-term real growth and are more resilient. Some euro area
countries  adopted  ambitious  reforms  during  the  crisis  and  they  have  also  seen  good  results
afterwards – and the full effects are still materialising.
Nevertheless,  over  the  past  five  years,  structural  reform  implementation  in  the  euro  area  has
overall  been  sluggish  at  best.  Very  few  reforms  identified  at  the  European  level  have  been
substantially implemented in the last few years. Reversing this trend and putting our economy on
a higher convergence trajectory is thus a priority.
As  structural  reforms  remain  essentially  in  the  hands  of  national  governments,  those
governments should be the first ones to step up their efforts. Nevertheless, European policies, if
further developed, can be a significant catalyst and provide a strong engine for both growth and
employment, in various ways.
First,  there  is  scope  for  a  better  use  of  the  EU’s  budget.  The  discussions  on  the  2021-27
multiannual  financial  framework  offer  a  vital  opportunity  to  enhance  its  role  in  addressing
Europe’s structural challenges.
Second, the Single Market as an engine for convergence should be used to its fullest potential.
For consumers, the Single Market has already boosted competition in markets across the EU
yielding large benefits for consumers.  But also on the supply side, the Single Market provides
large productivity dividends by encouraging the integration of European value chains into global
chains. These chains have resulted in higher wages at all skill levels.
5
How  can  these  positive  effects  of  the  Single  Market  be  further  harnessed?  For  one,  by
completing it and expanding its reach into new policy areas, notably services. Services make up
over 70% of total EU GDP but only 5% relate to cross-border services.  Expanding the market
will drive economic progress, to the further benefit of consumers, businesses and the economy
as a whole.
Conclusion
6
Let me conclude.
We have gone a long to repair the flaws in the financial, regulatory and supervisory framework
which led to the crisis. We have taken bold steps to ensure that the euro is able to withstand
future shocks.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Reform fatigue always sets in over time. After all, the first calls to reform the international banking
rules were made directly after the crisis in 2008.  This year, ten years on, we are finalising the
last  details  of  these  reforms,  which  won’t  all  be  fully  implemented  until  2028,  20  years
on!  Similarly, the SRF is only being gradually built up and will not reach the target level until
2024, ten years after the implementation of the SRM Regulation.
7
8
Reforms take time. But we should not stop now.
9
Minsky  taught us that good times breed complacency, exuberance and optimism among market
participants. They can also lead to complacency among public authorities. While we cannot say
that we are completely out of the woods, economic growth in the euro area is currently solid and
broad-based. Public authorities should not let this opportunity go to waste; they should urgently
complete the reforms we initiated when the global financial crisis erupted in 2008.
This includes continuing on the path of reforms to reduce risks in the financial and public sectors.
But importantly it also includes risk sharing – alongside risk reduction – across national borders:
through integrated financial markets, a fully fledged European deposit guarantee scheme and an
incentive-compatible fiscal stabilisation function. If they are well designed, these elements can
further speed up the reduction of risks in all domains.
This project is undoubtedly ambitious, but it is essential to build resilience to future shocks, foster
stability and growth and improve the lives of the people of Europe.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
This choice addressed the “financial trilemma” identified by Dirk Schoenmaker, who wrote that the objectives of
(i) financial stability, (ii) financial integration and (iii) national financial policies are incompatible. Any two of the
three objectives can be combined, but not all three; one has to give. Dirk Schoenmaker (2011) “The financial
trilemma” in Economic Letters, 111, pp. 57–9.
Financial integration in Europe report, Special Feature A: Financial integration and risk sharing in a monetary
union, ECB, 2016.
See Carmassi, J., Dobkowitz, S., Evrard, J., Parisi, L., Silva A. and Wedow M., “Completing the Banking Union
with a European Deposit Insurance Scheme: who is afraid of cross-subsidisation?”, ECB Occasional Paper
Series No 208 (2018).
It does not help that some Member States with high debt levels are engaging in fiscal loosening during the
ongoing economic expansion. In doing so, they further undermine the credibility of the rules and erode mutual
trust. But even countries that were once the rules’ staunchest champions are not advocating them so strongly
now.
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3194929  There  is  evidence  demonstrating  that  the  EU  has
stricter competition laws, less market concentration of firms and less money spent on lobbying than in the
United  States.  This  yields  direct  dividends  for  Europe’s  consumers.  For  example,  it  is  estimated  that  US
consumers would gain USD 65 billion a year if US mobile service prices were in line with German ones.
cefup.fep.up.pt/uploads/fin%20seminars/2017/Semin%C3%A1rio_Mara%20Faccio_25.05.2017.pdf
European Parliament, “Understanding the Single Market for services”, Briefing, September 2016.
The “Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision” were published in September 2008.
www.bis.org/publ/bcbs144.htm
The final agreement on the Basel III reforms foresees a phased-in implementation of the standardised output
floor over five years between 2022 and 2027. Other elements of the agreement are foreseen to apply from
January  2022  (see Press release). Alongside the minimum regulatory requirements set out in the Basel III
framework,  large  banks  will  be  required  to  have  at  all  times  sufficient  loss-absorbing  and  recapitalisation
capacity available, as defined in the new standard on the adequacy of total loss-absorbing and recapitalisation
capacity in resolution (‘the TLAC standard’). The minimum requirements included in the TLAC standard will be
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
phased  in  from  2019  (and  fully  applied  in  2022),  but  large  institutions  headquartered  in  emerging  market
economies will be required to meet the full requirements by 1 January 2028 (see Press release).
9
H.P. Minsky, The Financial Instability Hypothesis, Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, Working Paper
No 74, May 1992.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
