  05.10.2018 
 The challenges to the Spanish banking industry  
Conference on banking, profitability and monetary normalisation /Universidad 
de Deusto, KPMG and El Correo 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Good morning. Let me first thank the organisers for their kind invitation to me to participate 
in this Deusto University event. It is a pleasure to be here with you today and to share some 
thoughts on the Banco España’s view of the main challenges currently facing the Spanish 
banking industry.  
As is well known, credit institutions were greatly affected by the last crisis. This was manifest 
in  a  strong  rise  in  impaired  assets,  including  both  non-performing  loans  and  real  estate 
foreclosures, and in a significant fall-off in profitability, which even turned negative in 2012.  
To  address  these  problems  it  was  necessary  to  undertake  intense  recapitalisation  and 
restructuring  in  the  industry.  As  a  result,  there  has  been  a  notable  and  generalised 
improvement  in  Spanish  banks’  financial  position.  Also  contributing  here  have  been  the 
recent roll-out of an extensive package of regulatory measures and the favourable course 
since 2013 of the macroeconomic setting and financial conditions, assisted by the ECB’s 
monetary policy measures and by other actions at the European and domestic levels.  
The Spanish banking industry’s improved financial position in recent years can clearly be 
seen both in terms of asset quality and in its profitability and solvency levels. Thus, from 
December 2013, when the deterioration in bank balance sheets was at its worst, to June 
2018 the volume of non-performing loans in transactions with the resident private sector 
has declined by 60%. And the amount of foreclosures has done so by 40% since its 2012 
peak. The consolidated return on equity, which in 2012 stood at around -25%, has gradually 
picked up to levels of 7% on data as at June 2018, and the overall capital ratio has risen 
from 11.4% in 2012 to 15.1%.  
Despite  this  notable  improvement  in  its  financial  position,  the  Spanish  banking  industry 
continues to face significant challenges. These are largely shared by other banking systems 
in the euro area, and include i) the reduction in assets impaired by the crisis, ii) the recovery 
in profitability, such that Spanish banks may draw closer to the solvency levels of other euro 
area banks, iii) adaptation to the new regulatory framework and, iv) the configuration of a 
new  competitive  setting  characterised  by  the  emergence  of  new  technologies  and 
competitors.  
I  shall  now  focus  on  describing  each  of  these  challenges,  beginning  with  that  of  the 
reduction in assets impaired by the crisis.  
As stated, the volume of non-performing loans has diminished significantly from its 2013 
peak.  This  reduction  has  been  assisted  by  the  economic  recovery,  insofar  as  it  has 
favourably impacted debtors’ ability to pay, and also by the disposal of impaired portfolios. 
The correction in terms of non-performing asset levels is in line with what was observed in 
previous cycles; but the adjustment in terms of the non-performing loans ratio is proving 
slower than on previous occasions, which is attributable to the flatness of credit during the 
current cycle.  
Compared  with  the  banking  systems  in  other  euro  area  countries  that  have  also 
accumulated  a  high  volume  of  non-performing  assets  during  the  crisis,  the  correction  in 
Spain is at a relatively more advanced stage. Indeed, the non-performing loans ratio in our 
country, at the consolidated level, stands at around the average for the euro area countries. 
 3/8 
 Moreover,  the  fall  at  banks  is  across  the  board,  albeit  sharper  for  those  that  were  in  a 
position  of  greater  vulnerability,  the  reflection  of  which  has  been  a  lessening  of  the 
dispersion of the non-performing loan ratio.  
Despite this progress, the non-performing assets ratio in Spain is still at a high level from a 
historical perspective. Our forecasts indicate that non-performing assets will continue on a 
path of correction in the coming years, boosted by economic growth, which we expect to 
run  into  the  medium  term,  albeit  at  more  moderate  rates  than  those  observed  in  recent 
years.  
In the absence of an active management policy pursued by banks, the non-performing loan 
ratio will continue to be relatively high in late 2020. That would be in line with international 
evidence showing the general slowness of these adjustment processes and highlights the 
need for such a process to be complemented by banks’ active management by means of 
sale agreements in respect of their portfolios of problem assets. Indeed, in 2017 and this 
year  there  have  been  successive  announcements  by  banks  of  agreements  with  asset 
management companies to reduce the volume of non-productive assets on their balance 
sheets. This will result in an improvement in the quality of Spanish bank balance sheets and, 
consequently,  in  their  supply  of  credit  to  the  economy  as  a  whole.  In  fact,  the  evidence 
available shows that there is a negative correlation between the non-performing loan ratio 
and credit growth.  
From another perspective, the swift progress in correcting the high levels of bad debts in 
Spain and in other euro area countries is crucial for easing the way to finalising the Banking 
Union  project  in  respect  of  its  remaining  pillar,  which  is  none  other  than  the  definitive 
creation of a pan-European, pooled and sufficiently backed deposit guarantee scheme. 
All  the  foregoing  justifies  the  special  interest  we  have  as  economic  and  supervisory 
authorities in credit institutions taking the appropriate measures to expedite the ongoing 
reduction in the volume of impaired assets. One of the most significant initiatives here is the 
package disclosed by the European Commission in March. It includes a proposal to review 
capital  requirement  regulations  with  a  provisioning  calendar  for  non-performing  loans,  a 
draft  directive  for  the  creation of  a  secondary  market  in  this  type  of  asset and  an  extra-
judicial  mechanism  to  speed  the  recovery  of  collateral,  and  the  publication  of  guidelines 
supporting  the  development  of  asset  management  companies.  For  its  part,  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism published guidelines in March 2017 for the management of non-
performing assets and, more recently, it has released an addendum to this in which it sets 
out  explicitly  its  supervisory  expectations  on  provisioning,  both  for  newly-arising  non-
performing assets and for the existing stock, as part of the supervisory review process. 
Restoring profitability levels is another of the main challenges the Spanish banking industry 
faces. While the profitability of Spanish banks has returned to positive figures and stands 
somewhat above average EU levels, it continues to be down on pre-crisis levels and below 
those observed in the banking systems of other developed economies such as Australia, 
Canada, the United States and Sweden. 
The current low level of the average profitability of Spanish banks is particularly apparent in 
business in Spain, which was the area most affected by the crisis. The international activity 
of Spanish banks, concentrated in a very small number of institutions, was a major source 
4/8 
  of  risk  diversification  during  the  crisis  since  it  enabled  them  to  counter  the  downturn  in 
Spain’s  situation  with  the  sound  economic  progress  in  other  areas.  In  any  event,  this 
business  segment  is  not  free  from  challenges,  especially  at  present  when  some  of  the 
economies to which our banks are exposed, such as Turkey and Argentina, are undergoing 
significant difficulties. Against this background, the international business model of Spanish 
banks,  based  primarily  on  activities  conducted  through  subsidiaries  operating  in  a 
decentralised  fashion,  with  financial  independence  and  engaging  in  traditional  banking 
activities,  is  a  mitigating  factor  that  should  be  borne  in mind.  That  said,  and  despite  the 
conjunctural difficulties facing some of the countries in which Spanish banks are present, I 
would  like  to  underscore  the  undoubted  importance  of  geographical  diversification  as  a 
source of medium and long-term value added and stability for these banks.  
The  low  profitability  of  the  banking  business  in  Spain  is  attributable  to  a  combination  of 
factors,  some  cyclical  and  others  more  structural.  First,  the  high  level of  non-performing 
assets ensuing from the effects of the crisis adversely affects banks’ income statements 
both through the decline in interest received and, especially, the increase in the attendant 
asset impairment losses. The volume of these losses for Spanish deposit institutions as a 
whole peaked in 2012 and has subsequently tended to fall, although these losses continue 
to  consume  a  large  portion  of  revenue,  meaning  that  pre-crisis  levels  have  not  been 
restored. Specifically, in terms of assets, these losses were, between 2015 and 2017, double 
those recorded between 2003 and 2005. 
Another telling determinant of the low profitability of the banking business in Spain is the 
significant  decline  in  income  since  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  associated  with  the  strong 
reduction in the size of bank balance sheets. During the upturn prior to the crisis, against a 
backdrop of high demand for bank lending and of very easy financing conditions, banks 
expanded  their  balance  sheets  notably,  the  reflection  of  which  was  a  strong  increase  in 
typical revenue in the banking business. To cater for this surge in activity, banks increased 
their  capacity  by  means  of  increasing  the  number  of  offices  and  staff,  thereby  raising 
operating expenses; but given that such expenses grew more moderately than income, the 
operating efficiency ratio underwent no erosion and results improved.  
With  the  onset  of  the  crisis  it  became  clear  that  the  aggregate  debt  levels  of  Spanish 
households and firms were unsustainable, which triggered an intense and lengthy process 
of deleveraging. The ensuing reduction in the size of bank balance sheets has undoubtedly 
affected net interest income.  
Banks reacted to this contraction in activity and in operating income by cutting back their 
capacity,  both  in  terms  of  offices  and  of  staff,  a  correction  which  was  assisted  by  the 
ongoing concentration in the banking industry. Despite the notable adjustment in productive 
capacity, operating expenses declined to a lesser extent than operating income, the result 
of the existence of certain overheads and of the expansionary behaviour of certain items. 
The upshot has been a decline in the profitability of the banking business. 
Given  that  the  outstanding  balances  of  lending  in  the  short  and  medium  term  are  not 
expected to grow in a similar way to how they did in the expansion prior to the crisis and 
such  that  they  may  offset  the  reduction  in  net  interest  income,  the  recovery  in  bank 
profitability will have to be based on the continuing adjustment of expenses, on the search 
for alternative sources of income and on improved efficiency.  
 5/8 
 In any event, in the search for profitable business, banks cannot ease off in their vigilance 
regarding lending standards. In the current setting, very high rates of credit expansion, as 
is occurring in the household bank lending segment for the purchase of consumer durables, 
might be indicative of an easing of risk acceptance and selection standards which, as past 
experience shows time and time again, ultimately translates into notable increases in non-
performing loans. Despite the limited weight of this business segment in Spanish banks’ 
overall credit portfolio, the rise in the volume of non-performing assets in this activity as a 
result of overly rapid credit growth should strike a note of caution: from being an alternative 
source of income it should not become a potential source of losses.  
Low interest rate levels have contributed to compressing banks’ net interest income given 
that, with zero proving an effective floor for the remuneration of most deposits, once that 
level  is  reached  banks  have  not  been  able  to  continue  reducing  their  funding  costs  in  a 
setting in which risk-free returns have come to stand at negative values. In any event, the 
evidence available indicates that this negative effect on net interest income has been partly 
offset  by  a  lesser  pass-through  of  market  movements  to  the  interest  rates  on  the 
outstanding balance of lending.  
It  should  be  borne in  mind,  moreover,  that the  reduction  in interest  rates  also  has  some 
positive  effects  on  bank  profits  via  various  channels.  On  one  hand,  the  expansionary 
monetary policy has a favourable impact on economic activity, boosting the demand for 
credit and for other banking services. On the other,  the decline in the return on risk-free 
assets tends to raise the value of assets by reducing the discount factor implicit in their 
price, which translates into capital gains for the banks. Lastly, the decline in interest rates is 
conducive  to  a  decline  in  loan  default  losses,  as  it  reduces  the  debt  burden  and  raises 
borrowers’ income as a result of the boost to economic activity it entails.  
Overall, the above points suggest that the net final impact of the low interest rate levels on 
bank profitability has been comparatively low compared with the other above-mentioned 
factors. 
I will now move on to the third major challenge the Spanish banking industry faces. This is 
associated with  the  adaptation  to  a  more  demanding  regulatory  framework  that  involves 
higher requirements in respect of own funds and liquid assets, along with other additional 
demands derived from the new resolution regulations.  
These regulatory changes, which have been introduced globally, are the response by the 
economic authorities to the shortcomings highlighted by the international financial crisis. 
Their essential aim is to increase banking systems’ resilience in the face of adverse shocks 
and to prevent taxpayers from having to bear the cost of the resolution of ailing banks.  
The first raft of reforms, known as Basel III, which was designed between 2010 and 2011, 
focused  on  increasing  the  volume  of  bank  capital  and  improving  its  quality,  and  on  the 
introduction of new minimum liquidity requirements and counterparty exposure limits, and 
of  macroprudential  instruments,  such  as  the  so-called  countercyclical  capital  buffer.  All 
these requirements will be effective, practically in their entirety, in late 2019.  
Spanish banks have already largely adapted to these new requirements, with their liquidity 
and capital ratios currently standing above the minimum levels stipulated. In any event, as 
6/8 
  regards the CET 1 and Tier 1 solvency ratios, their aggregate levels – albeit with significant 
dispersion across banks – are, as at March 2018, low compared with those of the euro area 
banking systems, according to data from the European Banking Authority.  
This  once  again  highlights  the  need  for  Spanish  banks  to  adopt  capital-strengthening 
strategies.  With  regard  to  the  solvency  regulatory  measure,  which  does  not  take  into 
account  risk  weightings,  i.e.  the  leverage  ratio,  the  Spanish  banking  system  as  a  whole 
shows,  on  the  contrary,  slightly  higher  levels  than  the  euro  area  average.  Also,  Spanish 
banks evidence, overall, a sound liquidity position, with their LCR ratio above the European 
average.  
Regarding the resolution of institutions, in recent years a number of regulations have been 
approved  in  Europe  establishing  a  common  framework  for  the  EU,  and  defining  the 
circumstances in which banks with financial difficulties should enter wind-up or resolution 
processes. In this setting, a new category of senior non-preferred debt instruments has been 
created, which ranks below senior debt in the payment priority of insolvency proceedings, 
with a view to facilitating compliance with the minimum requirements for own funds and 
eligible loss-absorbing liabilities, known as MREL. The MREL requirements that the Single 
Resolution Board has started to set for significant European institutions are an added reason 
for  Spanish  banks  to  strengthen  their  capital  in  the  present  environment  of  recovering 
profitability and an economy that is growing at a significant pace. 
More recently, December 2017 saw the completion of the second phase of reforms in the 
Basel III framework. The reforms include, inter alia, the improvement of the standardised 
methods for calculating credit and operational risk, restrictions on the use of internal models 
and changes in the leverage ratio. These changes will be implemented in two phases that 
will conclude in 2027. 
Therefore, although Spanish institutions have already largely adapted to these regulatory 
changes, there are still some outstanding reforms to be applied, which will require them to 
make further adjustments. 
Lastly, the main medium-term challenge lies in the new competition framework derived from 
the new technologies and progressive financial disintermediation. 
New technologies can quickly change the competitive framework by increasing competition 
in some segments. That will oblige institutions to anticipate changes and adapt to the new 
environment, even though this entails a rise in costs in the short term, which will be difficult 
to manage in an environment of low profitability. One of the areas where the highest degree 
of penetration by new entrants has been observed is payment services, particularly retail 
payments, which is causing a decline in income from transactional services.  
Furthermore,  adapting  to  these  technologies  may  involve  greater  operational,  and  even 
reputational, risks, with aspects such as cybersecurity gaining in importance.  
But new technologies also entail fresh business opportunities for banks. On one hand, these 
technological  changes  allow  immediate  remote  access  to  a  broad  range  of  financial 
services, which may enable general administrative expenses to be reduced. The relatively 
scant penetration of digital banking in Spain suggests that there is ample scope for this form 
 7/8 
 of banking to grow, providing Spanish banks with an opportunity to expand their business. 
The  application  of  artificial  intelligence  and  the  use  of  large  databases  with  real-time 
information (known as big data) may also provide for significant efficiency gains. 
Continuing  financial  disintermediation  also  involves  increased  competition  for  credit 
institutions. It is well known that, if trade credit is excluded, the bulk of borrowing by Spanish 
non-financial  corporations  has  traditionally  been  in  the  form  of  bank  loans.  This  funding 
structure is similar to that observed in other European countries, such as Germany or Italy, 
but contrasts with the greater weight of financial markets in other economies such as the 
United States and the United Kingdom. 
Following the outbreak of the most recent crisis, a gradual increase in the weight of business 
funding  raised  on  financial  markets  through  the  issuance  of  fixed-income  securities  has 
been  observed  in  Spain  and  in  other  developed  countries.  This  phenomenon  especially 
affects large corporations. Among the factors potentially contributing to this development 
are the regulatory changes in the financial arena, imposing stricter requirements on banking 
activity, as mentioned earlier, and the corporate sector purchase programmes by central 
banks, which has reduced the cost of issuing these assets.  
Looking  ahead,  this  trend  towards  the  expansion  of  capital  markets  might  continue  if 
progress  can  made  on  the  European  project  to  create  a  capital  markets  union.  Also,  a 
potential  increase  in  long-term  savings  linked  to  the  ageing  of  our  society  could  also 
contribute in the same direction. 
Although a greater diversification of financing sources could potentially be positive for non-
financial corporations, making them less vulnerable to adverse shocks affecting a specific 
financing channel, for credit institutions it could entail a reduction in business volume and 
income. This is  particularly  relevant  in  the  current setting of low  demand  for  financing in 
Spain,  in  which  this  trend  could  contribute  to  further  eroding  the  net  interest  margins  in 
some market segments. 
To  conclude,  let  me  sum  up  the  key  messages  I  would  like  to  convey.  In  recent  years, 
Spanish credit institutions have made sterling efforts to overcome the problems stemming 
from the crisis and to adapt to the new and stricter regulatory requirements. This has been 
reflected  in  the  significant  improvements  in  their  solvency,  profitability  and asset  quality. 
However, despite these improvements, Spanish banks continue to face major challenges, 
largely  shared  with  other  euro  area  banking  systems.  These  include,  most  notably:  (i) 
stepping up sales of non-productive assets (ii) the need to strengthen capital, (iii) addressing 
profitability challenges without unduly easing credit standards and, lastly (iv) harnessing new 
technologies in a competitive environment of potential new competitors. In an economy as 
highly  banked  as  Spain’s,  overcoming  these  challenges  is  key  to  the  banking  industry 
gaining a sufficient position of strength from which to contribute to economic growth and 
job creation. 
Thank you for your attention.  
  8/8 
 