 News conference 
   Berne, 13 December 2018 
Andréa M. Maechler 
 
 
 
 Introductory remarks by Andréa M. Maechler 
 
I will begin with a review of developments on the financial markets and look at the status of 
the Swiss franc. After that I will say a few words about the upcoming transition from Libor to 
SARON as the new reference interest rate in Switzerland and inform you about progress 
being made on this front. 
Situation on the financial markets 
So let me start with developments on the financial markets.  
In the second half of the year, sentiment on the financial markets darkened considerably at 
times, despite the fact that the economic situation in many countries remained sound. 
Nonetheless, the economic data did weaken slightly in some regions. This caused investors to 
focus on a number of risks – most notably, ongoing concerns about protectionist tendencies, 
but also the currency crises unfolding in several emerging economies and Italy’s budget 
dispute with the EU.  
As a result, volatility on the financial markets has increased significantly since mid-year (cf. 
chart 1). This is particularly true of the equity markets, where prices fluctuated substantially at 
certain points. Thanks to strong economic data and solid corporate earnings growth, US stock 
exchanges performed better than their counterparts in Europe and the emerging markets (cf. 
chart 2). Despite suffering sizeable losses in October, the S&P 500 recently closed only 
moderately lower than it had at the end of June down 3%. In Europe, the Stoxx 600 lost 
around 9% over the same period. Various factors contributed to the weak performance of 
European stocks. Economic momentum has weakened of late and corporate earnings growth 
remained below expectations in the third quarter overall. Moreover, currency turmoil in 
Turkey and the budget dispute between Italy and the EU weighed on Europe’s stock 
exchanges. In Switzerland, the SMI has managed to gain around 1% since mid-year. This 
  Page 1/5 
  News conference 
 Berne, 13 December 2018 
Andréa M. Maechler 
above-average showing was predominantly due to a strong performance in July, which in turn 
was mainly driven by positive corporate news in the pharmaceutical sector. 
On the interest rate markets the picture initially remained mixed due to uneven growth 
momentum in the major economic regions since mid-2018 (cf. chart 3). In the US, the Federal 
Reserve confirmed that it intended to maintain its policy of gradual interest rate rises. Against 
this backdrop, yields in the US continued to rise and the yield on 10-year US Treasuries hit a 
multi-year high at the beginning of November. This rise in yields receded again in response to 
another dip in risk sentiment at the beginning of December. Most recently, the yield on 
10-year US Treasuries stood at almost 2.9% – close to the level recorded at the end of June. In 
Europe, on the other hand, yields have been more stable. Yield differentials between US and 
European government bonds thus also reached a multi-year high in November. Since then, 
differentials have narrowed again somewhat due to a more pronounced decline in the US. The 
yield on ten-year Confederation bonds last stood at –0.15%, virtually unchanged versus mid-
year.  
Let me now turn to the foreign exchange markets. Compared to the turbulent developments on 
the equity markets, the currencies of the major advanced economies traded within fairly 
narrow ranges in the second half of the year. On a trade-weighted basis, the US dollar has 
gained 2.5% since mid-year thanks to a buoyant economy and rising interest rates. The trade-
weighted euro, however, lost almost 1% over the same period due to weaker economic 
momentum in the euro area recently and uncertainty linked to Italy’s budget issues.  
The Swiss franc remains vulnerable to changes in risk sentiment on the international financial 
markets. It strengthened moderately, by 2.5%, in the second half of the year (cf. chart 4). This 
appreciation is primarily due to the period between August and mid-September, when 
concerns about emerging markets – and possible consequences for Europe’s finance sector – 
caused a renewed spike in risk premia on European financial securities. From mid-September, 
the Swiss franc depreciated again slightly, particularly against the US dollar which has 
become more attractive to investors due to the greater interest rate advantage. Furthermore, 
emerging market currencies stabilised noticeably. Overall, developments on the foreign 
exchange markets show that the situation remains fragile and that the Swiss franc continues to 
serve as a safe haven in times of heightened uncertainty. Thomas Jordan also referred to this 
phenomenon in his remarks on exchange rates.  
Replacing Libor with SARON 
I would now like to update you on the work that is under way to replace Libor with SARON 
as a reference interest rate. Since the UK Financial Conduct Authority announced nearly a 
year ago that it would not guarantee the continuation of Libor beyond 2021, this topic has 
attracted significant public interest. Alternative reference interest rates have now been 
identified for all currencies in which Libor is used as a reference rate. In Switzerland, the 
National Working Group on Swiss franc Reference Interest Rates (NWG) is drawing up 
  Page 2/5 
  News conference 
 Berne, 13 December 2018 
Andréa M. Maechler 
recommendations to ensure a smooth transition. Many of the leading market participants sit 
on the NWG, which is co-chaired by the SNB and a representative from the private sector. 
The SNB principally acts as a facilitator and is responsible for running the secretariat.1 It also 
maintains links with international bodies charged with preparing recommendations for 
reference interest rate reforms and ensuring a well-coordinated transition. 
In October 2017, the NWG recommended that the Swiss franc Libor be replaced by the Swiss 
Average Rate Overnight (SARON) used for overnight transactions in the secured segment. 
SARON has already gained in importance as a reference interest rate. In the course of 2017, 
an interest rate curve developed based on swap transactions referencing SARON. Although 
the outstanding volume is still substantially lower here than on the swap market referencing 
Libor, increasing use of SARON in loan agreements means that demand for interest rate 
hedging will rise. The SARON-based curve is therefore set to become increasingly important 
in the future. This interplay between loan products and interest rate hedging transactions is 
highly significant for the transition from Libor to SARON. 
This year, the NWG has been conducting detailed discussions on the modalities of replacing a 
longer-term rate like Libor with an overnight rate. In loan agreements, interest periods of 
three or six months are typically set. When using Libor, the interest payments due are thus 
fixed at the beginning of the interest period. With SARON, an overnight rate, this is not 
directly possible. The NWG recommends using the average of realised SARON values for the 
relevant interest period (e.g. the last three months) as the reference rate. The next step will 
involve working out various ways of using these averages in financial products such as loan 
agreements. 
The transition to SARON presents an array of challenges. For the changeover to run 
smoothly, all market participants must have a thorough understanding of the issues. The 
recommendations of the NWG play an important role here. However, each market participant 
is ultimately responsible for preparing its organisation to transition away from Libor and for 
taking necessary measures in time. 
  1 Relevant documents are published on our website: https://www.snb.ch/en/ifor/finmkt/fnmkt_benchm/id/finmkt_reformrates 
   Page 3/5 
 Berne, 13 December 2018 
Andréa M. Maechler 
 News conference 
 Charts 
 
     Page 4/5 
  News conference 
 Berne, 13 December 2018 
Andréa M. Maechler 
      Page 5/5 
 