Mario Draghi: Central bank independence
Text  of  the  First  Lamfalussy  Lecture  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central
Bank, at the National Bank of Belgium, Brussels, 26 October 2018.
 Advanced economies are now emerging from the aftermath of the great financial crisis. Despite
facing  the  largest  shock  in  the  postwar  period,  central  banks  have  succeeded  in  maintaining
price stability and fulfilling their mandates.
A  key  factor  behind  this  has  been  central  bank  independence.  But  in  spite  of  its  benefits,  its
desirability and relevance are nowadays being increasingly challenged.
The evolution of central bank independence
The  rationale  for  delegating  powers  to  independent  central  banks  evolved  mainly  from  the
experience of the 1970s. At that time, policymakers believed that there was a stable trade-off
between unemployment and inflation, whereby monetary policy could achieve permanently higher
employment at the cost of slightly higher inflation.
The trade-off rested on the notion that an increase in the money supply could boost aggregate
demand and stimulate employment, while keeping inflation expectations well anchored.
This policy was revealed to be time-inconsistent. Over time, commitments to control inflation at a
later  date  lost  credibility.  The  public  came  to  anticipate  the  behaviour  of  monetary  policy  and
quickly embedded expectations of higher inflation in their price setting and wage bargaining. The
1
trade-off between unemployment and inflation disappeared.
In the United States, for example, year-ahead inflation expectations rose steadily from around 4%
in 1970 to 12% in 1979.  Inflation stood between 3% and 12% for the whole decade. But there
was  no  fall  in  unemployment,  which  varied  between  4%  and  9%.  In  fact,  inflation  and
unemployment had a tendency to rise in tandem.
2
Therefore, to overcome time-inconsistency, central banks had to regain credibility as institutions
capable of delivering price stability. They thus committed to a non-inflationary path while resisting
any political pressure to pursue objectives other than price stability.
As  Alesina  and  Summers  showed,  central  banks  that  acted  in  this  way  –  such  as  the
Bundesbank – had managed to achieve lower inflation without suffering output or employment
3
penalties.
Annual  inflation  in  Germany  from  1970  to  1990  averaged  just  3.8%,  whereas  in  France  it
averaged 7.9% and in Italy 11.8%. At the same time, unemployment in Germany over the same
period averaged just 3.6%, whereas in France it was 5.6% and in Italy 6.4%.
Societies gradually converged on a framework whereby monetary policy was removed from the
pressures of short-term political agendas and delegated to independent central banks. A clear
social consensus had emerged that price stability was a common good under all circumstances,
but its achievement depended on the right institutional framework.
This rested on three elements: central banks needed a clear mandate to achieve price stability;
they needed independence over the instruments they could use to achieve their mandate; and
monetary policy had to be embedded in a strong accountability framework requiring the central
bank to explain how its decisions contributed to its goal.
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
This framework offered the public a guarantee that independent central banks would not exercise
power arbitrarily. Their discretion was limited to how they formulated monetary policy. They had
no discretion over whether to pursue their goals, and what goal they had to achieve. It is on this
basis that the mandate of the European Central Bank was established.
For  much  of  the  1990s  and  early  2000s,  the  monetary  policy  framework  went  unquestioned.
There was a broad consensus that granting independence to central banks had been successful
in  bringing  inflation  under  control.  Cross-country  studies  found  a  clear  negative  relationship
4
between independence and inflation in OECD economies.
inflation  observed  over 
Moreover, central bank independence was seen as a key factor in the lower volatility of output
and 
the  “great
moderation”.  The variability of real output growth was found to have declined by half since the
6
mid-1980s, while the variability of inflation had declined by about two thirds.
the  phenomenon 
this  period  – 
identified  as 
5
Importantly,  central  banks  had  been  able  to  maintain  low  and  stable  inflation  using  a  single
instrument  –  policy  interest  rates  –  which  caused  few  concerns.  Interest  rate  policy  was
perceived to be a normal tool of monetary policy and to create few distributional effects.
Then  the  great  financial  crisis  erupted,  which  led  to  a  steep  drop  in  both  output  and  inflation
across advanced economies. This presented central banks with two new challenges.
The first challenge was to their objectives. For the first time in living memory, there was a threat
of  a  deflationary  spiral  taking  hold.  This  would  have  led  not  only  to  central  banks  failing  their
mandates, but to the whole economy sinking into a prolonged depression – just as had happened
in the 1930s.
The  second  challenge  was  to  their instruments. Faced with these deflationary threats, central
banks responded decisively with conventional policy, but they eventually ran into the lower bound
on interest rates. This required them to adopt new, unconventional measures, such as large-
scale asset purchases, to stabilise inflation.
The new environment of low inflation and unconventional policies has led to questions about the
key tenets of the pre-crisis monetary policy consensus. Some observers now query whether the
circumstances that justified central bank independence still exist – and whether the grounds for
7
delegating monetary policy to independent authorities remain valid.
Time-inconsistency under low inflation
The  first  claim  is  that,  in  a  lower-inflation  environment,  the  time-inconsistency  problem  that
emerged in the 1970s has become less relevant. As such, independent central banks are no
longer a necessity to ensure credibility and keep inflation expectations anchored.
Such reasoning rests on two assumptions: first, that inflationary pressures have, by and large,
disappeared  in  advanced  economies;  and  second,  that  the  social  consensus  behind  price
stability is now so well established that elected authorities would not compromise it in the pursuit
of other objectives. Both of these assumptions can be questioned.
First, the absence of inflationary pressures in recent years is well-explained by two factors, and
neither would justify a change to the monetary policy framework.
One is the stability of the monetary regime, which has meant that economic shocks no longer
have lasting effects on inflation, either during slumps or during booms.  This is a direct result of
the success of central banks over the past twenty years in anchoring expectations and reducing
inflation volatility. So, the response to a stable inflation environment should not be to dismantle
the framework that has delivered it.
8
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  other  factor  is  the  depth  of  the  crisis  that  struck  advanced  economies,  which  created
unusually  high  unemployment  and  made  inflation  less  responsive  as  the  labour  market
recovered.  But here, too, little would be gained by making central banks less independent. Long-
term institutional arrangements which are based on a strong social consensus should not be
changed because of cyclically-driven developments in inflation.
9
But are there ongoing structural changes in the economy, as some argue, that will permanently
contain inflationary pressures in the future?
The notion that inflation is a non-monetary phenomenon is not new. In 1971, Federal Reserve
policymakers argued that inflation was “a structural problem not amenable to macroeconomic
,  and  similar  statements  can  be  found  in  the  records  of  other  central  banks
measures”
throughout the 1970s. The  Fed’s  view  only  changed  when  Paul  Volcker  became  Chairman  in
1979 and affirmed the responsibility of monetary policy.
10
Today  we  are  witnessing  major  demographic  and  technological  changes,  but  these  do  not
necessarily imply that structural factors are the main drivers of inflation.
Indeed,  the  impact  of  demographic  change  on  inflation  is  unclear.  It  might  put  downward
pressure on prices if aggregate demand falls more than aggregate supply. But it might equally
create  upward  price  pressures.  According  to  the  life-cycle  hypothesis,  as  society  ages  the
elderly will eventually spend their savings and consume more.
11
The  impact  of  technological  change,  such  as  the  spread  of  e-commerce,  is  also  unclear.  E-
commerce  could  in  principle  erode  the  monopolistic  power  of  suppliers,  which  would  reduce
mark-ups and flatten the Phillips curve. In other words, lower levels of unemployment would not
necessarily lead to faster wage increases. But it might also result in suppliers changing prices
more frequently, which would result in a steeper Phillips curve.
12
In any event, the effects of structural changes cannot create steady-state disinflation. They can
only lead to a potentially long transition to a new steady state. Whether inflation is higher or lower
over  time  will  depend  on  the  reaction  of  monetary  policy  along  the  way.  And  what  recent
experience  suggests  is  that  independent  central  banks  remain  the  best  institutions  to  anchor
inflation expectations through such transitions.
This brings me to the second assumption about the incentives of elected authorities.
The belief that they will no longer compromise price stability in the pursuit of other short-term
objectives is not borne out by what we have seen in recent years. In fact, it has become evident
that time-inconsistency is a recurring risk that arises in both high- and low-inflation environments.
When inflation is rising, short-term political considerations still create a certain set of incentives
to  pressure  central  banks  into  prioritising  economic  growth  and  avoiding  monetary  tightening.
And when inflation is falling, we have seen that there are incentives to prioritise considerations of
moral hazard and financial sector concerns and to oppose monetary easing.
Such incentives were visible in the euro area during the crisis. Despite an observable slide in
inflation,  there  were  those  who  opposed  responding  with  unconventional  measures,  because
they  feared  the  possible  effects  on  governments’  willingness  to  enact  reforms,  or  on  banks’
incentives to clean up their balance sheets. These risks were given priority over the certainty that
price stability would be sacrificed without action.
And today in other jurisdictions, we see concerns being publicly expressed about whether the
central bank should pursue a normalisation path in the face of rising inflation.
These deeds have so far had limited consequences only because central banks are independent
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
and credible. But if central banks were less independent, and the public perceived that monetary
policy could be pressured in either direction, it would eventually de-anchor inflation expectations
and jeopardise price stability – just as in the 1970s.
The relationship between monetary and fiscal policy
The  crisis  has  also  prompted  questions  about  the  relationship  between  monetary  and  fiscal
policies.  First,  it  is  claimed  that,  once  central  banks  use  unconventional  measures  that  entail
buying large volumes of government bonds, they cross the boundary into fiscal policy. In doing
so, they exceed their mandates and the scope of their independence.
Such reasoning ignores key aspects of our institutional framework.
The  specific  design  of  central  banks’  mandates  –  which  gives  them  independence  over  their
tools, but not their goals – was put in place because no one could foresee all the challenges that
monetary policy might face in the future. Allowing central banks leeway over their instruments
was  the  best  way  to  ensure  that,  come  what  may,  the  social  consensus  in  favour  of  price
stability could be maintained.
The actions of central banks during the crisis not only followed this principle to the letter – they
demonstrated precisely why it was necessary in the first place.
With conventional policy no longer sufficient to secure price stability, central banks would have
failed their mandates without instrument independence. But by expanding their set of tools, they
extended their policy space so that they could deliver their objective.
Though the measures we used were unprecedented, the shift was only in form, not in function.
Their function was exactly the same as that of conventional policy: to increase money and credit
aggregates, lift demand and stabilise medium-term inflation around our objective.
Indeed,  Milton  Friedman  argued  that  asset  purchases  are  not  only  an  appropriate  tool  of
monetary policy, they are ‒ under certain circumstances ‒ essential to boost money supply and
maintain price stability. He therefore supported their use during deflationary episodes such as the
Great Depression or Japan in the 1990s.
13
The fact that deploying asset purchases was fully in line with our mandate was confirmed by the
European Court of Justice. In its judgement on our Outright Monetary Transactions programme,
it ruled that purchases of government bonds are legal under the ECB’s statute and a legitimate
tool of monetary policy.
14
Another challenge to central bank independence is related to the effectiveness of monetary policy
at the lower bound on interest rates.
When interest rates fall towards zero, it is argued, monetary policy becomes ineffective, since it
enters a “liquidity trap” where it can no longer stimulate demand. In these conditions, fiscal policy
is needed to stabilise inflation.
For  as  long  as  interest  rates  remain  constrained  by  the  lower  bound,  the  argument  goes,
monetary policy should therefore support fiscal policy to achieve price stability. But central bank
independence, it is said, impedes such coordination.
To begin with, the notion that monetary policy is ineffective when the lower bound is reached has
been disproved by the experience of the crisis. There is now a wealth of evidence showing that
the unconventional policies adopted by central banks have eased financing conditions, boosted
output and stabilised inflation.
15
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the ECB’s case, there was a particular question about whether our asset purchases would be
effective in a bank-based economy. But we estimate that the growth rate of bank lending to euro
area  firms  would  be  more  than  a  third  lower  today  without  our  package  of  credit-easing
measures. The rates that banks charge for firms to borrow money would have been around 50%
higher.
This is not to say that monetary policy could not benefit from greater alignment with fiscal policy
when  faced  with  a  deep  slump.  In  the  euro  area,  it  was  clear  that  the  lack  of  a  supportive
aggregate fiscal stance was a headwind for monetary policy during the crisis. But for such policy
alignment to be successful, it has to be on the basis of every authority fulfilling its own mandate
in full independence.
The  existence  of  multiple  actors  in  setting  macroeconomic  policy  requires  clear  mandates  to
avoid what Milton Friedman described as the “dispersal of responsibility, which promotes shirking
of responsibility in times of uncertainty and difficulty”.
16
Moreover, if central banks were to enter into a form of coordination with fiscal authorities that
reduced their independence, it would ultimately be self-defeating.
While the mandate of the ECB is price stability, fiscal authorities have multiple mandates. So, if
the central bank were to submit to political control, coordination with fiscal authorities would be
unlikely to be limited to the lower bound.
Fiscal authorities would have an incentive to use monetary policy to achieve other objectives.
And this would end up with monetary policy becoming fiscally dominated, which history shows is
inconsistent with price stability in the long run.
Distributional effects of unconventional measures
The  third  claim  against  central  bank  independence  relates  to  the  distributional  effects  of
unconventional policies. In particular, it is argued that the distributional effects are much larger
than for conventional policies. But the delegation of monetary policy to an independent body rests
on the premise that such effects are not first order.
Unconventional policies are perceived to have larger distributional effects because they involve
active  intervention  in  financial  markets. And  conventional  policies  are  perceived  to  have  lower
distributional effects because they entail passively providing liquidity to banks.
But  this  is  an  incorrect  perception,  for  two  reasons.  First,  conventional  policies  also  produce
differing effects on creditors and debtors. Second, empirical evidence suggests the effects on
distribution of both conventional and unconventional policies are in any case limited.
In the long run, monetary policy is not an important factor for the distribution of resources within
societies. Distribution is affected more by low-frequency developments such as structural and
institutional factors, or fiscal policies such as tax regimes.
17
In  the  short  run,  monetary  policy  can  influence  distribution  via  two  channels:  a  direct  effect
related to asset prices and financial income, and an indirect effect related to the macroeconomic
impact of expansionary policy on jobs and wages. But the net effect on distribution appears to be
balanced, including with unconventional measures.
Across  households,  research  finds  that  our  unconventional  measures  have  barely  affected
wealth  inequality,  because  they  have  had  a  positive  impact  on  housing  wealth.  This  is  fairly
evenly distributed across households and dominates wealth held in stocks and bonds.
18
Furthermore,  while  some  savers  have  seen  their  financial  income  reduced  by  lower  interest
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
rates,  asset  purchases  have  at  the  same  time  triggered  both  a  sizeable  reduction  in
unemployment  and  wage  increases  for  the  employed.  In  fact,  households  with  the  lowest
incomes and the fewest liquid assets have benefited in particular from monetary easing.
19
Estimates suggest that asset purchases by the central bank leading to a 30 basis point decline in
the term spread, reduce the unemployment rate among households in the bottom income quintile
by  2  percentage  points,  and  contribute  to  a  modest  drop  in  the  Gini  coefficient  on  gross
income.
20
So, the positive effect on employment – which has risen by 9 million in the euro area since the
trough of the crisis – counterbalances any potential negative distributional effects of monetary
policy. And the same appears to be true in other advanced economies.
21
The distributional effects of monetary policy across member states are similarly balanced.
If  we  look  at  how  the  net  interest  income  of  different  countries  has  been  affected  by  falling
interest rates since 2008, we do not see a picture of “creditor” countries losing out and “debtor”
countries gaining. In fact, despite having a large net international investment position, Germany
has gained slightly from low rates – meaning it has received more in interest earnings than it has
disbursed in interest payments.
22
At the same time, all member states have benefited from the economic recovery and the stable
macroeconomic  environment,  which  were  enabled  by  our  expansionary  policies.  Since  the
launch of our measures, the dispersion of growth and unemployment rates have fallen to their
lowest level since the start of Monetary Union.
So,  there  is  little  to  suggest  that  the  use  of  unconventional  measures  during  the  crisis  has
created first-order distributional effects – and certainly not to an extent that would undermine the
rationale for central bank independence.
And  perhaps  more  importantly,  the  distributional  effects  of not  acting  to  defend  our  mandate
would have been severe. This would have resulted in a fundamental shift in growth and inflation
expectations,  triggering  a  deflationary  spiral,  with  significant  implications  in  particular  for  the
poorer and younger members of society.
The continuing value of central bank independence
23
These  various  arguments  against  central  bank  independence  also  miss  a  more  fundamental
point, which is the value of an independent central bank that can act decisively without political
pressure – and especially in the euro area.
Indeed,  we  saw  clearly  during  the  euro  area  crisis  that  coordinated  policy  responses  among
governments were difficult to achieve, tended to arise only under severe market pressure, and
then often turned out to be insufficient, requiring further responses later.
In  this  context,  the  governance  structure  of  the  Eurosystem  –  where  each  member  state  is
represented by the governor of its central bank in their own personal capacity, who is not bound
in  their  decision-making  by  their  nationality  –  was  essential,  since  it  facilitated  an  effective
systemic response.
A central bank that was both independent and built to serve the whole of the euro area, and not
individual member states, was able to create the required policy space in an extremely difficult
context.
This brings me to my conclusion.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Central banks are powerful, independent and unelected. This combination can only be squared if
they have a clearly defined mandate for which they are held accountable by the public.
It is legislators that define the mandate that establishes the goals of monetary policymaking. And
it is legislators that are responsible for holding central banks accountable for the effectiveness of
their monetary policy. But for effectiveness, credibility is essential, and therefore legislators must
want a credible central bank.
Credibility hinges on independence: the central bank should not be subject to fiscal or political
dominance and should be free to choose the instruments that are most appropriate to deliver its
mandate.  Legislators  should  therefore  protect  the  independence  of  central  banks,  as  it  is
essential for fulfilling the mandate that they themselves have defined.
The distributional consequences of monetary policy, if there are any, and other risks such as
moral  hazard  and  financial  stability,  must  be  addressed  by  other  tools.  These  include  fiscal
policies, macroprudential policies and banking supervision – policies that are more targeted and
therefore inherently more appropriate for close scrutiny by legislators.
Faced with future crises, central banks will adhere to their mandates and use their independence
to fulfil them. In our case, the ruling of the European Court of Justice has shown that we can use
all the tools within our mandate to tackle future challenges to price stability. We cannot foresee
now what those challenges might be, but if and when they arise, they may require us to adjust
our policy space once more to meet our mandate.
The instruments we deploy in such conditions, and the safeguards that accompany them, will be
commensurate with the nature of the challenges we face. And it is crucial that we are at all times
transparent and accountable in our actions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
See  Kydland,  F.  and  Prescott,  E.  (1977),  “Rules  Rather  than  Discretion:  The  Inconsistency  of  Optimal
Plans”, Journal of Political Economy, 85(3), 473–491 and Barro, R. and Gordon, D. (1983), “Rules, Discretion
and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy", Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12, No 1, pp. 101–121.
See Davis, J. (2012), “Inflation Expectations Have Become More Anchored Over Time”, Economic Letter, Dallas
Fed, Vol. 7, No 13.
Alesina, A. and Summers, L. (1993), “Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some
Comparative Evidence”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 25(2), pp. 151–162.
See, among many others, Cukierman, A., Webb, S., and B. Neyapti (1992), “Measuring the Independence of
Central Banks and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes”, The World Bank Economic Review, 6(3): 353–398; Berger, H.
and de Haan, J. and S. Eijffinger( 2001), “Central Bank Independence: An Update of Theory and Evidence”,
Journal of Economic Surveys, 15(1): 3-40.
See  Bernanke,  B.  (2004),  “The  Great  Moderation”,  remarks  at  the  meetings  of  the  Eastern  Economic
Association, Washington, DC, 20 February.
See Blanchard, O. and Simon, J. (2001), “The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output Volatility," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 135–64.
For  a  review  of  the  arguments  against  central  bank  independence,  see  Tucker,  P.  (2018),  “Pristine  and
Parsimonious Policy: Can Central Banks Ever Get Back to It and Why They Should Try”, in Hartmann, P., Huang,
H. and Schoenmaker, D. (eds.), The Changing Fortunes of Central Banking, Cambridge University Press. See
also  Summers,  L.  (2017),  “Central  Bank  Independence”, Bank  of  England:  ‘Independence  –  20  years  on’
Conference.
See Mishkin, F. (2007), “Inflation Dynamics", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No 13147.
See  Ciccarelli,  M.  and  Osbat,  C.  (editors)  (January  2017),  “Low  inflation  in  the  euro  area:  Causes  and
consequences”, Occasional Paper Series, No 181, ECB.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Federal Open Market Committee meeting, Memorandum of Discussion, 11 May 1971.
See Juselius M. and Takats E., 2015. “Can demography affect inflation and monetary policy?”, BIS Working
Papers 485, Bank for International Settlements.
Gorodnichenko,  Y.  and  Talavera  O.  (2014),  “Price  Setting  in  Online  Markets:  Basic  Facts,  International
Comparisons and Cross-border Integration”, NBER Working Paper, No 20406.
Friedman,  M.  (1997),  “Rx  for  Japan:  Back  to  the  Future”,  article  published  in  the  Wall  Street  Journal,  17
December.
Judgment of the Court of Justice of the European Union (Grand Chamber) of 16 June 2015, Peter Gauweiler
and Others v Deutscher Bundestag.
See e.g. Joyce, M., Lasaosa, A., Stevens, I. and Tong, M. (2011), “The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative
Easing in the United Kingdom”, International Journal of Central Banking, pp. 113–161; Wu J. and Xia, F. (2016),
“Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound”, Journal of Money, Credit
and  Banking,  Volume  48,  pp.  253–291;  Eser,  F.  and  Schwaab,  B.  (2016),  “Evaluating  the  impact  of
unconventional monetary policy measures: Empirical evidence from the ECB’s Securities Markets Programme”,
Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 119, Issue 1, pp. 147–167.
See Friedman, M. (1968), “The Role of Monetary Policy”, American Economic Review, Vol. 58, No 1, pp. 1-17.
See  Wang,  C.  and  K.  Caminada  (2014), Income inequality and fiscal redistribution in 39 countries, around
2004–2010, Leiden University.
Ampudia, M., Georgarakos, D., Slacalek, J., Tristani, O., Vermeulen, P. and Violante, G. (2018), “Monetary policy
and household inequality”, Working Paper Series, No 2170, ECB; see also K  Adam and P  Tzamourani (2016),
“Distributional consequences of asset price inflation in the euro area”, European Economic Review, Vol. 89,
pp. 172–192.
See Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), “Distributional effects of monetary policy”, Monthly Report, September 2016;
Casiraghi,  M.,  Gaiotti,  E.,  Rodano,  L.,  and  Secchi, A.  (2018),  “A  ‘reverse  Robin  Hood’?  The  distributional
implications  of  non-standard  monetary  policy  for  Italian  households”, Journal  of  International  Money  and
Finance, Elsevier, Vol. 85(C), pp. 215–235; and Lenza, M. and Slacelek J. (2018), “How does monetary policy
affect income and wealth inequality? Evidence from quantitative easing in the euro area”, Working Paper Series,
ECB, forthcoming.
Lenza and Slacalek (2018), op. cit.
See  Mumtaz,  H.  and  Theophilopoulou,  A.  (2015),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Inequality  in  the  UK”, Working
Papers 738, Queen Mary University of London, School of Economics and Finance; Gornemann, N., Kuester, K.
and Nakajima, M. (2016), “Doves for the Rich, Hawks for the Poor? Distributional Consequences of Monetary
Policy”, International Finance Discussion Papers, No 1167, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
To  exclude  the  impact  of  variations  in  the  stocks  of  assets/liabilities  on  net  interest  income,  changes  are
computed by applying asset and liability rates of return on notional asset and liability stocks in the first quarter of
2008 or the first quarter of 2014, and expressed as a percentage of GDP. Sources: Eurostat, ECB and ECB staff
calculations.
See Adam, K. and Zhu, J. (2015), “Price level changes and the redistribution of nominal wealth across the euro
area”, Working Paper Series, No 1853, ECB; see also Household Finance and Consumption Network (2016),
“The Household Finance and Consumption Survey: results from the second wave”, Statistics Paper Series, No
18, ECB.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
