Burkhard Balz: The role of the renminbi in international payments
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Burkhard  Balz,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  5th  European-Chinese  Banking  Day  as  part  of  the  Euro  Finance  Week,
Frankfurt am Main, 14 November 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
There’s an ancient Chinese proverb which reads: “Don’t be afraid to be slow. Be afraid only of
standing still.” And indeed, tenacity and staying power often do pay off.
Patience and perseverance are also called for when it comes to anchoring the renminbi in the
group of key international currencies.
I am pleased to be able to highlight this topic – the role of the renminbi in international payments –
in my keynote speech here today, at what is already the fifth European-Chinese Banking Day.
2 The internationalisation of the renminbi: the story so far
The internationalisation of the renminbi is certainly a less prominent topic in current debate than it
was  a  few  years  ago.  On  the  other  hand,  the  political  influences  that  impact  on  the  renminbi
today feature somewhat more strongly. The spectre of a trade war between the United States
and China is omnipresent, and accusations of currency manipulation and of a currency war as a
result haven’t quite died down yet. In my speech today I would like to look more closely at these
and other topics.
For  quite  some  time  now,  the  Chinese  government  has  been  pursuing  the  long-term  aim  of
bringing the use of the renminbi in international payments, amongst other things, into line with the
importance  of  the  Chinese  economy.  Moreover,  the  Chinese  want  to  strongly  increase  the
influence of the renminbi as a trading and investment currency. Yet developments surrounding
the renminbi in the individual areas are not always synchronous.
A look at the statistics will give you an idea of why I speak of patience and perseverance in the
context of the renminbi’s role in international payments. Whereas the share of global economic
output accounted for by China in 2017 was just over 17%,   the renminbi’s share in international
2
payment flows in August 2018 was a mere 2.12%.
1
The US dollar and the euro find themselves in a different position. The share of global economic
output  for  the  US  in  2017  was  15%,  and  that  for  the  euro  just  over  16%.   By  contrast,
commanding a share of just over 39%, the US dollar undisputedly remains the world’s most often
used currency in payments, followed by the euro with just under 34%.  As a payments currency,
the  renminbi  currently  ranks  fifth  (behind  the  US  dollar,  the  euro,  the  pound  sterling  and  the
Japanese yen).
3
4
Still, this is a sign of its ascendancy, since it came in at only sixth place last year. Use of the
renminbi as a global trade currency has gained momentum again after a negative trend in 2016
5
and 2017. However, it has not yet returned to 2.45%, which was its share in September 2015
This development is probably due in part to the fact that the Chinese economy has experienced
weaker growth than in earlier years. This has also had an impact on trading activities and the
underlying payment flows.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
There are signs of a similar picture with regard to the renminbi and foreign reserves. According
to a recent survey of central banks and sovereign funds on their plans for the management of
their foreign currency reserves, the present weighting is not expected to change greatly in the
near  future.  Although  the  renminbi  was  among  the  biggest  winners  last  year,  the  US  dollar
remains the standard currency for new investments of reserve assets. This makes it all the more
important  that  the  Chinese  government  demonstrates  staying  power  in  order  to  reach  its
objective in this respect, too.
Last year the renminbi took only a 1.7% share of global foreign exchange reserves, so that it
ranked  behind  the  Canadian  dollar.   This  is  due,  not  least,  to  concerns  surrounding  financial
stability in China as well as to capital restrictions. Progress will have to be made in this respect if
the renminbi is to become more attractive as a foreign reserve currency.
6
As I have already mentioned, however, the strategy of internationalising the renminbi is geared for
success in the long term. Phases in which use of the renminbi stagnates should not, therefore,
come as a surprise. The Chinese government’s objective is clear. It wants to see the renminbi
established as a trustworthy and widely used international reserve currency, trade currency and
payments currency.
The much needed patience I spoke of earlier paid off handsomely for China in October 2016. The
renminbi  was  officially  added  to  the  International  Monetary  Fund's  (IMF)  basket  for  special
drawing  rights  (SDR).  Since  then,  it  has  occupied  a  place  in  this  select  group  of  currencies
alongside  the  US  dollar,  the  euro,  the  Japanese  yen  and  the  pound  sterling.  With  that,  the
renminbi took its first formal step on its way to becoming an international key currency.
This was a step that crowned many years of political wooing and a process of cautiously opening
up the Chinese capital markets, as well as a variety of programmes to give foreign investors
access to China’s capital markets. Use of the renminbi as a reserve and investment currency
was  gradually  increased  as  a  result.  The  first  milestone  was  reached  in  2017,  when  Bond
Connect, a joint venture of the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) and Hong Kong
Exchanges  and  Clearing  Limited,  was  set  up.  Amongst  other  things,  the  idea  behind  Bond
Connect is to make it easier for foreign investors to participate in trading in the Chinese fixed-
income market. Close to 400 foreign investors have so far joined the interbank bond market via
Bond Connect. In March of this year, Daimler took advantage of the opening up of the Chinese
capital market to international issuers to become the first large German enterprise to issue a
renminbi bond.
Over and above that, foreign financial corporations in particular have, for the most part, had quite
a hard time in China to date. But China’s President and party leader, Xi Jinping, announced a
new “opening-up phase” earlier this year. Foreign enterprises are now permitted to take majority
shares in Chinese banks, brokers and insurers. Moreover, non-residents will in future be able to
hold up to 51% of financial enterprises.
This is an important step towards the further opening up of the capital markets, given that foreign
investors were barred in the past from engaging in the Chinese financial markets independently.
The only role open to them was that of junior partner holding a share of no more than 49%.
Although  the  markets’  response  to  this  new  opening-up  process  has  so  far  been  muted,  this
constitutes major progress. What’s more, the Chinese government has announced that it will
completely  remove  the  restrictions  on  participations  in  the  coming  years,  thereby  ending  the
requirement  that  foreign  service  providers  enter  into  a  joint  venture  with  Chinese  companies.
That said, international investors will undoubtedly have to continue to demonstrate patience in the
near future.
Bond Connect and the loosening of the joint venture requirement are just two further additions to
a chain of measures designed to establish a modern market infrastructure in China.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
For  instance,  the  interbank  payment  system  CIPS  (Cross-border  Interbank  Payment  System)
makes the clearing and settlement of cross-border renminbi payments possible.
CIPS was launched in October 2015 with 19 direct participants. By August 2018, no less than 31
financial institutions were direct participants, with 750 financial institutions taking part indirectly.
CIPS  clearly  demonstrates  the  importance  of  international  standardisation  in  an  increasingly
globalised economy, given that CIPS is based on what is known as the ISO 20022 standard,
which is making great strides in European payments as well. The more internationally operating
institutions use this standard, the simpler it will be to make use of CIPS internationally, which will
benefit the internationalisation of the renminbi.
Accordingly, the internationalisation of the Chinese currency will receive a boost from the use of
the ISO 20022 standard in CIPS as more and more internationally active institutions apply this
standard.
On top of that, 25 Chinese banks representing 86% of Chinese cross-border payments use the
SWIFT  Global  Payment  Initiative  (SWIFT  gpi).  SWIFT  gpi  offers  more  transparency  through
uniform  standards  and  the  payments  tracking  service,  which  ensures  a  fast,  transparent  and
low-cost settlement of renminbi transactions, despite the time-consuming transformation costs
that are incurred in transferring international payments into China’s national payments system.
3 Factors affecting the internationalisation of the renminbi
The  successful  implementation  of  the  strategy  to  internationalise  the  renminbi  rests  on  the
interaction between two core elements.
These are, first, the gradual liberalisation and international opening up of the capital markets,
which I just described to you, and
second, the global broadening of the user base of the renminbi.
The inclusion of the renminbi in the IMF’s basket of currencies provides an element of support in
China’s internationalisation efforts.
Yet purely foreign exchange policy aspects are no longer to be made the sole point of focus.
Politically realistic considerations are also being increasingly placed in the foreground.
In this respect, a key role is played by China’s Belt & Road strategy, developed by China and first
presented to the public in 2013. The idea behind this is to reopen the ancient “Silk Road”, which
once  led  from  China  through  Central  Asia,  the  Middle  East  and  central  Europe  to  western
Europe, and to supplement it by a maritime trade route. Plans exist for the Chinese state and
participating  companies  to  make  investments  worth  billions  in  various  infrastructure  projects
along these routes, thus stimulating trade between countries situated along these routes as well
as between them and China.
At  the  same  time,  the  Chinese  hope  that  the  payment  flows  stemming  from  these  trading
activities  will  help  them  to  encourage  use  of  the  renminbi  in  those  countries.  The  Chinese
government’s  hopes  not  only  concern  the  success  of  the  projects  in  the  various  emerging
markets along the Silk Road.
Rather, it is hoped that trade relations with Germany as Europe’s largest economy will also be
strengthened.  In  fact  the  German  town  of  Duisburg,  with  the  biggest  inland  port  of  its  kind  in
Europe, represents the “western” end of the trade route often referred to as the “new Silk Road”.
And  in  this  context,  the  Frankfurt  financial  centre,  given  its  position  as  a  one  of  23  renminbi
clearing  hubs  worldwide,  would  be  forming  the  link  for  payment  flows  between  Germany  and
China.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Recently, however, China’s efforts have met with more and more obstacles. For example, the
additional  tariffs  on  Chinese  goods  and  the  threat  of  a  trade  war  with  the  United  States  are
damaging  relations  between  the  two  countries,  with  negative  repercussions  for  global
equilibrium. This can have an adverse effect on the entire world economy, as there are only ever
losers in a trade war. Imposing tariffs and retaliatory tariffs undermines an important foundation
of our prosperity.
However, at the recent meeting of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in Bali, both the United
States and China indicated that neither was interested in an escalation of the trade conflict. I very
much hope that this proves to be the case.
In debate, the Chinese government is often accused of taking advantage of a depreciation of the
renminbi, risking a downward spiral in the process. Yet studies to date show that China has no
wish for an artificial devaluation. At the meeting in Bali, Dr Yi Gang, President of the People’s
Bank of China (PBoC), also promised that China would not initiate a spiral of depreciation in the
trade  conflict.  Rather  than  take  part  in  a  race  to  the  bottom,  China  would  like  the  market  to
continue to determine the exchange rate.
This stance is a most welcome one. Against the backdrop of loosened monetary conditions, the
PBoC  successfully  implemented  a  number  of  measures  to  halt  the  downward  trend  of  the
renminbi, which persisted until the middle of August. This is confirmed by the currency’s slight
upward tendency. Given the uncertainty surrounding economic developments, however, there is
still  palpable  concern  regarding  a  depreciation  and  renewed  capital  outflows,  all  the  more  as
China is one of the last big economies that is continuing to loosen parts of its monetary policy.
4 The importance of the Frankfurt financial centre for German-Chinese cooperation.
Frankfurt has always been the mainstay of the good relations between our two countries.
The  Deutsche  Bundesbank  is  not  just  an  onlooker  with  regard  to  promoting  German-Chinese
relations; it also makes its own active contribution.
One year ago, my predecessor Carl-Ludwig Thiele announced at this very location a joint study
by the Bundesbank and the Academy of Internet Finance of Zhejiang University Hangzhou, the
Sino-German  Center  and  Professor  Bernd  Skiera  of  the  Goethe  University  in  Frankfurt,  and
supported  by  the  Deutsche  Gesellschaft  für  Internationale  Zusammenarbeit  (GIZ)  to  examine
consumers’ payment behaviour in Germany and China. The results have now been published. A
number  of  parallels  have  been  found  to  exist  between  our  countries.  In  China,  providers  of
innovative payment procedures such as Alipay and WeChat today play a dominant role in online
trade and at points of sale, with market shares of up to 65%. Cash is still most commonly used
in rural areas, however.
Innovative payment methods are increasingly gaining market shares in Germany, too, although
many consumers still do not see the advantages of the new technology or view it with distrust.
For this reason, preference is still given to traditional payment methods.
The study is one of numerous initiatives that have been launched to foster dialogue and promote
mutual understanding.
In this context, the Sino-German Center of Finance and Economics I just mentioned, which is a
research centre run jointly by the Goethe University in Frankfurt and the Renmin University in
Peking,  acts  as  a  platform  for  the  exchange  of  independent  ideas  and  organises  regular
workshops in Frankfurt and Peking, amongst other things.
And interest in a close exchange of thoughts between China and Germany is likely to grow still
further in the years to come.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Given  the  forthcoming  Brexit,  Frankfurt’s  role  as  a  major  financial  centre  within  the  European
Union  will  grow  more  and  more  important.  This  means  that,  besides  Chinese  business
representatives, representatives from the fields of politics and academia will increasingly seek to
exchange  thoughts  on  matters  of  business  and  finance  with  Frankfurt.  Moreover,  current
geopolitical  discussions  could  lead  to  us  complementing  our  present  transatlantic  partnership
with more strongly focussed cooperation with Asia.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
In Germany we have a saying that roughly translates as: “Slow and steady gets you there.”
The internationalisation of the renminbi was a success story for many years owing to China’s
impressive  economic  growth.  The  economic  reorientation  in  China  led  to  a  phase  of  relative
disillusion. However, the outlook gradually seems to be brightening up again.
In this context, we recognise the continued willingness of China’s decision-makers in politics and
business to help the renminbi assume a role in global economic activity that is commensurate
with the importance of the Chinese economy. This willingness shows that the renminbi has not
yet reached the end of the road as regards comprehensive internationalisation. We therefore look
forward to future developments.
On that note, let me wish you exciting discussions and fascinating insights.
And to everyone who is actively involved in the onward development of the renminbi, I wish you
continued perseverance and patience. I am sure that both will pay off in the end.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See Federal Statistical Office.
See SWIFT RMB Tracker.
See IMF.
See SWIFT RMB Tracker.
See SWIFT RMB Tracker.
See IMF.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
