Juyeol Lee: Opening address – BOK-BIS Joint Conference
Opening  address  by  Mr  Juyeol  Lee,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  BOK-BIS  Joint
Conference, Seoul, 19 November 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure for me to welcome all of you today to this BOK-BIS Joint Conference. I
would like to express my sincere gratitude to our keynote speaker, Dr. Emanuel Mönch, Head of
Research at the Deutsche Bundesbank, and also to BIS General Manager Agustin Carstens and
Head  of  Research  Hyun  Song  Shin,  who  will  join  us  tomorrow.  Let  me  also  thank  all  of  our
distinguished moderators, speakers and discussants.
In 2016, the BIS Asian Office suggested Asia-Pacific fixed income markets as a research theme,
in recognition of the need to assess the role of such markets and their future development. The
BIS Asian Consultative Council(ACC), comprising the central banks in the Asia-Pacific region,
also judged this work as timely and has been actively supporting it through the participation of its
researchers. After an interim workshop held in Hong Kong in September last year, I am pleased
that  we  have  reached  the  final  stage  where  we  can  share  and  discuss  the  results  with  each
other at today’s conference.
As you probably know, prior to the 1997 Asian financial crisis, fixed income markets in the Asia-
Pacific region were underdeveloped while financial intermediation depended greatly upon short-
term bank borrowings. In such a case, domestic or external shocks that hinder the smooth roll-
over  of  loans  can  lead  to  a  major  crisis  –  something  we  learned  the  hard  way.  Through  this
lesson, countries in the region have made great efforts to foster sound financial markets that can
support stable economic growth. As a result, our region’s fixed income markets have developed
remarkably: they are now bigger, more liquid, and more open.
This fixed income market development in the region has brought about two positive changes.
First, it has contributed significantly to the successful transition to interest rate-based monetary
policy frameworks. Fixed income markets are one of the most important channels through which
the effects of policy rate adjustments are transmitted to the real economy. Central banks are now
able to assess market expectations more quickly by analyzing bond yields for different maturities,
making their policies more effective.
Second,  with  greater  bond  investment  from  abroad,  foreign  capital  is  flowing  in  more  diverse
ways. It used to come in mostly through short-term bank borrowings or equity investment, but
now a considerable portion of capital inflows is invested in local currency-denominated longer-
term bonds – this change has made foreign capital flows much more stable.
On the other hand, the development of fixed income markets in the region has also brought new
difficulties. First, as foreign investors hold a greater share of bonds in the region, bond yields are
greatly affected not only by domestic economic developments or monetary policy, but also by
global economic conditions. In addition, there are increased concerns about financial and foreign
exchange market unrest in the event of a sudden reversal of capital inflows to the regional bond
markets. There have recently been dramatic changes in global economic environment, including
the continuing monetary policy normalization by the U.S. Federal Reserve and the rising trade
tensions between the U.S. and China. In fact, some emerging market economies with weaker
fundamentals  have  experienced  large-scale  capital  outflows,  resulting  in  more  volatile  stock
prices, exchange rates and interest rates.
So far, we have seen that the development of the fixed income market in the Asia-Pacific region
has  greatly  contributed  to  better  market  functioning  and  a  better  policy  environment,  while
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
creating no small difficulties. Against this backdrop, allow me to suggest some policy tasks that
countries in the region must first pursue to enhance financial and economic stability.
To begin with, we must enhance the overall resilience of the regional economy so that sudden
changes in capital flows triggered by external shocks do not lead to systemic risk. To this end,
we must reinforce our capacities and policy space to properly respond to external risks. This
may  be  done  by  improving  current  account  balances,  holding  sufficient  foreign  reserves,  and
enhancing exchange rate flexibility.
Next,  we  must  continue  our  international  cooperation  to  reinforce  financial  safety  nets. Asia-
Pacific countries have striven to establish regional financial safety nets and develop fixed income
markets  through  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralization(CMIM),  the  Asian  Bond  Markets
Initiative(ABMI),  and  the  Asian  Bond  Fund(ABF).  We  also  need  to  continuously  expand  our
cooperation not only within the region but also with international organizations such as the IMF
and BIS to strengthen global financial safety nets.
Last  but  not  least,  we  have  to  continue  our  policy  efforts  to  strengthen  fixed  income  market
infrastructure  and  functioning,  such  as  by  seeking  diverse  investors,  making  corporate  bond
markets more vibrant, and improving the processes for bond issuance and trading. I believe that
these efforts would expand both the depth and liquidity, and therefore the stability of our region’s
financial markets.
Ladies and Gentlemen!
The  research  papers  to  be  presented  at  today’s  conference  reflect  the  serious  thoughts  and
ideas of expert researchers on major issues. These include not only the development of fixed
income  markets  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region,  but  also  the  impacts  of  changing  global  risk
preferences on emerging market capital flows, the determinants of fixed income market yields,
and the relationship between the term structure of interest rates and macroeconomic variables.
I hope that the research presented at today’s conference will spark vigorous debate and allow the
sharing of diverse opinions that will help solve the financial and economic problems facing the
Asia-Pacific region.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
