1st Bank of Italy – World Bank International Research Workshop 
Building Human Capital for 21st Century Jobs 
Welcome address by Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Rome, 15th November 2018 
 It is a pleasure to welcome you to the first workshop jointly organized by the Bank of Italy and 
the World Bank on “Building human capital for 21st century jobs”. 
In  the  last  25  years  the  world  has  been  profoundly  transformed  by  rapid  technological 
advancements, the globalization of trade and production processes, demographic trends and intense 
migration flows. By their very nature, these factors intrinsically spread beyond individual national 
borders and, therefore, require the support of renewed international and multilateral coordination. 
No single country can successfully conquer these challenges alone. This makes cooperation a key 
element for the  promotion of sustainable growth and the boosting of shared prosperity.  And this 
enhances the role played by international institutions, as well as their responsibilities. 
Technological  progress  in  the  “second  machine  age”  poses  distinct  challenges  at  both  an 
economic and a social level. Digitalization and automation of production phases, the introduction of 
new  materials  and  the  rise  of  entirely  new  processes  (like  data-driven  production  and  artificial 
intelligence) are drastically  changing the functioning of economies and societies in general. This 
new “knowledge society” promises great opportunities in terms of welfare in the long run, but it 
also poses major challenges during the initial transition period. The burden of the changes required 
in the transition is likely to be borne unevenly by different income and social groups, increasing the 
risk  of  a  substantial  decline  in  employment  and  wage  growth  in  certain  industries  and  regions, 
underpinning a revival of the concept – originally proposed by Keynes in 1930 – of “technological 
unemployment”. 
Indeed, new technologies are replacing labour at great speed: today’s firms have already begun 
to automate not only manual and routine jobs, but also data-processing and information-intensive 
tasks, re-designing productive processes in fields where human intervention previously appeared to 
be decisive. In France, Germany and Italy the number of robots per worker in manufacturing has 
doubled  in  the  last  20  years  and  it  has  risen  fourfold  in  Spain;  the  “Great  Recession”  further 
accelerated the process. Artificial intelligence allows even non-manual tasks to be automated: think 
about the increasing number of firms hiring “internet bots” to handle the initial stages of customer 
services;  or  consider  the  growth  of  language  teaching  software  that,  through  machine  learning 
techniques,  provides  customized  on-line  courses;  or  the  possibilities  opened  up  by  the  latest 
generation of virtual personal assistants. 
Globalization has further fueled the process of technological change, raising other challenges. 
Major companies have increasingly spread their operations around the world in order to better serve 
their customers and improve their competitiveness. While corporate revenue and profit growth have 
been enhanced by globalization, this trend has clearly created strains on those regions and towns in 
 1 
developed countries that have seen jobs and significant portions of key industries relocate to other 
geographic regions, now benefitting in terms of employment and production spillovers. As global 
trade  between  countries  has  expanded,  economic  conditions  in  one  nation  now  have  a  greater 
potential to impact economic conditions in others, through the trade of goods and services as well as 
through capital flows and labour market dynamics. Global frontier firms, such as the major players 
in  the  tech  industry  (the  “Big  Tech”)  are  best  placed  to  take  advantage  of  network  effects.  This 
advantage  can  lock-in  their  market  dominance,  creating  a  winner-takes-all  dynamic,  potentially 
leading to increased earnings inequality across firms. Concentration allows for greater benefits from 
economies of scale, but there is a risk that barriers to entry can stifle innovation. The changes that 
innovation and globalization bring about in the corporate structure and organization and in labour 
demand clearly need to be understood and responded to.  
The most significant impact of the current wave of globalization is, again, on the labour market. 
Whether  it  is  low  cost  or  skilled  manufacturing  workers  in  China,  software  or  customer  service 
professionals in India, or highly skilled employees in Eastern Europe, companies can now access 
new pools of human capital across the globe – a fact that can have a profound influence on their 
strategy  and  structure.  The  availability  of  a  global  pool  of  human  capital  also  presents  new 
challenges as to how firms should organize themselves to take advantage of this opportunity. The 
uneven distribution of skill requirements and wage levels between advanced and emerging countries 
has also proved to be a strong push factor for surging migration flows. 
These  changes  couple  with  key  secular  demographic  trends.  Higher  living  standards  have 
increased life expectancy around the globe and, for the first time in history, the world not only is 
experiencing  a  growing  population  (increased  by  about  50  per  cent  in  the  last  thirty  years  and 
expected to reach 10 billion in the next thirty years, from the 7.5 billion today) but also, in most 
advanced  countries  as  well  as  in  China,  a  dramatic  increase  in  old-age  dependency  rates.  One 
billion people today are aged 60 or over, 13 per cent of the world’s population, and this age group is 
growing much faster than the younger ones. This trend will bear directly on the rates of workforce 
participation and, in turn, impact rates of potential economic growth across the industrialized world. 
At the same time, while in relative terms the old exceed the young, the number of young people in 
the world is the largest in history. But it is not distributed evenly around the globe: of the 2.2 billion 
people added to the world population since 1990, less than 1 in 10 live in advanced countries. In 
addition Africa, which comprises some of the poorest countries in the world, is expected to have the 
fastest population increase and to reach Asian figures within this century in absolute terms. Future 
higher  pressures  on  migration  flows  are  to  be  expected,  as  well  as  further,  possibly  dramatic 
consequences for climate change.  
 
In  response  to  all  these  changes,  which  policies  are  countries  called  on  to  design  and 
implement?  My  view  is  that  the  first  and  most  important  response  to  the  confluence  of  rapid 
technological change, globalization and demographic trends should be to rebuild human capital and, 
then,  to  prioritize  human  capital  investment  as  a  key  strategy  for  economic  competitiveness  and 
growth.  
Many observers are now advocating for a greater emphasis on the more creative subjects into a 
wider  school  curriculum,  integrating  science,  technology,  engineering  and  mathematics  (the 
 2 
traditional  acronym  STEM)  with  the  arts  (STEAM)  and  reading  and  writing  (STREAM).  It  is 
widely  suggested  that  once  both  manual  and  data-driven  tasks  have  been  automated,  human 
contribution will be concentrated in those creative tasks that will redefine product differentiation: 
understanding and anticipating the needs and behaviour of consumers, designing the aesthetics of 
new products and their integration into every-day life.  
But  this  is  not  sufficient:  a  more  complex  and  comprehensive  definition  of  “human  capital” 
should  be  endorsed.  In  the  21st  century,  the  traditional  classroom  method  where  knowledge  is 
imparted passively from teacher to students is no longer enough. Today’s citizens are required to 
develop  and  continuously  refine  a  large  arsenal  of  both  cognitive  and  non-cognitive  skills.  They 
need  to  be  able  to  search  for  specific  information  in  the  ever-growing  digital  ocean  that  is  the 
internet, recognize the quality of this information and process it critically. To adapt to the modern 
and more flexible model of business organization, the workforce must develop soft skills such as 
problem-solving  attitudes,  teamwork,  effective  communication  and  negotiation.  Workers  can 
survive and successfully exploit the acceleration of the pace of technological innovation only if they 
“learn to learn”, and continuously update their skills.  
Re-designing  education  policies  is  an  extremely  challenging  task.  It  requires  the  ability  to 
assess  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the  skills  available  among  the  population,  determine  and 
anticipate those demanded by the labour market and implement efficient strategies to maintain and 
update them throughout workers’ lifecycles. Data on available skills is, however, of poor quality 
and  the  demand  for  skills,  present  and  future,  is  often  a  black  box.  In  developing  countries 
challenges are even greater as access to basic-level schooling remains an issue for a sizeable share 
of the population: action will have to be taken to carefully balance equal access to and completion 
of lower-secondary education with further learning both for school-age children and for adults.  
These  strategies  require  coherence  and  co-operation  among  schools,  the  private  sector  and 
social  partners:  the  world  of  learning  and  the  world  of  work  must  be  linked.  Formal  education 
attainments do indeed display high complementarity with on-the-job training and other initiatives 
intended to increase the coherence between the supply and the demand of skills. 
Human  capital  investment  is  key  not  only  to  boosting  productivity  but  also  to  tackling 
inequality and promoting social mobility, enhancing social capital and maintaining social cohesion. 
Adults with low levels of education have a higher likelihood of reporting poor health and a lower 
participation in community groups and organizations. At the same time, more qualified adults are 
much more likely to feel that they have a voice that can make a difference in social and political 
life.  These  results  are  consistent  across  a  wide  range  of  countries,  confirming  that  skills  have  a 
profound  relationship  with  economic  and  social  outcomes  in  many  different  contexts  and 
institutions. Investing in skills is far less costly, in the long run, than paying the price of poorer 
health,  lower  incomes,  unemployment  and  social  exclusion  that  could  lead  to  political  aversion 
towards technological advancement and progress.  
Finally, I would like to stress the important role of international cooperation in the management 
of  the  long  and  uncertain  transition  phase.  An  institutional  synoptic  design  encompassing  all 
policies (fiscal and welfare, antitrust, and structural reforms) is highly desirable. Greater attention 
must be paid to the coordination of policies at a supranational level and to the sharing of data and 
 3 
statistics in order to correctly measure and interpret the economic variables as well as the channels 
through which the effects of these policies will meet their intended target. 
 
Let me conclude by thanking the organizers – Emanuela Ciapanna, Fabrizio Colonna and Paolo 
Sestito from the Bank of Italy as well as Ciro Avitabile, Ritika D’Souza and Roberta Gatti from the 
World Bank –, all the economists who will be sharing their research over the next two days, and the 
representatives from both the international institutions and the private sector that will animate our 
policy panel tomorrow afternoon. I wish all of you a fruitful interaction during this conference. 
 4 
