Elisabeta Gjoni: Role of money in wartime
Opening remarks by Ms Elisabeta Gjoni, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the
Second Conference of the Museum of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 20 September 2018.
 Dear guests, participants, researchers, academics, numismatists, collectors, students,
Welcome to the Bank of Albania!
It is a special pleasure for me to open the proceedings of the Second Conference of the Museum
of the Bank of Albania on “Role of money in wartime”.
The rich collection of coins and banknotes and other items exhibited in our Museum becomes
more meaningful when supported by the historic background of the period of the country of issue.
The  organisation  of  this  Conference,  an  annual  one,  contributes  to  the  both  the  historic  and
educational  role  of  the  Museum.  This  conference  is  also  an  excellent  opportunity  to  share
experiences with representatives of the main institutions of culture in Albania and museums of
central banks and other prominent foreign institutions in this field.
I am happy to see in this room both old and new collaborators, whom we wish to be “permanent
consultants”  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  We  aim  to  create  and  cultivate  a  solid  and  productive
relationship with the best experts in numismatics, museology, cultural heritage and research.
Dear participants,
Today’s  presentations  will  address  the  mutual,  complicated  and  multi-dimensional  relation
between money and war. Wars have had an impact on the economy and development of human
kind from the birth of civilisations to modern times. Meanwhile, in the words of the Socrates, the
Greek philosopher, “all wars are fought for money”.
We heard some good examples that illustrate this relation in last year’s conference. We heard
from Prof. Picard about King Monunius, who is known thanks to the respective coin. He had it
minted for the sole purpose of raising a strong army, convinced that his might rested with the
army. From Prof. Egro, we learned that Mahmut Pashë Bushatlliu and Ali Pashë Tepelena tried
to introduce their coins and banknotes, independently from the Ottoman Empire, not for financial
purposes but as a token of rebellion or an attempt to break away from the Empire. Later on, in
WW1, we see the banknotes of the Republic of Korça, which are a rare phenomenon not only in
terms of numismatics, but also a materialisation of the early issues as a result of the war, after
the  formation  of  the  Albanian  state.  During  WW2,  the  Albanian  currency  underwent  radical
changes. On its obverse and reverse we no longer see King Zog. Instead, Victor Emanuel III is
featured and the most significant change is that the Albanian franc was officially pegged to the
fate of the Italian lira. We will have the opportunity to hear, during the day, other interesting and
important examples in the monetary and economic history of Albania.
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen,
This conference does not seek to analyse wars and the various factors triggering them; instead,
it aims to show how the radical changes introduced by wars or conflicts on political systems and
alliances,  or  the  divisions  between  states  have  affected  monetary  developments.  The  history
shows  that  conflict  or  war  periods  are  particularly  related  to  radical  changes  in  monetary
systems and policies.
Over the centuries, we find various examples of such developments, materialised in changes in
the  monetary  system  or  introduction  of  temporary  fiscal  policies,  additional  quantity  of  money
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
issued before the start and during a war, massive circulation of a monetary type in areas far
away  from  their  place  of  origin,  higher  number  of  hoards  found  in  a  conflict  zone  or  massive
usage of the currency of allied countries. Numerous phenomena testify to the constant presence
of a relationship throughout epochs, between military conflicts on the one hand and the role of
money in wartime on the other.
To better reflect the relationship between conflicts or war and money, we have decided for the
conference proceedings to follow a chronological order of presentations, starting from antiquity,
to  middle  ages  and  the  modern  history  of  the  XX  century.  Our  guests  are  distinguished
professors,  scholars,  historians,  and  representatives  from  central  bank  museums  who
responded to our invitation to research and lecture on this topic.
The  views  and  conclusions  expressed  in  the  presentations  are  of  the  authors  and  not
necessarily of the respective institutions or the Bank of Albania.
Wishing success to the conference, I hope that all the participants will benefit from the interesting
presentations that will be shared with the audience today.
I have now the pleasure to invite our keynote speaker, Prof. Olivier Picard, former Director of the
French Archaeological School in Athens, Professor at the Sorbonne University, Member of the
“Académie des Inscriptions et Belles – Lettre” (Institute of France), who will hold a presentation
on “Minting of coins in Illyria in wartime”.
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
