 Speech 
   Embargo 
20 September 2018, 
5.30 pm 
Third Karl Brunner Distinguished Lecture 
Introduction of Otmar Issing, ETH Zurich 
 
Thomas J. Jordan 
 
Chairman of the Governing Board 
Swiss National Bank 
Zurich, 20 September 2018 
© Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 2018 
    Page 1/4 
     Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to welcome you all to the third Karl Brunner Distinguished Lecture. In this 
Lecture Series, the Swiss National Bank pays tribute to academics whose research is of 
particular relevance for central banking. 
This year, we are expressing our appreciation of an outstanding monetary policy theorist and 
practitioner, an independent mind and a leading voice in economic affairs. From this 
description, you may doubt that I am talking about just one person. But I am. That person is, 
of course, Otmar Issing. 
Professor Issing’s life has been extraordinary and widely admired. His scholarly activities and 
policymaking contributions have been both impressive and mutually reinforcing. His 
publication list includes numerous articles in scientific journals and periodicals. His collected 
speeches and articles in the library of the Bundesbank amount to 21 volumes of about 10,000 
pages. His textbooks have shaped the understanding of monetary theory and policy of entire 
generations of students, myself included. 
While there are many reasons for the SNB to honour Otmar Issing with this Karl Brunner 
Lecture, three stand out: his role as chief architect of the European Central Bank’s (ECB) 
monetary policy strategy, his tireless commitment to price stability, and his significant 
influence on general economic debate. I shall discuss each of these during the rest of my 
welcome address. However, first allow me to recount a few stages in a career full of 
accomplishments. 
Otmar Issing was born on 27 March 1936 in the university town of Würzburg. At the age of 
18, he enrolled for classical philology, the study of classical languages, but soon switched to 
economics. He earned his PhD in 1961 and received his habilitation in 1965. From 1967 to 
1990 he was a professor of economics. In 1990 he joined the Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank. And in 1998 he became a founding member of the Executive Board of the ECB 
and its first Chief Economist. Since 2006 he has been president of the Center for Financial 
Studies at the Goethe University in Frankfurt am Main. 
Architect of ECB strategy 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now focus on the three attributes central to our decision to 
honour Otmar Issing with this lecture. I will begin with his role in the conception of the 
ECB’s monetary policy strategy, his most important and enduring contribution to Europe’s 
new monetary order. 
While Chief Economist of the Bundesbank, Otmar had written a paper claiming that a future 
European central bank should have a monetary target, essentially emulating what the 
Bundesbank had achieved. But when he arrived at the ECB, his thinking changed. He realised 
the risk of a monetary target in a totally new environment. Thus, a tailor-made strategy to 
achieve price stability was called for. It had to include both monetary and economic analysis – 
the ECB’s famous two pillar strategy. By explicitly taking into account the development of 
  Page 2/4 
     money and credit in its monetary policy strategy, the ECB was unique in the world of central 
banking. 
However, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy was questioned by some academics. They 
favoured inflation targeting. Otmar never shied away from his critics and their arguments. 
Consequently, he launched the ECB and Its Watchers Conference. Academics, journalists and 
market participants were invited. There were lively debates about the role of money in the 
ECB’s strategy. In his last contribution to the ECB and Its Watchers Conference in 2006, 
Otmar reviewed the active discussion about the role of money in the ECB’s monetary policy 
strategy over the previous eight years. Otmar reminded the audience how some had argued 
that the role of money was too large. For others it was too small. Otmar pointed out that his 
typical response had been that it was ‘just right’. 
This reminds me of a scene in the film ‘Amadeus’. Mozart, Otmar’s favourite composer, asks 
the emperor whether he likes his new piece, the Abduction from the Seraglio. The emperor 
answers, hesitantly, that he does, but adds that occasionally the piece seems to have too many 
notes. ‘I don't understand’, Mozart replies. ‘There are just as many notes, Majesty, as are 
required. Neither more nor less.’ 
Hence, while more or fewer notes would have impaired Mozart’s harmony, more or less 
emphasis on money in the ECB’s strategy would have created monetary instability. The fact 
is that the development, implementation and communication of the ECB’s new monetary 
policy strategy went smoothly and successfully. This was a remarkable achievement, given 
the lack of data and the high uncertainty about the structure and functioning of a new and 
heterogeneous currency area. 
Commitment to price stability 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me now to proceed to the second reason for paying tribute to 
Otmar, namely his commitment to price stability. Reportedly, back in 1998, finance minister 
Theo Waigel had to persuade Chancellor Helmut Kohl to appoint Otmar to the ECB Board, 
despite his uncontested merits. At the time, Otmar was considered to be sceptical about the 
early starting date for monetary union. Ultimately, Waigel convinced the chancellor that the 
appointment of Otmar Issing would help convince ordinary Germans that the future of the 
euro was in safe hands. 
In fact, at the ECB, Otmar continued his insistence on a policy oriented towards price stability 
in the medium term. Indeed, Otmar was convinced that a monetary policy that is geared to 
steadiness and medium-term objectives reinforces the stability of the economic area. When 
Otmar left the ECB in May 2006 at the end of his eight-year term, the ECB had gained a 
reputation for price stability and the euro had established itself as the world’s second most 
important currency. 
  Page 3/4 
     Continued influence on general economic debate 
This leads me to the third reason for honouring Otmar today, which is his continued influence 
on general economic debate. To use a sporting analogy: while, in his younger years, Otmar is 
said to have been an excellent sprinter, he is actually a marathon runner. He shows no signs of 
slowing down. And his voice is widely heard. One very important issue for him is central 
bank independence. He argues that central banks should be aware of what they can do and 
what is beyond their influence. And they should communicate this limitation to the public. If 
they promise more than they can deliver, they will undermine their credibility. Otmar is 
particularly concerned about central banks taking on too many tasks for which they have no 
mandate. This puts their independence at risk. 
I completely agree. Central bank independence will only endure as long as the public is 
convinced of its benefits, and trust that the central bank is exercising its power responsibly. I 
am certain that central bank independence is essential, both for maintaining price stability and 
for ensuring stable and healthy economic growth. However, it is not a given. Rather, the 
support for central bank independence must continuously be earned anew. 
Today, Otmar will speak about central bank communication, another very important aspect of 
central banking. This has attracted a lot of attention in the literature over the last two decades. 
Who better to speak to us this evening on this topic than Otmar, with his extraordinary talent 
for communicating with an interested general public? 
Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in welcoming Otmar Issing with a big round of 
applause. 
  Page 4/4 
 