  16.11.2018 
 Remarks - First panel: “Central banks, macroeconomic stability and 
economic growth” 
Banco de España and European Institute of the Mediterranean with the 
support of the Central Bank of Tunisia 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  In  this  first  session  of  the  conference  we  will  focus  on  the  role  of  central  banks  on  both 
shores of the Mediterranean in contributing to the achievement of sustainable growth in the 
long term. 
Before  giving  the  floor  to  our  distinguished  speakers,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  the 
current global outlook and their implications for economic policymaking.  
At present, the global economy seems to be approaching its cyclical peak while the process 
of monetary policy normalization in the advanced economies continues, particularly in the 
United  States.  This  process  should  normally  precede  the  tightening  of  global  financial 
conditions.  
At the same time, tensions in international trade remain, with the risk that disputes in this 
area  will  be  solved  with  a  greater  use  of  protectionism  to  the  detriment  of  a  multilateral 
approach to the resolution of these conflicts; and, elsewhere, the markets of some emerging 
economies  that  had  significant  macroeconomic  imbalances  have  undergone  episodes  of 
severe turbulence.  
We  are  therefore  facing  a  phase  of  growth  moderation  with  limited  scope  for  economic 
policies. It would seem necessary to harness the current moment in which growth records 
are still satisfactory in order to generate margins that allow a certain countercyclical gearing 
of economic policies in the future. 
In the fiscal area, the post-crisis recovery has not been accompanied in a significant number 
of countries, advanced and emerging alike, by a sufficient reduction of structural deficits in 
public accounts and the halting of the process of rising public debt. More generally, in many 
cases  it  may  be  necessary  to  move  forward  with  fiscal  reforms  that  seek  to  reduce  the 
distortions to growth while allowing the most vulnerable sectors of society to be supported 
more decisively. 
The  limited  fiscal  space  available  is  exacerbated  in  the  longer  run  in  many  economies, 
principally but not exclusively the advanced countries, owing to the adverse demographic 
prospects. Ageing populations pose significant challenges for public finances, as they bear 
on  both  the  revenue  and  the  expenditure  sides.  On  the  expenditure  side,  ageing  will 
considerably affect pension and healthcare spending which, in many cases, will require re-
thinking pension systems to guarantee their sustainability. On the revenue side ageing leads 
to changes in the composition of tax bases as it does to lower labour income shares, to 
capital deepening and to changes in the composition of consumption.  
In  the  area  of  monetary  policy,  many  advanced  economies  are  still  in  a  situation  of  zero 
lower  bound.  More  generally,  in  most  countries  the  room  currently  available  to  face  a 
hypothetical recession is less than that existing at previous similar cyclical junctures.  
Monetary policy also needs re-thinking, on the basis of more long-term challenges for the 
economy.  The  natural  interest  rate  has  been  falling  since  at  least  the  1980s.  Population 
ageing, by increasing the relative supply of savings, explains most of the fall across several 
advanced economies. A low or even negative natural interest rate poses new challenges for 
stabilisation  policies.  The  lower  bound  on  the  nominal  policy  interest  rate  may  more 
frequently be binding, and not just in episodes of acute crisis. This leads to the conclusion 
 3/5 
 that  non-conventional  monetary  measures  may  ultimately  be  used  more  frequently  than 
originally expected. 
In  addition,  many  emerging  economies  face  the  gradual  tightening  of  global  financial 
conditions in a context of slowdown in their economic activity. In particular, this context is 
especially  challenging  for  the  economies  that  receive  capital  flows.  In  these  cases, 
economic  authorities  must  foster  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  and  sound 
institutions that attract permanent capital flows. 
The  widespread  scant  room  for  manoeuvre  for  the  traditional  stabilisation  tools  we  have 
witnessed  calls  for  the  development  of  other  policies  to  relieve  monetary  policy  of  the 
excessive role it has played post-crisis in maintaining financial stability.  
One of the lessons of the crisis is the importance of including new instruments in the policy 
toolkit,  namely  macroprudential  policy.  Therefore,  it  is  essential  to  identify  risks  and 
vulnerabilities to the economy that may stem from the financial system affecting the real 
economy  or  vice  versa.  In  any  event,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  to  develop  the 
appropriate  macroprudential  instruments  covering  both  bank  and  non-bank  financial 
intermediation  to  tackle  these  risks  in  order  to  have  a  stable  financial  system  with 
countercyclical buffers that support sustained economic growth. 
The favorable cyclical juncture at which a number of economies still find themselves is a 
propitious  time  for  tackling  structural  reforms  aimed  at  fomenting  increase  in  potential 
growth.  This  is  especially  relevant  in  the  case  of  advanced  economies  that  have  seen  a 
significant decrease in productivity growth in recent years. We should not forget that in the 
downturn phase of the cycle the introduction of structural reforms is much more costly. 
The  global  financial  crisis  led  to  a  regulatory  wave  aimed  at  achieving  a  more  stable 
international financial system. Much progress has been made in this area, but challenges 
still remain. At the European level, it is necessary to complete the institutional architecture 
of  the  euro  area,  bringing  the  Banking  Union  to  fruition  and  strengthening  the  fiscal 
framework.  On  a  global  scale,  there  are  multiple  challenges:  the  reinforcement  of  the 
regulation of non-banking intermediaries, the emergence of new risks (cybersecurity) and 
the creation or expansion of global and regional backstops. 
Finally, the recent tensions in international trade and the recent proliferation of protectionist 
measures should serve as a reminder for us to defend the benefits of trade liberalisation as 
a means of strengthening growth in the economy and the reduction of poverty. This defence 
must be accompanied, on the one hand, by a reform of the rules of world trade so as to 
include more effective mechanisms to guarantee a more balanced playing field; and, on the 
other, by domestic policies (flexibility of the labour market, a sound social security network, 
and  the  creation  of  educational  and  training  opportunities)  that  adequately  address  the 
distributive problems that may stem from trade exchanges. It is also worth mentioning the 
promotion  of  trade  openness  in  new  sectors,  mainly  services,  where  the  potential  profit 
margin is significantly higher. 
Without further ado, let me introduce the panelists. We are honoured to have with us today 
three very experienced representatives of the central bank community of the Mediterranean 
region.    
4/5 
   Mr. Abdellatif Jouahri, Governor of the Bank Al Maghrib.   
Mr. Sadiq al-Kabir, Governor of the Central Bank of Libya.  
Mr. Marc-Olivier Strauss-Kahn, Managing Director and Special Adviser of the Governor. 
They are very well suited to address the topics of this panel as  they have a far-reaching 
knowledge of the economies of the region and long-dated experience as policymakers. 
 Governor Jouahri, the floor is yours. 
   5/5 
