     29 November 2018 
Deputy Governor Rannveig Sigurðardóttir. Introductory remarks 
at the 2nd Annual Nordic Cyber in Finance Conference, Helsinki, 
29 November 2018 
  Let  me  begin  by  saying  that  this  conference  is  both  timely  and 
interesting for me, as I have only been in office for five months. Given 
that I come from the monetary policy department at the Central Bank 
of Iceland, cybersecurity has not been much on my agenda until now. 
It is, nonetheless, a very important topic. The Central Bank of Iceland, 
and other central banks are facing several new challenges in this area, 
both  in  the  financial  sector  generally  and  central  banking  more 
specifically.  
Last week I attended an interesting macroprudential policy conference 
at  Danmarks  Nationalbank.  The  discussion  paper  prepared  for  that 
conference was called While the sun is shining, prepare for a rainy day. 
Sitting there, I pondered what the discussion paper for this conference 
today might be called. Perhaps something like The snowstorm is here – 
what do we wear? 
Cybercrime  is  now  the  world’s  fastest-growing  type  of  crime.  It  has 
shot  up  to  second  place  on  the  list  of  the  top  ten  business  risks 
worldwide, after not even making the list five years ago. The financial 
sector  is  particularly  important  because  it  greases  the  wheels  of  our 
economies,  and  cyber  risks  pose  mounting  threats  to  the  financial 
system. 
Developments  since  the  emergence  of  the  internet  show  that  new 
technologies have brought with them new challenges. We only need to 
think of robotics, artificial intelligence, blockchains, and smart phones 
with  5G  Wi-Fi  to  realize  the  extent  of  the  changes  that  lie  ahead  for 
financial services.  
New  technologies  also  bring  opportunities.  The  Austrian  economist, 
Finance Minister, and banker Joseph Schumpeter demonstrated in the 
1920s that successive waves of technological change raise productivity, 
income, and living standards. However, we know from long experience 
that technological change often results in costs involving new risks that 
must be addressed in order to optimise the net benefit. So while FinTech 
  will broaden consumers’ range of choices in financial intermediation, it 
also brings new risks, both to the security of transactions and to privacy. 
To  maintain  financial  stability  and  real  economic  activity,  we  need 
payment  and  settlement  systems  that  are  secure.  As  a  result, 
cybersecurity has moved from being a technical issue to a central bank 
issue. That is why the Nordic central banks have set up this forum for 
discussion and cooperation so as to foster closer cooperation on cyber 
resilience  and  cybersecurity.  Today  the  focus  is  on  financial  market 
infrastructure.  
One of the questions being asked in this section of the conference is, 
“What challenges are likely to emerge with new operating models and 
new  actors  in  the  financial  sector?”  As  I  said  before,  the  FinTech 
snowstorm  is  already  here.  The  newest  challenge  with  respect  to 
cybersecurity  is  the  emergence  of  new  players  offering  financial 
services,  some  of  whom  have  not  provided  financial  services  before. 
The question therefore becomes: What technology are they using? Is it 
established, or is it new and unknown technology? 
We also know that attitudes towards security and operational risk are 
important.  But  with  tech  firms  rushing  to  offer  new  products  to  the 
market, there is the risk of insufficient emphasis on security. This is a 
risk  that  must  be  monitored  –  not  only  for  new  products  or  for  new 
players, but also for incumbent businesses.  
Tech  giants  like  Google,  Apple,  and  Alibaba  look  set  to  become 
dominant players. Their advantage comes from providing cross-border 
services  and  having  already  gathered  significant  information  about 
users.  They  are  already  present  in  the  Nordic  marketplace.  This 
development  may  lean  towards  monopolies,  as  it  can  create  entry 
barriers for new and smaller players in the market. If that proves to be 
the case, it could have a negative impact on competition and go against 
the aims of the PSD2 (the recent EU Directive on payment services in 
the internal market (2015/2366). This risk is greater when the payment 
mechanisms are outside the jurisdiction of the relevant state.  
Then  there  is  the  question  of  supervision.  Will  the  new  solutions  be 
supervised,  and  if  so,  how?  The  challenge  here  is  that  many  new 
solutions are global, and thus outside the European Economic Area or 
the  European  Single  Market.  Such  supervision  thus  requires  cross-
border cooperation among supervisors. 
The challenge for the supervisor is  also  to maintain  a comprehensive 
overview of the market. For the legislator, it is a challenge to stay on 
top  of  rapid  technological  developments,  as  rules  tend  to  lag  behind 
technological changes. Financial market participants must commit fully 
to  guarding  the  system.  Cybersecurity  needs  to  be  promoted  at  all 
levels. 
With respect to this fast-changing technology, keeping one step ahead 
of antisocial elements is a constant challenge. As I see it, cooperation is 
the only way forward. It is vital that all financial system entities work 
together on all fronts – within and between countries – to identify and 
address  vulnerabilities.  We  need  to  share  both  our  successes  and  our 
mishaps. We must do as mountain-climbers do – tie ourselves together 
  –  because  we  are  all  in  this  together:  central  banks,  financial  service 
providers, FinTech firms, consumers, regulators, and politicians. And 
our success in combining forces will determine whether we reach the 
mountain peak or have to go back to base camp again. 
All systems can break. This is why some of us still use paper banknotes, 
even though they are not the most sophisticated technology. But their 
security has been improved upon over recent centuries. Try imagining 
what would have been the main topic at a conference in Florence at the 
time of the first Medici’s. As with paper money, the technologies we 
are discussing here today will become more secure, although we will 
encounter blizzards. Our role is to prevent or reduce the likelihood that 
those blizzards will create systemic risk.  
 
  