  Address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the Central Banking Seminar of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
 New York 
2 October 2018 
 The impact of a changing global environment on African economies and policy 
  Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
 Thank you to the New York Fed for again inviting me to address this prestigious 
annual  seminar  where  major  topical  issues  are  discussed.  This  year  is  no 
exception. The theme of ‘less accommodative policy amid questions about the global 
order’  has  been  a  key  focus  of  investors  and  policymakers  alike  for  quite  a  while 
already,  and  clear  answers  are  still  not  forthcoming.  Are  we  just  witnessing  a 
temporary  correction  of  financial  markets  amid  an  otherwise  benign  economic 
environment, or are disruptions large enough to challenge global expansion, especially 
in  emerging  economies?  If  more  severe  challenges  were  to  occur,  would  there  be 
sufficient global cooperation to deal with them in a cohesive manner? I certainly will 
not  pretend  to  have  clear  answers  to  these  questions,  but  will  try  to  provide  some 
perspective, looking specifically at how the changing in global environment is affecting 
South Africa  and  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s  (SARB)  reaction thereto. I  will  also 
pay  attention  to  the  challenges  facing  the  rest  of  Sub-Saharan  Africa  and  what  to 
possibly expect next.  
 1 
 In some aspects, the global outlook does not appear to have changed fundamentally 
from earlier this year. The International Monetary Fund is yet to release its October 
2018 World Economic Outlook, but the last time it published an update to its forecasts 
in July, its 2018 and 2019 global growth projections were unchanged from the previous 
forecasting exercise, at 3.9% for both years. The Bloomberg consensus of economists 
delivers  a  similar  message  of  stability  in  expectations.  The  forecast  for  2018  gross 
domestic product (GDP) growth  is presently at  3.8%, unchanged from two quarters 
ago. At the same time, the normalisation of monetary policies in advanced economies 
from the unusually loose stance that had prevailed since the end of the global financial 
crisis has proceeded largely along the pace which policymakers had signalled, and 
investors had expected, at the start of the year. 
 Yet, a closer look at the details of the global environment  suggests that the outlook 
may be becoming more challenging as some risks previously identified have begun to 
materialise.  First,  economic  expansion  has  become  less  synchronised  than  in  the 
‘sweet  spot’  of  2017,  when  most  economies  experienced  upside  growth  surprises 
without too much inflation.  While GDP growth in the United States (US) is still strong 
on the back of a buoyant labour market and fiscal stimulus, activity has slowed since 
the  start  of  the  year  in  the  eurozone,  Japan  and  China.  Second,  some  policy 
developments have contributed to either increasing such de-synchronisation – such 
as fiscal stimulus in the US – or raising overall growth uncertainty, as in the case of 
rising trade conflicts.  
 One key consequence of such economic and policy developments has been renewed 
upward pressure on the US dollar, which has benefitted from the further rise in interest 
rate  differentials  (nominal  and  real)  between  the  US  and  other  major  advanced 
economies, and from the outperformance of US equities. 
 The combination of rising growth and policy uncertainties, weaker commodity prices – 
with the notable exception of oil – from March to August 2018 and a stronger dollar 
has  hit  emerging  countries’  financial  assets  particularly  hard.  Since  it  peaked  in 
February  2018,  and  despite  some  recovery  in  September,  the  JPMorgan  emerging 
markets  foreign  exchange  index  has  declined  by  13%.  Over  the  same  period,  the 
MSCI  index  of  emerging  market  equities  has  shed  13%  and  the  Emerging  Markets 
 2 
Bond Index Plus (EMBI+) sovereign spread over US Treasuries has widened by  60 
basis points.  
 However, performances across the emerging world have been very disparate, ranging 
from severe financial stress to near-stability.  Judging by these different reactions, it 
appears  that  the  less  favourable  global  backdrop  has  led  investors  to  refocus  on 
relative country vulnerabilities, specifically with respect to the rising external liabilities 
of  governments  and  large  corporations,  fiscal  trends,  exposure  to  global  trade  and 
value chains and, in some cases, the level of inflation and the degree of anchoring of 
inflation expectations. 
 How the changing environment has affected South Africa 
 If  one  excludes  the  most  dramatic  sell-offs  experienced  by  the  Turkish  lira  and  the 
Argentine peso, the South African rand has been among the most affected emerging 
market  currencies  this  year  –  losing  13%  on  a  trade-weighted  basis  since  its  26 
February peak. This depreciation, together with the 98 basis point increase in the yield 
on  the  R186  benchmark  government  bond  and  the  60  basis  point  widening  in  the 
country’s  five-year  credit  default  swap  spread  illustrate  the  vulnerability  of  South 
African financial assets to the changing world environment I have just described. 
 Why  has  this  happened?  In  contrast  to  some  of  its  emerging  market  peers,  South 
Africa  has  managed  to  keep  its  foreign  currency-denominated  external  liabilities 
relatively under control. While the ratio of external debt to GDP has risen from a low 
of 18%  in  the mid-2000s  to 46%  as  at  the first  quarter of  2018,  the  majority  (about 
55%)  of  that  debt  is  denominated  in  rand,  and  includes  government  bonds  held  by 
offshore  portfolio  managers.  Importantly  too,  the  short-term  component  of  foreign 
currency-denominated  external  debt  did  not  exceed  8.5%  of  GDP,  and  the  bulk  of 
these  liabilities  consists  of  either  trade  finance  or  domestic  banks’  foreign  currency 
deposits, which in the latter case are more than offset by foreign currency assets. 
 Inflation patterns do not appear to be the cause of the market sell-off. Over the past 
12 months, consumer price readings have been below consensus expectations seven 
times  (including  in  the  past month),  and the  average  inflation  rate  (of 4.4%)  for  the 
second quarter also fell short of what the South African Reserve Bank’s (SARB) model 
 3 
projected 6 or 12 months earlier. The extended period of sub-par growth in demand 
appears to be limiting the pass-through to prices of higher input costs, including those 
related to exchange rate depreciation. Indeed, recent survey indicators suggest that 
companies’ pricing power, especially in the retail sector, is increasingly being eroded. 
At the same time, some modest signs of slower wage and unit labour cost growth have 
also emerged in the past year or two. 
 However, some several of South Africa’s fundamentals are fragile enough to keep the 
country at risk of portfolio flow reversals in periods of rising risk aversion. Among those 
is the persistence of ‘twin deficits’. While the current account deficit has declined, on 
average, in recent years – it stood at 3.3% of GDP in the second quarter of the year, 
down from a high of 5.8%, on average, in 2013 – it nonetheless appears elevated for 
an economy with weak demand and a negative output gap. Domestic savings remain 
low,  illustrating  the  risk  of  renewed  deficit  widening  if  demand,  especially  much-
needed  investment  demand,  picks  up.  At  the  same  time,  the  budget  deficit  has 
remained  in  excess  of  3%  of  GDP  in  the  past  few  years,  despite  repeated  tax 
increases, resulting in a continued rise in the debt-to-GDP ratio, compounded by an 
increase in contingent liabilities linked to state-owned enterprises. 
 Real economic growth has also been disappointing. At a year-on-year growth rate of 
only 0.5% in the second quarter of 2018, South African GDP growth was one of the 
weakest among the large emerging countries. In the second quarter, the South African 
economy  entered  what  is  commonly  called  a  ‘technical  recession’,  as  GDP  growth 
contracted  for  a  second  successive  quarter.  In  many  ways,  hopes  that  domestic 
political  developments  at  the  start  of  the  year  would  translate  into  a  quick  boost  to 
activity proved to be excessive. Business confidence quickly retraced most of its early 
2018 gains, and the South African rand, which had rallied at the time on the back of 
such hopes, fell back in sympathy with corporate sentiment (but also on account of the 
factors already mentioned). 
 Even  as  domestic  financial  markets  came  under  pressure,  some  assets  showed 
relative  resilience,  in  particular  long-term  domestic  bonds  that  sold  off  by  a  lesser 
amount – relative to the degree of rand depreciation  – than in previous episodes of 
market stress, for example the 2013 ‘taper tantrum’. Continued and relatively benign 
inflation readings probably helped limit the upward drift in bond yields, highlighting the 
 4 
importance  for  central  banks  of  keeping  price  expectations  solidly  anchored,  if  the 
impact of market stress is to remain limited – in both length and scope. 
  How the South African Reserve Bank is reacting 
 The SARB has had to acknowledge the risks that the changing global environment is 
posing to the domestic inflation outlook. Earlier this year, a decline in both actual and 
forecast  inflation  –  relative  to  what  the  SARB’s  models  had  been  projecting  –  had 
allowed the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to ease policy moderately, by 25 basis 
points in March, in an environment of weak domestic demand. However, the outlook 
for  inflation  has  since  deteriorated,  even  though  actual  inflation  readings  generally 
remained benign and the impact of the increase in the value-added tax rate from 14% 
to 15%, in particular, seemed relatively muted. Exchange rate depreciation as well as 
the  rising  trend  in  world  oil  prices  and  uncertainties  about  future  electricity  tariff 
increases pose the main upside risks to the outlook. 
 While  inflation  is  still  expected  to  remain  within  the  3–6%  target  range  over  the 
forecasting  period,  according  to  the  latest  forecasts  from  the  SARB’s  Quarterly 
Projection Model (QPM), inflation will peak at 5.9% year on year in the second quarter 
of  2019,  before  eventually  settling  at  5.4%  in  the  last  few  quarters  of  2020.  Core 
inflation is expected to follow a relatively similar, though smoother, profile, peaking at 
5.6% year on year during the course of 2019. Given the volatile environment, the risk 
of an overshoot of the target, given the balance of risks, should not be underestimated. 
Furthermore, an extended and sizable deviation in inflation from the midpoint of the 
target range would raise the risks of medium-term inflation expectations drifting back 
to, if not above, the top end of the range.  
 The SARB’s QPM model projects that in order to bring inflation back towards the target 
midpoint in the long run, five interest rate increases of 25 basis points each will be 
needed by the end of 2020. It is important to reiterate that the QPM projection is not a 
pre-commitment to a future rate path. It is a broad policy guideline that can and will 
evolve as economic conditions change. At its most recent meeting about two weeks 
ago, the MPC opted to leave the repurchase rate unchanged at 6.50%, cognisant that 
downside risks to the growth outlook  had partly offset the upside risks to the future 
 5 
inflation profile. The output gap remains negative and unlikely to close until late 2020, 
suggesting  that  risks  of  demand-led  price  pressures  should  remain  low  over  the 
forecasting period. Nonetheless, the MPC will need to remain vigilant and ready to act 
against any sign of second-round price effects from the recent rand exchange rate and 
oil price shifts. 
 The exchange rate of the rand has been the subject of much debate recently, given 
its depreciation and heightened volatility in reaction to a combination of fundamental 
drivers, external risk factors and a general reallocation of capital away from emerging 
markets. A number of emerging markets have more recently resorted to intervention 
in the foreign exchange market, informed by their own country-specific circumstances. 
The SARB has allowed the exchange rate to act as a shock absorber and adjustment 
mechanism,  and  maintained  its  policy  of  not  intervening  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market with a view of supporting the currency.  
 However,  as  previously  stated,  this  does  not  mean  that  we  are  totally  indifferent  to 
exchange rate movements. It also does not mean that there cannot be circumstances 
where the cost of not intervening to dampen excess volatility or abrupt and disorderly 
adjustments,  could  be  higher  than  that  of  intervening.  This  suggests  that  policy 
flexibility  requires  that  foreign  exchange  intervention  continues  to  be  part  of  the 
monetary  policy  toolkit  to  support  economic  and  financial  stability.  As  previously 
stated,  our  preference  has  been  to  deploy  this  tool  if  there  are  signs  of  the  orderly 
functioning  of  markets  being  threatened,  rather  than  to  go  against  the  grain  of  a 
market, which is realigning and repricing on the back of the factors mentioned above. 
Recent developments in domestic foreign exchange markets have not been judged to 
have been of such magnitude and nature   that they required any intervention from the 
SARB.   
  Challenges in the rest of sub-Saharan Africa 
 A  changing  global  environment  is  equally  as  important  for  the  rest  of  the  African 
continent. A decade or so ago, the conventional view was that, apart from the demand 
for  exports  and  the  impact  of  commodity  price  fluctuations  on  the  terms  of  trade, 
African  countries  were  relatively  insulated  from  global  financial  shocks,  as  their 
 6 
economies  were  less  integrated  into  the  world  financial  system  and  thus  less 
vulnerable to portfolio outflows or cutbacks in banks’ cross-border loan portfolios. This 
proved  true,  to  some  extent,  in  the  global  financial  crisis,  when  the  sub-Saharan 
African  region  experienced  a  less  pronounced  growth  downturn  than  other  major 
regions. However, this too is changing. Greater integration of sub-Saharan Africa into 
global  financial  flows  has  brought  access  to  new  resources  for  the  financing  of 
investments and economic development. It has also, however, ushered in a greater 
vulnerability to potential capital outflows. 
 So  far  this  year,  with  a  few  exceptions,  currencies  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  have 
depreciated  by  only  a  moderate  amount  against  the  US  dollar.  The  recovery  in  oil 
prices  appeared  to  help  energy  exporters,  while  other  countries  benefitted  from 
continued,  relatively  stable  economic  growth.  However,  other  segments  of  their 
financial  markets  have  not  performed  as  well.  In  particular,  yields  on  eurobonds  – 
which have grown in size as a funding instrument in recent years as sovereigns took 
advantage of the global ‘search for yield’ – have increased. In most cases, such yields 
are up by 100 to 150 basis points from early 2018 lows, reversing a significant part of 
the previous two years’ rally. At the same time, ‘frontier’ equity markets are displaying 
a  stronger  correlation  with  larger  emerging  markets  than  before,  illustrating  the 
vulnerability of earlier gains in still-small African stock exchanges. 
 Furthermore,  several  fundamental  economic  trends  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  are  a 
growing source of vulnerability. Current account imbalances are rising in a majority of 
the continent’s countries, which are largely non-resource exporters, and contributing 
to  a  rising  trend  in  external  liabilities  relative  to  GDP.  Government  budget  deficits 
remain fairly high, pushing public debt ratios higher. And while economies continue to 
grow in real terms, the experience of the past few years  – in particular, their abrupt 
slowdown  in  2015  –  highlights  the  region’s  vulnerability  to  external  developments, 
such as swings in  resource prices or a rebalancing of China’s growth path towards 
less commodity-intensive demand. Finally, while inflation in the first half of 2018 was 
reasonably benign in the majority of African countries, the sensitivity of consumer price 
trends to prices of oil and food commodities, and to exchange rate swings – because 
of the high share of consumer goods that are imported – is a strong reminder that such 
stability cannot be taken for granted. 
  7 
What will happen next? 
 How will the emerging market situation evolve over the next few months and quarters? 
In the past couple of weeks, pressure on emerging currencies and other assets has 
abated to some extent, helped by signals from several central banks  indicating that 
they  would not  tolerate  durable upward shifts in inflation.  However, it is too early to 
predict a stabilisation in emerging market assets, and too early to say with confidence 
whether  the  recent  market  correction  will,  or  will  not,  turn  into  a  more  severe 
adjustment  that  could  severely  undermine  growth  prospects,  and  possibly  strain 
corporate and bank finances in emerging countries.  
 At  present,  many  economists  are  of  the  opinion  that  emerging  market  assets,  and 
especially currencies, are more fairly valued than they were at the start of the year. 
However, historical experience tells us that ‘overshoots’ can often happen, following 
adjustments similar to what has just been witnessed, and financial assets can face an 
extended period of volatility before settling around new ‘equilibrium’ values. 
 There are, however, some encouraging factors which should limit the risk of a further, 
severe  adjustment.  First,  as  I  indicated  earlier,  growth  in  advanced  economies  has 
remained  relatively  resilient,  much  as  risks  seem  tilted  to  the  downside.  Even  in 
emerging markets, with the exception of Argentina, Turkey and South Africa , growth 
forecasts have not significantly changed since early 2018; hence, the risk that financial 
market  stress  in  emerging  countries  could  negatively  ‘spill  back’  into  the  advanced 
economy growth outlook still appears, for now, to be low. 
 Importantly, too, much as the risk remains, we are not witnessing the kind of inflation 
pressures that might force the world’s major central banks into a significantly faster 
pace  of  policy  tightening  –  potentially  derailing  economic  expansion.  While  both 
headline and core inflation are at present higher in the US, eurozone and Japan than, 
on average, in the past few years, few economists anticipate a prolonged overshoot 
of  inflation  targets  –  in  the  event  that  these  targets  are  reached  in  the  near  future, 
which  may  not  always  be  the  case.  And,  while  tighter  labour  markets  are  finally 
pushing wage growth higher, this is in part offset by some acceleration in productivity, 
implying limited upward pressure on prices from unit labour costs. 
  8 
Equally,  just  like  it  has  not  led  to  a  strong  build-up  of  price  pressures  in  advanced 
economies, the prolonged period of stimulative monetary policies has not led to the 
kind of broad-based private sector (especially financial sector) leveraging that would 
threaten  an  early  and  abrupt  end  to  what  is  now  an  extended  period  of  economic 
expansion. Admittedly, in some large emerging countries, in particular in China, private 
sector liabilities have risen sharply in the past decade as a share of GDP, raising the 
risk of a future adjustment that may, at some stage, have adverse consequences on 
not just local but also global economic growth. However, in the short term, the steps 
recently  taken  by  Chinese  authorities  –  including  some  mild  loosening  of  their 
monetary, fiscal and regulatory stance – indicate that they do not see the deleveraging 
of specific segments of the economy as incompatible with a relatively stable pace of 
economic expansion. 
 This  said,  several  factors  of  uncertainty  are  likely  to  persist  in  coming  quarters, 
implying an ongoing strong need for vigilance by central banks, especially in emerging 
countries such as South Africa that enjoy open and liquid capital markets.  
 The first factor to mention is the recent escalation in trade conflicts between the US 
and China, with both nations announcing an increase in tariffs on a broader range of 
goods than initially targeted. While earlier tariff announcements in the second quarter 
of  2018  appear  to  have  not  yet  had  major  negative  effects  on  economic  activity, 
concerns remain that a broader, longer conflict could undermine  global trade flows, 
corporate investment and, ultimately, economic growth.  
 More generally, a move away from the multilateral approach to international relations 
followed in recent decades – not only in trade but also in financial, regulatory and even 
military matters – could create a more complex environment for emerging countries 
relying on open markets and stable external relationships for economic development.  
 Turning  to financial matters,  one factor  of  uncertainty  is  the future  path of  risk-free, 
‘neutral’ real interest rates in coming years, and how this will continue to affect global 
investors’ appetite for risk and, in turn, the cost and accessibility of foreign funds for 
emerging economies. In the decade following the global financial crisis, several factors 
tended  to  depress  these  risk-free  rates,  including  low  productivity  growth,  higher 
precautionary  savings,  and  continued  reserve  accumulation  by  emerging  countries 
 9 
with  large  current  account  surpluses.  However,  these  factors  have  started  to  fade, 
albeit gradually. 
 Finally, geopolitical issues remain a concern. In the past few years, commentators and 
investors have mostly focused on growing voter frustration of low growth and  rising 
job  insecurity  in  advanced  economies.  However,  one  should  not  forget  that  such 
challenges  persist  in  emerging  economies  too,  in  particular  in  Africa.  Failure  to 
address  issues  of  persistent  inequality  and  poverty,  insufficient  job  and  skills 
development  opportunities,  and  poorly  planned  urbanisation  could  easily  increase 
social  unrest  and  reverse  earlier  gains  towards  a  more  stable,  rules-based  policy 
environment. And while most of the policy responses fall outside the remit of central 
banks’ mandates, their contribution to price and financial stability remain essential if 
development goals are to be achieved. 
 Conclusion 
 Acknowledging  the  impact  of  the  downside  risks,  especially  the  escalating  of  trade 
tensions and the tightening of global financial conditions, to global growth and inflation, 
it  goes  without  saying  that  global  coordination  and  cooperation  to  deal  with  these 
challenges is necessary. In part this would mean that authorities should consciously 
implement policies and reforms that will weather the financial markets volatility as well 
as protect global expansion. This kind of coordination and cooperation has served the 
global economy well during the last global financial crisis and we should work hard to 
improve on that. 
 Thank you.  
   10 
