Luis de Guindos: Euro area banking sector – current challenges
Keynote speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the
Annual General Meeting of the Foreign Bankers’ Association, Amsterdam, 15 November 2018.
Introduction
 It is my pleasure to speak to you here in Amsterdam. Today, I will focus my remarks on the state
of the euro area banking sector and its current challenges.
I will first look back and take stock of the developments since the financial crisis. Much has been
done  in  the  past  ten  years  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector.  But  as
welcome  as  these  developments  have  been,  under  many  metrics  euro  area  banks  are  still
underperforming relative to their international peers. It is therefore reasonable to discuss the key
challenges that the sector is currently facing.
As  I  will  explain,  some  of  these  challenges  still  relate  to  the  legacy  of  the  crisis.  Equally
importantly,  however,  some  are  linked  to  the  fragmentation  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector,
which acts as a drag on its operational efficiency and profitability.
While  it  is  up  to  the  banks  themselves  to  address  many  of  the  issues  surrounding  these
challenges,  I  am  convinced  that  policymakers  also  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  reducing
fragmentation  in  Europe.  So  I  will  finish  with  some  remarks  on  the  policy  action  needed  to
remove obstacles to the further integration of financial markets in Europe.
The euro area banking sector – developments since the financial crisis
Let  me  start  with  a  brief  recap  on  what  has  already  been  done  to  heal  the  fault  lines  that
appeared at the outbreak of the global financial crisis. The financial health of euro area banks has
improved markedly since the beginning of the crisis. The aggregate core capital (Common Equity
Tier 1) ratio of euro area banks stood at around 14% at the end of the second quarter of 2018,
the double of what is was in 2007. Regulatory liquidity ratios are at solid levels, with an aggregate
liquidity  coverage  ratio  of  141%.  European  banks  are  also  making  progress  in  fulfilling  the
minimum requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL).
One indicator of this is that the volume of Additional Tier 1 bonds and Tier 2 instruments issued
by euro area banks and held by investors in the euro area increased by two-thirds between 2013
and  2017.  Finally,  banks  are  also  making  progress  in  repairing  their  balance  sheets  –  the
aggregate non-performing loan (NPL) ratio has nearly halved from its 2013 peak of around 8%, to
its current level of 4.4%.
The  recently  published  results  of  the  2018  stress  tests  reflect  exactly  this.  On  average,  core
capital of euro area banks after stress stood at 9.9%, up from 8.8% in the same exercise two
years ago. Underlying the results is the strong build-up of capital buffers in recent years resulting
in a better condition at the starting point of the exercise (end 2017).
I would however like to note that, while the adverse scenario was generally more adverse for
European economies than in the 2016 exercise, it did not capture events which have become
prominent  through  the  course  of  the  year,  notably  developments  in  emerging  markets  and
sovereign spreads. Taking these into account would add on to overall capital depletion.
While euro area banks are clearly better capitalised and more resilient, this exercise should not
hide the fact that areas of vulnerability remain. In particular, banks are still struggling to achieve
sustainable profitability. Admittedly, headline profitability figures show that the sector seems to be
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
improving rapidly – the average return on equity for euro area banks increased from 3.4% in 2016
to  6.9%  in  the  second  quarter  of  2018.  However,  more  careful  analysis  reveals  that  this
improvement is mainly due to a reduction in the cost of credit risk. This results, in part, from a
cyclical upswing that has stemmed the flow of new NPLs and led to provisioning costs falling to
post-crisis  lows.  At  the  same  time,  operating  profits  have  remained  modest  overall  and  the
average  cost-to-income  ratio  flat  at  66%  over  the  same  period,  reflecting  some  cyclical  and
structural challenges.
Through  the  lens  of  the  stock  market,  the  outlook  for  bank  profitability  remains  clouded,
confirming that these challenges are material. Euro area banks’ average price-to-book ratios of
0.8, are still about half of those of their US peers, which stand around 1.6. But these price-to-
book ratios vary widely between countries and between individual banks in the euro area. This
variation is bound to arise from cyclical factors, but it also stems from differences in the progress
made by banks in tackling structural issues.
Challenges to bank profitability
Let us take a closer look at these cyclical and structural challenges to bank profitability.
On the cyclical front, banks are finding it hard to increase their revenue in the low interest rate
environment.  Although  credit  growth  has  increased  somewhat  with  the  improving  economic
conditions, it is not yet sufficient to compensate for the low interest rate margins. The continued
economic recovery should, however, reduce the negative impact of cyclical factors over time, as
banks’ balance sheets adjust.
But most importantly, a number of structural challenges continue to dampen bank profitability.
These  factors  vary  across  countries  and  banks  and  include  incomplete  business  model
adjustments, cost inefficiencies and excess capacity. The stock of NPLs also remains high at
some banks. Let me elaborate on each of these issues in turn.
Starting  with  the  issue  of  business  model  adjustment,  our  analysis  shows  that,  in  the  past,
diversified banks have been more successful in generating higher revenues from net fees and
commissions  and  trading  when  faced  with  pressure  on  interest  income.  This  is  perhaps  no
surprise, as banks engaging in custodian, asset management or investment banking activities
are  likely  to  be  better  able  to  gear  themselves  towards  fee-generating  activities,  whereas
1
commercial banks may not have access to such opportunities for diversification.
At the same time, one has to acknowledge that it is not only the low yield environment and lack of
income  diversification  that  is  challenging  banks’  business  models.  The  rapid  pace  of
technological  advances  and  the  ensuing  change  in  the  competitive  landscape  are  both  a  key
strategic  opportunity  and  a  challenge  for  banks.  For  example,  a  shift  from  branch  networks
towards digital banking has enabled many banks, notably in the Nordic countries, to reduce costs
while  maintaining  sound  customer  bases  and  market  shares.  But  clearly,  a  successful
transformation  is  likely  to  hinge  on  the  support  of  beneficial  structural  factors  such  as  labour
laws, how the market is structured and the digital readiness of the economy. Policy action may
thus have a role in supporting these conditions. Incumbent banks also need to be prepared for
the  increasing  competition  from  the  non-bank  financial  sector  and  “Fintech”,  fuelled  by  the
increasing role of technology in financial services. Increased competition in lending, investments
and payments is bound to increase pressure on retail banking revenues. It will subject deposits
to more intense price competition, and may erode revenues related to overdrafts and payments.
Adjustments to business models are closely linked to the second challenge: the need to improve
cost  efficiency.  I  already  mentioned  that  digitalisation  can  enable  substantial  cost  savings.
However,  on  aggregate,  euro  area  banks  have  so  far  been  unable  to  meaningfully  reduce
operating costs in the aftermath of the financial crisis. In fact, euro area significant institutions’
operating expenses have increased by over 5%, on aggregate, since 2010, despite a 3% decline
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
in total assets over the period and the extensive restructuring efforts that have taken place in
many banks.
Third, regarding the legacy of NPLs we first need to acknowledge that significant progress has
been made. On average, NPL stocks are being reduced fairly quickly, particularly in countries
with the highest levels of NPLs.
Still,  the  burden  remains  heavy  for  a  number  of  banks.  Reduction  plans  for  these  banks  look
ambitious for the coming years, but it is how they are implemented that will make the difference.
At  the  same  time,  the  ongoing  policy  initiatives  designed  to  address  this  issue  and  prevent  a
similar build-up in the future are essential.
If  these  structural  challenges  are  only  resolved  slowly,  the  outlook  for  the  euro  area  banking
sector will hinge on cyclical developments and their impact on banks’ operational environment. It
is  thus  interesting  to  look  at  the  broader  financial  stability  challenges  for  banks  over  the  next
couple of years. Despite some positive recent trends, the risk environment has become more
challenging for the euro area financial system in many ways.
On  the  positive  side,  the  growing  economy  and  the  ever  more  resilient  banking  sector  are
supporting financial stability. This is partly why the financial system has recently proved resilient
to volatility, and why contagion across countries and markets has remained limited.
But these developments need to be put into the context of the continuing search for yield in the
markets, rising trade protectionism, and political and policy uncertainty, which increase risks to
financial stability.
Taking these factors together, the euro area financial sector is faced with risks, which can be
classified in three categories.
First, the factors that are related to the past, in other words, the legacy of the crisis, include a
still-significant  private  and  public  debt  overhang. And  as  I  just  said,  the  banking  sector  is  still
dealing with the challenges posed by the quality of its legacy assets.
Second, the current expansion of the US is now significantly longer than historical norms and the
second  longest  in  US  modern  history.  Looking  ahead,  a  down-turn  in  the  US  macro-financial
cycle could trigger a correction in markets in particular for riskier asset classes. Furthermore,
tensions have grown in emerging market economies on the back of a stronger US dollar and
increased  trade  frictions.  These  developments  may  undermine  global  growth  prospects  and
ultimately lead to abrupt increases in risk premia. So far, however, we continue to observe high
risk-taking  by  market  participants  searching  for  yield  in  the  low  interest  rate  environment,  a
symptom of which is increasing asset prices.
Third, in Europe, debt sustainability concerns have risen both in the public and private sector. As
regards public finances, Italy is the most prominent case at the moment in light of the overall debt
level and the political tensions around the Italian government’s budget plans. Contagion to other
European sovereigns has however been limited.
Against this background, the risk of an abrupt rebound in risk premia remains high, and could be
further exacerbated by low market liquidity if market-making capacity evaporates. Developments
in  the  non-bank  financial  sector  also  require  monitoring,  as  the  sector  continues  to  become
2
larger, more interconnected and more exposed to risks.
Having said this, I would still like to stress that we currently see no indication of excessive credit
growth or broad-based asset price misalignments, in other words the types of developments that
have  preceded  previous  financial  crises.  However,  increasing  asset  prices  in  some  sectors,
such as residential and commercial real estate in some euro area countries, do warrant close
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
monitoring, also following up on warnings issued by the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB)
3
and an ECB statement on this topic.
In sum, there is no reason to be complacent about financial stability risks in the banking sector,
which  could  materialise  in  a  number  of  ways.  At  the  current  opportune  moment  with  22
consecutive quarters of economic growth behind us, minds should be concentrated on tackling
structural impediments to sustained profitability in the euro area banking sector.
Financial integration in the euro area banking sector
Let me now turn to financial integration. The economic benefits of an increase in cross-border
banking  activities  are  unquestionable.  These  include  higher  diversification  of  risks,  which  can
improve resilience and lead to better risk-sharing across countries. To date, cross-border activity
in  the  banking  sector  remains  fairly  limited  in  the  euro  area.   Banking  sector  integration  also
matters for the good functioning of the monetary union, as it fosters the smooth transmission of
monetary policy throughout the euro area economy.
4
Despite  these  benefits,  progress  in  banking  market  integration  in  Europe  has  been  slow,
particularly in retail banking. For example, in 2017 cross-border loans amounted to only 8.6% of
5
total loans to firms and a negligible 0.9% of loans to households.
It is true that cultural, legal and language barriers may make it difficult to directly provide cross-
border  banking  services.  Increased  consolidation  across  countries  may  be  the  more  realistic
way to make the single banking market more integrated. Banking union will also help address the
financial stability concerns surrounding resolvability, moral hazard and cross-border contagion
that are related to large cross-border banks.
But so far, banking union has not induced a wave of cross-border mergers. In fact, M&A activity
in the euro area banking sector, and especially across borders, has been declining since 2000,
especially in the aftermath of the crisis.  The overall value of M&A transactions declined from an
average of €51 billion in 2000-06 to less than €5 billion in 2017. Of this amount, cross-border
7
euro area transactions accounted for 17% in 2017 compared with 21% in 2000-06.
6
Given the economic benefits of further consolidation in the euro area banking market, we should
pause  for  a  moment  to  consider  what  is  stopping  us  from  reaping  these  benefits.  There  are
certain  structural  challenges  that  still  need  tackling.  For  example,  some  banks’  high  levels  of
NPLs may reduce their attractiveness as potential targets, and therefore also deter consolidation.
This is another reason why resolving the NPL problem is of the utmost importance.
But financial integration may also be hampered by regulatory obstacles that hinder the free flow
of  capital  and  the  liquidity  of  banking  groups.  These  obstacles  often  relate  to  regulatory
fragmentation  and  the  ring-fencing  of  national  markets.  They  could  be  addressed  by  further
harmonisation,  combined  with  appropriate  prudential  safeguards  to  address  possible  financial
8
stability concerns. Let me give you a few examples.
First, on the free flow of capital. Unfortunately, in the ongoing review of the Capital Requirements
Regulation, Member States have not agreed to introduce cross-border capital waivers within the
European Union. This is a missed opportunity, as such waivers would be consistent with the
establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  banking  union.  The  potential
financial stability concerns raised by their proposed introduction could have been addressed by
making the waivers subject to additional prudential safeguards and transition arrangements that
would accommodate the planned future development of the banking union.
Second,  on  the  free  flow  of  liquidity.  In  theory,  the  existing  legal  framework  already  allows  for
cross-border  liquidity  waivers  within  the  EU.  Unfortunately,  the  remaining  national  options  and
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
discretions in the EU regulatory framework hamper the practical application of such waivers. For
example, the national large exposure limits on intragroup exposures that are currently in place in
several European countries prevent banks from transferring liquidity flexibly within the group. We
need further harmonisation to address such practical obstacles, also given that the regulation
already contains appropriate prudential safeguards for applying liquidity waivers.
Third, banking union as a single jurisdiction. In coherence with the current common supervision
and  resolution  mechanisms,  the  international  regulatory  framework  should  treat  the  banking
union as a single geographical area for the purpose of calculating capital surcharges of global
systemically important banks.
Banking union and the benefits of more integration
The  banking  union  is  key  to  reaping  the  benefits  of  cross-border  banking  activities  in  the
monetary  union.  But  while  we  have  made  significant  progress,  the  banking  union  is  not  yet
complete.
We still need a backstop for the Single Resolution Fund (SRF) to underpin its credibility, and a
common fully mutualised European deposit insurance scheme – EDIS. While discussions are
progressing on the SRF backstop, the negotiations on EDIS have stalled.
That  is  unfortunate,  as  both  elements  would  improve  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area  by
increasing  confidence  and  reducing  the  likelihood  and  cost  of  a  bank  failure.  With  EDIS,  this
would mainly happen via three channels. First, depositors would trust that their deposits are safe,
regardless of the location of the bank in question. This would help break the link between banks
and  sovereigns.  Second,  pooling  resources  at  the  banking  union  level  would  enhance  the
banking  sector’s  resilience  to  shocks.  Some  argue  that  this  would  lead  to  unwarranted
systematic  transfers  between  banking  sectors.  However,  banks’  contributions  to  the  deposit
insurance fund can be designed to reflect their relative riskiness, in terms of NPLs or sovereign
exposures,  for  example.   Third,  EDIS  would  remove  the  current  misalignment  whereby
supervision and resolution have been elevated to the European level, while depositor protection
remains a national task.
9
10
But  it’s  not  all  about  the  banking  union.  We  need  to  continue  making  progress  with  other
important initiatives to work towards a more complete financial union. The capital markets union
is another element that will foster cross-border financial integration. In the past, banks and capital
markets  were  sometimes  seen  as  competing  with  each  other  for  limited  investment
opportunities.
  Some  even  went  further  –  seeing  capital  markets  as  a  threat  to  traditional
banking models. However, banks and capital markets can complement each other in financing
the  real  economy.  Seen  in  this  way,  the  banking  union  and  the  capital  markets  union  are  not
mutually exclusive projects; they are, in fact, mutually reinforcing and can bring the Single Market
for  financial  services  to  the  next  level.  This  is  particularly  important  in  the  light  of  the  United
Kingdom’s departure from the EU and the importance of London as a centre for capital market
services.
The synergies between the banking union and the capital markets union can be looked at from
two angles. On the one hand, the banking union supports the capital markets union by increasing
the resilience of banks, which in turn supports the development of capital markets. On the other
hand, the synergies also run in the opposite direction, as the capital markets union supports the
banking union. More integrated and jointly regulated capital markets would support cross-border
activities and the resilience of banks.
Let me be more specific.
In an integrated capital market, banks would no longer need to develop local expertise for each
national market. They could exploit economies of scale more easily by offering similar or even
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the same products and services in several countries. By operating in a larger, more integrated
market,  they  would  likely  increase  their  cross-border  holdings  of  assets  and  be  able  to  build
larger and more diversified collateral pools for securitised products and covered bonds.
Cross-border assets would contribute to reducing the sovereign-bank nexus. And banks could
also benefit from a larger investor base for funding.
Conclusion
Let me conclude. Although we can see that the resilience of the euro area banking sector has
improved  considerably  since  the  financial  crisis,  the  lingering  structural  challenges  and  the
financial stability outlook mean there is no room for complacency. It is important to tackle the
remaining structural issues that are preventing the financial union from reaching its full potential.
First, banks need to adjust their business models to further diversify their income and reduce
cost inefficiencies. They should also prepare for the challenges of digitalisation and competition
from technology companies. And it is of the utmost importance that the large stocks of NPLs that
still remain in some banks are reduced.
And  second,  policymakers  need  to  maintain  the  momentum  towards  completing  the  financial
union.  Undue  regulatory  obstacles  to  cross-border  banking  sector  consolidation  need  to  be
removed.  Banking  union  needs  to  be  completed  with  a  backstop  for  the  SRF  and  a  credible
EDIS.  Finally,  we  need  to  complete  the  capital  markets  union  and  take  advantage  of  the
synergies between the two unions.
The work that banks and policymakers need to do will not be easy. But we should not be daunted
by the task ahead. We should take things one step at a time, making sure that we are always
making progress.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
See European Central Bank (2016), “Adapting bank business models: financial stability implications of greater
reliance on fee and commission income”, Financial Stability Review, November, pp. 147–157.
See de Guindos, L. (2018), “Coming to the forefront: the rising role of the investment fund sector for financial
stability in the euro area”, Speech at Opening Conference, 21st Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 12
November.
See the Governing Council statement on Macroprudential Policies, December 2016, and the ESRB warnings,
September 2016.
See  ECB  (2018), Financial integration in Europe, May. For more information on the benefits of cross-border
consolidation, see Hartmann, P. et al. (2017), “Cross-border bank consolidation in the euro area”, Financial
Integration in Europe, May, pp. 41–64.
See ECB (2018), op. cit.
See ECB (2017), Report on financial structures, October.
See, for example, Chart 2.8 in ECB (2017), ibid., updated with ECB calculations based on Dealogic data.
See  also  Draghi,  M.  (2018),  “The  Benefits  of  European  Supervision”,  speech  at  the ACPR  Conference  on
Financial Supervision, Paris, 18 September; and Praet, P. (2018), “Creating an enabling environment for pan-
European banks in the Banking Union”, remarks at the Eurofi Financial Forum 2018, Vienna, 5 September.
See Carmassi, J., Dobkowitz, S., Evrard, J., Parisi, L., Silva, A. and Wedow, M. (2018), “Completing the Banking
Union with a European Deposit Insurance Scheme: who is afraid of cross-subsidisation?”, Occasional Paper
Series, No 208, ECB, April.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
See Allen, F. and Gale, D. (1997), “Financial Markets, Intermediaries, and Intertemporal Smoothing”, Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 105, No 3, pp. 523–46; and Boot, A. and Thakor, A. V. (2000), “Can Relationship Banking
Survive Competition?”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 55, No 2, pp. 679–713 .
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
