Yannis  Stournaras:  Monetary  policy  and  bank  supervision  in
Europe  after  the  last  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis  and
challenges for the future
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  in  the  governors'  panel
discussion at the Bank of Greece Economic History Conference "The birth of inter-war central
banks: building a new monetary order", Athens, 2 November 2018.
 Since  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2007,  major  central  banks  have  resorted  to
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures,  such  as  ample  liquidity  provision  to  commercial
banks and large-scale asset purchases, while short-term interest rates hit the zero lower bound.
The purpose of these measures was to help alleviate tensions in financial markets and to lower
long-term interest rates, thus supporting the real economy and avoiding a deflationary downward
spiral. In addition, supervisory authorities have tightened regulatory standards in order to avoid a
repeat of the crisis in the future. In my introductory remarks to this session, I will first focus on the
monetary  policy  measures  of  the  Eurosystem  and  then  turn  to  the  supervisory  measures
adopted  in  response  to  the  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Domestic  issues  of  particular
interest will be touched upon at the end.
Non-standard monetary policy measures of the Eurosystem
The first episode of volatility in early August 2007 was associated with waves of downgrades of
securities based on US subprime mortgages and concomitant acute difficulties faced by some
financial institutions. The crisis intensified with the collapse of Lehman Brothers a year later. As a
response, several policy actions were initiated by central banks around the globe. In this context,
the Eurosystem started to provide liquidity without any quantitative limit and at a fixed interest
rate,  i.e.  adopting  the  so-called  fixed  rate  full  allotment  policy,  and  conducted  additional
refinancing operations with longer maturities. Key interest rates were cut in several steps and the
list of eligible collateral was expanded.
In  2010  the  focus  of  concern  switched  to  the  euro  area,  which  was  facing  an  escalating
sovereign debt crisis that led to dysfunctions in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.
Therefore, the Eurosystem introduced the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) in May 2010,
acquiring securities issued in the vulnerable Member States.
By the summer of 2012, the contagion had spread further. To counter the unwarranted worries
relating to the eventuality of a redenomination back to national currencies, the Governing Council
of  the  ECB  intervened  by  unveiling,  late  in  the  summer  of  2012,  a  new  instrument,  termed
“Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs)”.  With  the  OMTs,  the  Eurosystem  would  undertake
large-scale  purchases  of  government  debt  under  strict  conditionality. Although  in  fact  it  never
became  necessary  to  activate  this  instrument,  its  mere  announcement  led  to  much  calmer
conditions  in  euro  area  financial  markets  and  to  receding  fragmentation,  demonstrating  the
commitment  of  the  ECB  to  do  “whatever  it  takes”  –  to  use  the  famous  phrase  of  President
Draghi earlier that summer – to save the euro.
Subsequently, the euro area faced very low inflation rates, far below 2%. Again, the Eurosystem
initiated  a  multidimensional  policy  reaction,  aiming  to  counter  the  fragmentation  of  financial
markets in the euro area, which was fed by the sovereign debt crisis, as well as to revive the
lending activities of banks. The Eurosystem carried out targeted long-term refinancing operations
(TLTROs), on favourable lending terms for those banks with the strongest credit expansion to
the  real  economy,  continued  to  cut  key  interest  rates,  and  employed  forward  guidance.
Additionally,  a  large-scale  purchase  programme  of  private  and  public  sector  securities  (APP)
was initiated in late 2014 and is unprecedented in scale at €2.5 trillion last month. Purchases
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
under  the  APP  are  expected  to  run  until  the  end  of  the  current  year,  after  which  time  the
Eurosystem will continue to reinvest the proceeds from securities maturing in its portfolio.
1
To  a  large  extent,  these  measures  have  helped  improve  financial  conditions  and  the  inflation
outlook, and boost the recovery in the euro area , while potential side-effects from the monetary
policy easing, in the form, say, of excessive asset valuations or excessive risk-taking by market
participants  do  not  seem  to  have  materialised.  Given  that  inflation  pressures  continue  to  be
moderate in the euro area, substantial monetary policy stimulus shall continue to be provided in
several  ways,  until  the  Governing  Council  assesses  that  developments  regarding  inflation  are
compatible with the Eurosystem’s mandate.
Challenges for the future
Looking ahead, one main challenge relates to the formulation of monetary policy strategies by
central banks in the aftermath of the crisis.
Will the strategies eventually converge to the pre-crisis status quo or will the “new normal” reflect
some of the lessons learnt over the previous years?
• According to the first approach, central banks may gradually wind down the non-standard policy
measures and return to the pre-crisis consensus of an as lean balance sheet as possible.
• The second approach includes the incorporation of unconventional policies into the standard
central bank toolkit in normal times, thus leading to a ‘permanently’ larger balance sheet.
Other aspects of monetary policy strategies also feature in this debate, including, inter alia, calls
for revisions of central bank mandates to encompass, for instance, financial stability objectives.
Moreover, there have been voices pointing to the need to adopt a higher inflation target so as to
reduce the likelihood of hitting the zero lower bound, even after large adverse shocks. However,
the difficulty of managing the transition to the new target without losing credibility should not be
underestimated.
Furthermore, recent academic research   has  suggested  that  policy  makers  should  target  the
price level and not inflation, but only when the zero lower bound is binding, i.e. any low-inflation
episode  would  be  compensated  by  a  period  of  relatively  high  inflation.  However,  the  practical
difficulties  of  implementing  this  policy  could  prevent  markets  and  the  public  from  fully
3
understanding it, and could render it ineffective .
2
Another future challenge relates to the evolution of the equilibrium real interest rate, the “natural
rate”. There are reasons to believe that the natural rate has declined substantially over the past
few decades due to productivity slowdown, population aging and other structural forces affecting
the global economy. The Global Financial Crisis seems to have accelerated the downward trend
of the natural rate due to deleveraging of the private sector, higher risk aversion and the lack of
supply of risk-free assets. The policy rate set by the central bank would have to keep track of the
evolution of the equilibrium real rate, otherwise monetary policy would be too tight, dampening
both economic activity and inflation . The natural interest rate is, however, unobservable in the
real world and is merely measured using various models which provide different results. Thus, it
is challenging to use estimates when formulating monetary policy.
4
Overall, as far as the setting of the new monetary policy framework is concerned, the prevailing
pre-crisis  orthodoxy  has  served  well  in  achieving  price  stability,  while  also  contributing  to
favourable growth and financial stability outcomes. At the same time, the positive experience so
far with unconventional measures − from longer-term refinancing operations to large-scale asset
purchases − speaks in favour of including some of these measures to a certain extent in the
standard  toolkit.  Further  developments  in  this  regard  are  still  subject  to  debate,  and  policy
makers look forward to relevant research that will help inform future decisions.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The response of supervisory authorities to the crisis
The response of the Eurosystem to the global and European financial crisis has been effective,
despite  the  initial  lack  of  crisis  mechanisms  and  the  challenging  external  environment.  As
outlined above, the initial response came in the form of a significant easing of the monetary policy
stance. However, deeper institutional reforms had to be established.
In response to the strong negative feedback loops between banks and sovereigns, as well as
contagion among national financial markets, European leaders, in 2012, initiated the creation of a
Banking  Union.  Its  three  pillars  consist  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  the  Single
Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  still-to-be-completed  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme
(EDIS). Apart from the elements of the Banking Union, a number of other important regulatory
initiatives have been taken, covering almost all aspects of the financial sector and activities (the
Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive,  an  updated  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  and
Directive  for  the  banking  sector,  Solvency  II  for  Insurance,  the  European  Market  Infrastructure
Regulation  for  financial  markets  and  infrastructure,  to  name  a  few).  The  establishment  of  the
European  Systemic  Risk  Board 
the  creation  of  appropriate
macroprudential instruments, allowed policy makers to place greater emphasis on identifying and
addressing system-wide risks and to prevent the incipient build-up of financial imbalances.
(ESRB),  coupled  with 
The  Banking  Union,  however,  must  be  completed,  by  creating  a  common  European  Deposit
Insurance Scheme and by setting up a credible common fiscal backstop to the Single Resolution
Fund  that  underlies  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism.  Such  steps  are  necessary  to  improve
confidence in the banking system and break the bank-sovereign feedback loop.
Moreover, a genuine Capital Markets Union (CMU) can be promoted through legislation changes
that impose harmonisation towards best practices on securitisation, accounting, insolvency and
company law, property rights, etc. Such changes will allow for deeper integration of bond and
equity markets and will ensure that companies (in particular SMEs) can gain access to capital
markets on top of bank funding. The Capital Markets Union will enhance cross-border investment
and consequently strengthen private sector risk-sharing across countries as returns on assets
and  access  to  credit  become  less  correlated  with  domestic  economic  conditions  in  each
Member State.
Moreover, in view of the creation of the CMU and in order to preserve financial stability, particular
emphasis in the future should be placed on the risks and vulnerabilities of the rapidly expanding
non-bank financial sector . In addition, further steps to enhance data quality and availability are
necessary,  including  by  harmonising  data  definitions  and  promoting  greater  standardisation  at
global level (e.g. financial and real estate transactions data).
Issues related to Greece
5
Let me now turn to a few key domestic issues. Throughout the crisis, the Bank of Greece has
been the guardian of financial stability, fully protecting all deposits and supporting the economy
and  serving  the  public  interest.  The  Bank  focused  on  two  major  fronts:  ensuring  adequate
provision of liquidity, and managing and assisting recapitalisation, resolution and restructuring of
the banking sector.
With  respect  to  liquidity  provision,  the  Bank  has  been  critical  in  ensuring  continuous  liquidity
provision  to  banks  in  its  role  as  the  lender  of  last  resort.  On  various  occasions,  the  Bank  of
Greece has provided ELA to the banking system. This has helped preserve financial stability and
contributed to the avoidance of a banking crisis.
With respect to managing and assisting recapitalisation, resolution and restructuring, the Bank,
in the context of the adjustment programmes, aimed to strengthen viable institutions and resolve
non-viable  ones,  whilst  safeguarding  financial  stability.  To  this  end,  viability  assessments  and
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
capital needs assessments were undertaken.
Those banks deemed non-viable were resolved and absorbed by systemic banks. With 14 such
resolutions  having  successfully  taken  place  since  2011,  this  process  has  also  facilitated  the
considerable consolidation of the banking sector.
Following  three  rounds  of  recapitalisation,  Greek  banks  now  have  among  the  highest  capital
ratios of banks in the euro area and maintain buffers sufficient to absorb additional credit losses,
as  the  recently  completed  pan-European  stress  test  indicated.  They  have  also  markedly
improved their liquidity position, reducing their reliance on central bank funding, regaining access
to the interbank market and issuing covered bonds. Concurrently, customer deposits have been
gradually increasing.
However,  the  ratio  of  Non-Performing  Exposures  (NPEs)  to  total  exposures  remains  quite
elevated and constitutes the most significant challenge for the Greek banking sector. Banks have
set operational targets to significantly reduce the stock of NPEs by end-2019. At the same time,
significant reforms have been implemented, aimed at removing administrative, legal and judicial
impediments to NPE resolution, as well as establishing a secondary market for NPL servicing
and sales. These efforts have started to bear fruit: according to end-June 2018 data, the stock of
NPEs reached €88.6 billion (47.6% of total exposures), i.e. it decreased by 17.3% or €18.6 billion
from its March 2016 peak. The key driver of NPE reduction so far has been write-offs. Going
forward, NPL sales and securitisation will play a more important role, coupled with collections,
collateral liquidation and curing of loans. The pace of NPE reduction is anticipated to accelerate
based on the more ambitious revised banks’ NPE targets covering the period up to 2021.
Efficient  NPE  management  will  also  underpin  the  operating  profitability  and  internal  capital
generation capacity of banks, contributing to the restoration of their credit intermediation function
and the establishment of a sustainable business model. This, in turn, is of utmost importance for
the financing of innovative and export-oriented investment projects and companies in the context
of the rebalancing of the Greek economy.
Conclusion
The recent financial crisis has been the most severe in seventy-five years. A key question not
only for all of us in this room but also for those who study it or act as policy makers is “Will it
happen again?”
My answer is − if and when it does happen − next time will be different.
First, a long absorbed lesson is that, while things may work well if left to the invisible hand, during
periods of stress that hand seems to lose its grip, in the words of Ahamed Liaquat in his Pulitzer-
winning “Lords of Finance”. Policy makers around the world have learned their lessons from the
Great Depression: a financial system in distress requires active central bank intervention. Central
banks thus acted quickly and forcefully. They equipped their toolkit with a combination of more
flexible, effective and innovative measures and enormous firepower. Given the success of these
policies,  some  of  these  instruments  may  be  permanently  included  in  the  new  standard-
framework, and thus equip policy makers with the tools to engage in proper and timely action.
Second, we as central bankers have gained a much better understanding of how the financial
system operates and how risks to the stability of the financial system may develop. A lot has
been done to make the system much safer than it was 10 years ago and as resilient as possible.
Such  work  has  progressed  in  various  directions,  including  not  only  better  regulation  but  also
higher  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  for  banks,  early  warning  systems  and  the  development  of
macroprudential tools to increase resilience to shocks when they occur.
Third,  we  have  also  taken  bold  steps  to  strengthen  Europe. At  the  national  level,  euro  area
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries have stepped up structural reform efforts in the labour and product markets to boost
productivity and in the fiscal sector to make public finances more effective. The Banking Union
(with a single supervisor, a Single Resolution Mechanism and – a yet-to-be-established but of
utmost importance – shared European Deposit Insurance Scheme) has helped create a better
integrated,  more  efficient  and  well  capitalised  European  banking  sector.  Coupled  with  the
completion of the capital market union, it can support the single market and fund investment and
growth.
At the same time, many challenges remain and a lot still needs to be done. The financial system
continuously innovates and the work of regulators comes with a lag. In fact, certain large financial
institutions that conduct activities similar to banks but have no banking license – what we call
non-banks  –  remain  insufficiently  monitored  and  under-regulated.  Challenges  also  remain
outside  the  financial  system,  with  for  instance  geopolitical  risks  remaining  elevated,  trade
disputes or cyber-risks. As central banks, we have to be prepared for all contingencies.
For someone like me, with deep interest in economic history, it is clear that “those who can’t
remember the past are condemned to repeat it”. We need not only the ability to learn from the
mistakes of the past, but also the vision to avert repeat mistakes. At the same time, it is our duty
to strengthen our safety net and be better prepared for all contingencies and, as I just discussed
in my remarks today, a lot has been done on that front
1
2
3
4
5
Since the announcement of policy measures in June 2014, lending rates for non-financial corporations and
households have dropped by around 130 basis points and 110 basis points, respectively. Rates on very small
loans (a proxy for loans to SMEs) have declined by more than 210 basis points. Heterogeneity of lending rates
across  countries  has  fallen  sharply.  See  Mersh,  Y.  (2018),  “Monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  –  a  brief
assessment”. 
2018.
(www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp181010.en.html)
Roundtable, 
Singapore, 
Connect 
October 
MNI 
10 
Bernanke, B. (2017), “Monetary Policy in a New Era”, conference on Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy, Peterson
Institute for International Economics, 12–13 October 2017.
See, for example, Constancio, V. (2018), “Past and future of ECB monetary policy”, speech at the Conference on
“Central Banks in Historical Perspective: What Changed After the Financial Crisis?”, organised by the Central
Bank of Malta, Valletta, 4 May 2018 (www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180504.en.html).
Setting short-term interest rates above the natural rate puts downward pressure on activity and inflation. Setting
them  below  the  natural  rate  has  the  opposite  effect.  See,  for  example,  Cœuré,  B.  (2016),  “Assessing  the
implication  of  negative 
rates”,  Yale  School  of  Management,  New  Haven,  28  July.
(www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160728.en.html).  Cœuré,  B.  (2017),  “Outlook  for  monetary
policy 
2  February
(www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/sp170202_2.en.html)
d’  Économie  Financière,  Paris, 
area”,  Association 
interest 
euro 
the 
in 
The  shadow  banking  sector  accounts  for  around  40%  of  the  EU  financial  system.  See  Draghi,  M.  2018,
Welcome 
the  ESRB,  Frankfurt,  27  October.
(www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180927.en.html)
the  3rd  annual  conference  of 
remarks  at 
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
