Olli  Rehn:  Monetary  policy  normalisation 
uncertainties
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Olli  Rehn,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Bank  of  Finland
monetary policy seminar, Helsinki, 31 October 2018.
the  world  of
in 
 Accompanying slides of the speech.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
Welcome to our seminar on monetary policy normalisation and frameworks. It is a part of the
economic  research  and  policy  analysis  work-stream  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  which  aims  at
contributing, for our part, to the making of monetary policy in the Eurosystem.
With  this  event  we  want  to  deepen  our  interaction  with  and  learning  from  the  academic
community. Thus, it is indeed both a pleasure and an honour to have you here today and discuss
how  monetary  policy  should  evolve,  in  order  to  continue  contributing  to  a  strong,  sustainable
economic progress in Europe. So, welcome once again.
In my opening remarks today, I will discuss monetary policy and its challenges in the current
world of major uncertainties, focusing on the euro area. But before going into that, let me reflect
on an issue with which I have recently often been confronted. 
That is, I have frequently been asked the classical but sympathetically simplistic question: "Are
you a hawk or a dove?"
To my mind, apart from being simplistic, this is also a misleading question, since it appears to
assume that one could pursue sound monetary policy only with one policy orientation, with one
analytical model, with one mental map – regardless of space and time. 
Instead  of  such  simplicity,  we  could  well  ponder  what  kind  of  features  a  sound  and  solid
monetary policymaker should possess. To answer that, I would refer to the classic distinction by
the philosopher Isaiah Berlin who divided policymakers to foxes and hedgehogs: “the fox knows
many things and the hedgehog knows one big thing”.
However, instead of seeing this as a binary question “must be one or another”, in my view a
competent  central  banker  should  possess  the  qualities  of both  the  fox and  the  hedgehog.
Pursuing the price stability objective with consistency and resolve, while keeping sound focus on
sustainable economic growth and job creation, requires traits of the hedgehog. At the same time,
having  a  keen  strategic  understanding  of  the  interplay  between  the  economy  and  politics,  the
markets and the media – and knowing when to play offense, when to stick to defence, and when
to combine the two! – are obvious attributes of the fox.
Working on the basis of such dual approach is particularly appropriate in the current world of
significant uncertainties, which requires a steady but creative hand from the makers of monetary
policy. From this point of departure, today, let me focus on the challenges of monetary policy
normalisation and framework over the medium term.
The ECB monetary policy and gradualism
Slide 2. Euro area GDP in 2008-2020
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Despite  some  moderation  following  the  strong  growth  performance  in  2017,  the  euro  area
economy continues to expand at a rate estimated to be higher than its long-run potential growth
rate.  There  has  been  good  progress  in  the  labour  market,  and  over  9  million  jobs  have  been
created during the recovery since 2013. The underlying strength of the economy should support
the convergence of inflation to our price stability target.
Despite the anticipated winding-down of the Eurosystem’s net asset purchases, the monetary
policy stance of the European Central Bank remains very accommodative, which is still needed
to support achieving our price stability target in a sustained manner over the medium term.
In this, in many ways benign situation, monetary policy makers are bound to take decisions in the
world of uncertainties. Today’s concrete uncertainties stem from the continued trade tensions,
vulnerabilities  in  the  emerging  market  economies  and  financial  market  volatility.  They  are
amplified by analytical uncertainties related to the functioning of the economy and the operation
of  economic  theories,  which  we  use  daily  in  formulating  our  policies.  These  uncertainties  are
related to e.g. the prospect of secular stagnation, the assessment of the natural rate of interest,
and  the  slope  and  movements  of  the  Phillips  curve.  We  will  hear  Michaela  Schmöller’s
presentation about the issue of secular stagnation shortly.  A corollary from these factors is the
additional question: what is the impact of these uncertainties on central banks’ strategies?
1
After a decade of exceptional measures, prospects for returning to a more conventional interest
rate  environment  and  a  more  normal  Eurosystem  balance  sheet  have  slowly  strengthened. A
watchword in the discussion on normalisation is gradualism. Gradualism has been defined as
the  central  bank  tending  to  adjust  the  interest  rates  (and,  in  the  present  context,  its  other
instruments) incrementally, in a series of gradual steps in the same direction. Theoretically, this
cautious approach can be justified by William Brainard’s classic 1967 argument, which showed
that gradualism is warranted when there is uncertainty about how the economy will respond to
2
the instruments used .
The link between economic uncertainty and policy gradualism seems especially relevant at the
present juncture when several uncertainties about the effects of monetary policy are prevailing. I
will consider two of them in more detail: the lower state of the natural rate of interest, and the
changing  relationship  between  economic  activity  and  inflation  –  in  textbook  terms,  the
position and shape of the Phillips curve.
The natural rate of interest
Interest rates in the euro area and in other advanced economies are presently lower than what
they used to be prior to the global financial crisis. This phenomenon, visible through the term
structure of interest rates, is partly policy-induced, but it is also likely that the so-called long-term
equilibrium real interest rate has declined.
The natural rate of interest can be defined as the real interest rate that is consistent with the
macroeconomic equilibrium. It is the real interest rate that would prevail if the economy were at
the  equilibrium  employment,  the  output  at  its  potential  level,  and  the  inflation  stable  –  neither
accelerating nor decelerating. It is a major reference point for monetary policy, as it defines the
“neutral”  policy  stance  at  any  given  time.  Low  equilibrium  rates  obviously  affect  the  monetary
policy stance, and any given policy rate is less stimulatory with lower equilibrium rates.  If policy
induces  a  short-term  real  interest  rate  that  is  higher  than  the  natural  rate,  monetary  policy  is
restrictive.
3
A major analytical problem is that the natural rate is not a constant but a moving target, and as a
theoretical  concept  it  is  also  unobservable.  That  is  to  say,  it  cannot  be  measured  outright  —
instead it must be inferred using a variety of econometric methods.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Estimates  of  the  natural  rate,  drawing  from  various  studies,  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
natural real rate of interest has declined in the major advanced economies over the last 20 years
or so, and, in the euro area, it is currently significantly lower than prior to the financial crisis. The
slide shows a range of estimates of the natural rate for the euro area.
Slide 3. Estimates of the natural rate of interest in the euro area
4
  The
However, the estimates of the natural rate of interest are subject to a lot of uncertainty.
reasons for the decline of the natural rate of interest rate are linked to changes in the saving-
investment balance in the advanced economies, both in Europe and globally. An increase in the
economy’s  propensity  for  savings,  or  likewise  a  decline  in  its  demand  for  investment,  would
produce a lower natural rate of interest.
The  changes  in  the  saving  and  investment  behaviour  have  their  deeper  underlying  causes,
cyclical  or  structural.  The  structural  explanations,  which  suggest  a  permanent  change,  are
potentially more significant. They relate to the possibility of ‘secular stagnation’, i.e. the slowing
down of long-term growth potential in the advanced economies. This deceleration of growth can
be  a  result  from  population  ageing  (which  would  increase  the  saving  rate),  or  a  general
deceleration of productivity growth (reducing investment), or both.
Now,  if  the  natural  rate  has  indeed  declined,  monetary  policy  in  the  course  of  normalisation
becomes tighter at an earlier stage than the past experience of historical interest rates would
suggest. A given rise in policy rates would result in a higher degree of monetary tightening than a
backward-looking analyst or policy maker would expect.
In the longer run, a worrying consequence of a permanently lower natural rate of interest is that
the economy would hit the zero lower bound of interest rates more frequently than in the past,
and  even  following  smaller  negative  (demand)  shocks  than  in  the  past.  The  efficacy  of
conventional  monetary  policy  would  then  be  hampered,  and  its  ability  to  fight  recessions  and
deflationary risks weakened.
These long-run considerations suggest that the unconventional monetary policy measures and
instruments that were used during the crisis years, and the ECB, for one, is still using, should
stay permanently in the monetary policy toolbox, at least in the reserve.
Shifts and readings of the Phillips curve
The persistent and even surprising weakness of inflation pressures in the euro area, despite the
long and significant recovery of the economy and the remarkable decline of unemployment, is
one of the sources of uncertainty for monetary policy. How long will it take before the on-going
expansion will result in a sustained adjustment to a higher rate of inflation? How much longer is
at least some monetary stimulus needed before our definition of price stability will be satisfied?
These  questions  revolve  around  the  Phillips  curve,  which  describes  the  relationship  between
inflation and economic slack. During and after the crisis, the behaviour of the Phillips curve has
diverged  from  its  past,  as  the  rate  of  inflation  has  not  picked  up  significantly  despite  higher
economic growth and employment.
Slide 4. Euro area Phillips curve in three periods in 1999–2017, as a correlation between core
inflation and unemployment
In other words, the Phillips curve has ‘flattened’ – a dilemma, which has haunted economists and
central bankers throughout the post-crisis years. In the slide, the Phillips curve for 1999–2003 is
indicated in red and clearly points to a negative correlation between underlying inflation and the
rate  of  unemployment.  However,  already  for  the  years  2004-8  the  Phillips  curve  gets  flatter.
Finally, when looking at the years 2010–2017, we discover that the Phillips curve seems almost
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
horizontal, signalling that the above-mentioned correlation between inflation and unemployment
was no longer valid for this period.
When both the earlier and more recent periods are combined in a single graph, the change that
has  occurred  gets  highlighted.  If  this  change  were  to  prove  permanent,  what  would  be  the
implications for price stability? Logically it would mean that even a continued expansion of output,
and the decline of unemployment, would not lead to the expected acceleration of inflation: there is
uncertainty about the limits of expansion and its effect on inflation.
However, the Phillips curve obviously relates the inflation rate to just one background factor – a
measure of slack in the domestic economy. In addition, inflation is expected to react to other
factors as well, not least to inflation expectations. Indeed, in recent years, changes in inflation
5
expectations seem to be able to explain part of the changes in inflation.
What are the implications for monetary policy? Both the decline in the natural rate of interest and
the low inflation expectations reinforce the case for a gradual approach to normalisation. Under
heightened uncertainty, this will allow monitoring the effects of monetary policy, and help avoid
unforeseen negative consequences. Moreover, it is important that monetary policy focuses on
ensuring  that  inflation  expectations  are  anchored  in  line  with  the  price  stability  objective.
Otherwise,  even  further  declines  in  unemployment  may  not  lead  to  desired  movements  in
inflation towards the price stability goal.
The previous analysis is supported by non-linearity of the Phillips curve. As its inventor A. W.
Phillips  himself  said  in  1958,  “The  relation  between  unemployment  and  the  rate  of  change  of
wage  rates  is  likely  to  be  highly  non-linear” .  Below,  this  is  illustrated  through  the  relationship
between wage inflation and the broad measure of unemployment (= U6).
6
Slide  5.  Euro  area  Phillips  curve  2005-17,  as  a  correlation  between  the  compensation  per
employee and the broad measure of unemployment
In  the  graph  we  note  a  non-linear  empirical  relationship  between  wage  inflation  and  broad
unemployment. What is the implication? I would read it so that the speed of wage increases will
accelerate significantly only once unemployment has been substantially reduced. Subsequently,
there is still the open question of pass-thru of wage inflation to core inflation. In any case, this
way of interpreting the Phillips curve gives credence to the assumption in the ECB Governing
Council that euro area inflation is gradually converging to our price stability target.
On the definition of price stability and monetary policy space
Although headline inflation has been picking up, underlying inflation is still persistently around 1
%, reflecting continuing soft domestic price pressures. Unemployment is declining, but there is
still  considerable  labour  market  slack  in  the  euro  area.  In  this  environment,  the  gradualist
approach required poses a challenge to monetary policy if we are hit by the next recession too
soon. Will we have space to react?
Former Chair of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke has sent us, the currently active central
bankers, a challenge to create more “policy space” for monetary policy going forward . This is
reasonable advice.
7
Various  suggestions  have  been  made  to  help  monetary  policy  suffering  from  having  too  low
inflation for too long: these include a higher inflation target, a permanent price stability target, and
nominal GDP targeting. I do not want to dwell deep into the pros and cons of these strategies
now, but as a general remark it is fair to say that, among central bankers and leading scholars,
there is, at least so far, no emerging consensus for any of these proposals.
In his paper Bernanke proposes a “lighter” option for an alternative monetary framework that he
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
calls  “a  temporary  price-level  target—temporary,  because  it  would  apply  only  at  times  when
short-term interest rates are at or very near zero.” Announcing this target would lead the public to
expect exceptionally low inflation to be followed by a period of higher inflation, as the central bank
would strive to get the price level back to its trend. The reaction of inflation expectations to the
temporary price level target should help monetary policy to achieve its objective.
8
This proposal deserves a thorough analysis, even if one can see challenges in communication .
It is of particular interest especially if we do not want to rely on large-scale bond purchases as
the first solution to the “zero lower bound” problem in the future. In fact, Bernanke’s solution can
be seen as a further developed form of forward guidance.
Even  in  communication,  action  can  sometimes  speak  louder  than  words.  Clearly,  monetary
policy space is reduced if the central bank, as seen from the outside, does not appear to resist
downward deviations from its inflation objective, and this appearance gets incorporated to private
expectations.  Markus  Haavio’s  presentation,  based  on  the  research  paper  of  Paloviita-Haavio-
Jalasjoki-Kilponen , deals with this matter by analysing the ECB’s reaction function on the basis
of real-time data over two decades. The paper asks what the expression "below, but close to,
two  per  cent”  has  meant  in  practice.  Their  key  empirical  finding  is  that  the  ECB’s  reaction
function since its inception, over the past two decades, has performed as if its inflation objective
had  between  1.6%  and  1.8%  –  or  as  if  the  ECB  had  responded  more  vigorously  to  upward
deviations of inflation from its objective than to downward ones.  
9
Now, the ECB’s well-known operational definition of price stability is “below but close to 2 percent
over  the  medium  term.”  It  is  evident  that  the  definition  allows  a  symmetric  interpretation.
Consequently,  a  temporary  price-level  target,  which  would  allow  the  central  bank  to  let  the
inflation  exceed  the  medium  term  target  temporarily  when  needed  to  compensate  for  past
cumulative negative deviations of inflation from the target, should not be regarded in contradiction
the ECB’s operational definition.
Under  this  interpretation,  the  ECB  definition  of  price  stability  would  be  seen  as  a  symmetric
target, with equal probability of inflation going below or above of the “below but close to 2 %”.
Following this policy would help prevent the drifting of inflation expectations persistently below the
target.  Operationally,  this  could  be  carried  out  by  a  lower-for-longer  forward  guidance  policy
regarding the policy interest rates, when needed.
As, in the longer term, inflation would be at the target on average, inflation expectations that are
consistent with the target would be supported. This would help avoid an unintended equilibrium
with low expectations and unnecessarily low nominal interest rates on average.
Tuomas Välimäki, a Member of the Board of the Bank of Finland, will shortly discuss monetary
policy frameworks more in-depth.
Concluding remarks: regular review of monetary policy frameworks
Over  the  past  decade,  the  monetary  policy  framework  has  come  to  include  a  variety  of  non-
standard measures that have proven to be effective in supporting economic activity and returning
to  the  price  stability  target.  Such  measures  have  included  asset  purchases,  negative  interest
rates,  forward  guidance  and  credit-easing  instruments.  In  combination  these  measures  have
enabled  central  banks  to  create  accommodative  financial  conditions,  greatly  enhancing  the
transmission of monetary policy.
However,  in  the  world  of  rapid  transformation,  it  seems  sensible  to  think  that  central  banks
should evaluate their monetary policy frameworks time to time. Regular review would also make
the strategy more open and transparent. It is also important that the central bank does not act in
a way that does not reflect announced long-term policy goals.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Many central banks already have an evaluation process in place. The Bank of Canada is one
example  of  such  practice.  The  Federal  Reserve  System  also  has  a  procedure  in  place  for
strategy  review.  The  same  is  true  for  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Swedish  Riksbank.  The
evaluations  could  be  internal  or  made  partly  by  outside  evaluators.  The  background  papers
supporting evaluation could be made public.
The ECB would benefit from considering its strategy work in this perspective. Regular reviews
would  assist  the  ECB  to  stay  in  tune  with  the  rapidly  changing  economic  and  financial
environment.
Especially in our present times of uncertainty, it is essential for any central banker to possess a
fully modernized monetary policy toolbox that is as functional and as effective as possible.
That  would  help  “the  fox”  to  outsmart  the  opposing  forces  and  overcome  the  immediate
obstacles,  and  enable  “the  hedgehog”  to  stay  the  course  of  medium-term  price  stability,
sustained growth and high employment.
So why not pursue it?
Many thanks for your attention, and welcome to the seminar. 
 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Michaela Schmöller, Secular stagnation: a false alarm in the euro area? Bank of Finland Bulletin 4/2018.
Brainard, William, Uncertainty and the effectiveness of policy. American Economic Review, 57 (May), 411–25.
Peter Praet, Economic policymaking under uncertainty. Speech at the Caixa, Madrid, 17 October 2018.
E.g.  a  broad  study  by  Banco  de  España  concluded  that  in  the  United  States,  the  range  is  from  –3%.  to
5%.  Similarly,  Holston,  Laubach  and  Williams,  leading  names  in  this  area  of  research,  estimate  that  the
confidence band around their estimates of the natural rate for the U.S. is currently around 5 percentage points.
For further discussion on the state of the Phillips curve, slack in the economy and inflation expectations, see e.g.
www.bofbulletin.fi/en/2018/1/reports-of-the-phillips-curve-s-death-are-greatly-exaggerated/
A. W. Phillips (1958): The Relation between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money Wage Rates in
the United Kingdom, 1861–1957. Economica, New Series, Vol. 25, No. 100, pp. 283–299.
See  Ben  Bernanke’s 
bernanke/2017/10/12/temporary-price-level-targeting-an-alternative-framework-for-monetary-policy/ 
paper “Monetary Policy in a New Era”: www.brookings.edu/research/monetary-policy-in-a-new-era/
targeting: www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-
  and  his
price-level 
temporary 
blog 
on 
For valid reference to communication challenges, see e.g. Praet 2018 ibid.
Maritta Paloviita – Markus Haavio – Pirkka Jalasjoki – Juha Kilponen, What does ”below, but close to, two
percent  mean?  Assessing  the  ECB’s  reaction  function  with  real-time  data”.  Bank  of  Finland  Research
Discussion Papers, 29/2017.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
