Leila Matroos-Lasten: Central banks should emerge as innovation
leaders
Opening speech delivered by Mrs Leila Matroos-Lasten, Acting President of the Central Bank of
Curaçao and Sint Maarten, on the occasion of the Bridging Financial Innovation and Regulation
Seminar, Willemstad, 29 June 2018.
The Minister of Finance of Curaçao, Mr. Kenneth Gijsbertha
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
 It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all, and in particular, our guests coming from abroad,
to the second day of the Bridging Financial Innovation and Regulation Seminar, hosted by
the Centrale Bank van Curaçao en Sint Maarten (CBCS). The topic of this seminar is one that
most  central  bankers  are  currently  struggling  with  nowadays:  How  is  the  digital  revolution
affecting the financial system? What is the impact on consumers, the economy, and on central
banks themselves?
As  I  noted  yesterday,  the  central  bank  of  the  monetary  union  of  Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten  is
responsible for, amongst other things, promoting a sound and efficient functioning of the financial
system  in  Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten.  This  is  why  the  main  focus  of  today’s  session  is  on
financial innovation, the rise of FinTechs, and the regulatory challenges that regulators are facing
in this new era.
FinTechs  are  innovative  financial  technology  firms  with  the  capacity  to  provide  a  variety  of
financial services that can include enhanced benefits such as lower transaction costs, a more
efficient  financial  intermediation  process,  and  better  access  to  financial  services  for  a  larger
section  of  the  society.  However,  FinTechs  also  can  present  potential  problems.  Recently,  the
General Manager of the Bank of International Settlements (BIS), Agustin Carstens , stated that
”financial authorities may not clearly understand the risks attached to some of the services being
offered by FinTechs, leading to unforeseen accidents and then delays in the adoption of financial
innovations”. Therefore, the challenge for central banks is to ensure that the FinTech industry
progresses in a way that maximizes the opportunities and minimizes the risks for society.
1
Ladies and gentleman, regulators are currently searching for ways to safeguard their financial
system while exploiting the benefits of FinTechs. In fact, numerous agencies are piloting new
approaches based on technological solutions developed by two subsets of FinTech: RegTech
and SupTech. Important business opportunities arise for RegTech from the trade-off between the
need for organizations to stay compliant with the rapidly changing regulations and the need to
2
remain profitable, while SupTech is focusing on the challenges faced by supervisory agencies .
The payment infrastructure is one of the examples where innovation has developed quickly with
payment  tools  available  directly  through  an  app  on  a  smartphone  or  even  on  a  smartwatch
nowadays.  The  issuance  of  Central  Bank  digital  currency,  which  is  a  digital  version  of  cash,
could be seen as a natural consequence of the broader process of digitization of the financial
system. In a world where assets are being traded electronically and payments are being made
with smartphones, should there only be room for physical cash? 
Central Bank Digital Currency
Ladies and gentlemen, distributed ledger technology is currently reshaping the financial system
and  is  here  to  stay  in  one  form  or  another.  If  this  financial  revolution  is  not  embraced  by
regulators,  private  players  will  continue  to  innovate  and  drive  the  development  of  alternative
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
technologies,  new  payment  methods,  and  digital  currencies.  Central  Banks  need  to  become
active shapers in the current debate to fulfill their mandates and drive change as active agents
rather than passive bystanders.
Given some of the shortcomings of cryptocurrencies pointed out by the BIS, some people have
supported the idea of central banks issuing their own digital forms of currency as more stable
and reliable alternatives to cryptocurrencies. Let’s face it: a central bank digital currency could
overcome  the  volatility  risks  of  an  unbacked  asset  with  no  intrinsic  value.  In  addition,  central
banks are in better position to develop a robust financial infrastructure that provides a secure
environment for both domestic and cross-border transactions. With the recent shift in the interest
of  central  banks,  it  is  not  unthinkable  to  assume  that  digital  cash  will  one  day  dominate  the
payment infrastructure.
Financial Innovation
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  I  noted  a  few  minutes  ago,  the  FinTech  industry  is  designing  new
services that better adapt to users’ needs in order to expand its business. In doing so, FinTechs
try  to  find  the  right  balance  between  the  opportunities  in  the  market  place  and  the  financial
regulation  they  have  to  comply  with.  However,  FinTech  will  aim  at  enhancing  profitability  and,
therefore, may not have the right incentives to reach a socially viable equilibrium.
The greatest challenge for central banks is to find the right balance between the clear benefits
that financial innovations have on growth and identifying and mitigating the associated risks. The
interaction between regulation and innovation is a two-way street. It is not just that change in the
financial sector will impact  the  way  regulatory  bodies  implement  regulations,  but  also  that  the
regulatory framework will affect the speed and direction of transformation in the financial sector.
Thus,  a  sound  regulatory  framework  is  imperative  for  private  services  providers  to  develop
secure and efficient financial services and for authorities to keep the confidence of user in the
regular functioning of the financial system.
Regulators who are not willing to embrace (regulatory) innovation are at risk of being left out of
the potential advantages and benefits of the current financial revolution. If that happens, then the
emerging FinTech financial services sector may not be able to develop its technology further,
and businesses and households will be deprived of the benefit of the technological revolution.
Furthermore, financial services can migrate to the less-regulated parts of the financial system.
Allowing risk to build up in an unregulated sector may impair financial stability in the long run and
reverse all the progress that has been achieved in the past.
Closing Remarks
Ladies and gentlemen, to bridge regulation with financial innovation, we first need to understand
innovation and how technological advances can aid regulation and vice versa. Regulation should
not stifle creativity, innovation, and technological advances that can aid our markets and market
participants.
New technologies entail new types of risks. Although risk related to cyberattacks and data theft is
what first comes to mind, authorities also have to recognize the risks that financial innovations
pose  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Finding  the  right  balance  between
facilitating  innovation  and  ensuring  financial  stability  and  consumer  protection  is  an  inherently
difficult task. Unfortunately, no quick fix exists.
Innovation and technology are transforming and reshaping the existing financial system in a way
we still do not fully comprehend. Therefore, bridging regulation with financial innovation requires
central banks to emerge as innovation leaders.
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by emphasizing that the main asset of a Central Bank
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
today is not the cash stored in the vaults, but the trust of the public. Recognizing the FinTech
revolution  and  adapting  to  continue  to  meet  regulatory  objectives,  ensures  that  financial
innovation  can  contribute  to  economic  stability  and  social  welfare.  Only  by  doing  can  central
banks remain worthy of the public’s trust.
I thank you for your attention and wish you a fruitful second day at the conference.
1
2
Banker to central bankers – Interview with Mr Agustín Carstens, General Manager of the BIS, conducted by Mr
Vikram Khanna from Business Times and published on 24 March 2018.
Reference: Toronto Centre – FinTech, RegTech and SupTech: What They Mean for Financial Supervision –
Published on August 2017
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
