September  6,  2018
Bank  of  Japan
Economic Activity, Prices,
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Kanagawa 
Goushi Kataoka 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 I. Economic Activity and Prices 
A. Recent Developments and Outlook for Economic Activity at Home and Abroad 
I  would  like  to  start  my  speech  by  looking  at  global  economic  trends  affecting  Japan's 
economy.  I  expect  the  global  economy  to  grow  moderately  in  2018,  accompanied  by 
improvements in business fixed investment and exports.   
 
The  U.S.  economy  has  been  favorable,  underpinned  in  part  by  fiscal  policy,  and  the 
inflation rate is expected to be at around 2 percent for the time being. As for the European 
economy,  although  the  rapid  growth  in  the  second  half  of  2017  came  to  a  halt,  private 
consumption  and  corporate  investment  have  been  solid.  The  Chinese  economy  has 
continued to see stable growth on the whole, and other emerging economies have generally 
maintained their moderate recovery trend.   
 
According  to  Chart  1,  which  shows  the  economic  outlook  released  by  international 
organizations, growth rates of the global economy for 2019 are projected to remain more or 
less unchanged from 2018. Although growth rates of major advanced economies for 2019 
are likely to weaken somewhat compared with those for 2018, the weakening is expected to 
be offset by growth in emerging economies. 
 
As  I  mentioned,  international  organizations  have  projected  that  the  global  economy  is 
expected to continue on a steady expanding trend in 2019. Nonetheless, I am convinced that 
there  is  an  increasing  possibility  that  the  pace  of  expansion  in  the  global  economy  will 
decelerate  somewhat  from  next  year,  considering  the  recent  gradual  heightening  of 
uncertainties such as U.S. monetary tightening and its impact on global financial markets, 
protectionist moves and their effects, and negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from 
the European Union (EU).   
 
In particular, trade friction has become increasingly severe and the situation requires caution. 
Chart  2  shows  the  economic  impact  of  trade  friction  estimated  by  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF). Under certain assumptions, the direct influence of raising tariffs is 
said to be limited. However, if tariffs placed on automobiles and auto components are raised, 
the economic influence exerted through exports and imports will be large. Moreover, the 
1 
impact  on  the  global  economy  cannot  be  ignored  if  intensifying  trade  friction  leads  to 
stagnation  in  business  fixed  investment  or  to  a  decline  in  stock  prices  through  a 
deterioration in the sentiment of firms or investors. In a situation where uncertainties are 
gradually increasing, developments in overseas economies require further attention.   
 
Next, I would like to turn to developments in Japan's economy. The real GDP growth rate 
for  the  April-June  quarter  of  2018  recovered  to  positive  territory  after  a  decline  in  the 
previous quarter. This was supported by moderate growth in the global economy and the 
rebound from sluggish domestic demand due to factors such as severe winter weather. Chart 
3 shows the real GDP growth rate and the breakdown by component. The contribution of 
domestic  demand  to  total  growth  became  larger  as  business  fixed  investment  accelerated 
and  as  private  consumption  started  to  increase  on  the  back  of  improvements  in  the 
employment and income situation. On the other hand, the contribution of external demand 
declined in response to a decrease in exports of services. Although exports of goods for the 
April-June quarter were firm, the influence of developments in trade friction warrants close 
attention.   
 
Turning to the outlook for Japan's economy, as shown in Chart 4, the medians of forecasts 
made by the Bank of Japan's Policy Board members for real GDP growth rates presented in 
the July 2018 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report) are 1.5 percent 
for fiscal 2018, and 0.8 percent for both fiscal 2019 and 2020. My view, however, is that the 
pace of growth will be somewhat more moderate than these forecasts. Specifically, the real 
GDP  growth  rate  for  fiscal  2018  is  likely  to  be  around  1.0  percent,  mainly  due  to  an 
increase  in  business  fixed  investment  reflecting  improvements  in  corporate  profits  and 
business sentiment, and to a rise in exports reflecting the expansion of overseas economies. 
The rate for fiscal 2019 is likely to slow and move in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent as the 
pace of expansion in the global economy will probably decelerate and as domestic demand 
is likely to deteriorate mainly reflecting the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to 
take place in October 2019. Moreover, the rate for fiscal 2020 is likely to be only around 0.5 
percent.   
 
2 
Indeed, one of the key events for Japan's economy when making growth rate projections is 
the consumption tax hike scheduled for October 2019. The direct burden on households of 
the upcoming consumption tax hike could be small since the rate increase -- from 8 percent 
to 10 percent -- is smaller than that of the April 2014 hike, and because a reduced tax rate is 
scheduled to be applied to some items. However, as shown in the left-hand graph of Chart 5, 
even after four years since the 2014 hike, household consumption has at last recovered to 
the  level  of  April  in  the  year  prior  to  the  hike.  Moreover,  I  believe  that  household 
consumption  remains  vulnerable,  as  seen  in  real  private  consumption  by  type  in  the 
consumption  activity  index  (CAI)  shown  in  the  right-hand  graph  of  Chart  5;  although 
consumption  of  durable  goods  and  services  has  been  increasing,  albeit  with  fluctuations, 
that  of  non-durable  goods  including  food,  beverages,  and  clothes  has  continued  to  be 
sluggish. As long as such weakness remains, we must not underestimate the effects of the 
tax hike on consumption. Furthermore, I consider that economic growth for fiscal 2019 and 
onward is likely to decelerate, taking into account the following factors through fiscal 2020: 
(1) the possibility that the expanding trend of domestic business fixed investment will come 
to  a  halt,  mainly  due  to  the  dissipation  of  Olympic  Games-related  demand,  and  (2)  the 
possible materialization of the aforementioned risks surrounding developments in overseas 
economies.   
 
B. Recent Developments and Outlook for Prices 
Next, I will move on to price developments in Japan. The year-on-year rate of increase in 
the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food for July 2018 was 0.8 percent, 
as  shown  in  the  left-hand  graph  of  Chart  6.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  the 
contribution of a rise in energy prices to the CPI was significant at 0.5 percentage point, and 
the  rate  of  increase  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  and  energy,  which  directly  reflects 
supply-demand conditions, stood at only 0.3 percent year on year. In assessing prices, it is 
important  to  grasp  underlying  developments,  excluding  those  CPI  items  with  large 
fluctuations.  The  right-hand  graph  of  Chart  6  shows  some  indicators  that  represent  the 
underlying developments in consumer prices. These have been on a downtrend since March 
2018, and I would therefore argue that the trend momentum of inflation has weakened. 
 
3 
The important indicators that affect underlying price developments are the output gap and 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  The  output  gap,  as  shown  in  the  left-hand 
graph of Chart 7, has moved further into positive territory, reflecting improvements in the 
capital  stock  and  labor markets.  Nevertheless,  the trend momentum  of  inflation  has  been 
weakening. This inconsistency between a widening output gap and weakening inflation may 
be the result of a number of factors. The July 2018 Outlook Report showed that households' 
tolerance  of  price  rises  has  not  been  increasing  and  that  firms'  wage-  and  price-setting 
stance has not strengthened enough, even amid rising costs.1  Economic activity based on 
these conditions is not sustainable in the long run, although it is difficult to change in the 
short run; thus, if the expanding trend of the output gap continues to strengthen, economic 
activity  will  gradually  become  proactive,  and  the  burden  of  price  stagnation  will  be 
lessened. 
 
Meanwhile, inflation expectations have been somewhat weak. I am convinced that this is 
attributable to the adverse effects of prolonged deflation in the past and recent weak price 
developments.  In  addition,  I  believe  that  the  weakening  of  the  Bank's  commitment  to 
achieving the 2 percent price stability target is also affecting expectations. 
 
Turning to the outlook for prices, the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts for 
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) presented in the July 
Outlook  Report  are  1.1  percent  for  fiscal  2018  and,  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
scheduled consumption tax hike, 1.5 percent for fiscal 2019 and 1.6 percent for fiscal 2020 
(Chart  4).  In  contrast  to  the  April  Outlook  Report,  the  latest  price  projections  have  been 
revised downward, reflecting the current weak price developments, but the Bank's principal 
view  is  that  the  momentum  of  prices  toward  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  will  be 
maintained. However, I dissented from the relevant description in the July Outlook Report 
as I think the possibility of the inflation rate rising toward 2 percent is low at the moment 
and that the momentum of inflation has weakened. I would like to explain this in relation to 
the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. 
 
                                                   
1  For details, see Box 1 through Box 7 in the Bank's July 2018 Outlook Report. 
4 
II. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Let me first explain the Bank's current monetary policy framework, including the decision 
made in the July 2018 Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM). I would then like to touch on my 
opinion about the policy measures necessary to achieve the price stability target. 
 
A. Framework of Monetary Policy Conduct 
As  shown  in  Chart  8,  the  Bank  conducts  monetary  policy  under  the  framework  of 
Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control, aiming to 
achieve the 2 percent price stability target. This current framework consists of three major 
components. 
 
The  first  is  yield  curve  control, in  which the  Bank  controls  short-  and long-term  interest 
rates. Specifically, the Bank sets the short-term policy interest rate at minus 0.1 percent and 
purchases Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that 10-year JGB yields remain at around 
0 percent, thereby achieving accommodative financial conditions and stimulating economic 
activity and prices.   
 
The  second  component  is  purchases  of  assets such  as  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and 
Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs), which are conducted with a view to exerting 
positive effects on economic activity and prices through lowering risk premiums such as on 
stocks. 
 
The third component is the commitment regarding the future conduct of monetary policy. 
Under  the  inflation-overshooting  commitment  introduced  in  September  2016,  the  Bank 
continues  to  expand  the  monetary  base  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the 
observed CPI (all items less fresh food) exceeds 2 percent and stays above this target level 
in a stable manner. With this commitment, the Bank aims to increase the credibility that it 
will achieve the 2 percent price stability target by ruling out the possibility of a change in 
the direction of monetary policy at an early stage when achievement of the target comes in 
sight. 
 
5 
In this situation, as I explained earlier, the CPI forecasts of the Policy Board members were 
revised downward again in the July 2018 Outlook Report, on the view that it is taking more 
time than expected to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent. Nevertheless, although 
it will take time, it is necessary to maintain and strengthen the momentum of prices toward 
achieving the price stability target. Based on this recognition, the Bank decided at the July 
2018 MPM that it was desirable to maintain the output gap within positive territory as long 
as possible by persistently continuing with the current monetary easing, thereby ensuring 
the price developments toward achieving 2 percent inflation.   
 
As  a  result  of  the  discussion,  the  Bank  decided  on  a  statement  titled  "Strengthening  the 
Framework  for  Continuous  Powerful  Monetary  Easing"  to  address  two  challenges  that 
could  arise  from  the  continuation  of  monetary  easing.  The  first  is  to  further  strengthen 
confidence  among  the  public  regarding  the  Bank's  current  policy  stance  that  aims  at 
achieving  the  price  stability  target.  The  second  is  to  strengthen  the  sustainability  of  the 
current monetary easing so that the effects of monetary easing will not weaken, while taking 
care of the possible negative effects on financial markets. 
 
Chart  8  provides  a  comparison  of  the  key  features  of  "Strengthening  the  Framework  for 
Continuous Powerful Monetary Easing" with those of the previous policy framework. The 
first  feature  is  enhancing  the  sustainability  of  yield  curve  control.  Specifically,  the  Bank 
decided to allow some degree of fluctuation in the long-term yields, depending mainly on 
developments in economic activity and prices, while maintaining the target level for 10-year 
JGB  yields  at  around  0  percent.  This  aims  at  continuing  with  powerful  monetary  easing 
while alleviating concerns about a possible decline in the functioning of the JGB market.   
 
The  second  feature  is  the  Bank's  announcement  that  it  might  increase  or  decrease  the 
amount of ETF purchases, depending on market conditions, with a view to enhancing the 
sustainability of the policy, while maintaining the guideline that the amount outstanding of 
ETF purchases by the Bank will increase at an annual pace of about 6 trillion yen.   
 
The third feature is the introduction of forward guidance for short- and long-term interest 
rates.  Specifically,  the  following  commitment  was  announced:  "[t]he  Bank  intends  to 
6 
maintain  the  current  extremely  low  levels  of  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates  for  an 
extended period of time, taking into account uncertainties regarding economic activity and 
prices including the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 
2019." By announcing its intention regarding the guideline for controlling interest rates, in 
addition to the inflation-overshooting commitment that has been in place since September 
2016, the Bank aims to strengthen market confidence and expectations regarding monetary 
policy. 
 
B. Measures Necessary for Achieving the Price Stability Target 
I dissented from "Strengthening the Framework for Continuous Powerful Monetary Easing" 
considering  that  (1)  taking  account  of  the  current  sluggishness  in  prices  and  risk  factors 
going forward, it was desirable to strengthen monetary easing itself, and (2) controlling the 
long-term  yields  in  a  flexible  manner  would  make  their  target  level  of  around  0  percent 
unclear. In relation to this, I would like to raise three issues. 
 
First, I consider that additional monetary easing -- rather than strengthening the framework 
for  continuous  easing  --  should  be  implemented  in  a  situation  where  the  Policy  Board 
members'  forecasts  are  being  revised  downward.  To  justify  the  assessment  that  it  is 
appropriate  to  persistently  continue  with  the  current  monetary  easing,  the  degree  of  the 
current easing needs to be strong enough to achieve the price stability target. The key to 
making such an assessment is whether, under the current policy, the momentum for inflation 
has strengthened or is likely to strengthen going forward.   
 
Let us  first examine the momentum based on developments in two indicators: the output 
gap and inflation expectations. The output gap might stay in positive territory, but with the 
prospect of economic growth decelerating from 2019, the pace of the widening of the output 
gap will likely slow down. Amid relatively weak inflation rates, inflation expectations are 
likely to remain somewhat weak through the adaptive formation mechanism. Therefore, I 
believe there is little likelihood of the momentum increasing under the current policy. 
 
Another way to assess the momentum in inflation is the pace at which price rises will lead 
to achievement of the price stability target of 2 percent. Chart 9 shows a statistical estimate 
7 
of the probability of Japan's inflation rate reaching 2 percent within two years.2  Based on 
the assumption that the average of the changes in the monthly inflation rate over the past 
year  will  continue,  the  2  percent-passage  probability  has  declined  since  May  2018.  This 
suggests  that  the  momentum  in  inflation  has  weakened  somewhat.  Moreover,  the  2 
percent-passage probability calculated using the CPI for all items less fresh food and energy 
has been almost 0 percent since mid-2016, indicating that the momentum over the past year 
or so was mostly attributable to energy prices. In other words, it is possible to conclude that, 
under the current monetary policy, the momentum in inflation has not strengthened enough 
to achieve the price stability target as soon as possible. 
 
Second,  I  believe  that  it  is  unnecessary  for  the  Bank  to  conduct  policy  changes  so  as  to 
allow some degree of fluctuation in the long-term yields, at a time when the CPI forecasts 
of  the  Policy  Board  members  have  been  revised  downward.  Personally,  I  am  concerned 
about this policy change, in that it is possible that the long-term interest rate target level of 
around 0 percent will gradually lose significance if expectations of a rise in long-term yields 
heighten  in  financial  markets.  The  timing  of  achieving  the  price  stability  target  may  be 
delayed  if  interest  rates  rise,  whether  temporarily  or  not,  in  a  situation  where  inflation 
expectations  and  prices  have  not  risen  sufficiently.  Furthermore,  one  advantage  of 
yield-curve  control  is  that  it  strengthens  the  monetary  easing  effects  by  maintaining 
long-term  interest  rates  at  around  0  percent  when  they  are  subject  to  upward  pressure; 
however,  controlling  long-term  yields  in  a  flexible  manner  is  thought  to  weaken  such 
effects. 
 
Third, as for the Bank's commitment regarding future monetary policy changes and forward 
guidance for policy rates, my view is that, taking into account the current situation in which 
the observed inflation rate is still evidently far from the 2 percent price stability target, it is 
important for the Bank to make clear the influence of its monetary policy on prices and to 
show its strong determination to achieve the price stability target. It is true that enforcing 
the  Bank's  commitment  is  desirable,  given  the  continued  relative  weakness  in  inflation 
                                                   
2  Presuming  that  the  first  passage  time  probability  of  a  stochastic  process  obeys  the  Wald 
distribution, the probability of inflation rates hitting a threshold before a time horizon is estimated, 
assuming a 2 percent threshold and measurement horizon of two years. 
8 
expectations. Nonetheless, I believe that the description of forward guidance introduced by 
the  Bank  in  July  --  "[t]he  Bank  intends  to  maintain  the  current  extremely  low  levels  of 
short-  and  long-term  interest  rates  for  an  extended  period  of  time"  --  is  just  the  natural 
conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the  Policy  Board  members'  CPI  forecasts  and  the  observed 
inflation  rate  clearly  being  far  from  the  2  percent  price  stability  target.  I  am  not  sure 
whether the description does anything other than merely acknowledge the current situation. 
Rather, the Bank should design its forward guidance by clarifying the relationship of that 
guidance  to  the  inflation  rate,  inflation  expectations,  and  the  output  gap,  with  a  view  to 
strengthening its influence on prices. 
 
As I have explained, my view is that the current monetary easing measures are not strong 
enough  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  as  soon  as  possible,  and  if  the  Bank  allows 
long-term  yields  to  rise  when  the  inflation  rate  and  inflation  expectations  have  not  risen 
sufficiently, the timing of achieving the price stability target may be delayed. As presented 
in the joint statement by the Bank and the government, the Bank's mission is to achieve the 
price stability target at the earliest possible time. Instead of strengthening the framework for 
persistently continuing monetary easing, it is important to strengthen monetary easing itself 
so  that  the  easing  will  not  be  so  persistent.  Given  that  prices  are  sluggish  and  there  are 
concerns  over  increasing  uncertainties,  it  is  important  to  exert  a  stronger  influence  over 
economic  activity  and  prices.  Specifically,  I  believe  that  the  Bank  should  introduce  a 
measure  to  further  lower yields  on  JGBs  with  maturities  of  10  years  and  longer,  thereby 
accelerating the pace of widening of the output gap. Such a measure would create a more 
significant change in the behavior of firms and households in terms of setting wages and 
prices. Regarding the Bank's commitment to future monetary policy, I am of the view that 
the Bank needs to make clear its stance of not tolerating sluggish inflation expectations. In 
doing so, the Bank at this point needs to encourage inflation expectations to rise by making 
a commitment to taking additional easing measures if it revises downward its assessment of 
inflation expectations. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
9 
Economic Activity, Prices,  
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Kanagawa 
September 6, 2018 
 Goushi Kataoka 
Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan 
Global Economic Outlook by  
International Organizations  
Chart 1 
y/y % chg. 
  World 
Japan 
United States 
Euro area 
Germany 
France 
  United Kingdom 
China 
Brazil 
India 
Russia 
 d
e
c
n
a
v
d
A
i
 
s
e
m
o
n
o
c
E
 i
g
n
g
r
e
m
E
i
 
s
e
m
o
n
o
c
E
IMF 
OECD 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2017 
2018 
2019 
3.7  
1.7  
2.3  
2.4  
2.5  
2.3  
1.7  
6.9  
1.0  
6.7  
1.5  
3.9  
1.0  
2.9  
2.2  
2.2  
1.8  
1.4  
6.6  
1.8  
7.3  
1.7  
3.9  
0.9  
2.7  
1.9  
2.1  
1.7  
1.5  
6.4  
2.5  
7.5  
1.5  
3.7  
1.7  
2.3  
2.6  
2.5  
2.3  
1.8  
6.9  
1.0  
6.5  
1.5  
3.8  
1.2  
2.9  
2.2  
2.1  
1.9  
1.4  
6.7  
2.0  
7.4  
1.8  
3.9  
1.2  
2.8  
2.1  
2.1  
1.9  
1.3  
6.4  
2.8  
7.5  
1.5  
Note: Data for 2017 are actual figures, otherwise projections. For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis. 
Source: IMF, “World Economic Outlook Update, July 2018”; OECD, “Economic Outlook, May 2018.” 
Impact of Trade Friction on Economic Growth 
(Simulation Analysis by the IMF) 
Chart 2 
Global Economy 
 
              Scenario 1 
Scenario 3 
Scenario 2 
Scenario 4 
Japan’s Economy 
 
 
Scenario 2 
   Scenario 1 
Scenario 3 
Scenario 4 
years elapsed 
      years elapsed 
    Notes: 1. In both graphs, vertical axes show deviation of real GDP level from baseline in percent, and horizontal axes show years elapsed from the 
imposition of tariffs.  
2. “Scenario 1: adopted tariffs” incorporates tariffs that have already been implemented by the United States, with retaliation of equivalent size. 
“Scenario 2: additional tariffs” adds to Scenario 1 an additional 10 percent tariff on US$200 billion worth of U.S. imports from China, with 
retaliation of equivalent size. “Scenario 3: car tariffs” adds to Scenario 2 a 25 percent increase in tariffs on U.S. imports of vehicles, with 
retaliation from all affected regions on an equivalent amount of U.S. exports. “Scenario 4: confidence shock” introduces a temporary global 
shock to confidence on top of Scenario 3. It is assumed that advanced economies see risk premiums increase by 30 basis points -- about half 
the increase observed during the “taper tantrum” -- around two years after the additional tariffs, while emerging economies would face a shock 
that is twice as large. 
Source: IMF, ”G20 Surveillance Note, July 21-22, 2018.” 
Real GDP Growth  
and Breakdown by Component 
Chart 3 
Source: Cabinet Office, “Quarterly Estimates of GDP for April-June 2018 (First Preliminary Estimates).” 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices  
(July 2018 Outlook Report) 
Chart 4 
medians of Policy Board members’ forecasts, y/y % chg. 
Real GDP 
CPI 
(all items less 
 fresh food) 
Fiscal 2018 
Forecasts made in April 2018 
Fiscal 2019 
Forecasts made in April 2018 
Fiscal 2020 
Forecasts made in April 2018 
+1.5 
+1.6 
+0.8 
+0.8 
+0.8 
+0.8 
+1.1 
+1.3 
+1.5 
+1.8 
+1.6 
+1.8 
Note: Figures for the CPI (all items less fresh food) exclude the direct effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 
2019. 
Source: Bank of Japan, “Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices,” July 2018. 
Household Consumption Before and 
After Consumption Tax Hikes 
Chart 5 
Consumption Before and After Tax Hikes 
   Real Private Consumption by Type 
   Note: The latest figures are as of June 2001 and June 2018. 
Source: Cabinet Office, “Synthetic Consumption Index.” 
Notes: 1. The latest figures are as of June 2018.  
2. “Durable goods” includes household appliances and automobiles. 
“Non-durable goods” includes food, beverages, and clothes.  
3. The weights in the Consumption Activity Index are 9.4 percent for 
“Durable goods,” 39.1 percent for “Non-durable goods,” and 51.5 
percent for “Services.” 
Source: Bank of Japan, “Consumption Activity Index.” 
Consumer Prices 
Chart 6 
Consumer Price Index 
     Measures of Underlying Inflation 
Note: Figures are adjusted for changes in the consumption tax rate. 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, ”Consumer 
Price Index.” 
Note: The diffusion index is the share of increasing items minus that of 
decreasing items. The share of increasing/decreasing items is the 
share of items in the CPI (all items less fresh food) whose price 
indices increased/decreased from a year earlier. 
Source: Bank of Japan, “Measures of Underlying Inflation.” 
Output Gap and Inflation Expectations 
Chart 7 
Output Gap 
     Synthetic Indicators of Inflation 
Expectations 
Notes: 1. The data of the output gap in the left-hand graph are the estimates as of July 4, 2018. 
2. In the right-hand graph, semiannual data from the Consensus Forecasts up through 2014/Q2 are linearly interpolated. Figures for the Bank’s 
Opinion Survey on General Public’s Views and Behavior exclude inflation expectations by respondents whose annual inflation expectations were 
±5% or greater. The output prices DI in the Tankan represents the difference between the share of firms that raised prices in the preceding 
three months and the share of firms that lowered prices. 
3. In the right-hand graph, inflation expectations of firms are taken from the Tankan and those of households are taken from the Bank’s Opinion 
Survey. For experts’ and markets’ inflation expectations, data from the Consensus Forecasts, the QUICK Survey, and the inflation swap rate are 
used as indicated by their respective lines. 
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, ”Consumer Price Index”; Consensus Economics Inc., “Consensus Forecasts”; QUICK, "QUICK 
Monthly Market Survey (Bonds)"; Bloomberg; Bank of Japan. 
Strengthening the Framework for Continuous 
Chart 8 
Powerful Monetary Easing 
(1) Yield Curve Control 
Short-term rate : minus 0.1% 
Long-term rate  : around 0% 
Short-term rate : minus 0.1% 
Long-term rate  : around 0%. The yields 
may move upward and downward to 
some extent depending mainly on 
developments in economic activity 
and prices. 
(2) Asset Purchases (Target Amount of Net Purchases) 
ETFs     : 6 tril. yen per year 
J-REITs : 90 bil. yen per year 
ETFs     : 6 tril. yen per year 
J-REITs : 90 bil. yen per year 
  The Bank may increase or decrease 
the amount of purchases depending 
on market conditions. 
(3) Commitment (Future Monetary Policy Commitment) 
Inflation-overshooting commitment 
“The Bank will continue expanding the 
monetary base until the year-on-year rate 
of increase in the observed CPI (all items 
less fresh food) exceeds 2 percent and 
stays above the target in a stable manner.” 
Inflation-overshooting commitment 
Forward guidance for policy rates 
“The Bank intends to maintain the current 
extremely low levels of short- and long-
term interest rates for an extended period 
of time.” 
Inflation Momentum 
(Measured by 2 Percent-Passage Probability) 
Chart 9 
Note: Presuming that the first passage time probability of a stochastic process obeys the Wald distribution, the probability of inflation rates 
hitting a threshold before a time horizon is estimated, assuming a 2 percent threshold and measurement horizon of two years. The 
inflation momentum is assessed based on the assumption that the average of the changes in the monthly inflation rate over the past 
year will continue. 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, ”Consumer Price Index.” 
