Benoît Cœuré: The international dimension of the European Central
Bank’s asset purchase programme - an update
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at a
conference on "Exiting Unconventional Monetary Policies", organised by the Euro 50 Group, the
CF40 forum and CIGI, Paris, 26 October 2018.
 It was more than 30 years ago, in October 1987, when the spread between the yield on ten-year
US Treasuries and their German equivalents last reached current levels. Such stark divergences
in monetary policy cycles are often followed by abrupt reversals in cross-border capital flows.
Purchases of US securities by private non-residents, for instance, accelerated strongly in 1988
and  1989.  Much  of  the  inflow  went  into  US  Treasuries,  partly  due  to  attractive  bond  yield
differentials. But when returns on German Bunds caught up with those of US Treasuries in 1990,
the situation was turned on its head. In less than 12 months, private non-residents went from
1
being net buyers of US securities to net sellers.   
In recent years, the United States has once again become a destination for large capital inflows.
Between 2014 and 2017, purchases of US securities by non-residents roughly tripled. And in the
first half of this year, private foreign investors were still important net buyers of US securities.
I have provided evidence in the past that the unconventional monetary policy measures adopted
by  the  ECB  since  2014  have  led  to  sizeable  capital  outflows  from  the  euro  area  that  have
contributed to the inflows into the United States.  With the ECB’s net asset purchases nearing
their end – the Governing Council yesterday reaffirmed its anticipation that net purchases will end
after December – concerns have been voiced that cross-border capital flows may once again
rise to become a source of market volatility, with uncertain effects on global asset prices.
2
In my remarks today I will argue that such fears are largely unfounded. I will present evidence that
suggests  that  the  stock  effect  of  central  bank  asset  purchase  programmes,  together  with
increased  transparency  around  our  reaction  function,  has  helped  mitigate  abrupt  changes  in
international asset allocation in recent years.
And  I  will  argue  that  recent  changes  to  our  forward  guidance,  together  with  sizeable  future
reinvestments from maturing securities under our Asset Purchase Programme (APP), will also
in the future reduce the likelihood of sudden and adverse spillover and spillback effects. This will
help to maintain the financial conditions necessary for us to achieve our price stability objective.
Unconventional monetary policy and international capital flows
Let me start by briefly recalling the empirical evidence on the impact of the ECB’s policies on
cross-border capital flows. My first slide illustrates this impact quite clearly for the euro area.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
There was a striking turnaround in capital flows, from net inflows to net outflows, that started in
mid-2014, just when we had announced our credit easing package and when expectations were
gradually building among market participants that we would also begin purchasing government
bonds.
At their peak in the spring of 2016, net capital outflows – measured here in terms of 12-month
moving sums – reached nearly 5% of euro area GDP. Never before in the history of the euro area
have capital flows been so high.
You can also see that virtually all net capital outflows have been concentrated in purchases of
foreign long-term debt securities. That is, large-scale purchases of sovereign bonds by the ECB
encouraged many investors to rebalance their portfolios towards the closest substitute – bonds
3
issued by other sovereigns.
These capital outflows are likely to have added to downward pressure on global bond yields.  For
quantitative  evidence,  see  Cœuré,  B.  (2017),  “Monetary  policy,  exchange  rates  and  capital
flows”, speech at the 18 Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference hosted by the International
Monetary Fund, Washington, 3 November.
4
On  the  right-hand  side  you  can  see  that  the  start  of  the APP,  and  prior  expectations  thereof,
coincided with a measurable decline not only in euro area overnight index swap term premia but
also in term premia in the United States. Put simply, increased demand for foreign securities
increased their prices and thereby lowered their yield.
The  question,  then,  is  whether  the  approaching  end  of  net  asset  purchases  in  the  euro  area
might  see  a  sudden  waning  in  the  support  for  global  bond  yields,  and  thereby  risk  amplifying
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
prevailing  upward  pressure  on  global  sovereign  bond  yields  stemming  from  the  ongoing
tightening by the US Federal Reserve.
If such adjustments were abrupt, they could risk causing broader capital reallocations, including
from emerging market economies, and force a revaluation of global equity prices, with potentially
adverse impacts on the financial conditions consistent with our primary mandate.
The gradual decline in net capital outflows since their peak in the spring of 2016, which you can
see in the chart on the left-hand side, would, at least at face value, nurture such concerns. It
suggests  that  there  is  at  most  a  loose  correlation  between  the  actual  pace  of  Eurosystem
purchases under the APP – which has been gradually declining since April last year – and the
intensity of cross-border capital flows.
The persistence of policy-induced cross-border capital flows
The chart masks important differences across investors, however. You can see this more clearly
on my next slide. Up until May this year, net capital outflows in debt securities have decelerated,
by and large, as a result of a reduction in the pace of net sales by non-euro area residents – as
you can see in the chart on the left-hand side.
[5]
 In  April  this  year,  non-euro  area  residents  became  net  buyers  of  euro  area  long-term  debt
securities – in moving annual sums – for the first time in nearly three years. As non-residents
have  been  important  counterparties  to  the  Eurosystem  in  implementing  the APP,  the  gradual
slowdown in their net sales of euro area securities may not be surprising. It is likely related to the
step-wise reduction in the actual pace of Eurosystem purchases.
[6]
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Euro area residents, by contrast, and this you can see on the right-hand side, have reduced their
purchases of foreign securities to a much lesser extent. In fact, when we cut the monthly pace of
our purchases from €80 billion to €60 billion in April last year, euro area residents increased their
acquisition of foreign debt securities by more than 15% over the following six months.
Even when we cut the monthly pace of purchases to €30 billion as of January this year, euro
area residents remained important buyers of foreign securities. In the United States, and this you
can see in the chart on the left-hand side of my next slide, euro area residents accounted for
nearly 30% of total US Treasury purchases during the first half of 2018. In 2017, their share was
25%.
Now, there is no simple answer that could help explain the observed investment pattern. Some
would argue that foreign securities – US Treasuries in particular – offer a considerable yield pick-
up compared with comparable euro area securities. So it should not come as a surprise to see
continued outflows from low-yielding euro area bond markets.
But not all investors are willing or able to assume large amounts of foreign exchange risk on their
balance  sheets,  particularly  when  the  direction  of  exchange  rate  movements  might  be  less
predictable than during the run-up to the launch of a major monetary policy measure, such as
asset purchases.
Returns on US Treasuries adjusted for foreign exchange risk, however, have fallen steadily as
the government bond yield curve in the United States has flattened. You can see this on the right-
hand side. Since about mid-2017 the yield of a hedged ten-year US Treasury has been below
that of its German equivalent.
There are two factors, in my view, that might help explain the observed persistence of capital
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
flows.
5
The first has to do with the “traditional” stock effect of asset purchases.
Central bank asset purchase programmes effectively constrain the supply of bonds available to
private price-sensitive investors. So, the share of outstanding central government bonds held by
the  private  sector  –  the  so-called  “free  float”  –  has  declined  measurably  as  a  result  of  our
cumulative purchases, also when taking into account the considerable amount of buy-and-hold
investors.
The implication is that some euro area fixed income securities are increasingly hard to come by,
or  come  with  a  price  tag  unattractive  for  more  short-term  orientated  investors.  This  may
incentivise some market participants to roll over their international asset allocations instead.
The Governing Council at its meeting yesterday reaffirmed its intention to reinvest the principal
payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time after
the  end  of  our  net  asset  purchases,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  maintain
favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  an  ample  degree  of  monetary  accommodation.  This  will
reinforce  the  stock  effect  channel  and,  as  a  result,  is  likely  to  also  help  to  mitigate  abrupt
changes in the direction of capital flows.
The second factor that may help explain the persistence of cross-border capital flows relates to
our forward guidance.
By clearly spelling out the Governing Council’s reaction function, and the sequence by which we
would adjust our various policy instruments, markets were able to better anticipate our actions
based on the progress made towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent
with our inflation aim.
They understood that, even as we were gradually reducing the monthly pace of purchases in
response to growing confidence in the convergence of inflation towards our aim, our key policy
rates would remain at current levels “well past” the horizon of our net asset purchases.
This  transparency  has  contributed  to  reducing  policy-induced  uncertainty  on  the  rate  outlook,
thereby extending the planning horizon of investors and, ultimately, moderating volatility.
More recently, the enhancement of our forward guidance in June has provided a similar sense of
the direction of the rate outlook in the euro area beyond the expected end of net asset purchases
in December.
By clarifying that the Governing Council expects its key policy rates to remain at their present
levels at least through the summer of 2019, we increased transparency around our near-term
6
policy intentions, which investors could then reflect in their asset allocation strategies.
It  may  therefore  not  be  surprising  to  see  capital  flows  by  euro  area  residents  being  rather
unreactive to the nearing end of the APP, thereby limiting any abrupt and adverse spillovers from
policy  normalisation  in  the  euro  area  to  global  financial  conditions.  I  would  call  this  the
“international stock effect” of our APP.
Moreover, the benefits go both ways, meaning that our forward guidance is also likely to have
contributed to reduce the sensitivity of euro area rates to foreign spillovers.
On my last slide you can see that ECB researchers, using the Diebold-Yilmaz methodology, find
that  spillovers  from  US  Treasury  bonds  to  German  Bunds  –  the  yellow  line  –  have  remained
remarkably stable, at low levels, over the past year or so, despite the continued upward pressure
on long-term US Treasury yields.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
ECB  forward  guidance,  and  clear  communication  more  generally,  may  therefore  have  helped
insulate the euro area from unwarranted foreign tightening pressures and comfort its monetary
autonomy, at a time where the independence of monetary policies under floating exchange rates
7
and freely mobile capital has been challenged by international financial integration.
And if communication indeed provides an effective shield, then further changes in our forward
guidance, if warranted in the future, may help us remain in control of financing conditions along
8
the policy normalisation path.
Conclusion
Overall,  therefore,  and  with  this  I  would  like  to  conclude,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  much  clearer
communication,  not  only  by  the  ECB,  but  also  by  other  major  central  banks,  together  with  a
commitment by central banks to handle changes to the size of their balance sheet with care,
have contributed to substantially reducing sudden and sharp directions of change in cross-border
capital flows. This is despite the notable divergence in the pace of policy normalisation across
advanced  economies.  As  a  result,  policymakers  have  been  able  to  pursue  their  domestic
objectives without sending shock waves across global financial markets.
None  of  this  is  to  say  that  markets  are  immune  to  foreign  spillovers.  In  an  integrated  global
financial  market,  central  banks  need  to  calibrate  their  policies  according  to  their  domestic
mandates. In the euro area, this means that significant monetary policy stimulus is still needed to
support the further build-up of domestic price pressures and headline inflation developments over
the medium term. This support will continue to be provided by the net asset purchases until the
end of the year, by the sizeable stock of acquired assets and the associated reinvestments, and
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
by our enhanced forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
In moving annual sums. Source: US Department of the Treasury.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “The international dimension of the ECB’s asset purchase programme”, speech at the
Foreign Exchange Contact Group meeting, 11 July.
See also Bergant, K., M. Fidora and M. Schmitz (2018), “International capital flows at the security level – evidence
from the ECB’s asset purchase programme”, ECMI Working Paper No 7.
For quantitative evidence, see Cœuré, B. (2017), “Monetary policy, exchange rates and capital flows”, speech at
the 18th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference hosted by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, 3
November.
See Cœuré, B. (2018, op. cit.).
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2018),  “Forward  guidance  and  policy  normalisation”,  speech  at  the  Deutsches  Institut  für
Wirtschaftsforschung, 17 September.
See, for example, Rey, H. (2015), “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
Independence”, NBER Working Paper No 21162.
See Cœuré, B. (2018, op. cit.).
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
