Peter  Praet:  Interview  in  BdP  Revista,  staff  magazine  of  Bank  of
Portugal
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
BdP Revista, staff magazine of Bank of Portugal, conducted by Ms Isabel Arriaga e Cunha on 18
June 2018 and published on 2 November 2018.
 Europe is celebrating the 20th anniversary of the European Central Bank (ECB), and in a
few  months  the  20th  anniversary  of  the  euro.  What  do  you  think  are  the  main
achievements and successes of these 20 years?
20 years ago the responsibility for monetary policy was entrusted to a new European institution
with the mandate of maintaining price stability. This was a major step forward in the process of
building an ever-closer union among the peoples of Europe. We are a European institution that
has been capable of deciding and acting in good times as well as in very challenging times. This
is a remarkable achievement from an institutional point of view. And we have fulfilled our mandate
in very difficult times – despite the financial and economic crises during the last decade. The
euro is a stable and safe currency. We see with 74% in the Eurobarometer the highest approval
rating for the single currency since 2004. That is quite remarkable, even more so as there are
strong political forces challenging European integration.
So, you see the ECB as having lived up to its responsibility so far?
The ECB has had three presidents over 20 years. There have sometimes been differences. This
is quite normal within a decision-making body of today 25 members, but the Governing Council
has  always  enjoyed  a  strong  sense  of  collegiality.  We  are  all  fully  committed  to  fulfilling  our
mandate  and  are  always  open  to  debate  and  each  other’s  ideas.  This  is  why  the  ECB  has
always had the ability and the willingness to act, whenever it was needed and within its mandate.
So,  back  to  your  question:  what  are  the  main  successes  of  these  20  years?  The  euro  was
created, because the single currency is a necessary condition for the completion of the Single
Market. This remains true, but you need more than the single currency for the Single Market to
function  properly:  once  you  have  a  single  currency  with  a  single  market  with  free  mobility  of
labour, goods and services, you are urged to reach a higher degree of political integration. There
is a need for more European integration. This integration can take time, it will not come overnight,
but each politician should keep in mind that further integration is necessary. If we didn’t agree on
this need and we neglected the high degree of interdependence between Member States, we
would run the risk of going backwards – and that would probably be in a brutal way. In this sense,
the  sovereign  debt  crisis  acted  as  a  wake-up  call  and  led  to  substantial  steps  forward  in
European integration, including the creation of the European Stability Mechanism and the Single
Supervisory Mechanism.
The  ECB  is  a  federal  institution  where  competences,  such  as  competition  and  trade
policies, are European, as you said. Does that mean that the euro can only survive in a
federal setting, a federal union?
To  put  it  very  simply:  in  the  long  run  Europeans  will  decide  as  much  as  possible  in  local
communities and countries, and will decide jointly at a European level whenever necessary. That
is the principle of subsidiarity. Which decision-making belongs to which level is up for debate.
The euro is the currency of the European Union. To reap the full benefit of Monetary Union, it is
essential to put in place a sound institutional framework for other policies, where responsibilities
are assigned to the right level. Some policies, but certainly not all, are best assigned to the Union
level.  This  is  a  long  process,  and  the  Union  has  already  demonstrated  its  ability  to  make
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
progress.
There  was  a  high  degree  of  consensus  after  the  financial  crisis  that  banks  would  be  best
supervised  at  the  Union  level.  The  responsibility  for  banking  supervision  was  accordingly
assigned to the Union level, following a decision taken by the European Council in June 2012. In
some  policy  areas,  rules  are  not  sufficient,  you  also  need  institutions.  Crisis  management  is
another example. The rules that we had before the crisis didn’t even foresee the possibility of a
crisis, and this made the response to the euro area sovereign debt crisis particularly challenging.
Lessons  were  learnt  from  this  painful  experience  and  a  permanent  institution  for  crisis
management was established, the European Stability Mechanism.
Assigning monetary policy to the Union level was relatively easy, because there is a broad social
consensus on central banking whereby the central bank should be independent and be assigned
the  pursuit  of  a  single  objective,  price  stability.  Defining  the  right  allocation  of  responsibilities
between the Union and its Member States is by nature a long historical process; it will continue to
elicit lively political debates in Europe. Such debates are to be welcomed, as they are part of our
writing a common history.
Is the ECB’s mandate enough for a single currency? For example, shouldn’t its mandate
include the role of lender of last resort?
The  role  of  lender  of  last  resort  is  a  traditional  role  for  central  banks  and  we  fulfil  it.  This
contributes to financial stability. The problem is that some economists and some politicians say
that the central bank should stand ready to finance government deficits. This is incompatible with
the mandate of a price stability-oriented central bank. This is why in the Treaty there are clauses
prohibiting monetary financing and guaranteeing central bank independence. In a monetary union,
it  is  however  important  to  have  institutions  that  can  support  Member  States  confronted  with
serious financial difficulties. If you don’t have that you face the permanent risk of instability. This
is  one  of  the  lessons  of  the  crisis  and  was  the  reason  for  creating  the  European  Stability
Mechanism (ESM), a permanent crisis management institution.
For the ESM to properly play its role, shouldn’t it become a European institution, with
joint decision-making at the “community” level? I mean, a federal institution instead of
the present intergovernmental institution?
It is essential for successful crisis management to have an efficient decision-making procedure,
because crisis management requires effective and quick action. Crises risk being exacerbated
by decision rules, such as unanimity, that prevent timely decisions from being taken and cast
doubt on the effectiveness of crisis management institutions. Decision-making procedures of a
federal nature are in this sense preferable to intergovernmental ones that often come with veto
rights.
In  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  emergency  funding  is  basically  provided  subject  to
conditionality  on  economic  and  fiscal  policies.  It  is  not  a  transfer;  rather,  financial  support  is
granted to smooth the adjustment process.
Is this the correct way to deal with potential crises?
I think so. It is a responsibility of Member States to consider their economic policies as a matter
of common interest and ensure sustainable public finances. Adverse economic developments
can put a Member State under financial stress and bring about a need for reform. Ill-designed
policies,  fiscal  profligacy  for  example,  can  also  eventually  lead  a  country  into  crisis.  It  is  a
collective responsibility of Member States to ensure a smooth functioning of EMU and this is why
they agreed that a crisis management framework was needed.
The EMU Member States have lost the traditional adjustment tools to deal with shocks –
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
such as the devaluation of their currency – whilst EMU had no proper crisis management
instruments…
That’s true. Our Economic and Monetary Union was not complete when the crisis hit us. When
the crisis came, some countries had weak public finances. Doubts about their creditworthiness
led markets to require higher risk premia, thereby stretching even further their public finances.
These countries then fell into a vicious circle whereby expectations of them not being able to
repay  their  debt  pushed  up  interest  rates  and,  as  in  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy,  those  higher
refinancing rates made their public finances look increasingly unsustainable, thereby leading to a
liquidity crisis. If you have a conditional lending facility, a country cannot be pushed into a liquidity
crisis  based  on  self-fulfilling  market  expectations,  because  markets  know  there  is  a  facility  to
cater for a lack of liquidity. This calms down speculation too.
But then, states in difficulty will get even more indebted…
No, because you don’t necessarily need to use these facilities. The fact that there is a backstop
can,  by  itself,  prevent  speculative  attacks  based  on  self-fulfilling  market  expectations.  It  is
important  to  stress  that  to  access  liquidity  facilities,  such  as  those  provided  by  the  ESM,
countries  have  to  accept  policy  conditionality,  to  agree  on  implementing  an  adjustment
programme. But it is true that, when the crisis came, there was a blame game between current
account surplus and deficit countries.
Shouldn’t this be recognised at last?
It  is  true  that  during  the  crisis  there  was  some  asymmetry  in  the  adjustment  mechanism.
Historically, the deficit countries have always been weaker than the surplus countries. But there
is  an  important  point  one  should  keep  in  mind.  What  would  have  happened  if  the  crisis  had
happened  without  our  Monetary  Union  guaranteeing  capital  mobility?  For  example,  when  the
Spanish or Portuguese banking systems were in difficulty, Dutch and German creditors were still
paid back. The counterfactual would have been that controls on the movements of capital would
have  been  imposed  and  there  would  have  been  a  sort  of  debt  renegotiation  –  but  this  didn’t
happen thanks to the currency union. With the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD)
we now have burden-sharing mechanisms for the creditors.
Talking  about  the  BRRD,  isn’t  it  dangerous  that  the  banking  union  remains  an
incomplete project?
We should not stay in the middle of the river for too long. That’s why we need a clear roadmap to
complete the banking union relatively soon – not tomorrow, but in a not-too-distant future. It is
abnormal  that  the  supervision  responsibility  is  collective  but  the  consequences,  if  something
goes wrong, go back to the national authorities. I’ve said very often that we have to go further. But
on the other hand you hear that there are legacy portfolios from the past, and before you can go
forward into the banking union, the issue of non-performing loans (NPLs) has to be addressed.
The countries that complain are mainly the ones that had the opportunity to clean up
their banks with public money before 2013, when the European state aid rules were in
abeyance.  Now  their  banks  have  been  cleaned  up,  whilst  the  banks  in  some  other
countries that were the main ones to suffer from the economic crisis face a huge NPL
legacy which, politically, prevents the banking union from progressing. Is this fair?
It’s true that some countries put a lot of public money into the banking system during the crisis.
Germany’s support for its banking sector had an impact on its public debt of more than 10% of
GDP at the peak. Now it’s lower, because most of the money has been recovered. In a country
like Italy, the difficulties came later, after the rules had changed. The transition to the new rules
could have been better designed.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Does this endless discussion on risk reduction before any progress in risk-sharing make
sense?
Banks today remain mainly exposed to the national economy and the national debt. The “doom
loop” between banks and sovereigns has not yet been fully severed. One way to improve risk-
sharing is cross-border consolidation. This doesn’t mean that we no longer need local banks.
Local  banks  are  still  very  important  for  the  financing  of  the  economy,  but  there  is  a  need  for
consolidation.  The  regulation  doesn’t  incentivise  banks  to  do  that,  because  of  the  capital  and
liquidity requirements for subsidiaries.
It is also important to have more internationally diversified bank bondholders, so as to prevent a
situation in which only creditors located in a specific country are affected in the event of a bank
failure.
What we really need today is a clear end-point. What would it mean for a bank to eventually be in
a complete banking union, and when is this going to happen? There is still too much uncertainty
for banks to think Europe-wide and to consolidate across borders, and I think that’s a problem.
EMU was launched with a promise of peace, security and prosperity, and that it would
accelerate the EU’s political integration. What went wrong?
European integration is a process, and it is important to learn from the experience so far to make
further progress. I would like to stress two points. First, EMU came with too-high expectations,
for example that the growth rates we had just before, or at the beginning of, EMU would continue
forever.  Many  borrowed  on  the  basis  of  those  optimistic  expectations.  So  there  was  a  basic
fragility in debt markets. The second thing was the absence of mechanisms to deal with debt
overhangs.  The  crisis  was  the  motivation  for  establishing  the  banking  union  and  improving
financial sector regulation.
On your question: did the Union deliver prosperity and security? The Single Market is a source of
prosperity  and  it  needs  a  single  currency.  The  currency  crises  of  the  1990s  were  very
detrimental to the internal market. Just remember the big exchange rate crisis we had before the
Monetary Union in 1992-93. In Belgium, for example, people were importing Italian cars directly
from Italy, where prices were much cheaper. It was possible to do that in the internal market.
Then  the  car  dealers  and  repair  outlets  in  Belgium  started  to  discriminate  against  these  cars
because they were not bought in Belgium. When going to a garage for maintenance, the car was
put on a waiting list. In practice, non-tariff barriers were put up in response to the exchange rate
effect. And that was jeopardising the very principle of the internal market.
You would say then that for countries most hit by the crisis, such as Portugal or Greece,
it would have been even worse if they were not in the euro?
insufficient  attention  was  paid 
I  think  so.  For  small  open  economies,  exchange  rates  can  be  very  destabilising.  That  is  why
smaller economies usually try to peg their exchange rates to a stable currency. In the Monetary
Union, 
to  competitiveness  divergences,  because  such
divergences build up over time, little by little, and at some point there is a need for a significant
adjustment. We should have paid more attention to economic divergences.
Why?
It  is  important  for  sound  economic  policymaking  to  identify  at  an  early  stage  the  erosion  of
competitiveness. For example, we should understand why Germany was able to increase the
value added in manufacturing during the crisis, while in other countries manufacturing suffered.
What  happened?  Why  did  German  manufacturers  do  better?  The  decentralisation  of  labour
negotiations at the firm level proved to be useful to cushion the impact of the crisis. Why did the
German unions collaborate to have contracts at the firm level? You also have to look at the fiscal
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
situation, and at education and training. In Germany, you have a lot of jobs, but at the same time
inequality has increased. In France, it’s the opposite: less inequality but higher unemployment. It
is important to understand much better these developments so as to design better economic
policies.
European citizens seem to be increasingly disaffected with Europe. In many countries
people feel poorer, they are tired of austerity, and they blame Europe, as is happening,
for  example,  in  Italy.  Everywhere  voters  are  increasingly  turning  to  anti-European
parties. How dangerous can this be for the European project?
I think most people realise that the European level is essential. A large majority of people agree
that Europe can provide better answers to certain international problems. For example in Italy,
according to the Eurobarometer, people say migration should be dealt with at the European level.
Think  about  the  threat  of  protectionism  and  the  necessary  response  to  it,  climate  change  or
preserving  the  environment:  people  believe  these  things  should  be  dealt  with  collectively,
because  that  is  how  we  can  make  our  voice  heard  on  a  global  stage.  But  then  they  feel
disappointed  in  some  cases  by  the  inability  of  the  EU  Member  States  to  decide  together  and
perceive the discussion between Member States as a game of shifting problems to neighbours.
And the reaction is then often: well, let’s do it at the national level because at the European level it
doesn’t work. My point is: Europe can provide the right answers, but all of us have to meet our
responsibilities.
But what if the Europeans feel tempted to try something different?
Most people understand the risks and what we would lose by giving up the objective of an ever-
closer union. All of us would become weaker and eventually less influential. If we want to decide
about how we want to live, we have to decide together. If we want to preserve our sovereignty,
we have to share it. We should think European and move forward.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
