Nor  Shamsiah  Mohd  Yunus:  Trust  and  integrity  key  principals  of
Malaysia central bank’s first governor
Welcoming  remarks  by  Ms  Nor  Shamsiah  Mohd  Yunus,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Commemoration of the Centennial of Tun Ismail Ali’s
Birth, Kuala Lumpur, 8 October 2018.
 Trust and integrity. These were the key principles of the man who built Bank Negara Malaysia
and shaped the nation. Some remember him for establishing institutions that form the economic
pillars  of  modern  Malaysia;  some  remember  him  for  his  contributions  to  the  nation  and  the
financial system. Some may remember him as family, or a good friend. Not all had the privilege
to meet him, but all remember Governor Ismail Ali as a paragon of trust and integrity.
Despite being the hands that shaped Malaysia’s early history, little has been written of Governor
Ismail Ali. Stories of his discipline, thrift and dedication only passed through word-of-mouth, rarely
put to paper. His wisdom and experience, whispered from ear-to-ear, risk being lost to the winds
of time.
It is my great pleasure to welcome you today. Indeed, it is our privilege to have Prime Minister
Tun Dr. Mahathir to grace today’s event and Tun Dr. Siti Hasmah Mohd Ali to deliver a special
tribute speech. Few may know that Governor Ismail Ali is the brother of Tun Dr Siti Hasmah and
the brother-in-law of our Prime Minister. We are honoured today to have the presence of Tan Sri
Mohamed Hashim, Dato’ Dr. Zainal Abidin and Hajjah Siti Jameah, siblings of Governor Ismail Ali,
as well as Mr. Ahmad Kamal, Governor Ismail Ali’s son. I am also honoured to welcome back to
the Bank those who have worked alongside Governor Ismail Ali.
Equally important, we are grateful to have with us the international central banking community,
who are travelling to Bali for the IMF and World Bank Group Annual Meetings and have taken time
from your busy schedules for this occasion. This indeed underscores the appreciation towards
central bank cooperation built on trust and friendship. 
This book is to honour Governor Ismail Ali as a nation builder; a titan of the Malaysian economic
and financial sector. He was an unassuming man but he powered the wheels of the nation – and
each turn on the wheel left a mark on history. We have spoken to more than twenty individuals
who  were  close  to  Governor  Ismail Ali  and  dedicated  hundreds  of  pages  to  his  life.  But,  it  is
certain that we have yet to do justice in capturing the breadth and depth of his persona.
Governor Ismail Ali had a far-reaching impact, not only on the country’s economic and financial
landscape, but also on the personal and professional lives of many. As we were completing this
book, we discovered there are others who carried untold stories of him, from here and abroad,
each with another brushstroke to add to the portrait of his vision. It is only right that we continue
to  capture  these  recollections  and  stories  of  Governor  Ismail Ali  and  therefore,  the  Bank  will
publish a Second Edition of this book.
It is our hope that the vision, dedication and resilience of Governor Ismail Ali would inspire our
future  generations,  be  it  central  bankers  or  not  –  and  to  prepare  them  as  they  partake  in  the
dynamic financial ecosystem. This book chronicles, not just who he was and what he did, but
also what Governor Ismail Ali stood for and what he envisioned for this country.
It is said that there are two things parents should give their children: one are roots, and the other
are wings. As the first Malaysian Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia, Governor Ismail Ali planted
the principles that now run deep within the Bank and gave us the vision to soar towards.
As guardians of the financial system, central bankers must maintain public trust. Not only does a
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
central  bank  need  to  be  careful  custodians  of  monetary  policy  and  an  able  adviser  to  the
Government, we need to be seen and recognised as the competent authority to discharge these
roles. A central bank needs to engender confidence.
Governor Ismail Ali’s immutable emphasis on the integrity of the Bank’s moral compass and the
strength of our competency stems from a sense of duty, Amanah. Fundamental to building and
maintaining  this  trust  is  the  need  for  every  staff  of  the  Bank  to  perform  at  our  utmost  and
positively shape the Bank’s reputation in the eyes of the public. In this, Governor Ismail Ali led by
example.
There are two principles – trust and integrity – which were amongst the key principles that guided
Governor Ismail Ali, and with which he formed the pillars of Bank Negara Malaysia.
Governor  Ismail  Ali  was  strict,  sharp,  and  straightforward.  Meticulous  in  his  duties,  he  was
respected for his sound knowledge of central banking and rule of law. These virtues led him to
set the highest standards of professionalism and excellence for himself, his staff and the people
he dealt with. By his own admission, this made him a difficult leader to work for – but to create
the able talent to build this fledgling nation, he demanded nothing less.
Bank Negara Malaysia is proud to continue this tradition of fostering talent such as through the
establishment of the Tun Ismail Ali Chair on Monetary and Financial Economics at the University
of Malaya. This year, in conjunction with our celebration today, the Bank has awarded the Tun
Ismail Ali scholarship to Miss Thulaja Thessa Vasudhevan who is pursuing her master’s degree
in Nature, Society and Environmental Governance at Oxford University.
Beneath Governor Ismail Ali’s reserved appearance, lies a warm soul. He cared deeply for his
staff’s welfare and, like any parent, was stern to those under him so that they may grow into the
best versions of themselves. He treasured friendship and spoke of his close relationship with
fellow central bankers as one of the “most satisfying things for a Governor”. This underpinned his
unwavering commitment to harness the spirit of trust and cooperation amongst the regional and
international central banking community amidst the rising crescendo of challenges confronting
the global economy and financial system. He sowed the seeds for collaboration, such as through
the establishment of the South East Asian Central Banks Centre (SEACEN).
Governor Ismail Ali strove for perfection, yet he understood that neither economic assumption,
ceteris  paribus,  nor  econometric  models  can  accurately  predict  this  world.  He  said  that  “the
central bank works in an uncertain world, with policy tools that are often not easily understood,
and seeking to meet objectives of policy that are always broadly defined. With these uncertainties
in an imperfect world, the central banker needs to have the serenity to accept what cannot be
changed, the courage to change what cannot be accepted, and the wisdom to distinguish one
from the other".
As we sifted through the mementoes of Governor Ismail Ali for the book, we noticed that rarely
were there pictures of him at the centre of attention; in most, he was at the side of a dignitary
dispensing  advice.  I  believe  this  aptly  encapsulates  his  deep  understanding  of  the  role  of  a
central bank.
In 1978, he told a group of central bankers that a central bank needs to earn the right to advise
the government by winning the confidence and respect of the public. Earning this right is difficult,
but  once  this  is  accomplished  “a  central  bank  would  have  the  strongest  guarantee  for  its
independence  and  effectiveness,  far  stronger  than  any  formal  expression  of  central  banking
authority”.
Yet, however independent a central bank is from the government, it cannot function in isolation.
Fiscal and monetary policies are most effective when they are well coordinated. Further, in a
world  increasingly  buffeted  by  protectionism  and  the  risk  of  financial  contagion,  central  banks
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
must  cooperate  with  each  other.  Effective  policy  making  today  needs  to  have  a  global
perspective as the fallout of policy failures often spread rapidly across borders. Cooperation at
the  national,  regional  and  international  levels,  is  necessary.  This  trust  however,  forms  out  of
reliability, and reliability stems from competence.
It is my firmest belief that the best way for us to honour the late Governor Ismail Ali is to carry on
this vision – the vision of a central bank independent, competent and respected.
Once  again,  I  would  like  to  thank  everyone  present  for  joining  us  in  commemorating  the
centennial  of  Governor  Ismail  Ali’s  birth.  In  particular,  our  heartfelt  gratitude  goes  to  Prime
Minister, Tun Dr Siti Hasmah and family members of Governor Ismail Ali for your support and
presence for today’s special occasion.
I invite distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen to explore the gallery exhibition to honour the
life  and  achievements  of  this  great  man,  Governor  Ismail Ali,  our  first  Malaysian  central  bank
governor.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
