Ravi Menon: Asia's digital transformation
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the
GIC Institutional Investors Roundtable, Singapore, 31 October 2018.
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  I thank GIC for the invitation and am pleased to meet all of
you.
Why FinTech?
About  three-and-a-half  years  ago,  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  made  a
momentous decision - to promote an innovative and dynamic financial sector by working with the
industry to harness the power of technology.
We  saw  that  technology  was  transforming  the  way  people  live  their  lives,  the  way
companies deliver products and services, and the way cities work and connect.
Meanwhile,  the  financial  industry  globally  was  facing  the  headwinds  of  slower  economic
growth, tighter regulation, and keen competition from non-financial technology players.
Technology  presented  an  opportunity  to  inject  new  dynamism  and  new  growth  in  financial
services.
It was an opportunity to increase efficiency in an industry that had some of the most archaic
practices around – just think of interbank payments and settlements.
It was an opportunity to manage risks better: financial institutions were pouring ever more
resources into compliance and risk management – and still getting into trouble.
Most of all, it was an opportunity to improve people’s lives
to bring financial services to the unbanked and uninsured in Asia; 
to help a growing middle class plan its finances more holistically and efficiently;
to help enterprises raise money, make payments, and tap new markets.
In short: to maintain its position as one of the top financial centres in the world, Singapore must
embrace FinTech – harnessing its benefits, managing its risks.
Thus began Singapore’s FinTech journey.  And by FinTech, I mean two things:
encourage and support financial institutions to experiment and harness technology; and
promote non-financial FinTech players to provide competition and inject innovation so that
the ecosystem as a whole benefits.
MAS  takes  an  even-handed  approach,  allowing  competition  between  financial  institutions  and
non-financial FinTech players as well as facilitating collaboration among them.
And of course, doing all this with a keen eye on managing the risks associated with technology –
safeguarding financial stability and maintaining public confidence.
MAS and the financial industry are not doing this in a vacuum, but within the larger context of
Singapore’s Smart Nation agenda – to build a digital economy and society for higher productivity
and more gracious living.
Asia’s Digital Transformation
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Singapore’s Smart Nation drive is itself playing out against the backdrop of a dynamic Asia on the
cusp of a digital revolution.
Asia  remains  the  fastest  growing  region  in  the  world,  with  the  ASEAN-4  economies
expected to grow at 4.7% p.a. over the next 10 years, China at 5.7%, and India at 6.5%.
Growing  affluence,  rapid  urbanisation,  and  expanding  education,  are  propelling  strong
demand for modern services like travel, shopping, and financial services.
1
Yet  large  segments  of Asia’s  population  have  no  access  to  banking  and  payments  services,
insurance cover, or investment opportunities.
According to the World Bank, 170 million people in the ten member states of ASEAN with
mobile phones remain unbanked.
Some 53 million people still receive agriculture payments in cash.
Financial technology or FinTech is making significant headway in bringing these under-served
markets into the formal financial economy.
Example:  Digital  financial  transactions  have  increased  by  30%  in  Thailand  from  2014  to
2017.
The FinTech revolution in Southeast Asia is being driven by three forces.
First, there is a thriving FinTech start-up scene in ASEAN. These start-ups are building large
digital businesses and changing the face of financial services while doing so.
Take  for  example  Wing  in  Cambodia,  Wave  Money  in  Myanmar,  Momo  in  Vietnam,  and
MatchMove in Singapore.
They have quickly scaled by providing unbanked individuals with the means to store value
and transact digitally.
And  by  extending  their  services  to  SMEs,  these  FinTech  firms  are  facilitating  the
digitalisation of entire supply chains.
Second, the advent of pervasive e-commerce platforms has provided an Asian model for
financial inclusion.
These  platforms  rapidly  develop  a  consumer  base  and  offer  a  broad  stack  of  services,
expanding into areas such as payments and credit.
E-commerce platforms are among the best-funded ASEAN businesses.
Grab, Go-Jek, Carousell, and Lazada have together raised nearly US$6 billion in 2018.
According to a study by Google and Temasek, e-commerce is projected to grow explosively
in ASEAN, from US$5.5 billion in 2015 to US$88 billion in 2025.
Third, traditional financial institutions in Asia have embarked on a digitalisation journey,
enabled by core technologies such as cloud computing.
Almost  every  major  financial  institution  has  an  active  innovation  agenda  to  strengthen  its
business by harnessing technology.
In just the last three years, more than 30 global financial institutions have set up innovation
labs  in  Singapore,  testing  new  technologies  and  collaborating  with  FinTech  start-ups  to
develop solutions.
Let me give some examples of collaboration from the Singapore FinTech ecosystem:
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Hedge  fund  managers  are  using  a  solution  deployed  by  SQREEM  to  provide  them
behavioural  insights  related  to  equities,  foreign  exchange  markets  or  political  events  like
Brexit.
Relationship managers are using a solution by AIDA, to predict whether their clients are likely
to increase their assets under management or make a withdrawal.
FINQUEST is using big data analytics to connect small to mid-sized companies globally to
growth capital and potential acquirers.
APVERA is helping enterprises detect anomalies in the behaviour of their employees and
flag data leakage risks.
These three driving forces – FinTech start-ups, e-commerce platforms, and financial institutions
harnessing  technology  in  a  big  way  –  are  creating  the  synergies  that  power  Asia’s  digital
transformation.
Initiatives to Foster the FinTech Ecosystem
MAS has an active and wide-ranging FinTech agenda. 
In the interest of time, let me highlight three key initiatives we have taken in recent years to
nurture the FinTech ecosystem in Singapore and integrate it across ASEAN. 
First, the ASEAN Financial Innovation Network, or AFIN for short. 
This is a collaboration among the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the ASEAN Bankers
Association, and the MAS.
AFIN is a platform that offers two functions:
One, it is a marketplace where financial institutions in ASEAN seeking solutions to specific
problems can connect with relevant FinTech firms across the region and beyond.
Two,  it  is  a sandbox where  the  financial  institutions  and  FinTech  firms  can  test  potential
solutions and achieve scale in a cost-efficient manner.
Second, deepening the enterprise financing ecosystem.
We want to make Singapore an Asian hub for enterprise financing, to support the next generation
of Asian growth companies.
We are enhancing the private markets infrastructure.
Last year, MAS simplified the regulatory regime for venture capital managers, shortening the
authorisation process from 16 to 4 weeks.
We  are  working  with  the  industry  to  establish  private  market  platforms  to  enable  Asian
growth companies to connect with investors for capital and expertise.
We are strengthening the public markets ecosystem. 
We are working with the industry to develop an information aggregation utility for SMEs to
demonstrate credit worthiness in the pre-IPO phase.
We are deepening the research ecosystem for both private and public markets.
In the private markets, we are curating ASEAN venture capital (VC) and private equity (PE)
research with industry partners to raise awareness of investment opportunities in the region.
In the public markets, we are funding research to support market liquidity in the post-IPO
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
phase.
Institutional investors have been leveraging on Singapore’s strong connectivity and vibrant fund
management ecosystem to access regional markets.
There are currently some 220 VC and PE managers located in Singapore.
VC and PE assets under management in Singapore has grown at an average 28% p.a. over
the last 5 years.
More than 75% of their investments are across ASEAN, South and North Asia.
Third, the Singapore FinTech Festival.
This is the largest financial technology event in the world. 
It drew more than 30,000 participants from more than 100 countries last year.
There were 300 FinTech exhibition booths from 30 countries.
The FinTech Festival is a platform for the global and Asian FinTech community – to learn
new developments, exchange ideas, network and collaborate.
The third edition of the Festival will be held in two weeks’ time, 12-16 Nov.
A key component of the Festival is the Global Investor Summit, which brings together FinTech
start-ups and investors and facilitates deal-making.
This year, we have a new deal-making platform - called MATCH – to curate and showcase
promising ASEAN start-ups and enterprises to local and global investors.
Do check out the Global Investor Summit.
To sum up, Asia is undergoing a digital transformation. 
The Asian FinTech scene in particular is blooming. 
Opportunities abound for long term investors.
And Singapore sits at the centre of this exciting ecosystem of innovation and growth, from
which to tap these opportunities.
Thank you, and I hope to see you in two weeks’ time at the Singapore FinTech Festival.
1
ASEAN-4 (Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand)
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
