Yandraduth  Googoolye:  Enabling 
technologies in Mauritius
Speech  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Mauritius
International Financial Centre - Forward Looking conference, organized by the Financial Services
Commission, Balaclava, 20 September 2018.
framework 
financial
for 
Thank you Lord Desai.
 Let me first wish a very good morning to the other panelists and the distinguished guests present
at this Conference.
It is indeed a great pleasure for me to be part of this Panel today to share the Bank of Mauritius’,
as well as my personal views, on fintech.
We all agree that fintech — that is technology-enabled innovation in financial services — has
developed  significantly  over  recent  years  and  is  impacting  the  way  financial  services  are
produced and delivered.
The Bank of Mauritius, as the regulator for the Banking Sector and also having been mandated to
ensure  the  stability  and  soundness  of  the  financial  sector,  has  been  following  closely  the
evolution of Fintech.
I must, nonetheless, highlight that the application of technologies in financial services is not new. 
The  banking  sector,  for  example,  has  been  subject  to  gradual  transformation  through
technological  advent  over  the  past  decades  –  the  advent  of  ATMs,  credit  cards,  cheque
truncation,  internet  banking,  cross  border  transfer  of  funds,  amongst  others  are  just  a  few
examples. 
Technological evolution of the financial services sector therefore is a natural phenomenon which
happened  in  a  phased  and  orderly  manner.    The  legal  and  regulatory  landscape  has  been
continuously amended to adapt to the technological changes in line with the recommendations of
international standard setters.
Similarly, we are preparing ourselves for the fintech revolution. 
The  announcements  in  the  Budget  Speech  of  this  year  clearly  show  the  commitment  of  our
jurisdiction  to  adopt  and  accept  the  fintech  revolution.    The  building  blocks  of  these
announcements,  which  in  my  view,  are  the  key  drivers  in  the  development  of  an  enabling
framework for fintech, are:
(i) The Regulatory Sandbox Licence
(ii) Creating a regulatory framework for Digital Assets and investment in crypto currency as a
digital asset. 
(iii) The need for cyber-security and cyber-resilience policies and capacities.
(iv) the harmonization of the AML/CFT framework in line with development in Fintech.
Regulatory Sandbox Licences as a prelude to the enabling regulatory framework
As the demand for technologically enabled financial services, continued to increase, and in the
absence of an appropriate legal framework to govern same, in 2016, provision was made in the
Investment Promotion Act for the Board of Investment (now the Economic Development Board)
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to grant Regulatory Sandbox Licences. 
Applications for Regulatory Sandbox Licences in a variety of fields, such as crowdfunding, peer-
to-peer lending, cryptocurrency, initial coin offering, amongst others, were received.  Regulatory
Sandbox Licences, however, are granted for a specific period of time, usually not exceeding one
year,  pending  which  either  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  or  the  Financial  Services  Commission,
depending on the activity, would propose the appropriate regulatory framework to regulate the
fintech company.
This, however, was not a simple task as the Bank of Mauritius is not only the regulator of the
banking sector, but also the guardian of the safety and soundness of the financial sector. 
The regulatory framework cannot be amended nor overhauled in a haphazard manner as it must
ensure  that  the  stability  and  soundness  of  our  financial  system  nor  the  reputation  of  our
jurisdiction is not jeopardized in the process.
This is why we are following closely the works and guidance offered by international standard
setters such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Financial Stability Board, the
International Monetary Fund, the Financial Action Task Force, to name but a few, which have
realized that fintech must be properly regulated to maintain the stability and soundness of the
financial systems.
Most, if not all, international standard setters have underscored that fintech have resulted in new
business models, applications, processes, or products.  These changes have, in turn, had an
effect on financial markets and institutions which may have a potential impact on the monetary
and financial stability.
It is therefore crucial for the Mauritius International Financial Centre that its enabling framework
for fintech be in line with the latest discussions taking place at the level of these organisations to
ensure that, in setting up the fintech regulatory framework, the Mauritius International Financial
Centre  provides  the  proper  biosphere  for  the  fintech  ecosystem  while  affording  appropriate
safeguards to investors.
In a Paper issued in February 2018, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision considered
that while bank supervisors must remain focused on ensuring the safety and soundness of the
banking system, they should be vigilant for opportunities to enhance both safety and soundness
and financial stability while monitoring for current practices that might unduly or unintentionally
hamper beneficial innovation in the financial industry.
This consideration, in my view, is applicable to the non-bank financial services supervisors as
well.
Tobias  Adrian,  IMF  Financial  Counsellor  and  Director  of  the  Monetary  and  Capital  Markets
Department,  for  his  part,  in  a  recent  speech  expressed  the  view  that  adopting  well-designed
standards  can  promote  both  certainty  for  innovators  and  safety  for  consumers.    Hence,  to
maximize  the  full  potential  of  new  financial  technologies,  policymakers  must  strike  a  sensible
balance, namely, creating a supportive space for innovation while maintaining a robust regulatory
framework.
Amongst its terms of reference, the Fintech and Innovation-Driven Financial Services Regulatory
Committee  chaired  by  Lord  Desai  was  tasked  to  advise  on  the  development  of  a  regulatory
framework for fintech in Mauritius. 
The Regulatory Committee found that the applicable laws in Mauritius are essentially technology-
neutral  and  that  statutory  provisions  pertaining  to  the  innovative  application  of  technology  for
financial services are practically non-existent. 
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Regulatory Committee advised that two approaches may be considered in this respect –
namely extending the existing regulatory and supervisory perimeter to accommodate fintech or
setting up a fintech-specific regulatory framework.
I hope that these issues are considered by the National Regulatory Sandbox Committee.   
Digital Assets and crypto currencies
The Financial Services Commission has recently issued a Guidance Note on the recognition of
digital  assets  as  an  asset-class  for  investment  by  sophisticated  and  expert  investors.    The
Guidance Note clarifies that cryptocurrencies are not legal tender in Mauritius but have “value”
since they are exchangeable for other things having value, thereby showing characteristics akin
to physical commodities such as precious metals.
I expect that this Guidance Note will clarify a number of queries regarding cryptocurrencies.   
The Financial Service Commission will surely have regard to the framework developed by the
Financial  Stability  Board,  in  collaboration  with  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market
Infrastructures  (CPMI),  to  monitor  the  financial  stability  implications  of  the  developments  in
crypto-asset  markets.    While  the  Financial  Stability  Board  believes  that  crypto-assets  do  not
pose a material risk to global financial stability, it recognises the need for vigilant monitoring in
light of the speed of market developments.
Moreover, having regard to the international trend, I wonder whether the Bank of Mauritius, as the
sole  issuer  of  legal  tender  in  Mauritius,  could  possibly  consider  issuing  central  bank  digital
currency in the coming year(s).
The implementation of the National Payment Switch, which is well underway, is expected to add
more impetus and dynamism to the payment systems infrastructure by providing a multifaceted
inter-bank  switching  platform  for  various  payment  channels  that  will  easily  integrate  local  and
international payment systems.
Additionally, instantaneous access to bank accounts has become the basis for digitalisation of
the  economy.  The  change  in  consumer  attitudes  and  new  technologies  has  led  the  Bank  of
Mauritius  to  embark  in  the  implementation  of  an  Instant  Payment  System,  concurrently  to  the
National  Payment  Switch.  The  implementation  of  the  Instant  Payment  System  will,  further,
support the e-government initiative by promoting electronic payments through all channels in the
Government agencies through instant or near real time payments.
Cyber-security and cyber-resilience policies and capacities
In  2017,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  assessed  the  financial  stability  implications  from
fintech  and  noted  that  addressing  the  following  three  priority  areas  is  seen  as  essential  to
supporting an authority’s efforts to safeguard financial stability while fostering more inclusive and
sustainable finance.  These priority areas are –
Firstly, managing operational risk from third-party service providers;
Secondly, mitigating cyber risks; and
Thirdly, monitoring macro-financial risks that could emerge as fintech activities increase.
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  currently  enhancing  its  supervisory  guidelines  in  line  with  the
recommendations of the Financial Stability Board.  A new guideline on Information Technology
Risk  Management  is  currently  being  finalized  and  will  be  issued  to  financial  institutions.    The
Guideline will provide a framework for the establishment of sound practices and processes for
managing the risks that emanate from the use of IT systems.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
With  respect  to  macro-financial  risks,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  the  Financial  Services
Commission  have  been  collaborating  to  mitigate  such  risk  and  enhance  the  stability  of  the
financial services sector.
Enhancing the Regulatory framework against money-laundering and terrorist financing in
line with development in Fintech.
To mitigate potential AML/CFT risk, the legislative framework must be made applicable to fintech
driven financial services as well as the companies offering them.  The framework must also be
extended to crypto currencies and crypto assets.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has engaged, since 2016, a constructive dialogue with
fintech and regulation technology (Regtech) sectors to support innovation in financial services,
while addressing the regulatory and supervisory challenges posed by emerging technologies.
The  FATF  has  agreed  to  initiate  a  project  on  investigative  best  practices  related  to  virtual
currencies/crypto-assets to assist law enforcement in the light of the growing risks.
Additionally, the FATF’s guidance and standards are being reviewed to determine if changes are
necessary  to  clarify  their  application  to  virtual  currencies/crypto-assets  and  promote  a  more
consistent regulatory approach, taking into account the results of FATF’s stocktake exercise of
the different national regulatory approaches.
We must therefore follow progress made on this matter and adapt our legislation accordingly.
Conclusion
Fintech is definitely here to stay.  Regulators must therefore brace themselves to accept new
technologies as forming an integral part of the financial landscape.  In the process, the Bank of
Mauritius  is  ensuring  that  it  has  specialized  and  trained  resources  to  assist  it  in  fulfilling  its
mandate and better understand innovative and disruptive technologies.  
I  must  nonetheless  emphasise  that  fintech  must  be  encouraged  specially  where,  rather  than
disrupting the whole system, it adds value and facilitates certain processes or activities such as
transaction monitoring, client on-boarding process, regulatory reporting.
It  can  also  enhance  supervisory  capabilities.    The  use  of  innovative  technology  in  financial
supervision can indeed assist in this endeavour.  Supervisory technology (suptech) can help to
digitise reporting and regulatory processes, resulting in more efficient and proactive monitoring of
risk and compliance at financial institutions.
The Bank of Mauritius and the Financial Services Commission are collaborating in ascertaining
that any potential regulatory gaps are addressed and regulatory arbitrage eliminated.
I  am  confident  that  the  financial  services  sector  has  a  bright  future  ahead  and  together  with
fintech firms, regulators, services providers and customers can embark on this transformational
journey and design a new regulatory landscape and financial ecosystem for Mauritius.
Thank you for your kind attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
