Karnit  Flug:  Policy  dilemmas  and  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in
advising government
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the farewell conference marking
the end of her term, Jerusalem, 4 November 2018.
 This conference touched upon two areas that are at the center of the BOI responsibilities: one
which is unique among central banks and that is the governor of the BOI being the economic
advisor to the government. The second is the core business of central banks, namely Monetary
Policy making. Although the BOI has many other areas of responsibility, I would like to offer a few
reflections on each of those two very important areas.
In the first part of this conference, we have seen a sample of two research projects conducted by
researchers  from  our  research  department,  and  we  have  heard  Laurence  Boone,  the  chief
economist of the OECD covering policy issues related to inclusive growth.
The  two  research  projects  give  a  glimpse  of  the  type  of  research  that  tackles  specific  policy
issues; in this case public housing policies and EITC, or income support for the working poor.
The  work  performed  at  the  OECD  on  inclusive  growth  has  touched  upon  important  policy
dilemmas and tradeoffs, and provides some insights on what policies could be pursued in the
quest for inclusive growth: The need to enhance education and promote life-long learning and
acquisition  of  skills;  enhancing  access  to  affordable  housing;  and  ensuring  adaptation  and
diffusion of technologies across the board – in particular for small and young firms. These are
lessens that we, as the economic advisors to the government have grappled with over the years:
Some  research  projects  conducted  by  BOI  researchers  may  focus  on  a  very  specific  policy
question and directly help design a better policy. Others are of a more basic nature and provide a
better understanding of the interaction between relevant variables; while yet others estimate and
quantify  these  relationships  or  help  assess  the  speed  or  extent  to  which  a  policy  action  may
impact on relevant variables. What is common to all of this work is that it lays the foundations,
and  builds  the  infrastructure,  to  a  more  informed  policymaking  and  thus  helps  design  better
policies.
A natural question that arises in this respect is why at the Central Bank? Should the economic
advisor to the government be the Governor of the Central Bank?
This  question  was  debated  within  the  bank  of  Israel,  among  some  of  the  people  sitting  here
today. While we were discussing the new Bank of Israel Law, Stan was initially of the view that
the  role  of  an  economic  advisor  to  the  government  puts  the  bank  in  a  constantly  contentious
position  Vis  a  Vis  the  government  and  may  undermine  the  banks’  independence  in  its  core
responsibility. I was the Director of the Research Department at that time, and argued in favor of
maintaining the role of economic advisor in the law, which was eventually what was decided.
Several years later, when I became Governor, I met Stan (in Basel, at a BIS meeting) following
one of the heated debates I had with the government, and told him that now I understand and
sympathize with his initial view against having the role of the economic advisor. Stan surprised
me when he said that looking from the outside, he is even more convinced of the importance of
this role of the Bank of Israel.
  This  question  was  also  posed  to  an  independent  evaluation  committee  which  was  invited  to
evaluate the BOI’s research department back in 2012. In their report, they said, and I quote: “We
came to the Bank very skeptical of any central bank having the responsibility of being an advisor,
much less the advisor, to the government on economic policy". Following a thorough discussion
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
with  many  relevant  stakeholders  within  and  outside  the  bank,  they  concluded:  “Absent
fundamental changes in other Israeli institutions, we agree that the Bank must continue to play
the critical role of advisor to the government policy"
 Indeed, the argument against the CB’s role in economic policy advice because it enhances the
friction  between  the  Bank  and  the  government  and  thus  may  undermine  the  Bank’s
independence in its core responsibilities is not unique to the role of economic advisor.  In fact,
this debate resembles the discussion regarding the question that is debated extensively among
central  bankers  as  to  how  wide  should  our  responsibilities  and  mandates  be  defined.  I  have
heard the argument that in some issues the decisions reflect political priorities as opposed to
pure economic welfare maximization decisions, and therefore should be left to the politicians, or
that  they  may  undermine  the  central  banks’  credibility  or  independence.  These  are  valid
arguments,  and  certainly,  my  tenure  as  governor  has  demonstrated  that  providing  a  well-
grounded position on some sensitive or publically debated policy issues does raise the level of
friction with the government.
 However, when we think about designing institutions, we should not think in the abstract, and we
never start from scratch. We should take the starting point into account, and asses what is the
likelihood  that  a  change  will  get  us  closer  to  some  “ideal  institutional  design”  (if  such  exists).
Given  that  this  role  has  been  defined  in  the  original  BOI  law  from  1954  as  one  of  the  main
responsibilities  of  the  BOI  and  its  Governor,  the  basic  infrastructure  of  knowledge  and  highly
professional  staff,  and  reputation  has  been  built  at  the  BOI  to  serve  this  responsibility.  I  also
believe that the credibility of the central bank is enhanced, not damaged, by the quality research
and  policy  recommendations  it  provides.  In  that  regard,  it  may  even  contribute  to  the  public
support  of  an  independent  central  bank.   And  as  to  friction  between  the  central  bank  and  the
political system, during my term it was in fact most intense around issues related to the core
activity of the Bank of Israel in supporting financial stability. The quest for enhancing competition
in the provision of financial services, which we all share, led to heated debate as to the scope,
the speed and the specifics of the financial sector reform. It centered around our insistence on
ensuring  that  the  reform  does  not  undermine  financial  stability  that  was  sometimes  taken  for
granted by our partners in the design of the reform. In the past, the friction was most intense
regarding the disinflation process, and Jacob Frankel who sits here, can certainty testify to that.
So, we’ve had frictions in the past and will probably have them in the future, and we should be
able to withstand them. We should provide a quiet, behind closed doors policy advice in some
cases, and contribute to a better-informed public debate on key policy questions. I believe that
within the current political context, where policies tend, more than in the past, to focus more on
short term benefits and ignore longer term risks and costs, it is essential that an independent
well regarded institution provides solid policy analysis and advice, and helps explain this to the
public.  So, I believe that retaining the economic advisory role by the Central Bank in the 2010
BOI law has served the country well.
In the second part of the conference, we have heard an extensive discussion of the panel of very
distinguished speakers on monetary policy and Inflation Targeting in the post GFC era.  Thus, I
feel it will be somewhat ambitious on my part to try to add to this extensive discussion.
The only thing I would like to say is that monetary policy making in Israel over the last 5 years that
may have seemed boring at times to bystanders, has in fact been a fascinating journey to those
involved in making it. Early on, we reduced the interest rate to 0.1%—a record low for Israel, a
move that won me the title of “the most surprising governor in the world” according to one of the
international news wires.
Later  on  we  had  prepared  to  use  unconventional  policy  tools,  an  option  that  eventually  we
decided not to use in light of the solid growth, healthy developments in the labor market, and the
assessment that the low inflation was not reflecting weakness of demand but rather, at least in
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
part, the result of positive processes such as the intensifying of competition. During this period
we have also introduced some changes to the MP communication strategy: For example, we
launched a quarterly press briefing following rate decisions, and made use of forward guidance.
We have also made use of FX intervention, in times mildly, and in times intensively, according to
our assessment of the nature of FX fluctuations. Each policy decision followed a very thorough
and  deep  discussion,  and  although  many  times  the  debate  got  heated,  and  sometimes
disagreements  arose,  I  was  always  sure  that  every  member  of  the  MPC  had  only  the  best
interest of the Israeli economy in his or her mind. Now, following almost 4 years of keeping the
interest rate at 0.1 %, it seems as if the era of gradual normalization is approaching. I can already
visualize the heated debates that are likely to take place within the monetary committee as to the
exact pace and path that this process will take. The committee’s challenge will be to move not
too fast, so as not to choke the process of entrenchment of the inflation environment within its
target range; and not too slow so as not to find themselves behind the curve. I assure you I will
be watching this process closely with great interest.
Let me now thank the organizers Michel and Nadine, for initiating and organizing this excellent
conference, and thank all the presenters from the BOI as well as our distinguished guests, who
came from far away.
Thank you for the very kind words you said, I am moved and honored by all of this.
And thank you all for coming​.​
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
 