Yandraduth Googoolye: Importance of financial markets to growth
as Barclays launches Africa Index
Speech by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Launch of the
Barclays Africa Financial Markets Index in Mauritius, Port Louis, 22 November 2018.
 Members of the Board of the Bank of Mauritius
Chairman of the Mauritius Bankers Association
Head of Barclays Africa Trading, Mr George Asante
Chief Economist and Head of Research of OMFIF, Ms Danae Kyriakopoulou
Chief Executive Officers of Financial Institutions
Ladies and Gentlemen
Good Afternoon and Welcome to the Bank of Mauritius
We are pleased to welcome ABSA and OMFIF at the Bank today.
The Bank and the Financial Services Commission were admitted as members of OMFIF June
last. OMFIF regroups diverse players from the public and private sector, central banks, sovereign
wealth  funds,  and  academia  who  meet  to  exchange  views  and  share  experience.  We  look
forward as member of OMFIF in the future.
Finance has been compared to being the lubricant of the process of economic growth such that
the role of financial markets in the economic development of any country cannot be underplayed.
According  to  Robert  Merton,  the  primary  function  of  any  financial  system  is  to  facilitate  the
allocation and deployment of economic resources. The interactions of these functions work to
influence saving and investment decisions, which ultimately translate into the efficient allocation
of funds in an economy.
The Bank of Mauritius has long recognized the role of financial markets in Mauritius and set up a
Financial Markets Department as far back as in 2000. The Bank has also established a Financial
Markets Committee that meets under its Chairmanship and comprises Heads of Treasury from
all banks. The Financial Markets Committee acts as a forum for discussions on developments in
the domestic markets and also on existing and future market practices and instruments. Through
this forum, banks and the central bank endeavor to foster the development of money and foreign
exchange markets in Mauritius.
The  Bank  has  been  contributing  to  the  development  of  financial  markets  from  various
perspectives.  With  a  view  to  improving  market  efficiency,  all  information,  pertaining  to  the
financial markets are disseminated on our website in a timely and transparent manner. On 29
March 2018, the bank in collaboration with Bloomberg launched an E-Bond trading and market
surveillance system, which is a new electronic trading system for Mauritian government bonds.
The implementation of E-Bond has brought more efficiency and greater depth to the secondary
market in Mauritius. It has allowed the development of a benchmark yield curve, which will go live
to-day at noon London time. The yield curve will enhance price discovery for a range of money
market instruments and other corporate bonds.
Measuring financial development is quite challenging and we recognize the effort required to put
up  an  index  to  gauge  the  impact  of  financial  intermediation  on  real  economic  activity.  We
welcome the initiative and effort of both ABSA and OMFIF. The Africa Financial Markets Index
provides  a  toolkit  for  countries  seeking  to  strengthen  their  financial  markets  infrastructure.  It
tracks  progress  on  financial  market  developments  annually  across  a  range  of  countries  and
indicators. It will serve as a platform to build resilient and dynamic financial markets within the
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
African continent. As an independent think- tank, OMFIF provides the seal for good governance
and unbiased analysis.
The Africa Financial Markets Index, now in its second edition, ranks and compares the depth of
financial markets in twenty African countries which are assessed against six broad pillars:
financial markets depth;
access to foreign exchange;
market transparency and regulatory environment;
macroeconomic opportunity;
enforceability of agreements; and
capacity of local investors.
This recent index for Africa is a window on the potential of the continent. Despite some episodic
challenges  in  the  shape  of  developmental,  social  or  political  issues, Africa  has  grown  into  a
mature,  strong  and  forward-looking  continent,  much  in  line  with  the  vision  of  the  African
Renaissance so dear to one of Africa’s most illustrious sons, Nelson Mandela. It is, therefore, not
surprising that Africa has turned into a geo-political centrepiece. Such is the continent’s potential
that developed economies are literally racing against one another to tap the opportunities of this
new Eldorado. And what makes Africa’s CV all the more noteworthy is the fact that it has made
remarkable progress on the front of democracy and good governance whilst also demonstrating
commendable economic growth.
On this front, allow me to underline that over the past eight years, Africa has been registering
gross  direct  investment  inflows  of  around  USD50  billion,  on  average  every  year  according  to
2018 World Investment Report released in June last. These figures speak volumes about the
significance  of  the  emerging  markets  across  the African  continent  as  well  as  the  efforts  of  a
number of countries to promote their potential as investment destinations.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Africa Financial Markets Index brings to light the fact that dynamic and
efficient financial markets are pre-eminent triggers of economic growth by virtue of their capability
to crystallize the elements that investors look for: optimized product offerings, high returns, good
governance and strong regulatory and legal frameworks.
For the 2018 edition, three countries – Angola, Cameroon and Senegal – joined the index, thus
bringing the number of countries tracked to 20. The country measures were also broadened to
include elements of financial inclusion and levels of investor education. South Africa topped the
index this year again, followed by Botswana, Kenya, Mauritius and Nigeria.
While some may dwell on the fact that Mauritius ranks fourth among the twenty countries, I invite
them to examine the positive elements underlined in the report, and like we say, the glass can
also be half-full rather than half-empty:
The level of foreign exchange reserves which has grown substantially in Mauritius. Today,
we have a level of gross official reserves of about USD6.3 billion, representing nearly 10.6
months  of  imports  of  goods  and  services,  which  we  manage  judiciously  under  a  legal
mandate  of  security,  liquidity  and,  then,  return.  On  that  point,  I  would  like  to  stress  that
Mauritius is a notable exception with regard to investment in complex assets. As quoted in
the  report  “There  is  a  wide  range  of  investment  options  and  relatively  strong  demand  for
more complex assets, including different types of derivatives products’. [Unquote].
The report commends Mauritius for its strong legal and regulatory framework and highlights
that Mauritius is amongst the top countries as regards market depth, market transparency,
tax and regulatory environment as well as the legality and enforceability of financial markets
master agreements.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Africa Financial Markets Index comes at an opportune time when positive changes are being
witnessed on the domestic financial landscape. Mauritius aims to double the size of its financial
sector as spelt out in the Government’s Vision 2030 document and the financial sector blueprint.
We have broadened the access to the purchase of Government and Bank of Mauritius Securities
by  the  public.  The  development  of  a  secondary  market  for  risk-free  instruments  has  helped
individual  investors  to  benefit  from  the  increase  in  yields  registered  since  the  start  of  2018.
Today, Treasury Bills and Bonds are proving to be viable alternative investment instruments to
term deposits. Increased accessibility and enhanced public awareness has led to a three-fold
increase in the amount of securities held by individuals, from Rs1.8 billion as at end-December
2017 to Rs6 billion currently.
You  may  recall  that  the African  Development  Bank  along  with  Bloomberg  launched  the Africa
Domestic Bond Fund, which is listed on the Stock Exchange of Mauritius since 18 September
2018. This Fund tracks the performance of a Bond Index, comprising local currency sovereign
bonds  of  eight  markets:  Botswana,  Egypt,  Kenya,  Namibia,  Nigeria,  South Africa,  Ghana  and
Zambia.  Mauritius  is  also  expected  to  join  the  index  in  the  near  future  with  the  recent
developments on the secondary market of Government/ Bank of Mauritius Securities.
As  I  conclude,  allow  me  to  thank ABSA  for  its  initiative  to  launch  the Africa  Financial  Markets
Index in Mauritius. The Index will be yet another benchmark that will provide precious insights to
our  country  which  is  busy  positioning  itself  as  a  leading  international  financial  centre  and  a
gateway to Africa, with a clear vision to join the sphere of high-income countries.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
