November 29, 2018
Bank  of  Japan
Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Fukuoka 
Takako Masai 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
I. Developments in Economic Activity and Prices 
I would like to start my speech with a look at developments in economic activity and prices. 
 
Following the discussion at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on October 30 and 
31, 2018, the Bank of Japan published the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, or the 
Outlook  Report.  In  this  report,  the  Bank  presented  its  projections  for  Japan's  economic 
activity and prices through fiscal 2020. 
 
I will explain developments in economic activity and prices by presenting the main content 
of the Outlook Report. 
 
A. Overseas Economies 
Let me first touch on developments in overseas economies. The Bank's assessment is that 
overseas economies have continued to grow firmly on the whole. 
 
Looking at recent developments in overseas economies, their growth is losing momentum 
compared  to  a  while  ago,  when  the  global  economy  was  widely  referred  to  as  seeing 
synchronous growth. A virtuous cycle of overseas economic activity has been maintained, 
however, as seen in the fact that domestic demand in many economies has been firm.   
 
According  to  the  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  released  in  October  2018  by  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  of  the  global  economy  is 
projected to be 3.7 percent on a year-on-year basis for both 2018 and 2019. The projections 
have been revised downward by 0.2 percentage point for each year from the previous ones 
released three months before, and differences in growth rates among regions have widened 
to  some  extent.  Nonetheless,  the  growth  rate  of  3.7  percent  is  by  no  means  low,  as  this 
figure represents a level exceeding its past average. 
 
Let  me  outline  the  Bank's  outlook  for  overseas  economies  by  major  region.  The  U.S. 
economy  is  expected  to  maintain  its  expansion,  underpinned  by  expansionary  fiscal 
measures. The European economy is projected to continue recovering, albeit at a gradually 
slowing  pace.  The  Chinese  economy  is  likely  to  broadly  follow  a  stable  growth  path  as 
1 
authorities conduct fiscal and monetary policy in a timely manner, although it is expected to 
be affected to some extent by the United States having raised tariffs imposed on China.   
 
B. Japan's Economy 
1. Current situation 
Now I would like to move on to developments in Japan's economy. 
 
The  Bank's  assessment  is  that  Japan's  economy  is  expanding  moderately,  with  a  virtuous 
cycle from income to spending operating. 
 
The output gap -- which shows the utilization of capital and labor -- widened within positive 
territory from late 2016, for seven consecutive quarters through the April-June quarter of 
2018.  Although  the  first  preliminary  estimate  of  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  the 
July-September  quarter  --  released  on  November  14  --  was  minus  1.2  percent  on  an 
annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  this  is  considered  to  be  largely  attributable  to  the 
temporary  effects  of  natural  disasters  that  occurred  successively  this  summer.  In  fact, 
exports and production decreased slightly following these disasters, but have been showing 
recovery thereafter. Corporate profits have continued to follow their uptrend at record high 
levels, and business fixed investment also has continued on an increasing trend. According 
to  the  September  2018  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan), 
business  fixed  investment  plans  for  fiscal  2018  registered  a  year-on-year  increase  of  8.7 
percent  --  a  level  clearly  exceeding  the  past  average  for  the  September  Tankan  surveys. 
Meanwhile,  labor  market  conditions  have  continued  to  tighten  steadily  and  total  cash 
earnings per employee have risen moderately. Under these circumstances, the consumption 
activity  index  (CAI)  --  which  is  calculated  by  combining  various  sales  and  supply-side 
statistics -- increased for the April-June quarter on a quarter-on-quarter basis and continued 
to do so for the July-September quarter relative to the previous quarter. 
 
2. Outlook 
I  will  now  look  at  the  outlook  for  Japan's  economy  during  the  projection  period,  which 
covers from fiscal 2018 through fiscal 2020. The economy is likely to continue its moderate 
expansion. 
2 
In fiscal 2018, Japan's economy is likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential 
growth  rate,  which is  estimated  to  be in  the  range  of  0.5-1.0  percent,  mainly  against  the 
background of highly accommodative financial conditions and the underpinnings through 
government  spending,  with  overseas  economies  continuing  to  grow  firmly  on  the  whole. 
From fiscal 2019 through fiscal 2020, the economy is expected to continue on an expanding 
trend,  partly  supported  by  external  demand,  although  the  growth  pace  is  projected  to 
decelerate due to a cyclical slowdown in business fixed investment and the effects of the 
scheduled  consumption  tax  hike  in  October  2019.  In  terms  of  the  median  of  the  Policy 
Board members' forecasts in the October 2018 Outlook Report, the real GDP growth rate is 
1.4 percent for fiscal 2018, and 0.8 percent each for fiscal 2019 and 2020. 
 
I also hold the view that the Bank's baseline scenario has been maintained, in which Japan's 
economy is likely to continue its moderate expansion. As the reason for this, I would like to 
highlight two positive factors for the economic outlook. 
 
The first is the strength in business fixed investment, which I mentioned earlier. In addition 
to the high growth in the investment amount itself, I am reassured by the fact that firms in a 
wide  range  of  industries  have  been  planning  a  variety  of  investments,  such  as  (1)  that 
intended  for  domestic  capacity  expansion,  (2)  that  in  research  and  development,  (3)  that 
aiming at improving efficiency and saving labor, and (4) that aiming at enhancing business 
continuity arrangements in preparation for times of disaster or other emergency. 
 
The second positive factor is that, fortunately, the effects of this summer's natural disasters 
on Japan's economic activity are likely to be only temporary. According to information we 
obtained from, for example, interviews with firms conducted by the Bank's branches, many 
of  the  firms  for  which  production  and  distribution  were  undermined  already  have 
accelerated  their  production  to  offset  the  impact  of  the  disasters.  Moreover,  public 
investment  toward  restoration  and  rebuilding  is  projected  to  take  hold  going  forward. 
Although the extent to which the disasters affect inbound demand was a matter of concern 
at  first,  such  demand  has  been  showing  faster  recovery  than  expected,  partly  reflecting 
successful  results  of  the  government's  and  the  private  sector's  provision  of  relevant 
3 
information to the public. I believe that efforts that take advantage of lessons learned in the 
past have been playing a role in post-disaster restoration and rebuilding this time as well. 
 
3. Uncertainties regarding economic activity 
Meanwhile, there are various uncertainties regarding the baseline scenario of the outlook for 
Japan's economic activity. On this point, risks recently appear to be tilted to the downside, 
particularly regarding developments in overseas economies. 
 
Specifically,  risks  to  overseas  economic  developments  include  the  following:  the  U.S. 
macroeconomic policies and their impact on global financial markets; the consequences of 
protectionist moves and their effects; developments in emerging and commodity-exporting 
economies  including  the  effects  of  the  two  aforementioned  factors;  negotiations  on  the 
United Kingdom's exit from the European Union (EU) and their effects; the fiscal problem 
in Italy; and geopolitical risks. 
 
Of these risks, I remain especially concerned about protectionist moves; in particular, the 
trade  friction  between  the  United  States  and  China.  In  fact,  the  deterioration  in  Chinese 
firms'  sentiment  toward  business  conditions,  particularly  those  related  to  exports  and 
imports,  has  been  distinct.  Although  no  significant  changes  have  been  evidenced,  for 
example, by Chinese statistics on exports and imports, some have pointed out the possibility 
that China's trade activity has been buoyed temporarily by the front-loading of exports to 
the United States prior to a looming rise in tariffs. 
 
Thus far, the effects of the U.S.-China trade friction on Japan's economy have been limited. 
There is an argument, however, that if it takes time to ease this tension, this may result in a 
direct negative impact on Japan's economy through trade activity, and may adversely affect 
the  economy  to  a  greater  extent  through  such  channels  as  the  deterioration  in  business 
sentiment  and  the  destabilization  of  global  financial  markets.  The  IMF  and  other 
international organizations have released similar results in their simulation analyses on the 
effects of the U.S.-China trade friction on the global economy. According to these analyses, 
the extent to which this trade friction directly impacts the economy through trade activity is 
likely  to  be  limited,  but  the  effects  of  this  issue  would  be  larger  when  involving  such 
4 
channels  as  the  deterioration  in  business  sentiment  and  the  destabilization  of  global 
financial  markets.  I  believe  that  we  should  not  be  inclined  toward  extremely  pessimistic 
views in this regard, mainly because an agreement has been reached in the renegotiation of 
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and there has been ongoing dialogue 
between the United States and China toward easing the tension. However, I will continue to 
closely  monitor  the  effects  of  protectionist  moves  on  economic  activity  overseas  and  in 
Japan. 
 
C. Price Developments 
Next, I will turn to price developments in Japan. 
 
The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh 
food  slowed  temporarily  in  early  spring  2018,  but  it  has  been  accelerating  again  since 
summer, having risen to around 1 percent recently. Nevertheless, the year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI excluding energy in addition to fresh food has been at around 0.5 percent 
of late, and the underlying trend in prices in Japan has continued to show relatively weak 
developments compared to the economic expansion and the labor market tightening. 
 
This  is  likely  to  be  attributable  to  two  main  factors.  The  first  is  the  deeply  entrenched 
mindset and behavior based on the assumption that wages and prices will not increase easily. 
For this reason, firms' wage- and price-setting stance, as well as households' views toward 
price  rises,  have  remained  cautious,  and  there  has  not  yet  been  a  clear  change  in  this 
situation.  Behind  such  entrenched  mindset  and  behavior  lie  Japan's  fairly  recent  15-year 
experience of low growth and a mild but persistent decline in prices. In this sense, this first 
factor  can  be  regarded  as  people's  price  perception  inherent  in  Japan,  or  a  kind  of  social 
norm in the country. 
 
The second factor behind the relatively weak price developments is changes on the supply 
side of the economy, including active labor-saving investment and intensifying competition 
among firms, which have been brought about by the progress in digital technology, as well 
as an increase in labor participation by women and seniors. For example, it has been pointed 
out  that  retailers  such  as  supermarkets  maintaining  their  cautious  price-setting  stance  is 
5 
partly  due  to  the  expansion  of  online  shopping.  Unlike  the  first  factor,  such  intensifying 
competition brought about by technological progress can be described as a structural change 
observed globally, rather than only in Japan. 
 
As I have explained, Japan has continued to see a situation where the underlying trend in 
inflation  does  not  rise  easily.  Nonetheless,  with  the  output  gap  remaining  positive  and 
operating firmly as a driver for a rise in inflation, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI 
is likely to increase gradually toward the price stability target of 2 percent. In terms of the 
median of the Policy Board members' forecasts in the October 2018 Outlook Report, the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is 0.9 percent for fiscal 
2018 and -- on a basis excluding the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike -- 1.4 
percent and 1.5 percent for fiscal 2019 and 2020, respectively. 
 
II. The Bank's Monetary Policy 
A. The Basic Thinking behind the Bank's Policy 
1. Continuing powerful monetary easing 
Thus far, I have talked about Japan's economic activity and prices. Next, I will explain the 
Bank's monetary policy. 
 
In  order  to  overcome  prolonged  deflation,  the  Bank  introduced  in  April  2013  an 
unprecedented  and  highly  accommodative  monetary  policy,  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary  easing  (QQE).  Since  then,  the  Bank  has  supported  firms'  and  households' 
economic  activity  by  maintaining  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and 
contributed to an improvement in the output gap. At present, Japan's economy has improved 
significantly, and in terms of prices, it is no longer in deflation, in the sense of a sustained 
decline in prices. 
 
As  I  touched  on  earlier,  the  underlying  trend  in  prices  in  Japan  has  continued  to  show 
relatively  weak  developments  compared  to  the  economic  expansion.  Nevertheless,  the 
mechanism  whereby  an  improvement  in  the  output  gap  leads  to  a  rise  in  inflation  has 
continued  to  operate  and  the  momentum  toward  2  percent  inflation  has  not  been  lost. 
Therefore,  I  consider 
the  current  highly 
to  persistently  maintain 
it  appropriate 
6 
framework  consists  of 
accommodative financial conditions so as to keep the output gap within positive territory 
for  as  long  as  possible,  thereby  sustaining  the  positive  momentum  I  just  mentioned. 
Specifically, I believe that it is necessary that the Bank persistently continue with powerful 
monetary  easing  under  the  framework  of  QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control,  introduced  in 
September 2016. 
 
This 
two  components:  yield  curve  control  and  an 
inflation-overshooting commitment. Yield curve control is a policy under which the Bank 
aims  to  keep  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates  stably  at  low  levels.  Namely,  in  the 
guideline for market operations, the Bank sets the short-term policy interest rate at minus 
0.1  percent  and  the  target  level  of  10-year  Japanese  government  bond  (JGB)  yields  at 
around  0  percent,  and  conducts  JGB  purchases  so  as  to  achieve  this  target  level.  The 
inflation-overshooting  commitment  is  a  policy  under  which  the  Bank  commits  itself  to 
continuing  to  expand  the  monetary  base  --  the  total  amount  of  money  the  Bank  directly 
supplies  to  the  economy  --  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  observed  CPI 
exceeds 2 percent and stays above that level in a stable manner. Through this commitment, 
the Bank aims at increasing people's confidence in the achievement of the 2 percent price 
stability target. 
 
2. Policy effects and side effects 
While monetary easing stimulates the economy, keeping interest rates low across the entire 
yield curve for a prolonged period could exert adverse effects on the functioning of the JGB 
market  and  profits  of  financial  institutions.  Therefore,  the  Bank  deems  it  necessary  to 
proceed  with  policy  conduct  while  examining  policy  effects  and  the  possible  side  effects 
from every angle, as well as carefully assessing their costs and benefits to the economy. 
 
Based on this thinking, the Bank has pursued strong monetary easing by taking into account 
the situation at the time. Moreover, at the MPM held on July 30 and 31, 2018, it decided to 
further strengthen the framework of QQE with Yield Curve Control: the Bank introduced 
forward guidance for policy rates and decided to conduct market operations as well as asset 
purchases  in a more  flexible manner.  As  for  the long-term  interest  rate,  for example,  the 
Bank made clear that, while it would maintain the target level of "around zero percent," the 
7 
observed  yields might move upward and downward to some extent mainly depending on 
developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices.  As  for  exchange-traded  fund  (ETF) 
purchases,  it  was  announced  that  the  Bank  might  increase  or  decrease  the  amount  of 
purchases depending on market conditions, while maintaining the annual target of increase 
at  about  6  trillion  yen.  I  believe  that  conducting  these  flexible  measures  will  lead  to 
maintaining market functioning. 
 
The Bank intends to continue paying careful attention to the risks considered most relevant 
to the conduct of monetary policy. With a view to achieving the price stability target, it will 
conduct  monetary  policy  in  an  appropriate  manner,  taking  account  of  developments  in 
economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions. 
 
B. Addressing Changes in the Economic Structure 
So far, I have explained the Bank's monetary policy measures. In what follows, I would like 
to talk about the points I keep in mind regarding the basic thinking behind monetary policy. 
 
At each MPM, the Bank discusses the current situation of and outlook for developments in 
economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions, and decides on the conduct of 
monetary policy that is considered most appropriate for achieving the price stability target. 
In such policy conduct, I consider it important to make a comprehensive assessment, giving 
due consideration to various changes in the environment surrounding Japan's economy, such 
as digital innovation. 
 
Digital  innovation  in  recent  years  has  dramatically  increased  the  quality  and  quantity  of 
information people can obtain in their daily lives. Although it has been only about a decade 
since smartphones became prevalent among the public, they have disseminated explosively 
worldwide. In Japan, more than 60 percent of Japanese people own them today. Men and 
women of all ages carry in their pockets devices that are equivalent to the supercomputers 
of the past, and can access worldwide information instantly. People's lifestyles are changing 
significantly with smartphones: they enjoy listening to music and watching videos through 
digital  distribution;  do  shopping  and  make  travel  reservations;  look  up  information  more 
quickly  using  their  devices'  search  function;  and  spend  leisure  time  communicating  with 
8 
friends  through  social  media  and  other  digital  tools.  And  it  seems  that  such  changes  are 
becoming more rapid. 
 
Besides  lifestyles,  structural  changes  have  been  taking  place  in  various  aspects.  In  this 
regard, let me mention the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Jackson Hole Economic 
Policy  Symposium  held  annually  in  August --  which  may  not  be  well  known  among  the 
public but draws significant attention of central bankers, academics, and economists. At this 
year's  symposium  entitled  "Changing  Market  Structure  and  Implications  for  Monetary 
Policy," prominent academics presented interesting papers on the theme of recent shifts in 
the market structure.1  The topics included increasing differences between firms, the rising 
importance  of  intangible  assets,  and  intensifying  competition  in  the  banking  industry.  Of 
these, I would like to touch on the paper on intangibles.2  This posits that, in recent years, 
intangible  assets  --  including  software,  intellectual  property,  and  brand  --  account  for  an 
increasingly  large  share  of  total  capital  compared  to  traditional  physical  assets  such  as 
equipment. The paper then points out that, in the existing data, which do not sufficiently 
cover the increase in intangible assets, the amount of investment appears to be smaller than 
the theoretically optimal level. I will not go into more detail, but the paper also refers to the 
possibility  that  such  an  increase  in  intangible  assets  may  weaken  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy.   
 
A  similar  point  of  view  has  been  presented  from  the  business  sector.  Mr.  Bill  Gates,  a 
well-known  co-founder  of  Microsoft  Corporation,  claims  that,  given  the  ever-increasing 
importance  of  software  and  data  in  economic  activity,  policy  authorities  in  each  country 
should debate more actively the important question of the best way to stimulate economic 
activity.3 
 
                                                   
1  These papers are available at the following: 
https://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/symposiums/escp-2018. 
2  Nicolas Crouzet and Janice Eberly, "Understanding Weak Capital Investment: the Role of Market 
Concentration and Intangibles," paper prepared for the Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, 
August 2018. 
3  See https://www.gatesnotes.com/Books/Capitalism-Without-Capital. 
9 
I think that it is by no means a coincidence that the same issue was raised within academia 
and the business sector around the same time. This is probably evidence of how significant 
these changes are and that they are rapidly occurring worldwide. Intangible assets literally 
are  difficult  to  measure.  However,  taking  just  one  example  --  namely,  the  importance  of 
these assets being discussed both within academia and the business sector -- reveals that it is 
becoming  hard  to  assess  firms'  investment  activities  and  the  effects  of  monetary  policy 
without considering the impact of these assets. Therefore, I believe that it is necessary to 
adequately address these changes in the economic structure. 
 
The actual economy that central banks face is very complex and changing dynamically. It is 
of  course  very  important  to  learn  economic  theories  in  textbooks  and  analyze  past 
experiences.  However,  when  authorities  and  economic  entities  make  decisions,  it  is  my 
view that they should pay due attention to various factors, such as these structural changes 
that may not necessarily be evident from economic models, and continue to examine what 
needs to be done at the time. 
10 
