 Alan Greenspan: Global finance - is it slowing?  
Remarks  by  Mr  Alan  Greenspan,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System,  at  the  Bank  of  France  International  Symposium  on  Monetary  Policy,  Economic  Cycle,  and 
Financial Dynamics, Paris, France, (via satellite), 7 March 2003.  
 For at least the past twenty years, the process of financial globalization has been rapidly advancing. 
The  development  of  new  financial  products,  notably  a  wide  variety  of  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
derivatives, and the removal of many barriers to international capital mobility have tightened linkages 
among global financial markets. As a result, capital has flowed more freely across national borders in 
search of the highest risk-adjusted rates of return. 
At  some  point,  globalization  undoubtedly  will  reach  maturity.  Financial  innovation  will  slow  as  we 
approach a world in which financial markets are complete in the sense that all financial risks can be 
efficiently  transferred  to  those  most  willing  to  bear  them.  Equivalently,  as  institutional  and  legal 
impediments to cross-border flows are eliminated, the bias  in  the allocation  of savings toward local 
investments will be reduced to its minimum, and the opportunity for arbitrage across national markets 
will disappear. 
In my lecture today, I  will consider  whether there are signs that globalization is nearing maturity. In 
particular, has the pace of financial innovation begun to slow? Do the patterns of capital flows suggest 
that  global  financial  markets  are  approaching  full  integration?  And,  most  important,  what  do  the 
answers  to  these  questions  imply  regarding  the  potential  for  future  contributions  of  globalization  to 
economic growth and financial stability? 
Has the Pace of Financial Innovation Begun to Slow? 
Although  the  pace  of  innovation  cannot  be  measured  with  precision,  important  new  instruments 
continue to emerge. Credit derivatives arose only in the early to mid-1990s. Still more recent has been 
the marriage of derivatives and securitization techniques in the form of synthetic collateralized debt 
obligations (CDOs). These instruments have broadened the range of investors willing to provide credit 
protection  by  pooling  and  unbundling  credit  risk  through  the  creation  of  securities  that  best  fit  their 
preferences for risk and return. The combination of derivatives and securitization techniques is being 
applied to a growing range of underlying assets. 
Additionally,  the  way  that  OTC  derivatives  are  traded  and  settled  clearly  could  be  significantly 
improved.  Despite,  or  perhaps  because  of,  the  rapid  pace  of  product  development,  the  derivatives 
industry still executes trades predominantly by telephone and confirms them by fax. Systems for the 
electronic  execution  and  confirmation  of  trades  require  a  degree  of  standardization  and  a  large 
measure  of  cooperation  that  are  not  required  for  developing  new  instruments.  Still,  the  derivatives 
industry has a long history of cooperating to standardize documentation, and it is disappointing that so 
little  progress  has  been  made  in  adopting  efficient  and  reliable  means  of  executing  and  confirming 
trades. 
We must also consider how broadly the recent innovations have been adopted. Of course, the growth 
of OTC derivatives over the past twenty years has been spectacular and shows no obvious signs of 
abating.  The  latest  estimate  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  of  the  worldwide  notional 
amount  of  OTC  derivatives  outstanding  reached  $128  trillion  in  June  2002,  a  figure  more  than 
25 percent larger than that recorded a year earlier. Such derivatives have become indispensable risk-
management tools for many of the largest corporations. Yet a recent study drawing on U.S. Securities 
and Exchange Commission filings indicated that, as of year-end 1997, only a little more than half of 
the  1,000  largest  U.S.  non-financial  corporations  used  OTC  or  exchange-traded  derivatives.1  More 
detailed, comprehensive and timely data are available for American banking organizations. Those data 
show that although the fifty largest U.S. banking organizations all used derivatives as of September 
                                                      
1  See  W.  Guay  and  S.P.  Kothari,  “How  Much  Do  Firms  Hedge  with  Derivatives?”  Journal  of  Financial  Economics, 
forthcoming. 
BIS Review 12/2003 
 1
 2002, only 5 percent of all U.S. banking firms used any type of derivative. In the case of OTC credit 
derivatives, which have proved to be particularly effective in risk management, a mere 0.2 percent of 
U.S. banking organizations have begun to use such tools. Even among the fifty largest, less than half 
use these instruments. Thus, judging from the data on the use of derivatives, the potential for financial 
innovation  to  have  a  broader  impact  and  thereby  to  continue  contributing  to  globalization  appears 
considerable. 
Evidence of Financial Globalization in Capital Flows 
Implicit  in  the  criterion  for  complete  globalization  that  opportunities  for  cross-border  arbitrage 
disappear is that global savings should flow irrespective of location to investment in projects with the 
highest risk-adjusted rate of return.2  
A half-century ago, Harry Markowitz showed mathematically that an investor can reduce the variance, 
and hence the riskiness, of his portfolio for a given expected return by diversifying into assets  with 
imperfectly  correlated  returns.3  Subsequent  research  showed  that  foreign  assets  are  excellent 
candidates for diversification.4  
Direct  barriers  to  capital  flows,  such  as  restrictions  on  foreign  purchases  of  domestic  assets  and 
limitations on the ability of domestic residents to invest abroad, have promoted home bias, although, 
as I will discuss shortly, many such direct obstacles in recent decades have been mitigated. Indirect 
barriers, such as high costs of foreign transactions, inadequate information on foreign investments and 
cultural and linguistic differences between foreign and domestic investors, are also seen as sustaining 
home bias. And finally, there are exchange rate and country risks. Wild swings in exchange rates can 
entirely erase earnings on foreign assets, even as those same assets yield a healthy return in local 
currencies. Concern over who will bear the exchange-rate risk or, alternatively, who will bear the costs 
of  hedging  that  risk  are  an  additional  factor  retarding  international  investment.  Along  with  foreign 
exchange risk, political risk helps to drive a wedge between foreign and domestic perceptions of the 
expected  risk-adjusted  return  to  an  asset.  The  consequence  of  such  dual  expectations  is  a  lower 
market clearing price for those assets and a lower level of foreign investment than would exist in the 
absence of such distortions. 
Aside from any direct or indirect barriers, people seem to prefer to invest in familiar local businesses 
even though currency and country risks do not exist. The United States has no barriers to interstate 
investment, and the states share a common currency, culture, language, and legal system, yet studies 
have shown that individual investors and even professional money managers have a slight preference 
for investments in their own communities and states. Trust, so crucial an aspect of investing, is most 
likely to be fostered by the familiarity of local communities. 
Researchers  have  consistently  found  that,  in  general,  investors  direct  too  much  of  their  savings 
domestically.  Owing  to  risk  aversion,  they  tend,  to  their  own  detriment,  to  over-discount  foreign 
returns. Such suboptimal allocation of capital lowers living standards everywhere. 
In  their  seminal  paper  twenty  years  ago,  Feldstein  and  Horioka  pointed  out  that,  on  net,  nations’ 
savings  are  generally  invested  domestically.5  Their  research  implies  that  global  savings  are 
inefficiently distributed to investment, meaning that savers are bearing too much risk for the returns 
they achieve and that countries with high-potential investment projects are getting less financing than 
                                                      
2  Risk-neutral  investors,  if  they  exist,  will  price  an  asset  solely  on  the  basis  of  its  expected  return.  But  at  best,  very  few 
humans  are  risk  neutral.  In  general,  investors  require  an  asset’s  price  to  be  discounted  below  the  risk-neutral  price  as 
compensation for bearing risk. The amount of compensation required will vary both with the actual riskiness, or variance, of 
the  asset’s  returns  and  with  the  investor’s  degree  of  risk  aversion.  If  familiarity  reduces  an  investor’s  uncertainty  over 
expected  returns  to  an  asset,  one  would  expect  that  that  investor  would  discount  unfamiliar  assets  more  heavily  than 
familiar assets. In such a case, differences between foreign and domestic investors’ familiarity with an investment would 
lead to under-investment by foreigners relative to domestic investors, leaving an irreducible minimum bias toward investing 
locally. It is thus total risk, not neutral risk, that is arbitraged. 
3   H. Markowitz,”Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance, vol. 7, no. 1 (1952), pp. 77-91. 
4   See H.G. Grubel, “Internationally Diversified Portfolios,” American Economic Review, vol. 58 (1968), pp. 1299-314; or B.H. 
Solnik, “Why Not Diversify Internationally Rather than Domestically?” Financial Analyst Journal, vol. 30 (1974), pp. 91-135. 
5   M.  Feldstein  and  C.  Horioka,  “Domestic  Savings  and  International  Capital  Flows,”  Economic  Journal,  vol.  90  (1980), 
pp. 314-29. 
  they could productively employ.  A clear benefit of financial globalization  is that, to the extent that  it 
reduces  home  bias,  savings  will  be  better  directed  to  the  most  promising  investments  in  the  world, 
increasing global economic growth and prosperity. However, so long as risk aversion exists and trust 
is enhanced by local familiarity, we cannot expect that home bias will fully dissipate. 
Nevertheless,  is  globalization  at  least  reducing  home  bias  toward  its  minimum  level?  Survey  data 
collected in the United States suggest a large swing toward foreign investment. U.S. residents began 
to increase the share of foreign assets in their portfolios from less than 9 percent in the late 1970s to 
about 15 percent by the mid-1990s. Since then, the trend has leveled off. The increased allocation to 
foreign assets was broad based, encompassing portfolio flows into debt and equity securities as well 
as foreign direct investment. 
A  substantial  part  of  the  swing  to  holdings  of  foreign  assets  by  U.S.  residents  coincided  with  a 
significant  liberalization  of  capital  accounts  in  both  developed  and  emerging-market  economies.  In 
Western  Europe,  as  goods  markets  became  increasingly  integrated,  capital  accounts  followed  suit. 
Starting in the 1980s, controls on foreign exchange and on inbound and outbound capital flows were 
relaxed.  In  Japan,  the  most-restrictive  capital  controls  were  relaxed  in  the  early  1980s,  but  major 
liberalization came in the mid-1990s with the “Big Bang” financial reform measures. Similarly, many 
emerging-market  economies  removed  or  weakened  currency  and  capital  account  controls  in  the 
1990s.  One  cross-country  study  finds  that,  from  1983  to  1998,  capital  account  openness  improved 
markedly.6 With increased experience, U.S. investors doubtless improved their familiarity with foreign 
investment opportunities, and home bias, accordingly, declined. 
Data on financial flows into the United States indicate that foreign purchases of U.S. securities and 
foreign direct investment in the United States began to pick up in the early 1990s, and it has surged in 
the  past  four  years.  A  similar  pattern  is  apparent  in  the  accumulated  foreign  holdings  of  securities 
issued by U.S. residents. As late as 1998, foreign residents owned just 6 percent of U.S. equities, but 
by  2001  that  figure  had  risen  to  almost  15  percent.  Reliable  data  on  capital  flows  and  securities 
holdings outside the United States are scarce, but what data we can muster tell a similar story. 
Although international diversification appears to have increased over the past two decades, it remains 
puzzling that, as I mentioned previously, shares of foreign assets in U.S. residents’ portfolios began to 
plateau in the mid-1990s at levels still well below full diversification. This outcome might indicate either 
that substantial indirect barriers to capital flows still exist or that an irreducible home bias among U.S. 
investors is inhibiting geographic diversification. 
Formidable indirect institutional barriers to lowering home bias beyond those to which I alluded earlier 
obviously do remain. Legal restrictions on foreign ownership of domestic assets or limits on the flow of 
domestic funds abroad can be significant. Informal disclosure practices that favor local investors may 
lead to information asymmetries - that is, an advantage to domestic residents in acquiring information 
about prospective investments - that discourage foreign investment in a country. These asymmetries 
may be exacerbated by differences in corporate governance and local norms of fairness that diverge 
from foreign standards, undercutting trust. This unfamiliarity fosters risk aversion and elevates home 
bias. 
Recent studies suggest that differing disclosure and corporate governance standards preserve home 
bias. Researchers have shown that,  in most countries, holding a controlling interest in a firm  yields 
significant benefits that do not accrue to minority shareholders, and that a substantial portion of home 
bias in those countries can be attributed to local holdings of closely held firms.7 Additionally, staff at 
the  Federal  Reserve  Board  and  International  Monetary  Fund  have  shown  that,  for  firms  from 
emerging-market  economies  that  meet  U.S.  standards  for  disclosure  and  protection  of  minority 
shareholder  rights,  U.S.  residents  hold  the  theoretically  predicted  proportion  of  company  shares  in 
their portfolios.8 Thus, it appears that an improvement in global reporting and corporate governance 
standards could significantly reduce global home bias. 
                                                      
6   J. Miniane, “A New Set of Measures on Capital Account Restrictions,” mimeo, Johns Hopkins University, November 2000. 
7   See A. Dyck and L. Zingales, “Why are private benefits of control so large in certain countries and what effect does this 
have on their financial development?” mimeo, University of Chicago, 2001; or T. Nenova, “The value of corporate votes and 
control benefits: cross-country analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming; and M. Dahlquist et alia, “Corporate 
governance and the home bias,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming. 
8  H. J. Edison and F. E. Warnock, “U.S. investors’ emerging market equity portfolios: a security-level analysis,” prepared for 
the IMF Global Linkages Conference, January 2003. 
  So do derivatives markets that help to narrow the wedge between the perceived risk-adjusted returns 
of foreign and domestic residents on any particular investment. Foreign exchange forward contracts 
and swaps have helped reduce the overall risk of securities denominated in foreign currencies or to 
transfer the risks to agents with either a greater appetite for risk or a longer investment horizon over 
which  to  smooth  losses.  Even  the  imposition  of  capital  controls,  foreign  exchange  restrictions,  or 
devaluations of fixed currencies can now be at least partially hedged through nondeliverable forward 
contracts  that  settle  in  dollars  for  the  change  in  value  of  an  underlying  currency  over  some 
pre-determined period. Credit default swaps now allow agents to hedge or exchange even sovereign 
risk.  Argentina’s  recent  default  provided  a  powerful  test  of  these  new  derivatives  and  proved  their 
worth, perhaps even helping to limit contagion. 
The further development of derivatives markets, particularly in smaller economies where idiosyncratic 
risk  may  be  more  difficult  to  hedge,  will  likely  facilitate  greater  cross-border  flows  and  a  more 
productive distribution of global savings. The coincident development of local derivatives markets may 
facilitate the development of local currency bond markets in small or emerging-market economies by 
giving foreign and domestic investors more tools with  which  to hedge their exposure to the country 
risk. 
What Are the Real Economic Implications of Financial Globalization? 
It should  be  apparent  that the  process of financial globalization has come a long  way  but  is as  yet 
incomplete. Further development should lead to the enrichment and growth of developing economies 
as global savings are efficiently directed to capital accumulation in those countries where the marginal 
product of capital is highest. 
Another  possible  result  of  the  process  of  financial  globalization  is  increasingly  large  international 
payment imbalances as countries exporting capital run current account surpluses and those receiving 
capital run current account deficits. However, such developments should not necessarily be taken as a 
sign of a systemic problem. They can, in fact, be a sign that the global economy is becoming more 
efficient at directing capital to assets with the highest risk-adjusted rate of return. Along the way, the 
economies that liberalize first and to the greatest extent, and credibly commit to respect the property 
rights of foreigners, may receive the greater portion  of free-flowing capital  and  thus potentially both 
greater net inflows and larger current account deficits. 
This process may have contributed to the recent expansion of the U.S. current account deficit. That 
expansion coincided with a steady appreciation of the U.S. dollar in the late 1990s, suggesting that net 
demand for U.S.  assets  was an  important factor driving the significant  widening of the U.S. current 
account  deficit.  As  noted  earlier,  U.S.  savers’  appetite  for  increasing  the  share  of  their  portfolio 
devoted to foreign assets began to wane, and at roughly the same time capital account liberalization in 
other countries freed a large pool of savings to be invested internationally. These newly freed savings 
flowed  disproportionately  to  the  United  States,  where  as  a  consequence  one  must  assume 
risk-adjusted returns were perceived to be highest. 
Apparently,  rapid  U.S.  productivity  gains  not  seen  elsewhere  raised  expectations  for  the  return  to 
capital on U.S. assets. Moreover, the Asian crisis in 1997 combined with the Russian default a year 
later  to  reverse  global  investors’  enthusiasm  for  investments  in  developing  economies.  The  crises 
reminded foreign investors of the indirect barriers that continue to exist, especially in the developing 
world:  a  lack  of  adequate  corporate  disclosure  and  governance;  underdeveloped,  and  often 
capricious,  legal  structures  for  contract  dissolution  and  bankruptcy;  and  ex  post  government 
intervention in favor of domestic residents over foreign investors. Capital flows to the emerging-market 
economies,  which  had  been  at  record  levels  throughout  the  early  1990s,  dried  up  as  a  result.  In 
contrast, the deep and broad financial markets of the United States and a well-developed legal system 
with a long history of respect for private property drew record financial flows into the United States. 
The  lesson  we  should  draw,  however,  is  not  that  continued  financial  globalization  will  draw  ever 
greater amounts of capital to the United States or even to the industrial world more generally. There 
are limits to the accumulation of net claims against an economy that persistent current account deficits 
imply.  The  cost  of  servicing  such  claims  adds  to  the  current  account  deficit  and,  under  certain 
circumstances, can be destabilizing. 
The gross size  of global quarterly  or annual surpluses and matching deficits should rise  as indirect 
barriers  to  cross-border  investment  are  eliminated  and  home  bias  is  reduced.  However,  portfolio 
adjustments  will  presumably  continuously  ameliorate  such  imbalances.  As  international  accounting 
  and reporting standards become better, information asymmetries that currently exist between foreign 
and  domestic  investors  will  diminish.  Adequate  disclosure  will,  one  hopes,  accompany  the 
development of institutions that will reduce corruption, and improve corporate governance, respect for 
private  property  and  the  rights  of  minority  shareholders.  Together  with  the  growth  of  deeper  and 
broader markets for derivatives, these developments should lower the risk of cross-border investment, 
making a wider array of the world’s assets more attractive to international investors.  
Despite much progress, the process of global financial integration is far from complete. Though most 
direct barriers to international capital flows have been eliminated, numerous indirect barriers remain in 
place. While a dazzling array of financial innovations has sprouted in recent decades, the inability of 
market  participants  to  hedge,  trade,  or  share  certain  risks,  especially  those  related  to  cross-border 
investment, implies that financial markets still need further innovation and deepening. Such barriers to 
capital flows preserve home bias and impede the efficient distribution of global  savings to the most 
productive investments. 
We must  remember  that  as financial  globalization  matures  it  will  have  consequences  to  economies 
that we cannot ignore. Global capital flows will increase in size and will switch directions more easily. 
As a result, temporary imbalances will naturally occur from time to time. To counter these, we need to 
consider various multilateral policy initiatives, from international accounting standards to international 
capital requirements for banks, from a “New Financial Architecture” to crisis prevention and resolution 
mechanisms. Also, market participants will need to enhance their ability to manage vast quantities of 
collateral  that  are  integral  to  globalized  modern  finance.  Our  goals  should  include  not  only  global 
financial stability,  but also  the promotion of free flowing capital  directed to its  most productive uses 
throughout the world. That goal will bring about greater financial stability and a more prosperous future 
for all who choose to participate in the global economy. 
 