 Toshiro Muto: Structural changes in the world economy and challenges facing 
Japan(cid:146)s economy 
Speech by Mr Toshiro Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the JCIF International Finance 
Seminar, Tokyo, 17 June 2003. 
I. 
Structural changes in the world economy 
 Economic globalization and innovation in information technology (IT) 
A. 
Looking back, after the turn of the century, at the second half of the 20th century, we can assess it as 
an  era  marked  by  the  lengthy  Cold  War  after  World  War  II.  Before  the  close  of  the  20th  century, 
however,  the  Cold  War  came  to  a  dramatic  end,  with  the  collapse  of  the  Berlin  Wall  in  November 
1989.  Behind  the  change  in  the  Cold  War  structure,  the  worldwide  spread  of  the  market  economy 
worked as a driving force, as seen in the expansion of free markets in the former Soviet Union and 
Eastern Europe. 
The  end  of  the  Cold  War  further  accelerated  globalization  of  the  market  economy  in  the  1990s. 
Eastern Europe joined the world trade structure and has been playing an increasingly important role 
as a supply base especially in the euro area. In Asia, China, which had already introduced the market 
mechanism before the end of the Cold War, has become a giant supply base for developed countries 
including Japan. Exports from China currently account for approximately 15 percent of world exports 
after adjusting for purchasing power parity, a rise from around 5 percent in 1990. In the United States, 
imports from Latin America currently account for approximately 16 percent, an increase from around 
11  percent  in  1990.  These  facts  vividly  illustrate  the  trend  of  economic  globalization  driven  by  the 
chemistry of market mechanisms and changes in the international political system. 
Industrialization of emerging economies and development of IT-related industries 
B. 
Against  the  background  of  the  economic  globalization  in  the  1990s,  emerging  economies  have 
industrialized rapidly and elevated their importance in the world economy. In the meantime, innovation 
in IT has also contributed to economic globalization, nurturing the IT-related industries that came to 
have  great  influence  on  the  world  economy.  Since  the  IT-related  industries  have  a  multinational 
structure  involving  emerging  economies,  the  growth  in  IT-related  industries  inevitably  strengthened 
global economic linkages. 
Although these changes will help facilitate new economic structures in the long run, they sometimes 
engender negative aspects. The global inventory adjustments in IT-related areas that began around 
the end of 2000 are still fresh in our memories. In these developments, not only the United States but 
also Europe and Japan, as well as East Asian economies, experienced simultaneous stagnation due 
mainly to the decrease in exports, production, and investment in IT-related areas. 
Globalization of financial markets 
C. 
The  expansion  of  the  market  economy  and  technological  innovation  have  encouraged  the 
development  of  financial  markets  in  emerging  economies,  as  well  as  realized  new  financial 
instruments  such  as  derivatives.  They  have  consequently  strengthened  global  linkages  of  capital 
markets. 
The globalization of financial markets has facilitated the rapid industrialization of emerging economies 
by  promoting  capital  inflows.  On  the  other  hand,  financial  crises  in  certain  countries  or  areas  could 
spread more easily than before to other countries, as seen in the Asian currency crisis in 1997, the 
Russian financial crisis, and the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management in 1998. Central banks in 
many countries, including the Bank of Japan, have cooperated  in various forms of research on this 
issue recently. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 1
 Worldwide disinflationary trend 
D. 
Structural  changes  in  the  world  economy  also  affect  the  environment  for  prices.  A  worldwide 
disinflationary trend had become conspicuous in the 1990s, reflecting an increase in supply capacity 
worldwide  due  to  the  industrialization  of  emerging  economies,  technological  innovation,  and 
macroeconomic  policies  adopted  in  many  countries  to  restrain  inflation.  Inflation  rates  in  the 
G-7 countries averaged about 10 percent during the 1970s and about 5 percent during the 1980s. The 
simple average of the rates, however, declined to 2-3 percent after the start of the 1990s, and in the 
second half of the decade remained at 2-3 percent in the United States, United Kingdom, and Italy, 
and fell below 2 percent in the other G-7 countries. Japan has been experiencing gradual deflation, as 
consumer prices have ranged from -1 to zero percent year on year since the middle of 1998. 
In  Europe  and  the  United  States,  this  disinflationary  trend  has  brought  real  economic  benefits,  by 
securing a stable foundation for economic activity. The United States enjoyed a long-lasting economic 
expansion accompanied by price stability during the 1990s. The improvement in productivity reflecting 
technological  innovation  in  IT-related  industries  has  often  been  credited  with  this,  particularly  in 
discussion of the so-called (cid:147)new economy.(cid:148) In Europe, European Monetary Union was achieved since 
inflation  rates  in  the  countries  joining  the  union  declined  to  levels  that  satisfied  the  convergence 
criteria. 
On the other hand, central banks in many countries are becoming increasingly concerned with the risk 
of  price  declines,  which  have  not  occurred  in  the  decades  since  the  Great  Depression.  The 
background  to  this  is  that  inflation  rates,  particularly  those  of  major  industrialized  countries,  have 
trended downward to nearly  zero percent  amid the disinflationary trend  worldwide. Although it does 
have  a  positive  effect  on  real  economy,  it  has  brought  about  the  risk  that  inflation  rates  could  turn 
negative if downward pressure on prices increases from either the demand or supply side. 
The  Federal  Reserve  lowered  the  federal  funds  rate  gradually  from  2001  in  response  to  economic 
developments, and it has accordingly declined from 6.5 percent at the start of 2001 to 1.25 percent. 
The European Central Bank (ECB) also gradually reduced the main refinancing operations rate from 
4.75 percent at the beginning of 2001 to 2.5 percent, followed by a further reduction to 2.0 percent on 
June  5,  2003.  In  line  with  such  monetary  policy  developments,  central  banks  overseas  sometimes 
refer to the risks of price declines in their statements. The Federal Reserve, for example, commented 
that  (cid:147)the  probability  of  an  unwelcome  substantial  fall  in  inflation,  though  minor,  exceeds  that  of  a 
pickup in inflation from its already low level(cid:148) in its public statement after the meeting of the Federal 
Open Market Committee on May 6, 2003. In addition, several central bank officials have commented 
on the manoeuvrability of monetary policy against the background of price declines. 
Conventional monetary easing calls for reducing short-term interest rates. However, there has been no 
definite answer yet, either theoretically or empirically, to the question of whether there remains scope 
for  further  stimulation  of  economic  activity  with  monetary  policy  measures  under  the  (cid:147)zero  lower 
bound(cid:148)  of  short-term  interest  rates.  For  this  reason,  central  banks  overseas  are  paying  greater 
attention  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  by  the  Bank  of  Japan,  which  has  taken  unprecedented 
quantitative easing measures since March 2001. 
II. 
Issues facing the Japanese economy 
The catch-up of emerging economies 
A. 
Bearing in mind the structural changes worldwide I have described, I would like to focus on the issues 
facing the Japanese economy. 
During  the  Cold  War  period,  Japan  achieved  remarkable  economic  growth,  driven  mainly  by  the 
enhanced competitiveness of the manufacturing sector, to the extent that Japan became known as the 
(cid:147)factory  of  the  world.(cid:148)  However,  many  of  the  Japanese  industries  that  brought  about  the  economic 
growth in the postwar era are now facing competition from their counterparts in emerging economies 
that are rapidly catching up. 
The share of trading partners in Japanese exports and imports has changed substantially. In the past, 
the United States took the overwhelming majority of Japanese exports, and a fairly large proportion of 
imports were from oil producing countries. However, the share of imports from the Middle East, which 
was  nearly  30  percent  in  the  mid-1970s,  has  been  declining,  to  about  10  percent  recently.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  share  of  trade  (both  exports  and  imports)  with  East  Asian  economies,  which  was 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 around 25 percent in the mid-1980s, recently exceeded 40 percent. In particular, the share of imports 
from China  in total Japanese imports expanded to 18 percent in 2002 from 5 percent in 1990. The 
share  of  imports  from  China  has  overtaken  that  from  the  United  States,  making  China  the  largest 
importer for Japan. 
An  examination  of  imports  reveals  that  the  character  of  Japan(cid:146)s  trade  structure  -  importing  raw 
materials  for  manufacturing  and  exporting  products  -  has  changed.  For  instance,  the  share  of  raw 
materials in total imports from East Asian economies has declined to about 15 percent recently, from 
about  35  percent  in  1990.  In  the  meantime,  that  of  machinery  and  textile  goods  has  exceeded 
50 percent recently, compared with around 25 percent in 1990. The degree of penetration of imported 
products  in  the  domestic  market  illustrates  a  rise  in  the  value  added  to  imported  products.  In  the 
1990s, the growth in penetration of textile goods was conspicuous, but since 2000 it has leveled off at 
around  30  percent.  The  penetration  of  electrical  and  general  machinery  has  increased  to  nearly 
30 percent very recently, from 17-18 percent in 2000. 
These changes reflect progress in industrialization and the accumulation of technology in East Asian 
economies since 1990. They are also attributable to Japanese firms(cid:146) activities to transfer production 
sites overseas. At the same time, these changes make us consider what kinds of industries we should 
nurture and what types of economic value we can create as sources of Japan(cid:146)s future growth. 
The aging economy 
B. 
Japan is shifting from a growing economy to a mature one at an unprecedentedly fast pace. Since the 
second  half  of  the  1980s,  Japan(cid:146)s  birthrate  has  been  declining  significantly  and  the  aging  of  the 
population  pyramid  has  accelerated.  The  nation(cid:146)s  population  is  expected  to  decrease  from  2006. 
Given these circumstances, the Japanese socioeconomic system, including the employment system, 
social security, local budget and tax systems, needs to be drastically reconstructed from one based on 
a growing economy to one suited to a mature economy. 
The reforms of the system comprising the economy and society of a nation inevitably entail conflicts of 
interest,  and  it  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult  to  resolve  such  conflicts  through  the  benefits  from 
economic expansion. Thus, it is a very difficult challenge indeed for Japan to implement reconstruction 
of its socioeconomic system in order to catch up with changes in economic and social environments, 
while achieving a national consensus. 
Emergence and bursting of the bubble economy 
C. 
Given the various changes I have mentioned, from the second half of the 1980s through the 1990s it 
was necessary for Japan to embark on nurturing new industries that could be the leading industries in 
the  21st  century,  as  well  as  implementing  fundamental  changes  in  its  socioeconomic  system. 
However,  during  that  period  the  bubble  emerged  and  burst,  and  caused  serious  delay  in  such 
structural changes. 
Overheating of domestic demand and a sharp rise in asset prices due to the bubble allowed inefficient 
sectors to be preserved and permitted unprofitable investment businesses to expand. In the financial 
sector, a substantial rise in land prices caused an expansion of bank lending in a period when more 
emphasis should have been placed on financing through capital markets and securitization. 
Furthermore,  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  combined  with  characteristics  of  the  financial  system 
indigenous  to  Japan  -  a  high  proportion  of  bank  lending  -  caused  serious  problems  that  restrained 
economic activity for a long time, such as the problems of nonperforming loans (NPLs) and firms(cid:146) debt 
overhang. Efficient reallocation of resources through structural adjustments should have been realized 
as a result of risk-taking activities of various economic entities to explore business frontiers. However, 
the  financial  strength  of  banks  and  firms  and  hence  their  risk-taking  capacity  were  damaged 
significantly. Against this background, macroeconomic policies in the 1990s had to continuously deal 
with downward pressure on the economy stemming from the bursting of the bubble. 
Recent developments in the economy 
D. 
Now I would like to touch briefly on the recent developments in the economy. In the first half of 2002, 
Japan(cid:146)s economy recorded relatively high growth supported by an increase in exports that reflected 
global  inventory  restocking  in  IT-related  goods.  Since  the  second  half  of  2002,  however,  economic 
activity  in  Japan  has  been  basically  flat.  Despite  the  fact  that  corporate  profits  have  recovered 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 3
 reflecting the increase in exports and production, firms have not yet embarked on active investment 
due to uncertainty about the economic outlook. The employment and income situation of households 
remains  severe,  as  firms  have  continued  to  reduce  personnel  costs.  In  this  situation,  private 
consumption,  which constitutes a major part of aggregate  demand, remains flat, although it is fairly 
firm relative to the level of income. 
With  regard  to  the  outlook,  Japan(cid:146)s  exports  are  expected  to  start  increasing  at  a  moderate  pace, 
based  on  the  assumption  of  a  gradual  recovery  in  overseas  economies.  However,  the  pace  of  the 
recovery in Europe and the United States is likely to be moderate. In addition, it seems likely that the 
growth in East Asian economies, which has been fairly rapid so far, has slowed at least for the time 
being  due  to  the  impact  of  severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome  (SARS).  We  must  continue  careful 
monitoring  of  Japan(cid:146)s  economy,  taking  into  account  the  effects  from  the  developments  in  overseas 
economies and Japan(cid:146)s financial system. 
III. 
Monetary policy of the Bank of Japan 
Conduct of monetary policy 
A. 
In order to place the economy back on a sustainable growth path and overcome deflation as soon as 
possible, the Bank has been implementing extraordinary monetary easing measures, which far exceed 
the category of (cid:147)conventional(cid:148) monetary policy. 
In  March  2001,  the  Bank  implemented  the  (cid:147)quantitative  easing(cid:148)  framework  to  increase  further  its 
liquidity provision to the money market in a situation where short-term interest rates had declined to 
virtually  zero.  The  outstanding  balance  of  current  account  deposits  at  the  Bank  expanded  from 
4 trillion  yen  at  the  time  to  close  to  30  trillion  yen  at  present.  The  Bank  announced  that  it  would 
continue the framework of the quantitative easing until the consumer price index (CPI) records a year-
on-year increase of zero percent or more on a sustainable basis. The Bank also steadily increased its 
purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs),  and  is  currently  purchasing  a  little  less  than 
15 trillion  yen  worth  of  JGBs  annually,  which  is  roughly  equivalent  to  half  the  total  value  of  newly 
issued  government  bonds.  The  Bank  also  introduced  the  Lombard-type  lending  facility  whereby 
financial  institutions  can  borrow  funds,  within  the  eligible  collateral  pledged,  from  the  Bank  at  the 
official discount rate that is now 0.1 percent. The Bank has widened the range of eligible collateral to 
asset-backed securities (ABSs) and many other new financial assets. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  several  central  bank  officials  overseas  have  commented  recently  on 
conceivable options of monetary easing under the (cid:147)zero lower bound(cid:148) of short-term interest rates. As 
possible  measures  to  be  taken  solely  by  the  central  bank,  they  raised  the  increase  of  liquidity 
provision, the announcement to continue monetary easing into the future, the increase of the outright 
purchases  of  government  securities,  extending  the  central  bank(cid:146)s  discount  windows  to  commercial 
banks  with  low  interest  rates,  and  widening  the  range  of  eligible  collateral.  The  Bank  has  already 
implemented most of these unconventional measures in its quantitative easing framework. 
The effects of extraordinary easing measures by the Bank of Japan have been observed in financial 
markets. Even when there were various shocks due to problems in the domestic financial system, the 
terrorist attacks in the United States, and the military action against Iraq, a liquidity shortage did not 
materialize  in  the  money  market,  and  short-term  interest  rates  have  continued  to  be  virtually  zero, 
including longer-term rates such as those on term instruments. This situation is a marked contrast with 
that  in  1997-98  when  the  failure  of  a  few  large  financial  institutions  triggered  concerns  about  the 
availability of liquidity at Japanese banks, and as a result, the so-called (cid:147)Japan premium(cid:148) expanded 
and a sharp credit contraction occurred in corporate financing. 
The Bank(cid:146)s policy commitment - that it will continue the current framework of monetary easing until the 
CPI records a year-on-year increase of zero percent or more on a sustainable basis - leads market 
participants to believe that short-term interest rates  will continue to be  zero  at least until the actual 
inflation  rate  turns  positive.  As  a  result,  risk  premiums  reflecting  future  fluctuations  in  interest  rates 
have declined considerably,  and the decline  in interest rates  has spread to  even  longer-term rates. 
The yields on five-year JGBs are in the range of 0.1 and 0.2 percent, those on ten-year JGBs have 
fallen below 0.5 percent, and those on 30-year JGBs are around 1 percent. Thus, the government is 
able to raise funds at almost zero or an extremely low cost. The cost for the private sector of raising 
funds has also declined. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 However,  despite  drastic  monetary  easing  by  the  Bank,  economic  activity  and  price  developments 
have not been influenced much so far. This is due to various factors. First, there was originally very 
little room for interest rates to decline further. As a consequence of the Bank(cid:146)s large-scale monetary 
easing since the bursting of the bubble, the overnight call rate was already below 0.5 percent in 1995, 
and long-term interest rates were already at around 1.5 percent at the time of the introduction of the 
quantitative easing framework. In this situation, the effects of various additional easing measures have 
remained marginal, especially when the economy has been under substantial adjustment pressures. 
The concern of many central banks about the risks of a price decline is based on a reflection of such 
uncertainty  and  limitation  of  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  easing  under  the  (cid:147)zero  lower  bound(cid:148)  of 
short-term interest rates. 
The second factor, as I mentioned earlier, is that the risk-taking capability of private entities, such as 
commercial  banks  and  firms,  has  been  greatly  impaired.  The  transmission  mechanism  of monetary 
easing effects depends heavily on private  entities(cid:146) risk-taking activity. In a  normal situation, liquidity 
provision  by  a  central  bank  to  commercial  banks  encourages  more  lending  because  their  liquidity 
constraints  are  eased.  However,  at  present,  the  capital  constraints  arising  mainly  from  the  NPL 
problem, not liquidity constraints, bind commercial banks(cid:146) lending capacities. This is the major reason 
why  bank  lending  has  continued  to  decline  and  the  growth  in  the  money  stock  has  been  sluggish, 
although the monetary base has been expanding. 
Furthermore,  whether  the  portfolio  rebalancing  effect  -  that  is,  the  mechanism  whereby  a  central 
bank(cid:146)s increase of liquidity provision still increases financial institutions(cid:146) investment in risk assets even 
after  short-term  interest  rates  reach  the  zero  bound  -  occurs  also  depends  on  the  extent  to  which 
financial institutions actively take risks. So far, they have been reluctant to take risks, and have mostly 
invested  funds  provided  by  the  Bank  in  credit-risk-free  assets  such  as  cash,  excess  reserves,  and 
government securities. As I have mentioned, the Bank is struggling under many constraints, not only 
the (cid:147)zero lower bound(cid:148) on interest rates which is a fundamental problem in monetary easing, but also 
the  impaired  risk-taking  capability  of  the  private  sector,  and  malfunctioning  of  the  transmission 
mechanism of monetary easing. 
This  has  been  an  issue  not  only  in  monetary  policy  but  also  in  recent  macroeconomic  policy  as  a 
whole in Japan. Throughout the 1990s, I was in charge of executing fiscal policy. During the period, 
Japan has taken substantial measures both in monetary and fiscal fronts. However, given that fiscal 
policy is determined in the political situation at the time, and since the growth expectation has been 
declining and the private sector(cid:146)s risk-taking capability has been impaired, multiplier effects of public 
investment and tax cuts have also been constrained. As the central bank has been struggling with the 
problem  of  malfunctioning  of  the  transmission  mechanism,  the  fiscal  authorities  have  also  been 
struggling  with  the  problem  that  fiscal  expenditure  has  not  led  to  vigorous  spending  by  the  private 
sector. 
Issues regarding further policy measures 
B. 
There  are  various  debates  outside  the  Bank  about  further  policy  options,  and  the  Bank  is  always 
examining  a  wide  range  of  imaginable  options.  I  would  like  to  raise  some  points  that  I  think  are 
important in discussing future policy conduct. 
First of all, we must bear in mind that Japan(cid:146)s efforts to overcome deflation ultimately aim at realizing 
the sound and continuous prosperity of its economy. With a growing number of countries shifting to a 
market-led  economy  and  economic  globalization  advancing,  it  is  essential  to  make  full  use  of  the 
private  sector(cid:146)s  initiatives  and  market  mechanisms  as  well  as  maintain  favorable  relationships  with 
other economies for Japan to continue enjoying economic prosperity in the future. If Japan took policy 
measures that distorted market mechanisms in the medium to long term, caused inefficiencies in the 
economy,  or  greatly  impaired  relationships  overseas,  the  prospects  for  economic  prosperity  in  the 
21st century would be substantially narrowed. It is important that various policy options be consistent 
with the direction desired for the economy. 
Furthermore, in conducting economic policies, it is essential to maintain the capacities to respond to 
various shocks and uncertainties, which are often unpredictable because of imperfect knowledge, in 
order to secure economic stability. Once the confidence of the public and market participants in such 
capacities of economic policies is lost, this can cause serious instability in the economy and financial 
markets.  Past  experience  tells  us  that  public  confidence  in  policy  entities,  once  lost,  is  extremely 
difficult to restore in a short period of time. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 5
 As an independent central bank, the Bank should bear in mind its accountability to the public for its 
policy  measures.  There  have  been  the  arguments  outside  the  Bank  that  the  Bank  purchases  risky 
assets  that  central  banks normally  do  not  purchase.  In  this  respect,  we  must bear  in  mind  that  the 
central bank ultimately belongs to the people. If a central bank buys some assets, it virtually means 
that it uses the people(cid:146)s money to buy them. In the current situation where short-term interest rates 
have reached the zero bound and conventional monetary easing tools have been exhausted, the Bank 
must consider measures that go beyond the boundaries of traditional monetary policy and sometimes 
approach the realm of fiscal policy. However, it is vital for the Bank to evaluate policy options from the 
perspective of whether they are consistent with the Bank(cid:146)s accountability to the public and thus make 
a balanced judgment. This point becomes all the more serious as policy options could have greater 
influence on the distribution of income and risks in the private sector. 
Issues of inflation targeting 
C. 
I would like to briefly talk about issues of inflation targeting. Inflation targeting is a policy framework 
adopted  in  several  countries  in  which  a  state  of  price  stability,  the  goal  of  monetary  policy,  is 
expressed in terms of a desirable rate of inflation in numerical values. I think that the background of 
the argument regarding inflation targeting in Japan differs somewhat from the original thinking that I 
have described. The thinking that underlines the current argument advocating the adoption of inflation 
targeting in Japan seems to be as follows: real  interest rates,  which are derived by subtracting  the 
inflation expectation rate from nominal interest rates, might be reduced if the inflation expectation rate 
increased, and declaration of a numerical target might contribute even when there is virtually no room 
for further reduction in nominal interest rates. 
Whether inflation targeting brings about its intended benefit, that is, to enhance the transparency of 
monetary policy and to stabilize people(cid:146)s expectation, largely depends on the following: how credible 
is  the  target?  That  is  to  say,  to  what  extent  are  the  tools  and  mechanism  to  achieve  the  target 
assured? As of now at least, it is hard to say that we are sufficiently equipped, considering the several 
constraints surrounding the current conduct of monetary policy. 
Like  any  other  central  bank,  the  Bank  needs  to  examine  every  possible  measure  to  enhance  the 
transparency  of  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  Bank  fully  recognizes  the  fact  that  inflation 
targeting  could  be  an  important  policy  tool  for  the  purpose,  once  we  enter  the  stage  where 
manoeuvrability is restored to monetary policy and the transmission mechanism recovers its function. 
The Bank will continue to examine the issue in the future. Bearing the lack of such manoeuvrability 
and the malfunctioning of transmission mechanism at present, however, I think it is critically important 
and urgent to take practical steps to restore the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism through 
which monetary easing influences economic activity and prices. 
I would like to emphasize that it would be a complete misunderstanding of the Bank(cid:146)s policy intention 
to conclude that the Bank is not actively implementing monetary policy to overcome deflation, based 
solely on the fact that the Bank does not adopt inflation targeting at this juncture. The Bank is willing to 
bring the inflation rate back to above zero percent, that is, a slightly positive rate, by doing its utmost 
and to maintain it at around that level. 
Enhancing transmission mechanism of monetary easing 
D. 
Amid various constraints imposed on its policy as I have mentioned, the important policy task of the 
Bank  is  to  enhance  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  easing.  As  the  credit  intermediary 
function of banks is not working properly, one of the contributions of the central bank to enhance the 
transmission mechanism is to  encourage  the development of securitized financing tools  and capital 
markets  that  could  complement  and  substitute  for  bank  lending,  and  improve  the  financing 
environment for small firms. 
The relatively high share of bank lending, which is one of the features of Japan(cid:146)s financial structure, 
contributed to absorbing shocks from the downturn in economic activity within banks(cid:146) assets, and thus 
succeeded  in  diminishing  their  effects  on  the  economy  as  long  as  the  impacts  of  the  shocks  were 
limited. However, when significant shocks such as those accompanying asset price falls occurred, the 
concentration of the loss to the banking sector caused substantial damage to its capital base and risk-
taking  capability.  This,  in  turn,  amplified  the  effects  of  the  shocks  through  tightening  of  corporate 
financing conditions. 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 This problem could be partially resolved if alternative financial markets substituting for bank lending 
were developed to a significant degree. The development of such markets would not only contribute to 
smooth corporate financing, it would also work as a discipline on banks(cid:146) lending activities, for example, 
by encouraging banks to formulate lending rates which reflect credit risks more accurately. In addition, 
broadening the scope of economic entities that take credit risks attached to the corporate sector could 
enlarge the risk-taking capacity  of banks. Investors  would be able to realize  portfolios by  utilizing a 
broader range of instruments with various combinations of risks and returns. A new financing channel 
of this kind is imperative to cope  with  the financing  needs of the corporate sector, as the economy 
becomes mature. 
Based  on  this  thinking  I  have  described,  this  April  the  Bank  started  examining  the  policy  option  of 
temporary purchase of ABSs with underlying assets such as receivables and loans related to small to 
medium-sized  firms.  The  Bank  decided  the  purchasing  scheme  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  on 
June  11,  2003,  taking  into  account  various  comments  from  market  participants.  Although  it  is  an 
unconventional measure for a central bank to directly take on private-sector credit risk, we thought it 
necessary to promote smooth corporate financing by nurturing the ABS market and to enhance the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  easing,  giving  due  consideration  to  the  required  functions  of  Japan(cid:146)s 
financial  system  in  the  future  and  the  current  weakness  in  the  credit  intermediary  function  of  the 
banking system. At the same time, the Bank will pay careful attention to avoid distortion of the ABS 
market and to maintain the soundness of the Bank(cid:146)s balance sheet. 
IV. 
For the revitalizing of Japan(cid:146)s economy 
The need for efforts by a wide range of economic entities 
A. 
I would like to briefly discuss my thinking on the efforts necessary to revitalize Japan(cid:146)s economy. 
As I mentioned at the outset, the world economy is undergoing structural change and industrialization 
in emerging economies is advancing. In this situation, Japan should foster new industries that will lead 
the  economy  in  the  21st  century  with  high  productivity  and  value-added  that  are  suitable  to  a 
developed nation. Such efforts are indispensable to ensure economic prosperity in the future, since we 
will  not  be  able  to  count  on  an  increase  in  the  population  as  a  source  of  economic  growth  and  an 
improvement in productivity is virtually the only way to create growth. 
At the same time, it is necessary to drastically reconstruct the socioeconomic system, which has been 
based on an expanding economy, into one fitted to a mature economy. It is very difficult to achieve a 
national  consensus  regarding  changes  in  the  system  itself.  If  the  changes  in  the  socioeconomic 
system  cannot  catch  up  with  the  actual  economic  and  social  developments,  however,  economic 
revitalization will be hampered through the effects of the disincentives. 
There  is  another  problem  regarding  private  economic  entities:  the  risk-taking  capability  of  financial 
institutions and firms is impaired because of the sluggish growth expectation after the bursting of the 
bubble. This problem undermines the effect of various policy actions. 
Therefore, the efforts of the government, the private sector, and the central bank must be concerted to 
overcome such complex issues facing the economy. As part of this, Japan should present a vision of 
the  future  socioeconomic  system  it  seeks  to  attain,  including  the  social  security  system  and  the 
relationship  between  the  central  and  local  governments,  and  seek  to  continuously  take  actions  in 
accordance with this vision. 
Japan(cid:146)s  prosperity  in  the  21st  century  should  be  achieved  through  maximum  utilization  of  private-
sector  initiatives  and  market  mechanisms,  as  for  example  an  investment  and  funds  intermediary, 
throughout the economy. At present, the private sector cannot fulfill the role to the utmost because of 
its  limited  financial  strength,  and  in  some  cases  public  authorities  are  required  to  support  private-
sector initiatives. The Industrial Revitalization Corporation of Japan established last month is a major 
example of a public initiative to support private activities, and I hope it will be utilized effectively and 
contribute to the revitalization of the economy. 
At the same time, such policies and support as a whole must be in line with the nation(cid:146)s vision, that is, 
an economy exploiting the full benefits of private-sector initiatives and market mechanisms. Continuing 
to take these policy actions in harmony with the future visions will heighten the growth expectation of 
the private sector and induce demand. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 7
 Reviving the financial system 
B. 
Finally, I would like to comment more specifically on issues concerning the Japanese financial system. 
In  order  to  revive  the  economy,  it  is  indispensable  to  realize  a  situation  in  which  Japan(cid:146)s  financial 
system performs the credit intermediary function fully. Discussion on putting the financial system on a 
sounder basis often focuses attention on the disposal of NPLs. Although this issue is very important, 
the disposal of NPLs is just one of the prerequisites for achieving the much broader task of reviving 
the  financial  system.  The  most  vital  necessity  in  the  medium  to  long  term  is  to  construct  a  new 
financial infrastructure, which can play a key role in the economy in the 21st century. 
After  World  War  II,  Japanese  financial  institutions  raised  their  profitability  by  maintaining  a  certain 
asset size, supported by high economic growth and private savings. In undertaking risk management, 
a basic function of commercial banks, most of the work associated with assessing the profitability and 
risk of each individual project was often substituted by monitoring the price of real estate that had been 
pledged as collateral. This system was based on the condition that real estate prices continued to rise. 
Market participants are now keenly watching whether Japanese financial institutions can generate a 
new  business model  and  establish  a  sufficient  foundation  for  profitability  in  the  future,  now  that  the 
external environment that supported their profitability in the postwar era has drastically changed. The 
value-added and the profit of financial institutions are ultimately generated from their activities of taking 
and controlling various risks such as credit risk, interest rate risk, and liquidity risk. For the Japanese 
financial system and economy to revive, it is extremely important that Japanese financial institutions 
create a new business model that ensures a foundation for profitability while supporting the Japanese 
economy in the 21st century. I think it is essential for financial institutions to make further efforts in this 
respect. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  will  make  its  best  effort  on  various  fronts,  such  as  enhancing  the  transmission 
mechanism of monetary easing, promoting the permeation of the easing effects through the economy, 
as well as ensuring financial market stability. As other developed countries are keenly watching our 
monetary  policy  conduct,  it  is  my  sincere  hope  that  Japan  realizes  sustainable  economic  growth 
accompanying price stability, and succeeds in recording a victory over deflation. 
8 
 BIS Review 29/2003
