 Bimal Jalan: A review of the Asian Clearing Union 
Welcome address by Dr Bimal Jalan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 32nd ACU Board 
Meeting, Bangalore, 16 June 2003. 
 Honourable Governors and distinguished Delegates, Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is a great privilege for me to welcome you to this 32nd Board meeting of the Asian Clearing Union 
(ACU).  I  am  happy  that  this  meeting  is  being  held  in  the  city  of  Bangalore,  known  as  the  (cid:145)City  of 
Gardens(cid:146), with a great tradition in music, literature, architecture, science and technology. The city is 
now known even more as India(cid:146)s leading city for information technology. 
Before  proceeding  further,  I  should  mention  with  immense  grief  that  Dr.  Mohsen  Nourbaksh,  the 
Governor of the Central Bank of the Islamic Republic of Iran is no more with us. He was one of the 
finest and leading personalities of the ACU fraternity. I request this House to stand in silence and pay 
our humble respect to the memory of Dr. Nourbaksh. 
The ACU Board meeting is being held in India after a gap of seven years - the previous one was held 
in May 1996 at Mumbai. I am sure that this meeting, as was the case with all the earlier occasions, will 
also prove to be a fruitful one and would be an important landmark in the consolidation and further 
strengthening of the ACU. 
The  Asian  Clearing  Union  (ACU),  which  started  functioning  in  November  1975,  has  completed 
27 years of successful operations. It has proved to be a strong and purposeful regional arrangement 
benefiting  its  members  by  optimizing  the  use  of  their  foreign  exchange  resources.  From  a  humble 
beginning of trade worth USD 51.4 million during the first year of its operations, the Union has grown 
into a reasonably powerful entity for regional co-operation in Asia. During the year 2002 it clocked a 
turnover of almost USD 7 billion. 
Benefits of ACU 
We may  recall  that  ACU  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  countries  in  the  region  were  facing  acute 
shortage of foreign exchange and, therefore, had stringent exchange controls. The Union provided the 
member countries with the twin advantages of economizing on the use of foreign exchange and also 
availing of short term credits during the period of the settlement cycle. In the process, the governments 
of  the  member  countries,  their  monetary  authorities  and  central  banks  have  established  close  and 
purposeful  relationships.  Further,  the  bankers  and  traders  in  the  member  countries  benefited  from 
lower  transaction  costs.  The  ACU  has  established  a  creditable  settlement  record  in  that  there  has 
been no default at all since the Union started functioning. 
A  significant  contributory  factor  for  the  success  of  the  ACU  was  the  switching  over  of  the  union(cid:146)s 
accounting  unit  from  AMU  (Asian  Monetary  Unit)  to  the  ACU  dollar.  Under  the  current  system,  in 
vogue since 1996, traders are being allowed not only to invoice their documents in US dollars but also 
to make and receive payments in dollars. Commercial banks in member countries are allowed to open 
nostro accounts in ACU dollars to facilitate all receipts and payments. Further the central banks are 
arranging to fund as well as absorb excess liquidity from these accounts. 
The switchover has facilitated the  application of real  time rates and up-gradation of the entire  ACU 
mechanism  to  be  in  tune  with  the  rapid  changes  in  the  international  forex  markets  due  to  the 
revolutionary  changes  in  satellite  communications  and  wide  ranging  financial  sector  liberalization  in 
the  developing  economies.  As  a  result,  the  transactions  are  now  being  settled  expeditiously  and  in 
true reflection of the market value of the currencies of member countries. 
Further, the switchover to ACU dollar for accounting of all the transactions of the Union has facilitated 
market  participants  in  member  countries  to  get  forward  cover  for  their  transactions  and  also  made 
them eligible to get pre-shipment and post-shipment credit denominated in foreign currencies. 
It is heartening to note that India has been playing a key role in the success of the ACU mechanism, 
topping the turnover table  year  after  year. Its share  in the volume of transactions has been  around 
40%  followed  by  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Iran  and  Bangladesh  at  23  per  cent  and  17  per  cent 
respectively on an average, during the last three years. 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 1
 In the last Board meeting my distinguished colleague from Sri Lanka, Governor Jayawardena rightly 
described ACU as the oldest institution for regional co-operation in Asia. Having been set up at a time 
of severe shortage of foreign exchange and having served the member countries well, the Union has 
reached a stage where there is a need to evaluate the future role of the ACU to adjust to new realities. 
In this context, Governor Jayawardena had suggested that the terms of reference of the ACU needs to 
be revisited, and I am glad that a technical team with the help of ESCAP has gone into this aspect. 
Future role of ACU 
For the evolution of ACU in the coming years the recommendations of the Technical Committee, which 
examined  (cid:145)The  Future  role  of  ACU(cid:146)  and  related  issues  are  important.  The  Committee  felt  that  the 
Union should continue in its present form and should continue to focus on the facility to settle, on a 
multilateral basis, payments for current international transactions and thus economise on the use of 
foreign  exchange  reserves.  It  has,  however,  highlighted  that  the  ACU  mechanism  needs  to 
demonstrate  the  tangible  benefits  it  could  provide  to  its  members.  On  the  expansion  of  ACU,  the 
Committee  has  pointed  out  that  neighbouring  countries  would  join  the  mechanism  only  if  they  are 
convinced of the benefits they could derive from the membership. It is, therefore, necessary to make 
the  ACU  mechanism  more  efficient  in  the  first  instance  and  enhance  the  volume  of  trade  routed 
through  the  arrangement.  In  this  context,  the  Committee  has  noted  that  administrative  bottlenecks 
have been hampering the progress of use of the mechanism to some extent. If ACU mechanism has 
to become popular, these bottlenecks have to be removed. 
Keeping  the  need  of  efficient  telecommunication  facilities  among  member  countries  in  view,  the 
Committee has also recommended that all the member countries could introduce SWIFT system for 
transmitting messages to facilitate faster settlement of transactions especially in view of the fact that 
use of telex is being discontinued by most countries. Introduction of the Real Time Gross Settlement 
System  (RTGS),  although  expensive,  could  be  thought  of  as  a  medium  term  objective  by  member 
countries. 
Apart from improving upon the existing operational mechanism of ACU to enhance efficiency of the 
Union it could now be used as a forum for free exchange of views among the members. The Union 
could become a strong and non-political forum of central banks in the region to discuss issues relating 
to economic co-operation among member countries within the ACU mechanism on the one hand, and 
other areas like exchange rate management and foreign exchange reserve management with a view 
to evolving appropriate approaches to resolving technical issues on the other. The forum could also 
facilitate  exchange  of  experiences  on  developments  taking  place  in  the  respective  economies, 
problems faced by individual member countries etc. The Board may like to deliberate on the details of 
the recommendations of the Technical Committee when its Report is presented, later during the day. 
Other issues 
Besides the issues concerning the ACU mechanism which I have just mentioned, perhaps this august 
gathering  can  deliberate  on  other  issues  like  the  overall  economic  development  of  the  region.  The 
global  economy  is  clouded  by  uncertainties.  The  major  economies  of  the  world  are  plagued  by 
sluggish  growth  and  are  searching  for  ways  to  improve  their  performance.  Compared  to  the 
industrialized  nations,  developing  countries  are  faring  better.  Within  the  ACU,  most  of  the  member 
countries recorded annual growths in excess of 4% during 2000-2001.This augurs well for the ACU. 
However, there is need for better volumes of trade amongst the member countries so that the system 
of ACU could be utilized to the full extent for the maximum benefit of each of them. 
There  is  need  for  further  efforts  at  increasing  economic  co-operation  among  members  and  closer 
relationships  among  the  banking  systems  of  the  countries.  n  the  scenario  of  fast  emerging 
developments, prompted by technology and deeper integration of global markets, it is imperative that 
ACU members should continuously update themselves technologically and be quick in adopting new 
and more efficient methods of operations. As recommended by the Technical Committee, members 
who are yet to switch over to SWIFT, should do so expeditiously, in order to enable ACU to aim for 
and achieve (cid:145)real time(cid:146) settlements as soon as possible. 
There is also a strong need to expand the membership. Besides Maldives, the possibilities of bringing 
in Thailand, China, Malaysia and countries like Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and others should be explored. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2003
 The expanded membership will help in better utilization of this important mechanism for the benefit of 
all the members. 
It is in this context that we have invited Thailand to attend this meeting. I extend a warm welcome to 
the  representatives  from  the  Bank  of  Thailand.  After  this  meeting,  they  will  be  visiting  our  office  in 
Mumbai to study in detail the working of the ACU mechanism and its utility for the member countries. I 
earnestly hope that they will be convinced about the benefits of membership of the ACU. 
Before I conclude, on your behalf and mine, I would like to pay a special tribute to the contribution of 
Dr.  Mohammad  Firouzdor,  Secretary  General,  to  the  work  of  ACU.I  have  been  informed  that  he 
proposes to retire from his position next week. As you are aware he has been the guiding spirit behind 
the ACU Secretariat for the last six years. Through his excellent efforts, among many other matters, 
Dr. Firouzdor has ensured that the switchover to ACU clearing mechanism is smooth and efficient. He 
was also instrumental in bringing the settlement mechanism to best international standards. All of us 
are grateful to him for the valuable contribution he has made to the success of ACU and wish him a 
healthy and happy retired life. 
A successor to Dr. Firouzdor would also need to be elected at this meeting. I propose we take up this 
item under our last agenda on (cid:145)any other business(cid:146). 
We earnestly hope that your stay during this Board Meeting will be comfortable and enjoyable. Once 
again, let me say how happy I personally, and the Reserve Bank are to welcome you to our country 
and to the City of Bangalore. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 3
