 Thirachai Phuvanatnaranubala: Prospects for the Thai economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Thirachai  Phuvanatnaranubala,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
German-Thai Chamber of Commerce Annual Meeting, Bangkok, 18 February 2003. 
 Ambassador Andreas von Stechow , Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be here. My task today is to assure you, as one of our most important groups 
of foreign investors, that the Thai economy is doing well. And for this year my task is quite easy. 
2002 was a good year for the Thai economy.  Despite much uncertainty in the global conditions, the 
Thai economy made a robust recovery with stability, both on the internal and external fronts. 
You may recall that 2 years after the crisis, we started to have positive growth in 1999. GDP growth 
rates  for  1999  and  2000  were  strong  at  4.4  and  4.6%.  But  the  year  after  that,  in  2001,  the  global 
downturn  adversely  affected  our  export  and  made  growth  for  2001  dip  to  1.9%.  However,  we 
recovered in 2002 when growth for the first three quarters climbed back up to 4.9%. 
For  the  final  quarter,  our  initial  estimate  is  just  over  5%,  which  would  result  in  growth  for  2002  the 
whole year at 5% as well. This is a good performance in the midst of slow growth in many parts of the 
world. 
So what has caused this? 
First,  there  was  an  export  recovery.  Export  contracted  as  much  as  -7%  in  2001.  But  it  began  to 
recover in April 2002. The latest figure for the whole year showed the annualised growth at almost 6%. 
This was a dramatic turn around. 
It should be noted that the export recovery did not come entirely from our traditional markets, the US 
and Europe. What we did see was that export to Asia increased by over 7%, somewhat higher than 
the average figure, with China absorbing a good 23% more of Thai goods this year compared to last. 
Second,  farm  prices  improved  substantially.  Prices  increased  by  11%  boosting  farm  income  by  the 
same percentage for the  whole  year.  Both these factors helped  improve our  domestic consumption 
especially the sale of automobiles, motorcycles and construction. 
Third, there was a strong recovery of other domestic demand. Part of this was helped by the fiscal 
stimulation. In 2002 the budget deficit was at 3.6% of GDP. The other factor was the low interest rate 
environment that the Bank of Thailand has maintained for the past 5 years and is now beginning to 
bear fruits. 
The accommodative monetary policy resulted in robust growth of mortgage lending as well as other 
types of consumer loans. Consumer confidence rose to its highest level in recent years. 
Domestic  investments  improved  too.  I  agree  that  at  the  moment  not  much  of  the  new  business 
investment was yet financed by bank loans. The entrepreneurs still rely more on their internal cash. 
But the latest investment indicators showed an annual rate of increase at a high of 23%. 
Domestic  demands  have  been  helped  not  only  by  direct  government  spending,  but  also  by  other 
government schemes that injected funds directly to the grass roots. We had the Bht 74 billion village 
fund (approx US$ 1.7 billion) whereby each village had been allocated Bht one million to on lend to 
village  members,  often  under  group  mutual  guarantees.  We  also  had  the  micro  loan  scheme 
organised by the Government Savings Bank, the government owned bank, which lend directly to the 
poor. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The good news went on. 
Despite the strong recovery, we have been able to keep inflation under check. Headline inflation for 
2002 was 0.7% and core inflation 0.4%. The adverse affect from high oil prices has not translated into 
much inflation. 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 1
 investors  helped  support  both  consumption  and 
Our currency was also quite stable. For the whole of 2002, the bath appreciated against the US dollar 
by  less  than  2%,  which  was  quite  modest  compared  to  other  Asian  currencies.  The  international 
reserves level was also ample at US$ 38.9 billion, allowing us to aim to pay back all the loans under 
the IMF program by the end of July this year. 
Moreover,  three  major  credit  rating  agencies,  S&P,  Moody’s,  and  Fitch  Ratings,  all  assigned  better 
outlook to the Thai economy. Japan  Credit Rating Agency  did in fact upgrade  Thailand’s sovereign 
rating  from  BBB  to  BBB+  last  November.    Such  widespread  improvement  in  confidence  among 
consumers,  entrepreneurs,  and 
investment 
throughout the year. 
We  have  also  made  a  substantial  progress  in  solving  the  non-performing  loan  problem.  The  Thai 
Asset  Management  Corporation,  the  central  organization  run  by  the  government  that  took  over 
Bht 700 billion of NPL’s from the commercial bank system has already worked through two-thirds of 
their  portfolio.  The  recovery  rate  was  135%  of  the  TAMC’s  purchase  prices,  which  was  the  banks’ 
written down value. This means that the TAMC should not add any further burden, both to the banks 
and the taxpayers. 
Meanwhile  even though the banking system still has 15% of the NPL left on their books. However, 
much of this has already been fully provided for in their loan loss reserves. The banks are therefore 
now poised to resume lending, and the restructured debtors are once again eligible to borrow. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The big question is of course – is this sustainable?  
2003 is fraught with so much uncertainty. The most important risk at the moment is from the external 
sector, namely, tension between the US and Iraq.  If this conflict aggravates into a war, it may delay 
the global recovery process.  If the situation prolongs and gravely deteriorates, there could be even 
greater risks posed to world demand and ultimately the demand for Thai exports and tourism.  At the 
same time, a possible upward pressure on the price of oil could have some adverse impact on an oil-
importing  country  like  Thailand,  affecting  not  only  the  cost  of  production  but  also  consumer  and 
business confidence. 
The domestic components, however, look set to continue their strong courses. The high confidence 
levels  by  both  the  consumers  and  the  businesses  should  ensure  that  domestic  demands  for  both 
consumption  and  investment  continue  to  expand.  The  repair  that  had  been  made  to  the  balance 
sheets of commercial banks – and many of them are now back to making substantial profits – should 
allow them to once again serve the economy. The improvement in debt equity ratios of many private 
companies also opens the road for them to start thinking up new investment projects. 
Even  on  the  external  components,  the  fact  that  Asian  countries  have  been  trading  more  and  more 
among  themselves  can  also  help  shield  them  from  temporary  turbulences  in  the  American  and 
European economies, should there be any. 
Our GDP growth forecast for 2003 is between 3.5 to 4.5, with both core and headline inflation at 0.5 – 
1.5. This is in fact a forecast that has taken into view of the uncertainty caused by the possible war.  
Therefore, if the external environment does not deteriorate much from the present trend, if the war is 
brief and limited in scope, our forecast has a significant upward potential, and growth could actually be 
higher than 4.5 percent. 
But  the  biggest  question  in  your  mind  is  perhaps  how  does  the  government  plan  to  manage  its 
financial  obligations,  since  a  large  part  of  the  GDP  growth  in  the  past  year  did  come  from  fiscal 
stimulus. 
In  this  respect,  I  can  inform  you  that  the  government  has  made  it  very  clear  that  they  plan  to 
consolidate the fiscal deficit to no more than 3.1% of GDP for fiscal year 2003. This is a good gradual 
reduction from 3.6% last year.  
The overall government debt is currently still at 54% of GDP, well under the cap of 60% announced in 
2001. The rapid recovery of the general economy also helped boost tax revenue collection by as much 
as 10% in 2002, and looks set to repeat itself in 2003 as well, helping to narrow the budget deficit. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
No one can plan for 2003 with absolute certainty. We are all following the news minute by minute, and 
even the best laid out plan for this year must contain several scenarios to cover for contingencies.  
  But the one certainty I can assure  you is that the macro economic policies in Thailand that aim for 
stability and sustainable growth will continue. 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 3
