 R Basant Roi: The monetary policy stance of the Bank of Mauritius 
Keynote address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at a seminar organised by 
the Mauritius Export Processing Zone Association, Pointe aux Piments, Mauritius, 23 April 2003. 
 President of MEPZA 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  this  morning.  I  am  equally  pleased  to  have  been  given  the 
opportunity to speak on an aspect of economic policy that has been for one reason or the other the 
subject of recurring sound-biting criticisms. Let me at the outset put it clearly that I am not here to reply 
to the criticisms that have been leveled against the Bank’s policy. Criticisms do provide opportunities 
for central bankers to come out and explain their policy stands. Criminologists claim that few acts of 
violence are committed after a good meal. This prolongs the lives of speakers. I have had a hearty 
breakfast this morning. I do not intend to deliver a long speech on account of my throat. The risk is that 
one of you might cut it. Central bankers are accustomed to saying the right thing at the right moment 
and to leave unsaid the wrong thing at the most tempting moment. 
Central banks, anywhere in the world, are never short of criticisms. The Bank of Mauritius has never 
been exempt of vitriolic remarks. Before July 1994 when the Exchange Control Act was suspended 
repeated  releases  of  repressed  emotions  through  random  shootings  of  caustic  remarks  against  the 
Bank’s  policies  were  quite  common.  In  the  wake  of  the  liberalization  of  our  financial  system  the 
monetary  policy  stance  of  the  Bank  has  received  less  appreciation  than  it  deserves.  While  the 
objective of the monetary policy of the Bank is well appreciated by some of us it is less so by others 
presumably  because  of  considerations  driven  by  self-interest.  A  short-term  view  or  rather  a  myopic 
view of the Bank’s monetary policy stance in a world economy that is highly demanding in terms of 
economic and financial efficiency is tantamount to losing sight of the forest because of the trees.  
I shall attempt to give a perspective to the monetary policy of the Bank for your benefit. I view this as 
being  important  simply  because  a  full  appreciation  of  the  Bank’s  work  and  results  does  require  a 
perspective beyond a few months or even beyond a single year. A single day, a few months or even a 
year  is  rather  a  short  time  to  really  gauge  what  monetary  policy  of  the  Bank  can  accomplish  on  a 
lasting basis. Monetary policy takes time to make its beneficial effects felt in any economic society. But 
I do also reckon that a few months or even a single month or a single day may sometime appear to be 
a long time. Events having undesirable consequences for the economy can take place in minutes.  
We live in an economic society wherein the role of money is taken for granted. The basic importance 
of  money  in  the  economy  is  unwittingly  overlooked.  Buyers  and  sellers,  savers  and  investors  and 
borrowers and lenders are, as you are aware, linked through money. It goes to say that money which 
links them should have our confidence if our economy has to perform well. Money that keeps its value 
will have the confidence it deserves. As is usually said among central bankers it is the democratic right 
of every citizen to see that the length of a metre or the weight of a kilogramme does not vary over 
time. Why then should the value of money change over time? Clearly, the basic objective of monetary 
policy of the Bank, which is the sole issuer of currency in the country, should be to preserve the value 
of money. 
The Bank of Mauritius is the nucleus in the process of money creation in the economy. It is mistakenly 
believed that the Bank has the intrinsic power of simultaneously achieving a multiplicity of objectives. 
This  is  a  gross  misconception.  Paradoxically,  there  is  also  a  common  tendency  for  some  in  the 
exporting community to believe that inflation need not be the prime consideration of the Bank. This is 
also an incorrect view of what should be the objective of our monetary policy. Our business community 
and the public at large would be badly served if the Bank’s monetary policy stance irresponsibly fuels 
inflation. Suffice to say that inflation creates uncertainty, breeds inefficiency and makes the economy 
less  productive.  Worst,  it  creates  inequity.  Those  who  gain  from  inflation  necessarily  gain  at  the 
expense  of  others.  In  fact,  the  Bank’s  power  to  print  money  is  limited  by  the  leverage  available  to 
monetary policy. The Bank uses this leverage to enhance the economic performance of our country. In 
simple terms, the Bank manages liquidity in the economy - which in turns affects expenditure – in such 
a manner that is consistent with the capacity of the economy to grow but, as far as possible, without 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 1
 giving  rise  to  inflationary  pressures.  Monetary  policy  would  not  be  doing  justice  to  all  of  us  if  it 
unleashes forces that create inflation.  
What  is  the  ‘ideal’  rate  of  inflation  then?  Ours  is  a  small  economy  and  highly  open  to  international 
exchange  and  international  economic  and  financial  influences.  As  such  it  is  quite  inflation-prone. 
There is no such thing as an ‘ideal’ rate of inflation. The best policy outcome can only be price stability. 
Taking  into  consideration  the  character  of  our  economy,  an  inflation  rate  of  3  to  below  5  per  cent 
sustained over time is believed to be tolerable. A rate of inflation in this range may be kept in sight as 
an anchor for the monetary policy of the Bank of Mauritius. The sustained policy effort in the last few 
years underpinned by the  absence  of a consequential  increase  in  wage bill  in  the economy helped 
bring down the rate of inflation. For the current fiscal year the rate of inflation is expected to be around 
5 per cent. Importantly, the pressure behind inflation appears to have lost some of its intensity. 
I wish to underscore that the problem of inflation would have been greater today had not the Bank of 
Mauritius  progressively  pursued  a  restrictive  monetary  policy  stance  in  response  to  the  intensified 
inflationary pressures following the rapid depreciation of the rupee in 1996, 1997 and 1998. Beginning 
1999 we pursued a policy of monetary tightening with a view to arresting the rapid depreciation of the 
rupee thereby stopping the flight of capital. Had the depreciation of the rupee and the resulting flight of 
capital not been arrested the foreign exchange reserves of the Bank would have dwindled to only a 
few weeks of imports. Inflation rate would have eventually risen to double digits. Seldom do we realize 
that with the least policy mistake in 1999 we would have subsequently knocked at the door of the IMF 
for  a  Stand-by  Arrangement.  Monetary  tightening,  that  is,  the  high  interest  rate  policy  relentlessly 
pursued over time helped stabilize the foreign exchange market and also check monetary expansion 
to a rate consistent with the objective of reducing the rate of inflation. 
It is therefore a misconstrued view that the Bank of Mauritius is pursuing a high interest rate policy. 
This is not how I would like to put it. The Bank is pursuing an inflation fighting policy. All of us know it 
well.  Savers  do  demand  higher  interest  rates  to  protect  themselves  from  higher  inflation  rates.  A 
monetary  policy  stance  that  eventually  brings  about  sustained  low  and  stable  inflation  rate  creates 
conditions for sustained low interest rates. We are all well aware that it is only in those countries that 
have a good track record of confidence in their money through policies that generate low and stable 
inflation that we find low interest rates. A good track record of low inflation does set the ground for low 
interest rates. Low inflation rates precede low interest rates. The converse is invalid. 
Lending rates of commercial banks are often said to be on the high side. There is no doubt an element 
of truth in this contention. However, it does not necessarily go to say that commercial banks alone are 
to be blamed for the high lending rates. Often borrowers too share the blame. You might recall I have 
since  1999  pressed  upon  banks  to  reduce  their  non-performing  loans  to  a  tolerable  level. 
Non-performing loans are one of the reasons that explains the tendency to charge high lending rates 
to borrowers. In any banking system the ‘free lunch’ has to be paid by someone. Generally depositors 
and honest borrowers are made to pay for the bad and doubtful debts through lower deposit rates and 
higher lending rates respectively. I do not see any justification for rogue borrowers to clamour for low 
rates of interest.  Banks need to make good credit appraisals while making lending  decisions failing 
which lending rates would continue to be prohibitive even to honest borrowers. The good news is that 
banks have seriously undertaken to bring down their non-performing loans to acceptable limits. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee.  Exchange  rate  is  evidently  important.  Its 
movements  and  levels  have  a  strong  bearing  on  medium  and  long-term  growth  prospects  of  our 
economy.  As  such  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee  has  a  lot  to  do  with  monetary  policy.  Monetary 
policy  is  effective  only  in  a  market  based  financial  system.  In  any  capitalist  system  the  financial 
markets are the most market-oriented. Undue intervention in such markets over a protracted period of 
time will most likely turn out to be counterproductive. In such a framework confidence is fundamentally 
an important ingredient that the Bank of Mauritius can provide to financial markets in the formation of 
judgements  regarding  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate.  It  goes  without  saying  that  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius should constantly seek to build confidence in the rupee. Confidence in the external value of 
the rupee cannot be maintained if confidence in the internal value of the rupee is not maintained. This 
is what price stability is basically all about. Let me stress that it does not go to say that we should have 
an exchange rate target. As you are well aware, the exchange rate of the rupee reflects international 
as  well  as  domestic  market  conditions.  Over  the  12-month  period  ended  March  2003,  it  may  be 
observed  that  the  US  dollar  has  weakened  significantly  on  international  financial  markets.  The 
Japanese  yen,  Pound  Sterling  and  the  Euro  have  appreciated  against  the  US  dollar.  The  rupee 
depreciated on average by 10.2 per cent against the Euro, 6.7 per cent against the Pound sterling and 
1.7  per  cent  against  the  Japanese  yen  but  appreciated  by  0.5  per  cent  against  the  US  dollar.  In 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 trade-weighted  nominal  effective terms, the exchange rate of the rupee depreciated by about  8 per 
cent. In real effective terms, the rupee recorded a depreciation of about 5 per cent. There is nothing to 
suggest that the exchange rate of the rupee is in any way responsible for the erosion of international 
competitiveness.  
Once again concern has recently been expressed about the appreciation of the rupee vis-à-vis the US 
dollar. In pressing their claim for a higher rate of depreciation of the rupee, some have even leaned on 
the Turkish case. What is not mentioned, however, is that the double digit rate of depreciation of the 
Turkish currency  has also  been served  with a helping of high inflation rate of 27 per cent and  high 
short-term  interest  rate  of  42  per  cent.  Let  me say  once  again  that  this  is  far from  being  a  Turkish 
delight!  
It  is  more  appropriate  to  view  exchange  rate  developments  over  a  period  of  time.  The  more  we 
integrate  with  international  financial  markets,  the  more  we  have  to  allow  markets  work  their  way 
through. The exchange rate of the rupee has recently been likened to price determination in a specific 
market. Well, in so far as we are trying to promote a competitive foreign exchange market, the Bank of 
Mauritius is quite comfortable with this reference. Indeed, we welcome it because the market under 
reference is the only market in Mauritius that is closest to the textbook model of perfect competition.  
Currency appreciation or depreciation cannot be a panacea for all our economic ills. We should not 
forget  that  appreciation  or  depreciation  of  a  currency  could  be  a  mixed  blessing.  In  terms  of 
macroeconomic policies, the authorities usually have to make a policy trade-off between the extent of 
exchange rate adjustment and the inflation rate. It must, however, be emphasized that the way forward 
for  Mauritius  is  for  it  to  become  competitive  through  the  achievement  of  real  productivity  gains.  A 
deliberate policy to depreciate the rupee can only be a temporary solution and not a permanent one. A 
lasting  solution  to  long-term  competitiveness  depends  not  on  exchange  rate  changes  but  on 
productivity growth. Short-term exchange rate accommodation can only serve to postpone the need to 
address the real issues relating to restructuring, good management and productivity improvement. Any 
attempt to rescue employment in the Export Processing Zone through the depreciation of the rupee 
cannot but be a temporary one. 
Finally, let me reassure firms in the Export Processing Zone that the Bank of Mauritius will continue 
with  the  pursuit  of  a  monetary  policy  stance  that  does  not  jeopardize  the  maintenance  of  low  and 
stable  inflation  keeping  in  view  certain  short-term  considerations.  The  monetary  scene  in  Mauritius 
today does not at all support the view that the economy is in a state of ‘fundamental disequilibrium’. 
There is no precise definition of ‘fundamental disequilibrium’. The IMF has a working definition to judge 
whether or not an economy is in a state of ‘fundamental disequilibrium’. Of the six broad criteria that 
define the presence of fundamental disequilibria in an economy none of them is palpably present in 
the current state of the Mauritian economy. Instead, Mauritius is for the first time in its history recording 
four successive years of current account surpluses in its balance of payments. The overall balance of 
payments surpluses are significant. The foreign exchange reserves position of the Bank of Mauritius 
has attained unprecedented level. Inflationary pressures in the economy are contained. Inflation is on 
a declining trend. Although the rupee has in the past months appreciated against the US dollar partly 
due to the surpluses generated in the current account of the balance of payments there is no evidence 
that  the  exchange  rate  is  mis-aligned.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  pretty  conscious  that  persistent 
appreciation of the rupee over a protracted period of time could potentially lead the economy to a state 
of ‘fundamental disequilibrium’.  
While  guided  principally  by  the  objective  of  sustaining  low  and  stable  inflation,  monetary  policy  will 
continue  to  strike  the  desired  balance  between  short-term  and  long-term  considerations  in  the  best 
interest  of  the  economy.  Once  I  likened  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  to  drawing  a  heavy 
paperweight with a piece of elastic – either the heavy paperweight does not move or it flies across the 
table and hits you in the face. This analogy seems closer to reality than the organized sound-biting 
criticisms.  
I wish you well. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 3
