 Joseph O Sanusi: A central bank look at fiscal policy management in Nigeria  
Keynote address by Dr Joseph O Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the seminar of 
the Nigerian Economic Society on (cid:147)Fiscal Policy Management in Nigeria(cid:148), Lagos, 22 May 2003. 
 His Excellency, The Executive Governor of Lagos State, Asiwaju Bola Ahmed Tinubu, 
The President, Nigerian Economic Society (NES), 
Council Members of the NES, 
Mr. Chairman, 
Distinguished Speaker and Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  feel  highly  honoured  to  be  invited  as  a  guest  of  honour  at  this  year(cid:146)s  seminar  of  the  Nigerian 
Economic  Society  on  (cid:147)Fiscal  Policy  Management  in  Nigeria(cid:148)  and  for  an  opportunity  to  present  this 
Keynote Address. The theme of the seminar could not have come at a more opportune time, as the 
outcome is expected to assist the government in policy fine-tuning and implementation in the context 
of its economic agenda under the next dispensation. This is in recognition of the fact that fiscal policy 
is  a major  dimension  of  an  adjustment  programme  to  ensure  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment 
and improved growth performance. Suffice to say that sound fiscal policy management, predicted on 
consistency, sustainability, efficiency, accountability and transparency, is essential for accelerating the 
pace of economic recovery. 
Since the 1970s, the government has been overly dependent on the oil sector as the most important 
source  of  revenue  accounting  for  four-fifths  of  the  total.  Consequently,  fiscal  operations  have  been 
influenced by the uncertainties of the international oil market. To minimize the destabilising influence 
of  the  volatility  in  the  price  of  crude  oil  on  government  budgetary  operations,  efforts  have  been 
intensified since the 1980s to broaden government revenue base and enhance the contribution from 
non-oil sources. Federal government expenditure has closely followed developments in the revenue 
flow,  which  has  given  rise  to  a  boom/bust  pattern.  The  rapid  acceleration  in  government  spending 
between 1973 and 1976 was so strong that the increased revenue earnings from oil over the period 
was  more  than  absorbed,  resulting  in  substantial  deficits.  It  has  been  difficult  to  scale  down 
expenditure  whenever  there  was  a  significant  deterioration  in  the  oil  market.  The  result  was  that 
government  resorted  to  borrowing  from  the  banking  system,  especially  from  the  Central  Bank,  to 
finance the deficits, with adverse implications for domestic prices and the exchange rate. Like most of 
the other oil exporting countries, Nigeria experienced a sharp bust of inflation in mid-1970s as public 
expenditure rose. 
It is noteworthy that fiscal dominance has been one of the sore points of monetary management in 
Nigeria, as it has tended to undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy. For most of the 1990s, for 
instance,  the  major  source  of  general  macroeconomic  instability  was  the  rising  fiscal  deficits  of  the 
Federal Government, financed mainly by the Central Bank. In recent times, the banking system has 
been characterized by the problem of excess liquidity arising from the expansionary fiscal operations 
of the three tiers of government, and the rapid monetisation of crude oil receipts. The large injections 
of liquidity into the system induced rapid monetary  expansion that  was substantially  out of line  with 
prescribed targets. 
A major problem of fiscal adjustment in recent times is the difficulty of lowering the largest components 
of  recurrent  expenditure  such  as  wages  and  salaries,  while  attempting  to  raise  the  level  of  capital 
formation.  A  keen  observer  will  notice  that  over  the  past  decade,  recurrent  expenditure  has  been 
dominant  in  total  federal  government  expenditure.  It  was  67.4  per  cent  in  2002,  compared  with 
56.9 per  cent  and  65.9  per  cent  in  2001  and  2000,  respectively.  To  generate  growth,  a  sizeable 
proportion  of  government  expenditure  should  be  allocated  to  capital  and  socio-economic  sectors. 
Beyond the issue of allocation, the quality of the expenditure remains critical in ensuring efficiency and 
optimal utilization of resources. In this regard, the Federal Government has instituted the Due Process 
compliance principle, which is being implemented.  
BIS Review 24/2003 
 1
 for 
is  a  need 
the  principles  of 
transparency  and  accountability.  There 
I wish to add that, to be able to measure the effects of policy,  the availability  of timely and reliable 
statistics on government revenue and expenditure cannot be over-emphasized. This is also consistent 
with 
increased 
information-sharing  on  a  regular  basis,  as  information  assymetry  undermines  policy  design  and 
analysis.  It  is  noteworthy  that  this  dispensation  has  witnessed  the  return  of  the  Public  Accounts 
Committee  of  the  National  Assembly  and  the  oversight  function  of  the  Auditor-General  of  the 
Federation. These are welcome developments that should be sustained. 
Before  I  conclude,  permit  me  to  highlight  some  of  the  practical  ways  of  addressing  the  problem  of 
fiscal dominance in order to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. First is ensuring how the 
overall  budget  deficit  will  be  reduced  and  how  it  will  be  financed  in  a  non-inflationary  way.  In  this 
regard,  current  effort  by  the  Federal  Government  to  access  the  capital  market  and  restructure  the 
outstanding  debt  stock  is  a  welcome  development.  Secondly,  the  Debt  Management  Office  (DMO) 
should  be  encouraged  to  assume  full  responsibility  for  government  debt  management,  thereby 
relieving  the  CBN  of  such  role.  Thirdly,  there  is  a  need  to  meet  the  West  African  Monetary  Zone 
(WAMZ)  convergence  criterion,  limiting  central  bank  financing  of  government  to  10  per  cent  of 
estimated  current  revenue.  Fourthly,  the  enactment  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  Act  should  be 
rigorously pursued. 
Your Excellency, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, there is no doubt in my mind that the issue of 
fiscal  policy  management  is  very  critical  to  the  successful  implementation  of  our  economic 
programmes. In this connection, I hope the seminar will find time to ponder on the following issues: 
(i) 
the  need 
revenue/expenditure volatility; 
formulate viable fiscal rules which are consistent with our fiscal federalism, and 
propose the way forward in addressing the problems of inter-generational equity argument 
arising from debt overhang. 
to  establish  a  stabilization 
fund  which  will  address 
the  problem  of 
(ii) 
(iii) 
I am convinced that the array of eminent professionals gathered here today will come up with concrete 
proposals that will enhance our fiscal policy in the medium to long-term. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2003
