 Joseph O Sanusi: Information and communication technology for the social 
transformation of Nigeria 
Special remarks by Dr Joseph O  Sanusi, Governor of the Central  Bank of Nigeria, delivered  at the 
Dinner/Investor  Forum  organised  by  Leapfrog  Venture  Partners  Ltd  during  the  National  Summit  on 
SMIEIS, Victoria Island, Lagos, 10 June 2003.  
 The Representative of the Honorable Minister of Industries, The Executive Governor of Lagos State, 
His Excellency, Alhaji Bola Ahmed Tinubu, Chief Executives of Banks and Other Financial Institutions, 
Members  of  Non-Governmental  and  Multilateral  Agencies,  Distinguished  Industrialists,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen. 
It is my pleasure and privilege to make this special remark at this historic investor forum/dinner aimed 
at  educating  and  enlightening  us  on  the  efforts  of  Leapfrog  Venture  Partners  Nigeria  Limited  in 
promoting and training skilled manpower for the social transformation of Nigeria. Let me state at the 
onset that, when the organizers of this forum approached me to be the Special Guest of Honor, I was 
hesitant in accepting it. However, because of how close this subject is to my heart and in my firm belief 
of the role of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in the promotion of SMEs in Nigeria, I 
accepted to attend. May I seize this opportunity to congratulate the organizes of the forum, for their 
foresight  and  wisdom  in  selecting  such  an  important  and  relevant  theme,  (cid:147)Information  and 
Communication Technology for The Social Transformation of Nigeria(cid:148). The effort is also commendable 
because currently we require massive investments in Information and Communication Technology in 
order to develop our socio-economic infrastructure.  
As you all know, advances in Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) were pivotal to the 
recent  social  and  economic  transformation  in  both  the  industrialized  and  developing  countries.  The 
increasing spread of ICTs has opened new opportunities for developing countries to harness for the 
attainment  of  their  socio-economic  and  developmental  goals.  It  is,  pertinent  to  note  that,  although 
there  have  been  several  efforts  at  the  highest  levels  of  government  and  industry  to  promote  the 
construction of a national information infrastructure, the attempt by Leapfrog Ventures is a very bold 
step by a private entrepreneur in this direction. We must all join hands with Leapfrog Ventures in order 
for Nigeria to reap the predicted social and economic benefits. 
Distinguished  Participants,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  you  are  aware,  recent  advances  in  digital 
technologies have separated further, the divide between the rich and poor countries. Since there is no 
comprehensive solution for this problem within the current conventions, it is imperative therefore that 
we  explore  the  potential  ways  of  utilizing  digital  technologies  in  empowering  our  people  and 
communities  to  better  perform  their  tasks  and  roles  in  our  increasingly  technologically  driven, 
information centered and knowledge-based economy. 
We are all aware that, by developing and executing a robust ICT strategy, many developing nations 
and  companies  have  enhanced  their  cutting  edge  and  vastly  improved  their  core  competencies  in 
these  areas.  Some  of  these  nations  and  companies  have  achieved  competitive  edge  because  the 
improvements  in  their  ICT  had  allowed  them  to  leverage  the  benefits  of  network  economies, 
knowledge  management  and  the  advantages  of  rapid,  frictionless,  information  flow.  They  have 
optimized the full spectrum of their capabilities and have from it, realized significant gains in sharing 
information, products, ideas, and intellectual capital. They have, in that way, positioned themselves in 
leadership roles  in  the global market place of the new millennium. There is  no gainsaying  that, the 
evidence with independent initiatives all over the world, has revealed the potentials of Information and 
Communication Technology in, namely:- 
(i) 
Empowering people to help themselves in a very broad range of applications, irrespective of 
their age, gender, race or level of education; 
Addressing the multi-dimensional nature of poverty; and 
Transferring the initiatives for development from outside sources to individuals, communities, 
local authorities and nations.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
 These developments had together put a lot of emphasis on information networks and data bases for 
both government and large scale commercial uses. The social application of these technologies calls 
BIS Review 27/2003 
 1
 for emphasis on more user-friendly software, that people (including illiterate people) could interact with 
by entering their own information, for their own purposes, at a very low cost and at their own time. In 
addition, it demands quick access to the relevant information from distant sources. 
It is my noble opinion therefore, that since the technology is already here, what is absent is, a funding 
mechanism that will allow poor people access to such information and, the enabling environment in 
which this can be achieved. I think it was, Peter Drucker, the doyen of Management, who stated that, 
(cid:147)the importance of information technologies is not in their ability to increase the efficiency of current 
approaches but because they enable us to do new things(cid:148). 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, it is in this vein that I commend the efforts of the West African 
Institute of Information and Communications Technology (WAIICT) in their endeavor to build the first 
West  African  advanced  and  integrated  information  and  communications  technology  institution  of 
higher  learning  and  to  concomitantly,  create  Nigeria(cid:146)s  Silicon  Valley  (ICT  cluster).  I  was  reliably 
informed that, the Institute will provide an opportunity for Nigerian and West African youths, to acquire 
the relevant skills and critical competencies required to participate in the new global information and 
communications technology-driven economy and provide the necessary human capital that would give 
them a competitive edge in the global market place. 
I am also aware that, WAIICT(cid:146)s proposition is simply to identify the best and brightest young men and 
women  with  interests  in  technology,  and  train  them  into  world-class  programmers  and  software 
developers.  In  addition,  the  Institute  will  equip  students  with  the  strategic  and  operational  skills  to 
manage projects and corporate enterprises to ensure that technology remains tied to market needs. 
The WAIICT initiative is also patterned along global ICT developments, where software development 
and  programming  languages  require  basically  similar  skills.  I  am  tempted  to  say  that  with  such  an 
initiative, the West African sub-region and indeed the entire continent of Africa, can enjoy the benefits 
of an ICT revolution because of the availability of English-speaking, high quality and low cost labor. 
The  need  for  software  engineers  in  Germany  has  led  the  Foreign  Minister  to  visit  India  on  several 
occasions  to  lure  Indian  engineers  into  Germany.  It  has  even  prompted  a  revision  of  the  German 
Immigration  laws  to  accommodate  that  economic  need.  Another  example  is  the  case  of  ACS,  a 
Ghanaian  telecomputing,  data  processing  and  transcription  service  company,  which  is  focused  on 
serving  high  end  U.S.  clients  and  providing  hardware  and  software  training  all  over  the  continent. 
These examples suggest to me that Nigerian companies can also compete in the offshore IT space. 
Permit  me,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen  to  stress  that,  overall,  the  application  of  ICTs  to  facilitate  the 
provision of public services, achieve productivity gains, improve the quality of life of our citizenry, and 
enhance access to  information and facilitate knowledge-based sharing are  all  not only desirous  but 
very necessary, for Nigeria to properly position itself and assume the much desired leadership role in 
our  increasingly  globalizing,  information  and  communications  technology  driven  world  economic 
system.  It  is  instructive  to  note  that,  since  these  achievements  represent  feats  that  Nigerian 
companies are yet to emulate, taking advantage of such opportunities requires the systematic creation 
of a competitive knowledge economy. This is what I think WAIICT is going to provide. It is a need that 
they have correctly identified to provide and I am calling on all patriots to join WAIICT in meeting this 
need. 
In  concluding  my  brief  remark  this  evening,  May  I  state  that  poverty  sits  like  an  open  sore  on  the 
consciences of the Nigerian elite. We should remember that many of the South East Asian countries 
who have leapfrogged their stages of development and are today, part of the emerging economies, 
were at the same level of development with Nigeria some three decades ago. With a mono-cultural 
economy  totally  dependent  on  oil,  the  diversification  of  the  Nigerian  revenue  base  becomes  a 
compelling necessity and this can only be achieved through massive investments in Information and 
Communications  Technology  (ICT).  India  currently  earns  twice  as  much  from  software  exports  as 
Nigeria earns from oil. The time for us to act is now. Leapfrog Ventures Nigeria limited is bold to take 
the bull by the horn. Let us therefore support this worthy endeavor to transform the Nigerian economic 
landscape by investing in the shares of the West African Institute of Information and Communications 
Technology, giving grants or endowing Professorial chairs. 
I urge WAIICT investors to explore opportunities in the SMIEIS scheme which has accumulated over 
N14.6 billion naira as at end-May, 2003 
With these few remarks, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish you an appetizing dinner.  
Thank you for your time. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2003
