 Ilmars Rimsevics: General economic developments and banking in Latvia  
Notes by Mr Ilmars Rimsevics, Governor of the Bank of Latvia. Overview in December 2002. 
 General Economic Developments  
In  November  2002,  Latvia’s  sound  macroeconomic  development  was  acclaimed  on  an  international 
scale.  The  invitation  to  begin  accession  talks  to  join  NATO  is  politically  significant  and  homage  to 
Latvia’s security and stability, and this, no doubt, will be a positive stimulus for economic growth, as 
Latvia’s membership will reinforce its security, fostering inward flows of investment.  
As  Latvia’s  integration  into  the  European  Union  (EU)  is  seen  as  an  irreversible  process  and  a 
significant constraint on eventual risk probability, for the first time since 1997 the international rating 
agency Moody's Investors Service upgraded Latvia’s credit rating from Baa2 to A2 with regard to long-
term loans in foreign currency and Latvia’s eurobonds and from Prime2 to Prime1 with regard to short-
term liabilities in foreign currency.  
In its autumn report on economic developments in the accession countries, the European Commission 
retained  for  Latvia  the  highest  annual  GDP  growth  projections,  at  5%  in  2000  and  5.5%  in  2003, 
among the accession countries.  
As projected, economic growth was more pronounced in the third quarter than in the first half of the 
year. Higher economic indicators were a result of the sustained high level of domestic demand and a 
more pronounced increase in external demand. The output indicators of manufacturing, construction 
and  trade  increased  at  a  more  rapid  pace  than  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  showing  year-on-year 
increases in the third quarter:  
- 7.9% in the manufacturing sector, owing to a considerable increase in new orders; 
- 8.4% in the output of the construction sector (at constant prices);  
- 20.9% in retail trade turnover (at constant prices); 
- a continued decline was observed in the transit of oil and oil products  (by rail and by the oil main) 
and turnover at the Ventspils port in the third quarter. Nevertheless, in October transit by rail, including 
the  transit  of  oil  products,  grew  rapidly  (by  29.1%  year-on-year).  The  decrease  in  turnover  at  the 
Ventspils port, which is the largest in Latvia, slowed, whereas turnover at the ports of Riga and Liepāja 
continued to show marked increases. Hence, the decrease in total turnover at the ports of Latvia was 
considerably lower in October (6.5%) than in the past months.  
GDP growth is expected to be more rapid in the latter half of 2002 than in the first one, at 5.6% to 
5.7%. The principal contributors are likely to be manufacturing, construction, trade, a number of other 
areas of the service sector, and transport, storage and communications, of which the latter has shown 
significant improvements over the third quarter. Real GDP growth is likely to be about 5% in 2002.   
Inflation  remained  low.  In  November,  consumer  prices  were  1.6%  higher  than  the  year  before  and 
0.8%  higher  than  in  October.  The  November  pick-up  in  consumer  prices  was  mostly  a  result  of 
increases in food prices. The core inflation rate was 1.3% in November. The inflation rate for 2002 is 
projected at 2%.  
In the first nine months of 2002, Latvia’s exports and imports of goods showed year-on-year growth of 
10.0% and 12.6%, respectively. Exports to the EU member states rose by 6.9%.  
Higher export growth observed in the recent months was partly attributable to the low level of exports 
in the corresponding period of 2001,  when  demand in Europe, along  with exports, dramatically fell, 
and this year’s significant increase in new orders.  
The  growth  in  exports  was  mostly  effected  by  higher  exports  of  prepared  foodstuffs,  wood,  metals, 
furniture, and appliances and equipment. The most rapid growth was observed in exports to the United 
States, Sweden, Russia and Lithuania.  
According to preliminary data, the current account deficit (about 8.6% of GDP) declined in the third 
quarter compared with both the previous quarter (by 9.3%) and the third quarter of 2001 (by 10.3%), 
BIS Review 1/2003 
 1
 because  exports  of  goods  increased  more  rapidly  than  imports,  and  the  current  transfers  surplus 
increased substantially.  
In the first nine months of 2002, the services surplus was 12.0 million lats higher than the year before. 
Although  transportation  services  rendered  to  non-residents  decreased  significantly,  the  services 
surplus increased as proceeds on travel services were higher (mostly due to the increasing number of 
foreigners visiting Latvia) and the other services balance improved. In the first nine months of the year, 
the services surplus covered 40.5% of the goods deficit.  
Due to qualitative changes in collection of balance of payments statistics, the current transfers surplus 
increased by 88.6 million lats in the first nine months of 2002, covering 18.8% of the goods deficit.  
The current account deficit continued to be covered largely by foreign direct investment (in the amount 
of 75.5% in the first nine months of the year).  
Provided the internal and external economic environments do not deteriorate significantly at the end of 
the year, the current account deficit is likely to be 8.5% of GDP in 2002.  
The country’s fiscal position was better than in the past  year. In the first ten months of 2002, fiscal 
deficit  in  the  general  government  consolidated  budget  totalled  32.1  million  lats.  (Fiscal  deficit  was 
1.4 times or 46.0 million lats higher in the corresponding period of the past year.)  
Nevertheless,  there  are  grounds  to  expect  that  the  fiscal  deficit  in  the  2002  general  government 
consolidated budget will remain at the level of 2001, not exceeding 2.0% of GDP.  
The  Cabinet  of  Ministers  has  basically  accepted  the  projections  for  budgetary  revenues  for  2003, 
according to which revenues in the central government basic budget will be 7.3% higher than those 
projected for 2002. No agreement over expenditures projections has been reached.  
The  Bank  of  Latvia  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  tight  fiscal  policy  in  ensuring  a  balanced 
development  in  the  national  economy.  Under  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  achieving  fiscal 
discipline is of particular importance. The Bank of Latvia encourages the Government to draw up the 
state budget for the next year so as to keep the deficit below 2.0% of GDP. In case tax revenues grow 
in excess of projections, the expenditures, which are not included in the next year’s budget, could be 
revised.  
Developments in the Banking System  
Interbank market rates on lats transactions continued to follow a downward trend in November. The 
overnight RIGIBOR dropped from 4.0% at end-October to 3.0% at end-November, while the six-month 
RIGIBOR, to which interest rates on lats loans to domestic enterprises and private persons are usually 
fixed, fell from 4.2% to 4.1%, respectively.  
In October, interest rates on loans in lats and the OECD currencies granted to domestic enterprises 
and  private  persons  fell,  reaching  a  record  low.  This  downward  trend  was  promoted  by  a  gradual 
decrease in money market rates on lats transactions of longer maturities and escalating competition.  
The weighted average interest rate of short-term loans in lats dropped to 6.42% and that of short-term 
loans in the OECD currencies was down to 5.59%. At the same time, the weighted average interest 
rate of long-term loans in lats declined to 7.43%, and that of long-term loans in the OECD currencies 
fell to 6.16%.  
A  slight  month-on-month  increase  in  October  notwithstanding,  deposit  rates  remained  rather  low. 
Basically, lending and deposit rates have followed a falling trend since the beginning of the year.  
The weighted average interest rate of short-term deposits in lats was 2.97% (2.71% in September), 
and that of long-term deposits was 5.44% (4.53% in September). The weighted average interest rate 
of short-term deposits in the OECD currencies was 2.19% (2.05% in September), while that of such 
long-term deposits declined from 5.19% to 3.20%.  
The  demand  for  cash  continued  to  rise,  and  currency  in  circulation  grew  by  9.6  million  lats  (by 
7.2 million lats in October), amounting to 585.8 million lats.  
In  October,  loans  to  domestic  enterprises  and  private  persons  increased  by  4.2%  (a  year-on-year 
increase of 46.4%), totalling 1 734.3 million lats.  
2 
 BIS Review 1/2003
 Loans to domestic enterprises increased by 38.5 million lats, and loans to domestic private persons 
grew by 31.6 million lats.  
In October, the largest growth was observed in long-term loans (by 62.5 million lats). At the same time, 
short-term loans increased by only 7.6 million lats.  
The  development  of  the  real  estate  market  and  a  downward  trend  in  lending  rates  fostered  further 
rapid growth in mortgage loans, which rose by 25.1 million lats in October. The year-on-year growth in 
mortgage  loans  was  81.9%.  Significant  increases  were  recorded  also  in  commercial  credit  and 
industrial credit, which are related to the development of the trade and industrial sectors (21.5 million 
lats and 13.3 million lats, respectively).  
At the end of October, loans granted by banks totalled 1 989.5 million lats (4.2% higher than at the 
end of September).  
Deposits with banks rose 9.3% in October, amounting to 2 954 million lats.  
Deposits by domestic enterprises and private persons (1 261 million lats) were 2.2% higher than in 
September and 22.9% higher than in October 2001.  
In October, banks’ assets (excluding trust assets) increased by 4.6% (by 27.5% over October 2001), 
totalling 4 147 million lats.  
Banks’ equity capital grew by 0.9% in October, reaching 369 million lats at the end of the month (a 
year-on-year increase of 29.4%).  
Banks’ profit for the first ten months of 2002 was 44 million lats (a year on-year increase of 34%).  
Bank of Latvia  
The  main  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia,  as  defined  by  the  Law  "On  the  Bank  of  Latvia",  is  to 
implement  monetary  policy  by  controlling  the  amount  of  money  in  circulation  with  the  aim  of 
maintaining price stability.  
The  independence  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia  is  guaranteed  by  the  Law  "On  the  Bank  of  Latvia"  and 
ensured in practice. The Bank also meets all prerequisites, as established by the European Monetary 
Institute,  for  independence  of  the  central  bank.  No  institution  or  person  can  influence  the  Bank’s 
decisions.  The  Governor  is  appointed  by  the  Saeima  of  the  Republic  of  Latvia.  Likewise,  upon  the 
Governor’s recommendation, it appoints members of the Board of Governors. All the above officials 
are appointed for a six-year term. The Governor, the Deputy Governor and members of the Board of 
Governors may be discharged before their term of office only if they have tendered their resignation, if 
a  court  decision  on  sentencing  any  of  them  for  a  deliberate  crime  has  taken  legal  effect,  or  the 
Governor, the Deputy Governor or a member of the Board of Governors is not able to officiate for a 
period exceeding six successive months because of illness or some other reason.  
The Law prohibits the Bank of Latvia from granting direct credit to the Government for the needs of 
covering  budget  deficit.  In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Latvia  does  not  have  the  right  to  buy  government 
securities on the primary market.  
The  Bank  of  Latvia  has  developed  and  is  using  the  full  set  of  the  same  indirect,  market  based 
monetary policy instruments that are used by the European Central Bank.  
On May 18, 2000, the Bank of Latvia was assigned quality management ISO 9002 certification.  
Movement of Capital and the Payment System  
Both current and capital account transactions have been fully liberalised in Latvia. There are virtually 
no  restrictions  on  cash  and  capital  flows  to  and  from  Latvia.  The  Bank  of  Latvia  ensures  the 
convertibility  of  the  lats  by  buying  and  selling  unlimited  amounts  of  the  SDR  basket  currencies  to 
banks at their request.  
In 2000, the Bank of Latvia introduced the interbank automated payment system (SAMS), which is a 
real-time gross settlement system. It conforms to the relevant requirements of the European Central 
Bank and may be joined in the TARGET system.  
BIS Review 1/2003 
 3
 Brief Description of the Banking Sector  
Currently, financial services are provided by 22 banks and one branch of a foreign bank (Riga Branch 
of  Nordea  Bank  Finland  Plc).  A  representative  office  of  Dresdner  Bank  AG  (Germany)  operates  in 
Latvia, but it has no right to render financial services.  
According to the Financial and Capital Market Commission, foreign shareholders owned 64.3% of total 
share  capital  in  Latvian  banks  at  the  end  of  the  second  quarter  of  2002.  In  10  banks,  foreign 
shareholders held over 50% of share capital.  
The restructuring of the banking sector has been completed: the industry is almost entirely in private 
hands (the state owned only 7.9% of banks’ total share capital as at the end of the second quarter of 
2002). The state is the owner of only one bank, the state joint-stock company  Latvijas Hipoteku un 
zemes banka, and holds 32% of interest in the joint-stock company Latvijas Krajbanka.  
Banking Legislation  
General. The legislative framework for banking meets the EU requirements in full, and in some areas 
the requirements are even more rigorous. International Accounting  Standards (IAS) have been fully 
introduced; banks’ annual reports are prepared in accordance with IAS and audited by internationally 
recognised auditing firms. Practical supervision is very tight and bank inspections are conducted more 
frequently than in the EU member states.  
Licensing. The required minimum initial capital to establish a bank is 5 million euros. The prudential 
requirements that foreign banks wishing to establish representative offices or branches in Latvia must 
meet are the same as for domestic banks.  
Legislation.  The  principal  relevant  law,  the  "Law  on  Credit  Institutions",  has  been  in  force  since 
October 24, 1995, and it has been amended on several occasions. The regulations of the Financial 
and Capital Market Commission and the Bank of Latvia detail the requirements set by the Law. The 
whole set of regulations normally used by a supervisory authority is in place and corresponds with the 
EU standards.  
The  Law  "On  the  Prevention  of  Laundering  of  Proceeds  Derived  from  Criminal  Activity"  came  into 
effect on June 1, 1998. The Law fully conforms with  the relevant  EU directive:  it requires customer 
identification  and  keeping  records  on  all  transactions,  defines  suspicious  transactions  and  obliges 
banks to report them to a special control institution (Disclosures Office).  
The Law "On Natural Person Deposit Guarantees" came into effect on October 1, 1998. From January 
1, 2002 until December 31, 2003, deposits will be guaranteed up to the level of 3 000 lats. This applies 
to  all  deposits  made  with  banks  that  are  subject  to  this  Law,  regardless  of  the  day  a  deposit  was 
made.  The  Law  prescribes  a  schedule  for  increasing  this  amount  to  the  level  required  by  the  EU 
directive (13 000 lats) in six years. As of 2003, the guarantees will also be applied to deposits of legal 
persons.  
As of July 1, 2001, the financial sector is supervised by a single supervisory authority, the Financial 
and Capital Market Commission, the successor, in this area, to the Bank of Latvia. Hence, the financial 
sector will continue to benefit from the supervision framework that is among the strictest in Central and 
Eastern Europe.  
Latvia's Integration in the European Union and the Introduction of the Euro  
The Bank of Latvia’s policy responses are based on this country’s strategic goal, which is accession to 
the  EU,  and  the  task  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia  is  to  prepare  the  country  for  joining  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. In light of its commitment to joining the EU, Latvia is aiming towards both nominal 
and  real  convergence  with  the  EU  member  states.  Real  convergence  is  a  long-term  objective,  but 
Latvia is well on its way of achieving it.  
Since  1996 real GDP growth in Latvia has exceeded GDP growth in the EU (except in 1999), thus 
narrowing per capita income differences.  
The structure of Latvian GDP is in line with that of the developed countries: the shares of agriculture 
and manufacturing in total value added declined from 10% in 1995 to 4% in 2001 and from 22% to 
13%, respectively, while the share of services increased from 56% to 63%.  
4 
 BIS Review 1/2003
 Latvia’s export structure by trade partner indicates the strengthening of the role of exports to the EU: in 
the first nine months of 2002, 60.3% of total exports went to the EU member states.  
Although  the  accession  countries  are  not  required  to  meet  the  Maastricht  convergence  criteria,  we 
have set fulfilling the Maastricht convergence criteria as a medium-term target in the area of nominal 
convergence. Already now Latvia complies with most of them.  
- In November, consumer price inflation was 1.6%. 
- Gross government debt was only 11.9% of GDP at the end of the first half of 2002. 
- There was no budget deficit in 1997 and 1998. In 2000 and 2001, the budget deficit was below the 
Maastricht ceiling, i.e., 3% of GDP. 
- Yields on government bonds, while still higher (5.38% for 5-year Treasury bonds in September 2002) 
than  the  Maastricht  criteria,  are  on  a  downward  trend  and  their  maturity  continues  to  increase. We 
expect to be able to meet the requirements in the medium term. 
- The lats has been pegged to the SDR basket of currencies at a constant exchange rate since 1994. 
Latvia has thereby shown that it is ready and able to meet the currency stability criterion.  
During the pre-accession period, the exchange rate peg of the lats to the SDR will be maintained. This 
peg has served the Bank well and has ensured narrower exchange rate fluctuations than a possible 
peg  to  any  single  currency.  In  addition,  the  composition  of  Latvia’s  foreign  trade  by  settlement 
currencies  closely  resembles  the  composition  of  the  SDR  basket,  with  the  US  dollar  and  the  euro 
being the major component in both.  
The  Bank  of  Latvia  will  be  prepared  to  join  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  at  the  time  of 
Latvia’s  accession  to  the  EU.  The  structure  and  objectives  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia,  the  degree  of  its 
independence  and  its  set  of monetary  policy  instruments  are  fully  in  line  with  those  defined  for  the 
European System of Central Banks. 
BIS Review 1/2003 
 5
