 Lars Heikensten: The Riksbank and the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  SEB’s  EMU  seminar, 
Cirkus, Stockholm, 4 September 2003. 
 Let me begin by thanking the organisers for inviting me to speak at this event. 
The  past  few  months  have  certainly  been  hectic  for  those  of  us  working  at  the  Riksbank.  We  are 
undoubtedly in the eye of the storm and feature almost daily in the EMU debate. Moreover, we are 
affected more directly and tangibly by the result of the referendum than most people. I can take my 
own diary as an example; if the result is a (cid:147)yes(cid:148) vote, I will be in Frankfurt for a day or two at least 
every other week, while if the result is a (cid:147)no(cid:148), the visits will be reduced to a few hours four times a 
year.  
Given this, the temptation to jump into the debate head first has been strong at times. However, we 
have  decided  not  to  participate  in  any  campaigns.  The  Riksbank  as  an  institution  took  a  stand  in 
favour of EMU membership in the form of submission responses in both 1994 and 1997. However, the 
Executive Board has now decided to refrain from taking a stand in connection with the referendum. 
The personal views of the various members of the Executive Board have nevertheless been known for 
some  time.  Five  of  us  are  in  favour,  one  against.  As  the  staff  of  the  Riksbank  has  knowledge  and 
experience of significance in this field we have agreed to contribute factual information. We have also 
agreed that any senior managers wishing to express their views on various issues relating to the EMU 
discussion may do so, as long as this is done in a factual manner. Our ambition here is of course to 
ensure  that  the  general  public  retains  confidence  in  the  Riksbank regardless  of  the  outcome  of  the 
referendum. 
Today  I  intend  to  briefly  discuss  three  issues  that  have  arisen  in  the  discussions  and  of  which  the 
Riksbank  has  knowledge  and  experience.  The  first  concerns  whether  the  differences  between  the 
ECB  and  the  Riksbank  are  as  large  as  is  sometimes  claimed.  The  second  issue  is  the  need  for  a 
national stabilisation policy. Finally, I shall discuss, on the basis of our own experiences, the conditions 
for influence in economic policy forums if we choose to remain outside the Eurosystem. 
Are there major differences between the Riksbank and the ECB? 
In Sweden we lived for a long time - rather longer than the core EMU countries - under the impression 
that better economic growth and lower unemployment could be achieved merely by allowing inflation 
to be slightly higher. This led to repeated devaluations and to much poorer economic growth. Sweden 
fell  behind  the  other  EU  countries  in  terms  of GDP  per  capita  and  purchasing  power.  There  was  a 
break  in  this  policy  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  in  connection  with  the  crisis  during  that  period. 
Importing  the  stability-oriented  policy  that  had  long  been  conducted  in  the  EMU’s  core  countries 
helped to create better conditions for future growth. 
The  policy  model  we  now  follow  comes  originally  from  Germany.  During  the  entire  post-war  period 
they  have  endeavoured,  to  a  great  extent  successfully,  to  maintain  price  stability.  The  task  of 
achieving  this  has  fallen  to  the  German  central  bank  -  the  Bundesbank  -  which  has  operated 
independently, at arm’s length from party politics. 
The Bundesbank model is now copied by a number of industrial nations, which have given their central 
banks  a  large  degree  of  independence  and  the  task of  aiming  for  price  stability.  This  policy  is  also 
reflected in the Maastricht Treaty and in the Riksbank legislation. My colleagues in the major industrial 
nations also try - as long as they are sure that inflation is not about to deviate from the desired level - 
to take account of economic activity and unemployment. There are thus considerable similarities and 
this  applies  not  only  in  Europe,  but  also  in  a  comparison  with,  for  instance,  the  US,  although  the 
stipulated targets vary, sometimes for historical reasons. In this sense we are all the children of the 
Bundesbank!  
Within the central bank world the methods of working have also become more similar in recent years. 
Although not all industrial nations with a floating exchange rate say that they use inflation targeting, 
they  actually  do  so  in  some  form.  All  of  them  apply  a  forward-looking  perspective;  they  produce 
forecasts and try to adapt interest rates in good time to ensure that inflation will be in line with a target 
BIS Review 39/2003 
 1
 that is formulated with varying precision. The ECB now says that inflation should be below, but close 
to, 2 per cent, which does not differ greatly from our symmetrical 2 per cent target, given the prevailing 
error margins. In addition, we usually say that we focus on inflation 1-2 years ahead, while the ECB 
says it applies a medium-term perspective. There is no great difference here, either. 
When  it  comes  to  communication  and  accountability,  the  similarities  also  outweigh  the  differences 
now. This is perhaps not so surprising. Greater independence leads to a natural increase in demands 
for  central  banks  to  clearly  explain  and  account  for  their  actions.  It  is  also  natural  that  it  should  be 
possible to assess these actions. To this end, those who appoint the Executive Board at the Riksbank 
and  at the  ECB have the  opportunity  to  attend  important board meetings.  Both institutions  are also 
accountable  to  their  respective  parliaments.  However,  there  are  also  a  number  of  differences.  For 
instance, our target is more precise and we regularly publish inflation reports containing forecasts that 
show how our analysis work develops and changes over time. We also publish separate minutes of 
our monetary policy discussions.  
Neither  monetary  policy  theory,  nor  its  practical  implication  is  written  in  stone.  Changes  occur  over 
time. In this spirit the ECB has been reviewing its monetary policy operations over the past year. The 
enlargement  eastwards  will  entail  a  new,  formative  stage.  I  would  gladly  work  actively  to  achieve 
increased clarity and transparency within the ECB if the result of the referendum is a (cid:147)yes(cid:148) vote. 
Is a national stabilisation policy necessary? 
The risk that Sweden could end up in a different situation from the rest of the euro area, and that this 
would  cause  serious  economic  policy  problems,  has  been  strongly  highlighted  in  the  Swedish 
discussions, much more so than  in other countries  where  the monetary  union has  been discussed. 
The reason for this is, of course, the severe crisis that occurred at the beginning of the 1990s, with the 
collapse of the krona in 1992, which had such a tangible effect on the lives of many in Sweden. 
In my opinion, there is a tendency to overestimate the risks that developments in Sweden will differ 
substantially from the rest  of the  world and require unique stabilisation  policy  measures.  When we 
have differed from other countries previously - such as during the crisis years of the early 1990s - this 
has  usually  been  the  result  of  conducting  a  different  economic  policy;  of  not  having  control  over 
inflation or focussing on stability, as the core EMU countries did. However, there now appears to be a 
consensus  that  economic  policy  should  be  aimed  at  long-term  stability  and  that  this  policy  should 
stand firm. 
At the same time, I do not think that a relatively similar development in interest rates in Sweden and 
the euro area in recent years is sufficient argument against the need for a national stabilisation policy. 
While it is true that the instrumental rates have developed similarly to one another, which I believe will 
also be the case if we remain outside the Eurosystem, the point of a national stabilisation policy is not 
to fine-tune a relatively normal level of economic activity, as we have experienced in recent years, but 
to manage situations where Sweden for some reason deviates from the course pursued by the rest of 
Europe. Such a situation cannot be completely ruled out.  
The task we face if the result of the referendum is a (cid:147)yes(cid:148) vote is to make use both of other countries’ 
experiences and our own from the past ten years and to translate these into an appropriate regulatory 
framework for fiscal policy. The changes in budget policy, with a long-term expenditure ceiling and a 
budget  surplus  target,  form  a  natural  starting  point.  It  is  quite  simple.  There  should  be  sufficient 
reserves for the central government to be able to bear a deficit for a period if the economy were to 
deviate  significantly.  This  requires  first  and  foremost  that  the  central  government  debt  be  further 
amortised, which is a desirable goal in any case. If these reserves are available, one can be fairly sure 
that  they  will  be  used  in  a  crisis  situation.  The  opposite  situation  is  more  difficult;  when  restraint  is 
required in situations where there is a risk that prices and wage formation could get out of control. It 
would then be necessary to find institutional solutions to help the government and parliament to make 
the  necessary  long-term  decisions  and  to  do  so  even  in  situations  where  they  may  be  politically 
difficult  and  even  risky.  Here  I  think  it  is  possible  to  draw  on  some  experiences  of  the  Riksbank’s 
actions in recent  years. Clear targets, transparent analyses and discussions, combined with regular 
assessments, can put pressure on the political system to take action in time. If you remember, there 
was doubt at the beginning that the Riksbank would be able to achieve its inflation target. 
Some people say it is an impossible task. That Swedish politicians will never be able to manage fiscal 
policy  in  a  responsible  manner.  I  find  this  rather  difficult  to  understand,  although  we  have  negative 
experiences from the 1970s and 1980s. It is enough to look at two of our three closest neighbours - 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2003
 Denmark and Finland. Both have experienced equally severe fiscal policy problems as Sweden, but 
they now have, as far as one can see, fully-functional fiscal policy regimes adapted to fixed exchange 
rates. A different, improved budget policy system was also established in Sweden following the crisis 
in the early 1990s, although this was aimed at long-term sustainability rather than stabilisation, which 
is only natural with a floating exchange rate.  
Is EMU membership important for Sweden to gain influence? 
Finally,  I  intend  to  discuss  what  I  personally  consider  to  be  the  most  important  aspect  of  the  EMU 
issue  -  how  Sweden’s  opportunity  to  take  responsibility  and  exercise  influence  in  an  international 
economic  policy  context  will  be  affected  by  the  result  of  the  referendum.  Here  I  am  speaking  not 
primarily  as  Riksbank  governor  of  six  months  but  on  the  basis  of  my  experiences  over  almost  20 
years,  as  civil  servant  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  under  three  finance  ministers  and  later  as  deputy 
governor of the Riksbank, representing Sweden in numerous international forums. 
My  first  reflection  concerns  Sweden’s  influence  now,  compared  with  before.  As  I  see  it,  Sweden’s 
influence has declined considerably, which is not always made clear in the general debate.  
The most  important  reason  for  this  erosion  of  Sweden’s  position  is  that  we,  as  I mentioned  earlier, 
have declined in economic strength in relation to almost all of the other industrial nations. In addition, 
there is a more positive aspect here, namely that a number of former developing countries have made 
considerable economic progress and are now important players in the international economic policy 
game. The result is that we now sit at fewer decision-making tables than at any other point during the 
post-war  period  and  we  carry  less  weight  at  those  tables  where  we  have  retained  a  place.  One 
expression of this is that an ever-declining number of Swedes now hold central positions in economic 
policy and financial contexts. We have come a long way from the time when the first two heads of the 
IMF were Swedes. It is against this background - our weaker international position - that we should 
evaluate the importance of becoming full members of the European cooperation. 
Globalisation has strengthened the significance of the European Union. Of course, I can make direct 
contacts and conduct a dialogue with my colleagues in, for instance, South Africa or Argentina, and 
argue for a  particular  line  in an  international economic policy  issue,  which I actually  often do. They 
listen to my arguments, but when it really comes to the crunch on an important and sensitive issue, 
they  always  wonder  what  Europe  thinks.  To  an  increasing  extent  -  and  here  there  is  a  tangible 
difference compared with ten years ago - countries in other parts of the world are regarding Europe as 
a whole unit. Thus, if we do not have a strong influence in Europe, we will not be heard very far. 
The  discussion  of  influence  focuses  too  much,  in  my  opinion,  on  the  value  of  sitting  on  the  ECB’s 
Governing Council and determining interest rates. Of course, as members we would do all we could to 
ensure  this  functioned  well,  but  there  is  no  opportunity  here  to  take  into  account  specific  Swedish 
interests;  the  rates  are  set  for  to  the  good  of  Europe  as  a  whole.  More  important  from  a  Swedish 
perspective would be the discussions on developments in and regulation of the financial system. As 
banks and securities markets become increasingly integrated, new and interesting questions arise with 
regard to the best means of exercising international supervision and oversight. Plans are also being 
drafted for the European payment system. The ECB plays a central role in this work. Whether or not 
we have a place at the decision-making table affects the conditions for the financial sector in Sweden, 
a sector that currently employs around 80,000 people, which is almost twice as many as, for instance, 
the forestry-based industries.  
Even  more  important  here  is  the  broader  economic  policy  decision-making,  primarily  through  the 
Ecofin  Council,  where  the  Ministers  of  Finance  meet  regularly.  The  trend  is  clear,  although  the 
changes have so far been tentative and gradual. An increasing number of the important issues are 
discussed and decided in practice in the small circle of countries participating in the Eurosystem, what 
is known as the Euro group. 
It is not difficult for me to point out issues from recent years where we could probably have exerted 
greater influence if we had been members. During the early years, when the ECB was being built up, 
we  sat  at  the  decision-making  table.  When  it  then  became  clear  that  we  and  the  Brits  intended  to 
remain on one side, our colleagues quite simply decided to postpone a number of important issues 
where  we  had  strong  views,  including  the  monetary  policy  framework  with  inflation  targeting, 
transparency, etc. This also applied to various payment system issues, where our position was weaker 
on the outside. 
BIS Review 39/2003 
 3
 We have thus already lost considerable influence, which is also confirmed in surveys. If we now say 
(cid:147)no(cid:148) to membership, if not for good but at least for the foreseeable future, the  situation  will  worsen 
further. The fact that we were fully engaged in the work on preparing for the EMU in the mid-1990s 
means that we have good personal contacts, which are valuable in particular during difficult crisis and 
negotiating  situations.  A  new  generation  of  decision-makers,  with  whom  we  do  not  have  the  same 
relationship, will gradually enter the system. The allowances made by many countries and colleagues 
while expecting that we would soon join will no longer be made. The EU enlargement eastwards will 
also increase the group of countries involved and we will become less interesting. In addition, we will 
miss a formative stage in connection with the enlargement. Once it has been completed, the situation 
will in many ways be more fixed.  
Conclusion 
I  have  discussed  in  my  talk  three  questions  that  have  arisen  in  the  EMU  debate.  All  three  are 
connected in some way to the operations of the Riksbank. A brief summary of my conclusions is: 
   4 
 The European Central Bank is sometimes depicted as an institution completely different from 
the Riksbank. I think this is wrong. Of course there are some differences in working methods, 
although  these  have  declined  recently.  However,  the  similarities  in  the  policy  pursued  are 
much greater than the differences. We are both children of the successful German central 
bank, the Bundesbank. We have sprung from the same intellectual model, where the target 
is price stability, the management are appointed by the political system and the actual work 
is done at an arm’s length from party politics.  
In my opinion, the value of conducting a national interest rate and exchange rate policy is 
exaggerated in the EMU debate. On the other hand, it is conceivable that situations might 
arise  where  strongly  stabilising  fiscal  policy  measures  are  necessary.  It  would  then  be 
necessary to find institutional solutions to help the government and parliament to make the 
necessary long-term decisions and to do so even in situations where they may be politically 
difficult  and  even  risky.  Here  I  think  it  is  possible  to  draw  on  some  experiences  of  the 
Riksbank’s  actions  in  recent  years.  Clear  targets,  transparent  analyses  and  discussions, 
combined with regular assessments, can put pressure on the political system to take action 
in time. 
As representative of the Riksbank, I have been able to experience at first hand the closed 
doors to the meeting rooms of Europe and the fact that we have lost influence. During the 
early years, when the ECB was being built up, we sat at the decision-making table. When it 
then  became  clear  that  we  and  the  Brits  intended  to  remain  on  one  side,  our  colleagues 
quite simply decided to postpone a number of important issues where we had strong views, 
including the monetary policy framework with inflation targeting, transparency, etc. This also 
applied to various payment system issues, where our position was weaker on the outside. If 
we now say (cid:147)no(cid:148) to membership, if not for good but at least for the foreseeable future, the 
situation  will  worsen  further,  as  I  have  described  already.  I  think  this  would  be  very 
unfortunate. 
BIS Review 39/2003
