David Dodge: Economic integration in North America 
Remarks by David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Couchiching Institute on Public 
Affairs, Geneva Park, Ontario, 7 August 2003. 
 For more than 70 years now, the Couchiching Institute on Public Affairs has been bringing Canadians 
together  with  the  purpose  of  asking  some  thought-provoking  questions  and  encouraging  lively, 
stimulating  debates  and  action  on  a  variety  of  key  public  policy  issues.  For  example,  it  was  at 
Couchiching, 56 years ago, that the idea of creating a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) was 
first floated publicly by Escott Reid, a senior official with the Canadian Department of External Affairs. 
NATO was established a year and a half later, reflecting almost exactly the vision that Reid outlined in 
his speech at Couchiching. 
I  am  delighted  to  have  been  invited  to  participate  in  this  year's  conference,  the  theme  of  which  is 
“Continentalism: What's in It for Us?” True to form, here again is a topic that is thought-provoking and, 
some might say, provocative! 
Before I venture any thoughts on the subject, let me make it clear that I am not here as an advocate 
for greater North American integration. This is very much a political decision for Canadians and their 
elected governments. It is a big decision, and all of us, as a democratic society, will have to determine 
what we really want. 
I'm not a politician; I'm an economist. So, what I intend to do tonight is to lay down some parameters 
for an appropriate discussion of the issues relevant to greater economic integration in North America. 
First, I would like to review the benefits and costs of economic integration. By economic integration, I 
mean the free movement of goods and services, capital, and labour and the harmonization of the rules 
governing  the  operations  of  these  three  key  markets.  I  will  briefly  review  the  progress  Canada  has 
made  on  each  of  those  fronts,  and  the  benefits  we  have  derived  from  opening  up  our  markets  to 
international  competition  and  to  the  free  flow  of  capital.  Next,  I  will  talk  about  the  remaining 
impediments to fuller economic integration. And finally, I will briefly discuss where we might go from 
here. 
The economic benefits and costs of open markets  
Free trade 
(i) 
International  trade  in  goods  and  services  takes  place  because  countries  have  different  resource 
endowments and labour skills and because consumer tastes vary from country to country. 
David  Ricardo,  a  19th-century  British  economist,  argued  that  a  country  could  gain  from  trade  even 
when  another  country  had  an  absolute  advantage  in  producing  all  goods  and  services.  He  argued, 
rightly, that by concentrating on producing those goods and services in which a country was relatively 
more efficient, and importing those products in which it was relatively less efficient, it could increase its 
national income. And this would be so even if that country was absolutely less efficient in producing all 
products. This is the famous principle of comparative advantage. It is on this principle that economists 
base their view that barriers to trade reduce economic welfare in all countries. When countries export 
goods  and  services  in  which  they  are  most  competitive  and  import  those  in  which  they  are  less 
competitive, consumers everywhere benefit, the potential output of all nations increases, and so does 
the global standard of living. 
Opening  up  national  borders  also  opens  the  door  to  greater  global  competition.  And  this  acts  as  a 
potent incentive for businesses everywhere to become more efficient and productive. To relate this to 
Canada, international competition puts pressure on our domestic market to be more competitive, even 
in industries where the optimal scale may have only one or two Canadian firms operating. In the end, 
competitive pressure leads to greater efficiency, greater productivity, and higher standards of living. 
So  there  are  clear  economic  benefits  to  greater  economic  integration  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Of 
course,  there  are  adjustment  costs  to  be  borne  as  barriers  to  trade  are  removed.  Some  firms  and 
some industries will not be able to meet the foreign competition, and will die or contract. This is part of 
   1/6 
the process of releasing resources - both human and physical - to those industries or firms that are 
taking advantage of new markets abroad. So some kind of mechanism to equitably share the short-run 
costs of adjustment is important to reap the medium- and longer-run benefits of freer trade. 
Since the Second World War, Canada has had a history of being open to global markets for goods 
and services. In my view, this interaction with the rest of the world has proven very successful and has 
benefited Canadians, and our foreign partners, enormously. 
As you know, the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (FTA) of 1989 and the North American Free 
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) of 1994, which added Mexico to the partnership, were initially viewed with 
a great deal of skepticism in this country. And at first, the adjustment to the FTA was difficult. But, by 
the late 1990s, it was clear that freer trade in North America was bringing major benefits to Canada. 
FTA  and  NAFTA  have  opened  up  U.S.  and  Mexican  markets,  providing  Canadian  businesses  with 
tremendous opportunities. They have also put pressure on our entrepreneurs to be more efficient - a 
challenge they have clearly risen to. Canadian exports have flourished, and consumers in this country 
now benefit from greater product choice and lower prices. 
Under the FTA and NAFTA, we have achieved much freer trade in manufactured goods. And we have 
gone quite a distance with respect to certain services. But we still have problems in some key sectors. 
For  example,  we  certainly  have  a  long  way  to  go  when  it  comes  to  agriculture.  And  even  though, 
nominally, we have free trade in forest products and steel, complications do arise because the United 
States  retained  its  ability  to  apply  trade-remedy  laws.  The  current  softwood  lumber  dispute  is  an 
example  of  the  problems  we  face  with  U.S.  trade-remedy  laws,  specifically  anti-dumping  and 
countervailing  duties.  It  is  partly  because  of  such  problems  that  some  analysts  in  Canada  have 
recently been advocating a customs union, or some type of common market, with the United States. 
Clearly, some sections of NAFTA need further work if we are to eliminate all non-tariff barriers (such 
as  countervailing  and  anti-dumping  duties)  and  reduce  the  costs  to  industry  of  complying  with  a 
number  of  special  rules,  such  as  rules  of  origin.  Dealing  with  these  problems  also  means  closer 
integration of regulatory regimes in North America. 
Let me now turn from issues related to trade in goods and services to issues related to capital flows. 
Free capital flows 
(ii) 
Canada eliminated wartime foreign exchange controls in the early 1950s. Thus, for most of the post-
war  period,  we  have  benefited  greatly  from  the  free  movement  of  capital  and  from  competition  in 
financial markets. 
Capital  flows  have  played  a  very  important  role  in  Canada's  development  as  a  modern  economy. 
Indeed, particularly through the 1950s, 1960s, and early 1970s, we were able to use foreign savings to 
finance the large investment projects that were necessary to develop our industrial infrastructure and 
increase our production potential, especially in the resource and manufacturing sectors. At the same 
time, Canadians have been able to set up businesses and pursue investment opportunities abroad. 
Through  two-way  direct  investments,  Canada  has  also  had  access  to,  and  benefited  from, 
technological innovations and processes developed elsewhere. 
In a North American context, freeing up capital flows has not been part of formal negotiations between 
Canada and the United States. In both countries, this has largely been a domestic endeavour. By that, 
I  mean  that  the  integration  of  Canada-U.S.  capital  markets  has  proceeded  as  fast  as  we,  and  the 
Americans, have been able to reduce domestic impediments to freer capital flows. 
Free movement of workers 
(iii) 
Now, let me consider labour markets and the movement of labour between Canada and the United 
States. 
Back in the 19th century, there was considerable labour mobility between the two countries. But the 
movement  of  workers  across  the  border  suffered  a  serious  setback  after  the  First  World  War, 
particularly in the wake of the Great Depression. 
Today, the border between Canadian and U.S. labour markets is somewhat more open than it was at 
the end of the Second World War. But, in comparison with the markets for products and capital, it is 
still the least open. This is because of immigration policies and a multitude of different provincial, state, 
or federal licensing laws in the two countries. To achieve the full benefits of a single market, significant 
   2/6 
freeing up of laws and regulations that impede labour mobility would be needed. But I recognize that 
this is extremely difficult, particularly in a Canada-U.S.-Mexico context. 
This completes my brief review of the key Canada-U.S. markets for goods and services, capital, and 
labour.  Having  done  that,  I  believe  that  it  would  be  fair  to  say  that,  although  there  are  now  fewer 
“formal”  tariff  and  non-tariff  barriers  between  the  two  countries  than  there  were  15  years  ago,  the 
reality is that borders still do matter. As John Helliwell reminds us, “border effects are still too large to 
be ignored and too complex to be easily classed as good or bad.”1 
Regulatory regimes 
(iv) 
As I just pointed out in discussing labour markets, there are many non-tariff impediments to achieving 
the full benefits of economic integration. 
Among these, importantly,  are the different national,  provincial, or state regulatory regimes. Here, it 
seems to me that one of the key questions we should be asking ourselves is whether we have given 
sufficient consideration to “harmonizing” a number of our regulations with those of the United States. 
By  “harmonizing,”  I  mean  working  to  make  the  regulations  of  the  two  countries  compatible  or 
convergent, but not necessarily identical. 
My sense is that, on this score, we have made some but not much progress. I will expand on this point 
later. 
Where do we go from here? 
So, where do we go from here? 
Free  trade  within  North  America  has  brought  us  great  benefits.  Of  that,  there  is  no  doubt.  Ideally, 
though, what we should be striving for, as a country, is the removal of multilateral barriers to trade, so 
that the whole world can be open for business. The world community has been trying to do this since 
1947.  But  it  has  been  a  very  slow  process  because  building  consensus  continues  to  be  an  uphill 
battle, as we are witnessing with the current Doha round of trade negotiations. 
For me, free world trade is still the ideal. We in Canada cannot, and should not, lose sight of that goal 
by focusing only on free trade in North America. But, if we cannot tear down barriers multilaterally, we 
should at least continue to tear them down between provinces in Canada, between Canada and the 
United States, between Canada and Mexico and, indeed, throughout the Americas. 
As I said earlier, a number of analysts in this country have recently been calling for fuller economic 
integration in North America - to be pursued through arrangements ranging from a customs union to 
some type of common market, and all the way to full economic and monetary union. 
Of  course,  not  everyone  in  Canada  is  convinced  of  the  merits  of  fuller  economic  integration  within 
North  America.  In  fact,  as  you  will  probably  hear  later  in  this  conference,  many  Canadians  are 
concerned  about  the  implications  of  such  a  move  for  our  political  sovereignty  and  policy 
independence. 
Once again, I am here as an economist. So I will leave the political questions aside and focus instead 
on the factors that I see as relevant in the context of pursuing fuller economic integration. 
But I should point out that, although the interest for Canada in further integration is primarily economic, 
it is quite clear that the Americans see border security as an important element of that integration. So, 
as we in Canada consider deeper economic integration, we also have to consider what measures we 
would take to actually build a common security  perimeter around  North America. I  do  not intend to 
elaborate on this, since there are others at this conference who are much more knowledgeable and 
able  to  comment.  But  it  is  very  important  to  recognize  that,  for  our  southern  neighbours,  security 
integration and economic integration are clearly linked. 
With that, let me return to the question, Where do we go from here? 
                                                      
1  Helliwell, JF 1998. How Much Do National Borders Matter? Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution. 
   3/6 
Let's start with trade. The key issue for Canada is to reduce “border risk,” that is, guarantee Canadian 
producers and service providers access to U.S. markets without hassle and expense at the border, 
and without the risk of suddenly being shut out of those markets by some discretionary U.S. action. 
This is important. 
Here are some of the steps that could help in this respect: 
    a common external tariff - that is, a customs union and common border practices for imports 
from, and exports to, overseas markets 
harmonization of trade and commercial policies and regulation 
an end to the application of trade remedies within North America and 
a uniform policy with respect to federal and state/provincial subsidies. 
We could also work towards broadening NAFTA coverage to include agricultural products, although 
there are clear difficulties in this area. And we could work to remove barriers to trade in cultural, legal, 
financial,  and  communication  services,  although,  here again,  harmonizing regulatory  regimes at the 
federal and state/provincial levels would be very difficult. 
I  must  tell  you  that  arriving  at  an  agreement  on  measures  to  reduce  border  risk  or  to  broaden  the 
scope of NAFTA won't be easy. Most of the easier steps have already been taken. Remember, too, 
that the Americans have different concerns with respect to Mexico than they have with respect to us. 
There are many practical and political challenges to be overcome on the way. But if we could reach 
agreement on deepening and/or broadening NAFTA, it would be extremely valuable. It would spread 
the benefits of competition across more industries, reduce uncertainty stemming from unilateral trade 
actions, and greatly reduce non-tariff barriers (which are often even greater impediments to trade than 
tariffs).  And  if  we  could  agree  on  common  external  trade  rules  and  tariffs,  rules  of  origin  could  be 
eliminated and matters at the border would be enormously simplified. 
Let me now turn from trade in goods and services to other issues related to economic integration, or 
what  the  Europeans  call,  the  creation  of  a  “single  market.”  These  issues  largely  relate  to  the 
harmonization of regulatory regimes, not only with respect to the market for goods and services, but 
also the markets for capital and labour. 
There are efficiency gains to be made from moving to common regulatory standards in North America. 
Not  only  would  common  standards  reduce  the  costs  of  compliance;  they  would  also  allow  our 
entrepreneurs  to  compete  with  the  Americans  on  a  more  level  playing  field.  But,  as  the  European 
experience  demonstrates,  achieving  such  common  standards  is  a  long,  painstaking,  and  difficult 
process. What the Europeans did, in many instances, was to write a whole new set of rules to replace 
the often very divergent rules in the 15 member countries of the European Union. We do not face as 
daunting a problem in North America (at least in Canada and the United States) because the basic 
structure  and  philosophy  of  the  regulatory  frameworks  governing  commerce,  labour,  and  financial 
markets are similar - though far from identical. So the job of harmonization at the national level will be 
somewhat less onerous than in Europe. But it will still be a lengthy and difficult process. Furthermore, 
the  problem  for  us  is  that,  given  the  size  and  weight  of  the  United  States,  reaping  the  benefits  of 
harmonization will mean that, by and large, we would probably have to move towards U.S. regulatory 
standards. 
Clearly,  there  are  some  drawbacks  to  harmonizing  our  regulatory  standards  and  procedures  with 
those existing in the United States. U.S. standards may not always be absolutely ideal in a Canadian 
context.  But  the  point  is  that  we  should  not  reject  them  out  of  hand  because  they  are  not  perfect. 
Rather, we should assess them very carefully. And we should always be asking, Would we be better 
off adopting U.S. standards, so we can have harmonized regulatory regimes across North America, 
rather  than  adhering  to  our  own,  even  though  ours  might  be  better  suited  to  our  unique 
circumstances? 
What  I'm  saying  is  that,  if  we  are  going  to  preserve  different  regimes  of  economic  regulation,  we'd 
better have solid reasons for doing so. And we'd better make sure that the differences we maintain will 
indeed lead to better outcomes for Canadians. 
To be sure, there are some things that we may want to do differently in Canada, based on social or 
political  grounds.  For  example,  one  issue  that  Canadians  are  currently  debating  is  the  provision  of 
health  care  and  the  regulation  of  public  health  and  drugs.  Immigration  policy  is  another.  All  these 
issues deserve careful consideration. And we should encourage our analysts to examine closely the 
   4/6 
benefits and costs of maintaining divergent regimes versus the benefits and costs of pursuing regimes 
that move us closer to harmonization. 
One  last  point  I  would  like  to  make  with  respect  to  regulation  is  that,  domestically,  we  have  a  big 
problem in Canada. I am referring, of course, to the diversity of provincial standards in such key areas 
as  labour  markets,  financial  markets,  and  the  markets  for  some  services.  Different  criteria  for 
professional certification of tradespeople, different provincial securities regulations, and different rules 
related to transportation come readily to mind. By and large, this kind of diversity does not serve us 
well. So it is very important that we also harmonize regulatory standards at home. 
While most of the regulatory integration issues I have spoken about tonight apply to labour and capital 
markets  as  well  as  markets  for  goods  and  services,  I  want  to  make  a  couple  of  points  specifically 
related to further integration in labour and capital markets. 
Labour market integration would be greatly aided if Canada and the United States had procedures in 
place - procedures that were rapid, simple, and inexpensive - to grant work permits allowing citizens of 
either country to cross the border to take up jobs. Needless to say, this would be easier to negotiate if 
we  were  to  simultaneously  adopt  a  common  immigration  security  perimeter  for  North  America, 
although, logically, adoption of such a perimeter is not a prerequisite. 
To ensure that there are real welfare gains, initiatives to open up labour markets would also call for 
greater harmonization of licensing standards, so that people could actually be employed on both sides 
of the border. Of course, a good first step in this area would be harmonization of policies and adoption 
of common licensing standards in labour markets across provinces within Canada! 
Canadian and U.S. capital markets are already highly integrated and, as I said earlier, Canadians (and 
Americans) have benefited greatly from this open, transparent, and competitive market. As we all seek 
to improve corporate governance and to achieve greater transparency in the wake of recent corporate 
scandals, this is a real opportunity to achieve greater harmonization of rules in North America - not to 
mention globally. There is a willingness at the moment, on the part of authorities everywhere, to try to 
find a reasonable mix of principles and rules for accounting standards and securities regulation. We 
should seize  the  opportunity - and I  believe  we are in the  process of doing so  - to achieve greater 
uniformity of standards, not only with the United States but also among Canadian provinces. 
In sum, to achieve maximum economic benefits, harmonization of regulatory standards and practices, 
particularly with respect to capital and labour markets, should be a priority as we move forward. 
Economic integration and monetary union 
One last issue I would like to address briefly tonight is that of monetary integration. I have been asked 
the question, If there was a political decision in Canada to adopt policies of deeper North American 
integration, would it still make sense for us to keep our own currency? Or should we be thinking about 
adopting the U.S. dollar as our currency? 
First, let me stress that monetary union is an issue that should be considered once we have made 
more  progress  towards  establishing  a  single  market  for  goods  and  services,  capital,  and  labour. 
Without a single, well-functioning market for labour, a single currency could impose great adjustment 
costs  on  workers.  But  suppose  we  were  on  track  to  achieve  a  single  market.  Should  we  then  be 
thinking of a monetary union as well? The response to this, which I have set out in earlier speeches, is 
that it depends, to an important extent, on how close or how far apart are the industrial structures of 
the two countries. 
Although it is always  possible that at some future time those structures could converge (they could 
also diverge!), the reality is that, right now, they are quite different. This means that economic shocks 
tend  to  affect  our  two  economies  differently.  In  these  circumstances,  a  separate  floating  currency 
facilitates adjustment to those shocks at least cost, in terms of lost output or higher inflation. 
But  suppose  we  were  well  on  our  way  to  achieving  a  true  single  market  for  goods  and  services, 
labour, and capital. Then it would be sensible to consider a common currency in the context of the 
industrial structures prevailing at that time, with a view to ascertaining whether the benefits of lower 
transaction  costs  associated  with  a  common  currency  outweighed  the  higher  costs  of  economic 
adjustment. 
   5/6 
Conclusion 
Let me wrap up by summarizing my main points. 
Fundamentally, the decision to deepen economic integration in North America is a political one that 
Canadians and their governments will have to make. 
From a purely economic perspective, I have, as an economist, a strong predilection for continuing to 
tear down barriers to trade - preferably, multilaterally, but, realistically, first within Canada and North 
America. Over the long haul, that is going to encourage a more efficient, productive economy, greater 
opportunities for Canadian entrepreneurs and workers, and, most importantly, higher living standards 
for Canadians. 
To be sure, certain costs are involved in all of this. Fuller integration with the United States could make 
us more vulnerable to fluctuations in economic activity in that country. And we may no longer be able 
to  tailor  policies  to  fully  meet  our  own  needs  or  to  foster  particular  Canadian  industries.  These  are 
issues  that  we  ought  to  be  aware  of  and  analyze  very  carefully.  But  economic  theory  and  our 
experience so far support the view that, on balance, the benefits of opening up to the rest of the world 
outweigh the costs. 
Tonight, I have laid down some of the factors that I consider relevant in trying to come to a judgment 
about the desirability of further economic integration in North America, and about what needs to be 
done if Canadians decide to pursue this. 
I am looking forward to the insights that others may have on this issue as the conference unfolds. 
   6/6 
