 Linah K Mohohlo: 2003 Monetary Policy Statement 
Statement by Mrs Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, Gaborone, 25 February 2003. 
 Introduction  
I am privileged and honoured to welcome you to this important event in the calendar of the Bank - the 
presentation of the Monetary Policy Statement for 2003.  
Let me begin by refreshing memories on the objective and content of the Monetary Policy Statement, 
which  the  Bank  of  Botswana  issues  every  year.  The  Statement  serves  several  purposes.  First,  it 
provides an opportunity for the Bank to report on inflation and monetary policy developments in the 
previous year, and to present its assessment of the outlook for inflation in the current year. Second, it 
enables the Bank to outline policy issues and the approach that will be taken in formulating its policy 
stance in response to inflation-related developments throughout the year. Third, the Monetary Policy 
Statement  contains,  certainly  since  last  year,  the  Bank’s  annual  objectives  for  inflation  and  credit 
growth, and an explanation of how these are derived. The Statement, therefore, plays an important 
role in conveying to stakeholders and the public at large a range of information relating to one of the 
Bank’s core functions - the formulation and implementation of monetary policy.  
While the transparency entailed in the presentation of the Monetary Policy Statement is important in its 
own  right,  it  is  also  important  in  influencing  economic  and  financial  expectations,  as  well  as  the 
behaviour of economic agents. The Bank’s aim is to engender a public expectation of sustainable low 
inflation  consistent  with  the  broad  objective  of  macroeconomic  balance  as  a  basis  for  sustainable 
growth. In addition, the Statement serves as a vehicle for enhancing the accountability of the Bank to 
its stakeholders.  
In my remarks this evening, I will present only the main highlights of the full text of the 2003 Monetary 
Policy Statement. It is important, therefore, that you take the time to read the full text of the Statement, 
so you can obtain a more detailed analysis of monetary policy developments.  
I will briefly review the behaviour of inflation in 2002 and its underlying causes, before assessing the 
extent to which monetary policy succeeded in achieving its objectives in 2002. I will then outline the 
Bank’s  view  of  prospective  economic  and  financial  developments  in  2003  and,  on  the  basis  of  that 
assessment, the policy outlook for the current year.  
The Bank’s Monetary Policy Framework and Objectives  
I believe you are aware that the principal objective of monetary policy in Botswana, as it is for most 
central  banks  around  the  world,  is  to  control  inflation;  in  particular,  it  is  to  ensure  that  inflation  is 
predictable and maintained at low levels. By carrying out this responsibility of controlling inflation, the 
Bank contributes, along with other Government policies, to the ultimate objective of promoting a stable 
macroeconomic environment. This supports rising incomes and living standards for Batswana, along 
with  other  national  objectives,  especially  economic  diversification  which,  in  turn,  depends  on  export 
competitiveness.  You  will  agree that export competitiveness cannot be achieved unless Botswana’s 
inflation is low and comparable to the average of trading partner countries, such as South Africa, the 
United Kingdom, the United States of America and mainland Europe. This requirement is the basis for 
determining the desired range of inflation.  
The  framework  within  which  policy  is  determined  identifies  the  key  relationships  of  the  inflationary 
process. It is a well-known fact that excessive expenditure in relation to available goods and services 
in any given period pushes up prices - this is the concept referred to as demand-pull inflation. It is also 
well known that much expenditure, especially by the private sector, is financed through borrowing from 
the  banking  system.  Hence  the  Bank  determines  the  growth  rate  in  bank  credit  that  would  be 
consistent with a low and sustainable level of inflation. The framework also identifies the tool used in 
controlling inflation, and as is the case with most central banks, the tool used by the Bank is interest 
rates. Obviously in deploying the interest rate instrument, the Bank strikes a careful balance between 
the  need  to  discourage  excess  credit  growth,  and  the  need  to  encourage  productive  investment  as 
well as financial savings.  
BIS Review 12/2003 
 1
 In  formulating  the  monetary  policy  stance,  the  Bank  closely  examines  the  factors  that  influence 
inflation.  This  analysis  is  necessary  because  the  Bank  is  only  equipped  to  deal  with  changes  in 
inflation which are primarily due to domestic demand pressures. Furthermore, such pressures tend to 
have persistent, rather than erratic effects, such as those that may be due to transitory developments 
or supply fluctuations. That is why, in addition to the headline inflation data published by the Central 
Statistics Office, the Bank examines the underlying inflation trend, or core inflation. This is a measure 
of  inflation  which  excludes  the  impact  of  factors  which  are  transient  in  nature;  it  also  excludes 
exceptional changes in administered prices and/or indirect taxes, and is a more precise measure of 
price  developments  in  any  economy.  The  Bank  recognises  the  need,  however,  to  respond  to  any 
impact that the transitory developments may have on underlying inflation, particularly their effect on 
inflation expectations and second-round influences on price changes.  
In  a  market-based  economy  such  as  Botswana’s,  monetary  policy  influences  inflation  indirectly 
through its effect on interest rate changes, which then influence credit as a key means of financing 
expenditure  on  both  consumption  and  investment.  The  effectiveness  of  interest  rates  in  controlling 
credit is monitored closely. The Bank also recognises that the rate of growth of government spending 
is  an  important  component  of  domestic  demand,  since  the  Government  allocates  large  amounts  of 
funds to finance public consumption and investment. The fact that the Government plays a large role 
in  the  economy  underscores  the  need  for  complementarity  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  in 
achieving the inflation objective.  
This is the policy framework that provides a backdrop to the Bank’s assessment of the economic and 
financial environment over the past year, in which inflation or price developments took place.  
Developments in Inflation in 2002  
As you will no doubt recall, the Monetary Policy Statement for 2002 set an inflation objective range of 
4 - 6 percent. In setting this objective, the Bank was aware that headline inflation would be influenced 
by a number of transitory factors, especially the introduction of the 10 percent Value Added Tax (VAT) 
in July 2002. Before the introduction of VAT, annual headline inflation stabilised at around 6 percent 
during most of the first half of 2002. However, following the introduction of VAT, and as you will recall, 
inflation started rising, and increased from 5.9 percent in June 2002 to just over 11 percent by the end 
of  the  year.  The  Bank  had  anticipated  a  temporary  increase  in  headline  inflation  arising  from  the 
introduction  of  VAT,  of  between  4  percent  and  6  percent  over  and  above  underlying  inflation.  This 
prospect  was  conveyed  in  a  press  release  in  June  2002.  It  was  pointed  out,  at  the  time,  that  the 
VAT-related price increases would be a one-off temporary adjustment and that, in the absence of any 
significant second-round price effects, due for instance to compensatory wage increases, the impact of 
VAT would not result in a sustained rise in inflation.  
In the event, and in line with the Bank’s expectations, the effect of VAT was that the month-on-month 
rate of change in prices rose from an average of 0.5 percent over the twelve months to June 2002, to 
3.2 percent a month later in July 2002. Thereafter, the monthly rate of price increases progressively 
slowed  down  to  reach  0.4  percent  in  October.  The  monthly  price  increase  was  then  higher  in 
November, primarily due to technical adjustments to some components of the Consumer Price Index 
(CPI) basket, particularly the adoption of a new billing system by the Botswana Telecommunications 
Corporation.  
Although overall inflation increased sharply in the second half of the year, an analysis of the inflation 
trend  that  discounts  the  impact  of  VAT  and  other  technical  adjustments  to  data  suggests  that 
underlying inflation was around 6 - 7 percent for 2002, which was a little above the upper end of the 
Bank’s policy objective for that year.  
A closer look at the sources of inflation in 2002 provides further support to the conclusion that, while 
headline inflation was influenced by VAT and other price adjustments, the underlying rate was mostly 
contained. Prices of almost all categories of commodities rose at a higher rate in 2002 compared to 
2001 as had been expected, given the wide-ranging impact of VAT. Food prices, however, rose at a 
much faster rate than the average, due in part to drought conditions in the region. Food price inflation 
rose  from  approximately  4  percent  in  December  2001  to  over  14  percent  by  the  end  of  2002.  This 
accounted for almost half of the rise in overall inflation during the year, and reinforces the view that, 
after taking account of the impact of VAT and other exceptional factors, such as volatile food prices, 
underlying inflation was largely contained during 2002.  
  The relatively moderate rise in underlying inflation  was to some extent supported by a fairly benign 
inflationary environment in the world’s major economies. Although all major economies experienced 
moderately higher inflation, mainly as a result of rising energy prices, especially oil, average inflation 
rose by less than 1 percentage point, from 1.2 percent in 2001 to 2 percent in 2002. The inflation trend 
in South Africa was somewhat different; price increases were sharp, mostly due to the effects of the 
depreciation of the rand that had occurred towards the end of 2001. Inflation in South Africa was also 
affected by increases in food prices and labour costs. Core inflation in South Africa was 12.2 percent 
in December 2002 compared to 5.8 percent at the end of 2001.  
The  combined  effect  of  all  these  developments  was  that  average  inflation  of  Botswana’s  trading 
partners rose from 4.2 percent at the end of 2001 to 8.4 percent at the end of 2002, and was reflected 
in a rise in the cost of imports. In this connection, it should be pointed out that Botswana’s inflation 
briefly  fell  below  that  of  trading  partner  countries  in  the  middle  of  the  year,  although  it  was 
subsequently higher due to the impact of VAT.  
In light of the moderate upward trend in underlying inflation, the Bank continued to restrain the growth 
rate  of  commercial  bank  credit  to  the  private  sector.  After  an  adjustment  to  take  account  of  the 
extension and subsequent early repayment of loans by certain large borrowers, using offshore funds, 
credit rose by 21.4 percent over the year, compared to 18.1 percent in 2001. This growth rate was well 
above the Bank’s target range of 12.5 - 14.5 percent, which had been judged to be consistent with the 
economy’s underlying growth potential and the inflation objective.  
Moreover,  the  high  rate  of  growth  of  Government  spending,  estimated  at  18  percent  during  2002, 
albeit below the 20 percent growth rate recorded in 2001, also continued to exert pressure on inflation, 
thereby  placing  a  heavier  burden  on  monetary  policy.  The  expansionary  fiscal  policy  implied  an 
undesirable imbalance between fiscal and monetary policies in dealing with inflation.  
Monetary Policy Implementation During 2002  
In light of the high growth rate of credit and the need to contain inflationary expectations following the 
introduction of VAT, the Bank tightened monetary policy towards the end of the year by raising interest 
rates by a total of 1 percent in October and November 2002 - half a percent at each time.  
Consistent with past practice, the two changes in interest rates were immediately followed by press 
releases,  which  emphasised  that  the  increase  in  interest  rates  was  not  a  response  to  the  rise  in 
inflation resulting from the introduction of VAT, because the Bank considers the VAT-induced impact 
on inflation as a transitory event, which did not directly justify a monetary policy response. The Bank’s 
focus was on the impact that VAT may have on inflationary expectations. Hence it was important to 
forestall  the  development  of  expectations  of  higher  inflation  by  pointing  out  the  dangers  of 
accommodating  second-round  effects  of  VAT-related  price  increases  and  advising  against  possible 
compensatory  wage  increases.  Higher  interest  rates  were,  therefore,  aimed  partly  at  ensuring  that 
such expectations do not develop. This was done in order to demonstrate the Bank’s commitment to 
containing  inflation  arising  from  any  temporary  VAT-related  price  increases,  and  in  order  that 
expectations of rising prices do not become entrenched. There was also a need for a tighter monetary 
policy given that credit growth was still higher than desired.  
The effect of the exchange rate on inflation was benign during 2002. While the Pula appreciated in 
nominal  terms  against  major  international  currencies,  it  depreciated  by  8  percent  against  the  rand, 
resulting in an overall stable nominal effective exchange rate of the Pula. However, as inflation was 
higher  in  Botswana  than  in  trading  partner  countries,  largely  due  to  the  impact  of  VAT,  the  real 
effective exchange rate of the Pula appreciated by 2.6 percent in the year to December 2002; and to 
that extent, Botswana’s trade competitiveness was eroded.  
The Outlook for Inflation in 2003  
The  performance  of  the  global  economy  is  expected  to  improve  further  in  the  course  of  2003,  with 
world  output  currently  forecast  to  grow  by  2.5  percent,  up  from  an  estimated  1.7  percent  for  2002. 
Despite the forecast improvement in growth, inflation is expected to remain low and stable since the 
growth  in  world  output  will  still  be  below  trend.  There  is,  however,  considerable  uncertainty  with 
respect to oil prices due to the situation in the Middle East and Venezuela, as well as an imminent war 
in  Iraq.  Nevertheless,  as  inflation  continues  to  be  largely  under  control,  it  is  anticipated  that  major 
  world economies will maintain stimulative monetary policy which, in some instances, will be supported 
by expansionary fiscal policy.  
Inflation in South Africa, which is the most important external influence on inflation in Botswana, rose 
sharply during 2002. It is, however, expected to slow down in 2003, reflecting the recent strengthening 
of  the  rand,  the  tight  monetary  policy  stance  and  supportive  fiscal  policy.  Despite  these  favourable 
developments, it is unlikely that South Africa’s inflation target of 3 - 6 percent will be met during 2003. 
Forecasts of core inflation in South Africa for the year put it at between 7 percent and 8 percent, from 
just over 12 percent in 2002. For the other key trading partners, inflation is expected to remain around 
its  current  rate  of  2  percent.  Therefore,  if  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  Pula  is 
unchanged, Botswana’s imported inflation is likely to be lower in 2003 than it was last year.  
Demand  in  Botswana,  as  reflected  by  the  growth  in  commercial  bank  credit  and  government 
expenditure, was still undesirably high by the end of 2002. However, it is expected that the increase in 
interest  rates  in  the  last  quarter  of  2002  will,  in  due  course,  moderate  the  growth  in  bank  lending. 
Furthermore, the recently released 2003/04 Government Budget indicates that expenditure will grow at 
a  much  slower  rate  of  around  4  percent.  This  laudable  fiscal  restraint,  together  with  the  expected 
reduction in credit growth, should help to moderate inflationary pressures. The Government’s decision 
not  to  award  a  public  sector  pay  rise  in  2003  should  contribute  further  towards  restraining  demand 
pressures.  It  is  hoped  that  this  favourable  scenario  will  not  be  undermined  by  the  findings  of  the 
ongoing Salary Structure Review Commission. Be that as it may, prospects for 2003 are generally of a 
better  balance  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  and  this  augurs  well  for  a  sustainable  lower 
inflation in 2003.  
Against this background, it is the Bank’s view that inflation in the first half of 2003 will be around the 
present level of 10 to 12 percent, before falling by the middle of the  year and during the remaining 
months of 2003. This projection is based on the fact that most of the year-on-year effect of VAT on the 
Consumer Price Index will drop out after July 2003. The outlook is also predicated on the success of 
monetary policy in restraining credit growth, and the fact that government spending will indeed slow 
down. It is also expected that there will be no further undue external inflationary pressures generated 
by further large increases in prices of food and/or oil, or import prices more generally.  
Bank’s Monetary Policy Stance in 2003  
As highIighted earlier, the Bank seeks to achieve a rate of inflation that, at a minimum, will maintain 
relative stability in the real exchange rate and avoid the need for a devaluation of the Pula. The annual 
inflation  objective  is  based  on  an  assessment  of  forecast  inflation  for  trading  partner  countries. 
Although the forecast for Botswana’s trading partners’ inflation for 2003 is slightly higher than the initial 
forecasts  for  2002,  which  were  used  in  the  calculations  of  last  year’s  inflation  objective,  there  are 
strong reasons for maintaining the inflation objective range of 4 - 6 percent for 2003. First, by reducing 
Botswana’s  inflation  to  below  the  forecast  average  of  trading  partner  countries,  the  range  of  4  -  6 
percent will provide an opportunity to regain some of the competitiveness lost last year as a result of a 
relatively higher level of inflation in Botswana. Second, underlying inflation remains close to the upper 
end of this inflation objective, which means that the 4 - 6 percent range remains both a desirable and 
feasible  objective  for  2003.  Third,  there  remain  concerns  about  the  risks  of  further  VAT-induced 
increases in inflationary expectations. Hence it is important for the Bank to promote expectations of a 
sustainable low inflation.  
The range for the growth rate of private credit that is considered to be compatible with achieving this 
inflation outcome is 12 - 14 percent. As in the past, this range is calculated from the expected annual 
capacity  for  growth  of  the  non-mining  sector  of  the  economy,  as  contained  in  the  ninth  National 
Development  Plan  (NDP  9);  it  is  also  based  on  the  desired  level  of  inflation  for  the  year,  with  an 
allowance for the process of financial deepening as the economy develops.  
Conclusion 
I wish to conclude by underscoring the main message of this year’s Monetary Policy Statement - that 
inflation should continue to be restrained during 2003. This effort will  be supported by  an  expected 
favourable external and domestic developments, although there are uncertainties about the price of 
oil.  In  major  industrial  countries,  output  growth  is  expected  to  improve,  while  inflation  is  forecast  to 
  remain under control. Except for the threat of a possible oil price increase and the lagged impact of 
last year’s inflation increase in South Africa, there is minimal risk of external pressures on inflation.  
Here at home, it is anticipated that credit demand will slow down in response to the increase in interest 
rates  in  late  2002;  this  should  ease  demand  pressures  and  curtail  higher  inflationary  expectations. 
Moreover, fiscal restraint, as underscored by the much reduced growth rate of government spending 
for the ensuing fiscal year, is expected to contribute towards reducing inflationary pressures this year.  
In  light  of  these  prospects,  the  task  for  monetary  policy  in  2003  will  be  to  ensure  that  underlying 
inflation does not increase; the objective is also to reverse the upward trend in  overall inflation that 
was experienced in 2002 to a downward path of the Bank’s desired range of 4 - 6 percent by the end 
of  this  year.  While  the  Bank  will  continue  to  respond  appropriately  to  monetary  and  inflation 
developments, the fiscal restraint that characterises the 2003/04 government budget should contribute 
to a  balanced sharing of the burden of containing inflation as between monetary and fiscal policies 
during 2003.  
I thank you for having joined us this evening and for your kind attention.  
Thank you Director of Ceremonies. 
 