 Toshihiko Fukui: An overall review of the Bank of Japan(cid:146)s conduct of monetary 
policy 
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank(cid:146)s Semiannual 
Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs,  House  of 
Councillors, Tokyo, 24 July 2003. 
 Introduction1 
The Bank of Japan (hereafter, the Bank) submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary 
Control  for  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2002  to  the  Diet  in  June  2003.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this 
opportunity to present an overall review of the Bank(cid:146)s conduct of monetary policy. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  make  some  remarks  on  the  Bank(cid:146)s  view  of  recent  economic  and  financial 
developments and on the thinking behind our recent conduct of monetary policy. 
Developments in Japan(cid:146)s economy 
I. 
Economic activity remains virtually flat. Private consumption continues to be weak due to the severe 
employment  and  income  situation.  On  the  other  hand,  business  fixed  investment  is  on  a  gradual 
recovery trend, albeit showing some fluctuations, reflecting the improvement in corporate profits. Net 
exports are virtually flat. 
Looking  at  the  economic  outlook,  it  is  expected  that  the  uptrend  in  exports  and  production  will 
gradually resume, and this in turn will initiate the momentum for an economic recovery. This reflected 
expectations that growth rates in overseas economies will accelerate in the second half of 2003 partly 
due  to  diminishing  uncertainty  over  the  situation  in  Iraq  and  severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome 
(SARS). 
The June Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) released by the Bank at the 
beginning of July 2003 showed that corporate profits were projected to continue their uptrend and also 
confirmed that business fixed investment was on a recovery trend. However, the recovery in domestic 
demand is likely to remain modest for some time, since excessive labor input and debts continue to 
exert  downward  pressure.  As  for  the  environment  for  exports,  there  continues  to  be  substantial 
uncertainty about the recovery of the U.S. economy, while on the domestic front, developments in the 
financial system and the financial and capital markets continue to require close monitoring. 
Regarding prices, consumer prices are projected to continue falling at the current moderate pace for 
the time being due to the following factors. First, the weakness in demand, technological innovation, 
and the streamlining of distribution channels continue to exert downward pressure on prices. Second, 
imports of low-priced consumer goods are still increasing, although only very gradually. 
Developments in financial  markets have been stable  on the  whole as  the  Bank has been providing 
ample liquidity. In capital markets, stock prices have risen considerably and long-term interest rates 
have  risen,  as  market  participants(cid:146)  pessimistic  view  of  the  outlook  for  the  economy  and  prices  has 
subsided slightly across the world. 
In corporate finance, the fund-raising environment continues to be easy on the whole. However, the 
environment for firms with relatively high credit risk remains severe. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
It has been three months since I presented my previous statement regarding the Semiannual Report 
on Currency and Monetary Control. Since then, the Bank has implemented monetary policy measures 
                                                      
1   Governor Fukui made almost the same statement regarding the Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for 
the second half of fiscal 2002 before the Committee on Financial Affairs, House of Representatives, on July 16, 2003. 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 1
 in  a  timely  manner  against  the  background  of  increasing  uncertainty  about  the  outlook  for  the 
Japanese economy. 
At the  Monetary Policy Meeting on  April 30, 2003, the target for the outstanding balance of current 
accounts  held  at  the  Bank  was  raised  by  5  trillion  yen.  At  that  time,  there  was  still  considerable 
uncertainty about the prospects for recovery in the U.S. and European economies and the impact of 
SARS was a matter of concern for East Asian economies. On the financial side, stock prices in Japan, 
especially for bank stocks, remained  weak and volatile. Taking account of this increasing economic 
and financial uncertainty, the Bank decided to raise the target for the outstanding balance of current 
accounts to maintain financial market stability and thereby strengthen support for economic recovery. 
In the middle of May 2003, the Bank implemented further policy measures to provide support from the 
financial side after the emergence of problems at Resona Bank. The Bank decided to provide liquidity 
to Resona Bank when necessary, including loans pursuant to Article 38 of the Bank of Japan Law, 
which do not require submission of collateral. Furthermore, regarding its money market operations, the 
Bank decided to further raise its target for the outstanding balance of current accounts by 3 trillion yen 
to  ensure  an  ample  provision  of  funds.  This  reflected  greater  uncertainty  about  the  outlook  for  the 
Japanese economy due partly to instability in the stock and foreign exchange markets, in addition to 
uncertainty about overseas economies. With such significant uncertainties, the risk of further instability 
in financial markets adversely affecting economic activity was a cause for concern. However, owing to 
the timely implementation of a series of measures by the Bank, overall conditions in financial markets 
have remained calm and no funding problems have been observed at Resona Bank. 
Subsequent  developments  seem  to  suggest  that  uncertainty  about  the  outlook  for  the  Japanese 
economy has become somewhat less pronounced. 
Regarding  developments  in  overseas  economies,  which  have  a  considerable  effect  on  Japan(cid:146)s 
exports,  the  uncertainty  about  the  U.S.  economy  has  subsided  to  some  degree,  and  the  SARS 
problem in East Asian economies has been coming to an end. Against this background, in Japan(cid:146)s 
capital markets, participants(cid:146) pessimism with regard to the economy and prices has decreased slightly, 
and stock prices have risen considerably. Bank stock prices in particular have rebounded significantly. 
In this situation, long-term interest rates rose after falling to their historic lows of 0.4-0.5 percent. 
As  mentioned,  some  positive  developments  were  observed,  but  there  remained  various  structural 
problems in the Japanese economy. The Bank will continue its efforts to conduct monetary policy in a 
timely manner, monitoring carefully the strength of the recovery in overseas economies, the state of 
the financial system, and developments in financial and capital markets. 
The Bank is working to strengthen the transmission mechanism to ensure that the effects of monetary 
easing  permeate  throughout  the  economy.  As  part  of  its  efforts  in  this  regard,  the  Bank  has  been 
preparing to commence purchases of asset-backed securities (ABSs) from July 29, 2003. Although it 
is unusual for a central bank to directly  take on the  credit risk of private debt  obligations, the  Bank 
considers that, with the weakness of banks(cid:146) financial intermediary function, it is important to encourage 
the development of the ABS market. 
In formulating the specific details of ABS purchases, the Bank has paid due attention to contributing to 
the  smooth  financing  of  small  and  medium-sized  firms.  With  regard  to  underlying  assets,  a  broad 
range of assets will be deemed eligible, including receivables, loans, and lease claims. Furthermore, 
the Bank has decided to purchase securities with a BB rating or higher. This decision is based on the 
fact that there have been only a few investors purchasing securities with lower credit ratings, and this 
has been impeding development of the ABS market. The ceiling on the Bank(cid:146)s purchases is to be set 
at 1 trillion yen for the time being. 
The ABS market is expected to become one of the most important financial markets in Japan in the 
future.  The  Bank  hopes  that  the  Bank(cid:146)s  purchase  of  securities  will  contribute  to  the  autonomous 
development of the market. 
Purchases of stocks held by commercial banks 
III. 
The Bank started to purchase stocks held by commercial banks from November 2002 to reduce the 
risk that stock price fluctuations might impact negatively upon the business management of individual 
financial  institutions,  potentially  resulting  in  instability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  total 
amount of stocks purchased by the Bank as of July 20, 2003 was 1,505.9 billion yen. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2003
 Conclusion 
As  mentioned,  in  response  to  the  severe  economic  situation,  the  Bank  has  been  bold  in  its 
implementation  of  measures  deemed  necessary,  including  measures  that  are  unusual  for  a  central 
bank. At the same time, the Bank is making efforts to ensure its financial soundness by appropriately 
assessing the risk associated with holding new assets. The Bank considers its financial soundness to 
be fundamental to ensuring its ability to conduct monetary policy into the future and to maintaining the 
public(cid:146)s confidence in the currency. 
Japan(cid:146)s economy is still striving to construct a new system to accommodate the significant changes 
that  have  occurred  since  the  late  1980s,  such  as  globalization,  innovations  in  information  and 
communication  technology,  and  societal  aging  and  the  declining  birth  rate.  Given  the  various 
constraints involved, this is a formidable challenge. Nevertheless I believe that, by putting to use the 
high  levels  of  technology  and  creativity  at  Japanese  firms,  our  economy  will  ultimately  succeed  in 
realizing this goal. 
While taking into account the private sector(cid:146)s efforts, the Bank, for its own part, will continue to do its 
utmost to overcome deflation and put the economy back on a sustainable growth path. 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 3
