 R Basant Roi: Review of the financial sector in Mauritius 
Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the seminar on Financial Sector 
Assessment Programme, Pointe aux Piments, 8 September 2003. 
 Hon. Minister of Economic Development, Financial Services and Corporate Affairs 
Mrs Ann Rennie, Deputy Mission Chief 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good morning 
I am pleased to be here in your midst, this morning, for the opening of this Seminar on the Financial 
Sector Assessment Programme. 
Over three years ago, on May 26, 2000 the Financial Stability Forum had issued a Press Release in 
which it categorised Mauritius in the third and last group of countries regarding their perceived degree 
of supervision and co-operation. The categorisation was carried out on the basis of a survey, including 
questionnaires that  were, according to the  Press Release, forwarded to supervisors the world over. 
We  were  not  even  aware  of  this  survey.  Yet,  Mauritius  was  categorised  in  the  last  group.  Worse, 
Mauritius  was  never  given  a  hearing  before  its  categorisation  in  the  last  group.  In  spite  of  all  the 
statements of good intention made in the Press Release, some damage had already been inflicted to 
the  image  of  Mauritius  as  a  financial  services  centre.  Voices  against  this  approach  were  raised  at 
various international meetings of Governors of Central Banks.  
Subsequently, the IMF was urged and, rightly so, by the Financial Stability Forum to take a lead role in 
the  assessment  of  jurisdictions(cid:146)  adherence  to  international  standards.  The  IMF  held  a  Consultative 
meeting  to  hear  the  views  of  outside  experts  from  onshore  and  offshore  centres  and  international 
agencies. This initiative was formally and fully backed by Mauritius.  
The World Bank joined in with the IMF. 
The assessment of Mauritius by the joint IMF/World Bank Mission has been fair and just. The FSAP 
Mission has given the authorities of Mauritius a fair hearing. The assessment has been thorough and 
has been carried out in a manner that should help all of us here to further strengthen the soundness 
and safety of our financial sector. A careful reading of all the recommendations made in the Report 
does allow us to spotlight certain areas that are really vulnerable to risks. With a financial system like 
ours  that  is  fully  integrated  with  the  world(cid:146)s  financial  system  we  cannot  afford  to  take  lightly  the 
vulnerabilities  highlighted  therein.  Despite  certain  disagreements  that  we  have  had  with  the  FSAP 
mission(cid:146)s views, I must say that the quality of the recommendations is very much appreciated. I seize 
this  opportunity  to  commend  the  FSAP  Team,  in  particular  Mr  Abdessatar  Ouanes  and  Mrs  Ann 
Rennie, for having given a well-balanced assessment of our financial sector. 
The Report does not merely refer to the weaknesses and vulnerabilities of our financial sector. It does 
also underline the strength of our financial sector and the progress that has been made in recent years 
with regard to our supervisory framework. I am particularly pleased to note, among the findings of the 
FSAP Mission, the following: 
1. 
Overall, the Mauritian financial sector is currently in good health, and the short-term stability 
risks are modest.  
Mauritius has a relatively large and well-developed domestic financial system and a growing 
offshore sector. 
The authorities have embarked on an ambitious program to transform the economy, and the 
Government,  in  partnership  with  the  private  sector,  is  taking  decisive  measures  to  build  a 
knowledge  economy  based  on  higher  value-added  services,  notably  in  information  and 
communication technologies. 
The  assessment  of  Standards  and  Codes  found  a  high  level  of  compliance  with 
internationally accepted norms and best practices. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 39/2003 
 1
 5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Mauritius(cid:146) strong economic performance has spurred the development of a large, profitable 
and sound banking sector. 
The banking system of Mauritius is profitable, well capitalised and generally sound. 
The quality of banking supervision in Mauritius has improved significantly over the past few 
years and is of a generally higher standard than in most African countries. 
The Bank of Mauritius Guidelines on Corporate Governance, Internal Control and credit are 
all of a commendable standard reflecting international best practices and the capacity of the 
Bank  of  Mauritius  to  enforce  the  Guidelines  has  improved  with  the  development  of 
knowledge and skills within the Supervision Department. 
We  expect  that,  on  the  basis  of  the  FSAP  Report,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  will  issue  another 
press release announcing the removal of Mauritius from the third category.  
Our commitment to proceed with the  various recommendations is already evidenced by  the  actions 
that have already been taken by the authorities in Mauritius. We are thankful to the IMF and the World 
Bank for the prompt response given to our request for Technical Assistance to beef up our supervisory 
and legal framework. 
A few laws have, under the whip of the Honourable Minister for Financial Services, been enacted: the 
Anti-Money  Laundering  (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act  to  further  strengthen  our  institutional  and 
regulatory  framework  with  respect  to  money  laundering;  the  Convention  for  the  Suppression  of  the 
Financing  of  Terrorism  Act  which  lays  the  basis  for  Mauritius  to  ratify  the  Convention.  Regulations 
under  the  Financial  Intelligence  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act  2002  have  been  promulgated. 
Another law on Mutual Assistance in Criminal and Related Matters has also been enacted. 
Guidance  Notes  on  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  combating  the  Financing  of  Terrorism  have  been 
updated  and  aligned  with  international  standards  as  acknowledged  by  the  FSAP  Mission.  The 
ambiguity as to whether the Bank of Mauritius is empowered to issue such Guidance Notes has been 
dealt with in the Anti-Money Laundering (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act. 
Furthermore, a few additional guidelines are being worked upon. A draft Guideline on Credit policy has 
already been finalised and is due to be issued to the industry shortly.  
In February 2002, at the Quarterly meeting of the Banking Committee, I proposed to Chief Executive 
Officers  of  banks,  the  establishment  of  a  Credit  Information  Bureau  in  Mauritius.  Bankers 
enthusiastically welcomed the project. A Sub-Committee, comprising senior officials of all commercial 
banks  and  headed  by  the  Manager  Legal  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  was  appointed  to  make 
recommendations on the way forward. The Sub-Committee submitted their report in August 2002. I am 
happy to note that the FSAP mission is supportive of this initiative. 
The National Bank of Belgium houses one of the most sophisticated Credit Information Bureau in the 
world. I accordingly solicited the assistance of the Governor of the National Bank of Belgium to guide 
us on this project. A delegation headed by the Managing Director of the Bank of Mauritius, comprising 
bankers, will proceed to the National Bank of Belgium for a prospecting visit in November this year. 
 In  all  the  assessments  that  have  been  made  so  far  a  common  thread  is  perceptible.  The  strong 
willingness of the authorities in Mauritius to co-operate and to promote the country as a sound and 
clean  jurisdiction  runs  through  the  assessments.  Even  before  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Programme started we, at the Bank of Mauritius, had already identified certain areas of vulnerability of 
our banking industry. We did initiate several remedial actions and I am particularly pleased to note that 
the  FSAP  Report  does  make  mentions  of  the  various  initiatives.  The  FSAP  Report  is  a  critical 
assessment of where we stand today. The recommendations are expressions of views regarding what 
need to be done now and in the immediate future. But we need to constantly review our supervisory 
and legal framework in the light of changes taking place in the domestic economy and in the dynamic 
international financial system as well.  
We  have  a  panoply  of  rules,  guidelines  and  laws  for  the  proper  conduct  of  banking  business  in 
Mauritius. As regulators and supervisors we need to exercise discretion failing which the very purpose 
of  the  rules,  guidelines  and  laws  could  be  defeated.  Let  me  share  with  you  a  brief  paragraph  from 
Sammuel Brittan(cid:146)s Economics and Ethics: (cid:147)Most real-world situations are more complicated that the 
simple prisoner(cid:146)s dilemma, and the possibility of choosing an inappropriate strategy is a real one. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2003
 This  possibility  arises  because  the  way  in  which  strategies  are  normally  determined  is  via  the 
application  of  widely  accepted  rules  -  whether  these  are  obviously  moral,  such  as  (cid:145)do  not  kill(cid:146); 
conventional, such as (cid:145)drive on the left(cid:146); or habitual, such as (cid:145)do not scatter litter(cid:146). 
But  many  widely  supported  moral  practices  and  rules  are  double-edged.  Frank  cites  a  hypothetical 
Jones who sacrifices a day(cid:146)s earnings of $300 to prosecute Smith for stealing a $200 briefcase. The 
motive  here  can  only  be  described  as  vengeance.  Frank  is  inclined  to  regard  Jones  as  a  social 
benefactor because his action discourages theft. 
May be. But encouraging vengeance as a general practice is playing with fire.(cid:148) 
Regulators  and  supervisors  or  any  other  authorities  should  make  productive  use  of  the  rules, 
guidelines and laws in the best interest of our financial sector. Misuse of the rules, guidelines and laws 
by anyone of us could only jeopardize the achievement the authorities(cid:146) objectives. The goal should be 
the promotion of the growth of our financial market without excessive constraint.  
Let me wish all the participants in the Seminar a pleasant working day. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 39/2003 
 3
