 Lars Heikensten: How to promote and measure central bank efficiency 
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the Sveriges Riksbank, Stockholm, 
23 May 2003. 
 Let me begin by welcoming you all to Stockholm and Sveriges Riksbank. We have more or less made 
it a practice to organise an academic conference or workshop at least every second year on a topic 
which we think is relevant for central bankers. Last year the theme of the conference was Monetary 
Policy and Financial Markets in an Enlarged European Union. This time we have chosen the topic of 
Central Bank Efficiency.  
To attain legitimacy - and keep it - central banks have to use taxpayers’ money in an efficient way, not 
least  in countries  like Sweden  where the central bank is now an  independent  institution. This  is an 
issue of great importance to the bank, and it has occupied much of our time in recent years. We want 
to continue this work and develop our thinking in the area. Efficiency is also a very important issue 
from  a  European  perspective  and  will  be  as  important  should  we  become  a  member  of  the 
Eurosystem. 
Central bank efficiency is a fairly abstract concept that encapsulates several areas ranging from the 
roles  that  are  appropriate  for  central  banks  to  perform,  to  cost  efficiency  in  a  narrower  sense.  An 
investigation of the relevant literature shows that there has not been much research conducted on any 
of these issues. Through this workshop, we hope to stimulate discussion and future research in the 
field. Let me take the opportunity at this point to thank the BIS for their involvement in the initiation of 
this  workshop.  We  have  also  discussed  the  possibility  of  following  up  the  workshop  with  a  larger 
conference on a later date. 
In  these  introductory  remarks,  I  would  like  to  raise  some  issues  that  I  believe  are  important  for 
enhancing  efficiency  in  central  banks.  Naturally,  my  views  on  this  are  influenced  by  my  own 
experience after having been at the Riksbank for almost 8 years, first as deputy governor and now as 
governor. In addition, I would like to discuss some issues connected to the benchmarking of central 
banks. I am very much looking forward to hearing your views on these issues as well as on the other 
topics on the agenda both today and tomorrow.  
Well-defined objectives and operational independence 
It is important that the objectives of public authorities are well-defined. Only then can we achieve a 
clear  focus  that  enables  the  institution  to  be  made  accountable  for  its  actions.  Both  focus  and 
accountability are very important for efficiency. 
Central  banks  generally  have  several  objectives.  The  responsibilities  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  for 
instance, are laid down in legislation as maintaining price stability and promoting a safe and efficient 
payment system.  
Economic research has indicated that accountability is crucial for achieving the goal of price stability. 
While accountability should produce similar benefits for the other objectives of central banks, this is 
still very much an unexplored issue. As regards financial stability, one probable reason for this is that it 
is much harder to define financial stability than price stability. Another may be that the central bank 
seldom has sole responsibility for financial stability, sharing responsibility instead with the Ministry of 
Finance. A clear division of tasks among the authorities is important for producing accountability.  
In Sweden, a large part of the responsibility for financial stability has been delegated to the Swedish 
Financial  Supervisory  Authority.  The  Riksbank  and  the  Swedish  FSA  recently  signed  a  so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding which outlined the responsibilities of the two authorities in the area of 
financial  stability.  The  aim  of  this  is  to  facilitate  co-operation  and  increase  efficiency  in  the  work  of 
each  authority  towards  the  common  objective  of  financial  stability.   According  to  the  Riksbank,  the 
three  most  important  factors  for  financial  stability  are  the  soundness  of  the  financial  institutions, 
contagion, and the efficiency of the financial infrastructure. The main role of the FSA is to ensure that 
institutions operating in the system are sound. The Riksbank, on the other hand, is responsible for the 
oversight of systemic risks and the efficiency of the infrastructure. This framework, however, should be 
open to question. For example, it might have to be altered in order to accommodate changes in the 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 1
 financial  system.  It  should  also  be  developed  as  our  knowledge  of  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
sector increases.  
With  financial  companies  operating  in  several  countries,  the  division  of  responsibilities  among 
authorities in different countries will become an important issue. In Europe, a process has begun to 
line  up  a  division  of  labour  between  central  banks  and  other  authorities  as  well  as  between  the 
national central banks and the ECB. For the new structure to be efficient and stable, it is important that 
the roles and objectives of different actors are well defined. There are risks inherent in this process, 
however.  The  new  system  may  prove  too  bureaucratic,  stressing  stability  at  the  cost  of  efficiency. 
Also, it is important to prevent turf wars from dominating rational discussions about new challenges.  
Not only is it important that the objectives of central banks are clear. It is also vital that the necessary 
means are available and can be applied.  
The advantages of delegating monetary  policy to an independent central bank have  been analysed 
fairly extensively in academic research. The main argument for delegation is that politicians can avoid 
the  temptation  to  use  monetary  policy  for  short-term  stimulation  of  output  and  employment.  The 
collective experience of previous years - and from academic research - is that such stimulation often 
runs the risk of leading to wage-price spirals, which in the end can have severe implications for welfare 
in society.  
A parallel argument can be made concerning policy  for financial stability, although it is still a rather 
unexplored topic in economic literature. By delegating the lender of last resort function to the central 
bank,  and  making  it  clear  that  the  central  bank  will  not  support  insolvent  banks,  the  politicians  can 
avoid the temptation to use central bank funds to bail out banks in financial difficulty. 
Another reason for giving the central bank formal operational independence is that only then can the 
Executive  Board  of  the  central  bank  be  made  fully  accountable  for  the  bank’s operations,  and  as  I 
have said already, accountability is a crucial means of attaining efficiency. 
Transparency 
Accountability is intertwined with the issue of transparency, not only through clearly defined objectives, 
but also through actions. A central bank should be clear about which actions are being taken and for 
what reasons. Most people agree that central banks should do their best to minimise uncertainty over 
policy actions, as this will make policy more efficient. As my colleague Mervyn King said, if monetary 
policy becomes so undramatic and predictable that it is boring, then we will really have achieved a low 
level of policy uncertainty!   
The  issue  that  remains  open  to  debate  is  which  information  should  be  published  and  when.  At  the 
Riksbank, we have chosen to publish our inflation forecasts four times per year and to publish edited 
minutes of the Executive Board meetings, where interest rate decisions are taken with a lag of about 
two  weeks. While  we  strive  to  be  as  open  as  possible,  there  are  of  course  limits.  One  of  the most 
important  is  determined  by  what  we  know  about  the  functioning  of  the  economy  and  the  effects  of 
monetary policy.  
Not everyone agrees, however, that transparency is a good thing for attaining financial stability. Many 
people argue that so-called constructive ambiguity is the best way to avoid problems of moral hazard 
in the banking industry. I believe, however, that transparency is important in this area as well. Banks 
that  are  "too  big  to  fail"  from  a  systemic  point  of  view  will  in  any  case  count  on  support  from  the 
government. Especially when it comes to countries like Sweden, which experienced a severe banking 
crisis  not  so  long  ago,  it  is  likely  that  support  to  banks  that  encounter  financial  problems  will  be 
expected if nothing else is being communicated. Another risk associated with constructive ambiguity is 
that it could limit the motivation of central banks to seriously consider what to do in a crisis. In other 
words,  it  could  provide  an  excuse  for  not  thinking  the  issues  through.  However,  if  you  are  not 
prepared, you could easily become the bank’s prisoner in a time of crisis. Through deeper analysis of 
the  "too  big  to  fail"  problem  and  open  communication  of  crisis  strategies,  it  should  be  possible  if 
anything  to  mitigate  the  moral  hazard  problem.  If  you  can  show  that  the  banks  do  not  need  to  be 
systemically  important,  it should make banks even more uncertain about the possibility of receiving 
support than any policy of constructive ambiguity. 
At  the  Riksbank,  we  communicate  our  view  on  financial  stability  through  different  publications.  A 
Financial Stability Report is published twice a year and we also publish articles on issues of financial 
stability  in  our  journal,  Economic  Review.  A  new  regulatory  framework  governing  the  way  in  which 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2003
 banking crises are to be managed and resolved has been proposed by a government inquiry that was 
set up after the Swedish banking crisis. The Riksbank strongly supports the implementation of such a 
framework as it would increase transparency  and thereby the efficiency of crisis management even 
further. We have also sought to have these principles applied internationally. 
Transparency is also important in the sense that it facilitates external evaluation of the operations of a 
central  bank  on  the  basis  of  relevant  information.  This  type  of  evaluation  will  normally  enhance 
efficiency, and it is especially important in cases where the central bank determines its own budget. 
The monetary policy of Sveriges Riksbank is reported to the Swedish parliament twice a year and the 
bank’s  overall  activities  are  subjected  to  regular  evaluation  by  the  Parliamentary  Auditors.  They 
recently performed a comprehensive audit of the operations of the Riksbank in which they highlighted 
a  number  of  areas  where  costs  appear  to  have  increased  more  than  expected.  We  welcome  this 
evaluation, which has given us fresh inspiration in our search for increased efficiency. 
Finally, transparency stimulates improvement of a central bank’s internal analysis and decision-making 
processes. When all-important arguments made internally have to be explained externally, the quality 
of the internal work rises. By being more transparent, we are now open to criticism that is both sharper 
and  more  specific,  and  this  has  helped  us  to  improve  our  analysis.  This  particular  effect  of 
transparency  is  not  discussed  to  a  great  extent  in  economic  literature  but  is  of  great  practical 
importance. 
Concentration on core activities 
One problem for many public institutions is that they lack focus. Research and practical experience 
show that a concentration on core activities is a prerequisite for good performance.  
Central  banks  are  involved  in  many  different  activities.  The  extent  of  this  in-volvement  should  be  a 
point for discussion, however.  Some central bank tasks may have  arisen by historical accident and 
then  remained  in  the  central  bank  domain  without  ever  being  questioned.  This  raises  the  issue  of 
whether some services could be provided more efficiently by private entities.  
For instance, the Riksbank owned a paper mill and a note-printing works in the town of Tumba, as well 
as a mint in the city of Eskilstuna, for three hundred years. These are largely manufacturing operations 
that differ greatly from the work involved in monetary policy and financial stability. Since our job is to 
concentrate primarily on monetary policy and the difficult systemic questions in the financial world, we 
decided to sell both the operations in Tumba and the mint in Eskilstuna. This has not only given us 
more time for our core activities, but I also believe that a more professional owner, with many years of 
experience in the trade, has increased the chances of success for the operations in Tumba. 
In other cases, a different public authority could be the best supplier. Like most other central banks, 
Sveriges Riksbank is responsible for money and banking statistics. Statistics are important for users in 
Sweden and abroad, and the Riksbank’s statistics provide a basis for analysing the development of 
the financial markets. In Sweden, however, we already have a public authority whose core activities 
involve  the  collection  and  publishing  of  statistics,  Statistics  Sweden.  We  decided  that  transferring 
certain statistical tasks to Statistics Sweden would not only allow us to focus on our core activities, but 
it  would  also  make  the  production  work  more  efficient.  As  a  result,  Statistics  Sweden  has  been 
collecting and compiling money and banking statistics on behalf of the Riksbank since last month.  
Furthermore, we have transformed our system for distributing notes and coins into a company with the 
aim of selling it. This has proved to be less straightforward than the two other cases, however. One 
reason is that we have tried to do two things at the same time, namely to improve the efficiency of the 
market for cash, and also to rationalise our own cash management. Also, it has been difficult to draw a 
clear line between what the actual responsibilities of a central bank are, and what represents business 
that the bank has carried on for historical reasons. Today, we have managed to change the market 
structure in a direction that we believe will benefit society through lower total costs for handling cash. 
However, we have not yet found a good solution for the cash handling firm we created.  
Measuring central bank efficiency 
As I mentioned earlier, central bank efficiency involves many  different aspects, none of which have 
been the subject of much research. Unfortunately, there have not been very many attempts to actually 
measure  the  efficiency  of  central  banks.  Some  recent  studies  have  focused  on  monetary  policy 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 3
 efficiency, and these have provided some valuable insights. However, the achievements of the central 
bank are typically not related to its costs. On the other hand, a number of attempts have been made to 
measure the cost efficiency of central banks; these have typically focused on activities for which output 
is measurable, such as the production of notes and coins.   
Measuring the costs of central banks is relatively easy. For example, one can look at the size of the 
bank’s staff. The problem, however, is quantifying output.  
 
Diagram 1. Number of central bank 
employees per 100 000 inhabitants
44.6
29.0
26.6
22.5
20.7
18.5 19.3
18.0
13.7 14.1 14.7
11.4
11.5
7.6
5.6
3.8
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
UK
Sweden
Denmark
Spain
Netherl.
Finland
Austria
Germany
Italy
Ireland
Portugal
Euro area
Belgium
France
Luxemb.
Greece
Source: The Morgan Stanley Central Bank 
  
Diagram 1 shows the number of central bank employees per 100 000 inhabitants in different countries. 
From  this,  we  can  see  that  the  number  of  central  bank  employees  varies  greatly  from  country  to 
country.  This  would  also  apply  if  the  number  of  employees  was  related  to  some  other  measure  of 
country  size,  such  as  GDP.  Not  all  central  bank  functions  have  anything  to  do  with  the  size  of  the 
economy, however, which is probably the main reason why Luxembourg fares worst.  
One probable explanation for the large differences here is that the tasks of central banks differ from 
country  to  country.  This  raises  the  question,  however,  whether  it  is  necessary  for  central  banks  to 
carry out all the activities that they perform. As I mentioned earlier, I believe that central banks should 
assess  the  scope  of  their  operations  on  a  regular  basis.  By  focusing  on  core  activities  at  Sveriges 
Riksbank, it has been possible to cut the number of employees from about 850 in 1995 to around 450 
today. 
In addition, one could go on to compare the costs of certain activities. We per-form benchmarking in 
several areas, and I know that this is something that other central banks have been doing as well. One 
should also compare the costs of in-house operations with those of outsourcing. Such comparisons 
have led us to outsource some activities, such as cleaning services and our staff restaurant. 
One potential problem when comparing activities separately is that it presupposes that objectives are 
not  interrelated,  and  that  there  are  no  joint  costs  associ-ated  with  the  different  activities.  Recently, 
questions  regarding  the  connection  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability  have  attracted 
increasing attention and have given rise to a debate on whether there may be situations where the two 
goals  conflict  with  each  other.  In  normal  circumstances,  however,  we  do  not  perceive  any  conflict 
among our objectives.  
When measuring costs, it is important not to count the costs of the central bank only, but also of other 
parties  that  are  important  to  performance.   For  instance,  in  some  countries  the  central  bank  is 
responsible  for  bank  supervision,  while  in  others  this  is  the  task  of  a  special  financial  supervisory 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2003
 authority.  Countries  also  differ  with  respect  to  the  private  sector’s  involvement  in  fulfilling  certain 
objectives. In some countries the private sector provides services that in other countries are provided 
by the central bank.  
Here,  I  believe  that  more  empirical  work  could  be  done.  The  BIS  has  a  natural  role  to  play  in  this 
respect,  and  that  was  also  the  reason  that  I  first  contacted  the  BIS  when  I  got  the  idea  for  this 
workshop. I also believe that more comparisons could be made within the European System of Central 
Banks to help us all improve our efficiency levels. 
Final remarks 
Let me conclude by referring back to my opening remarks. Questions of efficiency have been at the 
top of our agenda for a long period of time, and there are good reasons for central banks to pay extra 
attention to their costs. It is true that central banks provide public goods and that minimising costs is 
therefore  not  always  the  best  solution.  However,  we  should  be  aware  that  the  pressure  to  at-tain 
efficiency is weak, as central banks are protected from competition. Private enterprises that compete 
with each other are forced to be efficient and profitable in order to stay in business and satisfy their 
shareholders.  Central  banks  generally  lack  such  pressure.  As  a  result,  we  need  to  work  hard  with 
these issues and invite external evaluation. Cost-consciousness is especially important in cases where 
a central bank determines its own budget, as hard-won legitimacy can be quickly lost.  
At Sveriges Riksbank, we will be continuing our search for efficiency gains, and we will so do whether 
or not we join the Eurosystem. To this end, we need new influences and new ideas, which I hope to 
get  over the coming two days. Once again, I  would like to extend  you  all a very  warm welcome to 
Sveriges Riksbank and this workshop. 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 5
