 Guillermo Ortiz: The state of the Mexican economy 
Speech  by  Dr  Guillermo  Ortiz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  LXVI  Banking  Convention, 
Mérida, Yucatán, 4 April 2003. 
 It is an honor to participate, once more, in the National Banking Convention. This meeting takes place 
in a context of uncertainty about the recovery of the global economy. The recession of the Mexican 
economy  is  mainly  a  consequence  of  the  links  we  have  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  However,  the 
relative  performance  by  the  Mexican  economy  during  the  recent  slowdown  is  based  on  two  key 
elements: first, reinforcement of the macroeconomic fundamentals, and second, development of the 
institutions the country has fostered in recent decades. 
I will talk about these two crucial factors during my remarks and the challenges we face in order to 
foster a stronger and more competitive economy allowing for sustained and broad development for all 
Mexicans. With this purpose in mind, I will stress the hurdles that the current international environment 
poses for us and the  pending tasks we have  to accomplish in order to forge  a  better future for the 
years to come. 
External environment 
The recovery of economic activity in the United States after the 2001 recession has been weak. The 
slowdown was the consequence of the necessity businesses faced to assimilate investment volumes 
that had been realized during the nineties, mainly in the areas of technology and telecommunications. 
The main difference between this recession and others in the past is that this one will end only through 
the gradual recovery of investment.  
The vulnerability of the American economy along with corporate scandals, political tensions derived 
from the Iraq conflict, and the loss of the economy’s dynamism, have weakened consumer confidence. 
In sum, we can highlight a series of issues that are contributing to making the recovery of the world 
economy much more uncertain: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
And over the medium term:  
• 
The deepening of the pessimism of economic agents motivated mainly by the Iraq war; 
The possibility of new terrorist attacks; 
Uncertainty about the oil price level and volatility;  
An increase of risk aversion in the international financial markets. 
The current account deficit and the low domestic savings rate of the United States together 
with the absence of structural reforms in Europe and Japan that would allow for a rebound in 
their economies and an orderly adjustment of the world economy.  
Resistance to the world recession 
The  Mexican  economy  has  not  been  able  to  isolate  itself  from  the  global  recession  that  has 
materialized  in  three  ways:  a  lower  growth  rate,  a  drop  in  employment  and  a  virtual  standstill  of 
Mexican exports. 
Notwithstanding  the  above,  the  Mexican  economy’s  performance  in  2001  and  2002  presents  some 
positive aspects. We can highlight the fact that Mexico has experienced a “normal” recession since 
2001, if such a word is allowed. Throughout decades, Mexico knew the dark side of recessions, the 
one that we used to call “crisis.” However, the experience that we have had with the recession that 
started in 2001 and the incipient recovery of 2002 has been quite different:  
• 
The public deficit has been close to its target in the last two years; 
• 
In 2002, the current account deficit was below 3% of GDP and was financed almost entirely 
by FDI; 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 1
   The  exchange  rate  was  relatively  stable  in  2001  and  2002,  and  actually,  current  peso 
depreciation has not affected the price level because exchange-rate pass-through has been 
virtually nonexistent; 
Inflation has been under control; 
The main peso-denominated nominal interest rates have fallen to single-digit levels, and the 
government and some private enterprises are issuing bonds in pesos at longer terms (up to 
ten years); 
• 
Foreign direct investment reached a record high in 2001 and maintained a high level in 2002. 
The vulnerability of the Mexican economy to recent external disturbances has been limited because of 
three  factors:  a)  We  have  been  able  to  advance  in  the  strengthening  of  the  macroeconomic 
fundamentals; b) The economic links with the United  States have been reinforced, and c) In recent 
years, Mexico has consolidated its institutions, politically and economically.  
Fiscal discipline; 
Inflation abatement; 
Consolidation and capitalization of the financial sector; 
Reinforcement of electoral institutions and increased democratic credibility; 
Independence of the Supreme Court of Justice; 
NAFTA benefits. 
Institutional improvements 
Two types of factors have contributed to the strengthening of the Mexican economy. It is important to 
highlight  the  economic  policies  that  have  been  implemented,  including  the  floating  exchange-rate 
regime and the inflation-targeting framework that has been adopted for the conduct of monetary policy. 
In addition, progress achieved through the consolidation of the institutional framework has reinforced 
the effects of economic policy. 
In  the  wake  of  the  1995  crisis,  the  public  has  developed  a  growing  consciousness  about  the 
importance of prudent economic policies, and a consensus has slowly gathered in favor of reaching a 
lower inflation rate and keeping a lower fiscal deficit. Although a lot of progress has been made on the 
institutional framework in many areas, I will focus on the elements I believe are the most important: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
With the objective of reinforcing the foundation for economic development, the current administration 
has continued efforts to maintain the health of the public finances. Fiscal prudence is reflected by the 
fact  that  public  debt  presents  a  sustainable  level  and  a  very  comfortable  maturity  profile.  Also,  the 
public sector deficit has not increased when the oil price has fallen and the pace of economic activity 
has  slowed.  To  this  end,  it  is  important  to  mention  that  the  fact  that  the  Mexican  Congress  is  not 
dominated by a single political party has not weakened fiscal discipline (although public finances have 
not been modified structurally, an issue I will discuss later). 
In the fight against inflation, we continue to make progress. After three consecutive years in which the 
inflation  target  was  met,  in  2002  the  annual  rate  was  120  basis  points  above  target.  However,  this 
deviation  was  a  consequence  of  the  evolution  of  the  agricultural  sub  index,  whose  prices  are 
extremely  volatile,  and  of  the  goods  subject  to  government-administered  prices,  which  are  not 
determined by the market. This year it is to be expected that the inflation rate will converge to our 3 
percent target.  
We have been  able to manage  the  external shocks we faced in recent  years thanks to the floating 
exchange-rate  regime.  Likewise,  stability  has  allowed  an  important  increase  in  our  international 
reserves. No doubt, our reserves have been one of the factors that explain the isolation of the Mexican 
economy  from  contamination  by  the  events  in  Argentina,  Brazil  and  Venezuela.  They  were  also  a 
determining factor during the process by which Mexico was given investment-grade status and hence 
has obtained better credit conditions in the international capital markets. 
Given the current level of international assets that Banco de México has, the marginal advantages of 
accruing them at such a high pace have diminished. That is why the Exchange Commission recently 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 agreed  on  a  mechanism  that  will  reduce  the  rate  of  accumulation  of  international  reserves.  This 
mechanism is transparent, its operation does not imply a discretional intervention in the market by the 
authorities, and it is also neutral with respect to the exchange rate.  
In  the  last  few  years,  the  financial  system  has seen  important  advances.  Now,  the  banking  system 
presents  sound  capitalization  ratios,  satisfactory  results  and  a  better  regulatory  framework.  It  is 
important to mention that the legal framework in which the banking system operates has formed the 
groundwork for its expansion. Stability will be an important issue that will permit the renewal of credit. 
To this end, it is quite significant that some banks have already started to renew credit. However, the 
behavior is not yet widespread and amounts of new credit to date are insufficient to contribute properly 
to economic development. 
In  the  political  arena  we  have  witnessed  important  institutional  progress.  For  example,  the  creation 
almost  a  decade  ago  of  the  autonomous  Federal  Electoral  Institute  was  a  great  success.  Election 
transparency has contributed in a very important way to the economy through the so-called democratic 
bonus. No doubt the electoral legitimacy of the public authority is an essential factor for the political 
stability of the country.  
With the consolidation of the democratic system, judicial power is more independent from the other 
powers. The Supreme Court is well respected, and its responsibility has been gradually transmitted to 
the federal courts to stimulate their improvement. Also, the local courts have been influenced by the 
Supreme Court’s performance, although to a smaller extent. 
As  is  known,  an  efficient  judicial  system  constitutes  an  element  of  great  value  for  economic 
development because, at the end of the day, it guarantees property rights and gives certainty to the 
decisions  of  economic  agents.  Recent  studies  point  out  that  an  adequate  legal  framework  and  an 
efficient law enforcement system are key to the  development of nations. Therefore, this is a crucial 
element in the classification of debtors risk and in the determination of credit costs. 
The  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA)  has  had  not  only  a  remarkable  impact  on 
Mexico’s  external  trade,  but  has  also  been  the  engine  of  the  institutional  change  that  Mexico  has 
experienced. In this respect, NAFTA has given certainty to trade relations between Mexico and other 
countries  and  has  opened  widespread  investment  opportunities.  NAFTA  has  also  contributed  to 
Mexico’s  industrial  modernization,  to  fostering  innovation  and  competition  and  to  creating  a  more 
predictable legal environment for all economic agents.  
To  a  great  extent,  developed  countries  are  developed  because  of  the  strength  of  their  institutions. 
Economic development calls for clear and predictable rules, and institutions that assure they will be 
enforced. 
The challenges: pending reforms 
It is not foreseeable that in the immediate future the world economy will present a favorable expansion 
pattern. The principal hurdles are the enormous current account deficit of the United States and an 
imminent fiscal deficit, to which we have to add the lack of structural reforms in Japan and Europe. It is 
evident that a situation in which the U.S. economy is absorbing two thirds of the world’s savings is not 
sustainable. In other words, there should be an adjustment in the world economy in the future that, 
amongst other things, should imply a dollar depreciation. If such adjustment is not accompanied by a 
rebound of the European and Japanese economies, it is not foreseeable that it will take place in an 
accelerated-growth context. 
Even under the most optimistic scenario it is not possible to expect, in the medium term, global growth 
comparable  to  that  of  the  nineties.  Hence,  the  premises  on  which  the  development  of  the  Mexican 
economy  has  been  based  in  recent  years  should  be  modified.  It  will  be  necessary  to  consolidate 
internal  sources  of  growth.  The  key  to  success  rests  in  the  capacity  of  the  Mexican  economy  to 
become more productive and more competitive in the international arena. Macroeconomic success by 
itself will not be sufficient to face actual and future challenges. 
The continuation of progress that Mexico has made in the area of competitiveness will depend on the 
simultaneous success of two factors: reinforcement of the institutional and macroeconomic framework, 
and implementation of pending structural reforms.  
There are concerns about the competitiveness of the Mexican economy against the rest of the world. 
As you may know, Mexico has fallen in the ranking of some indices that are elaborated by international 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 3
 fiscal; 
energy, and 
labor. 
high tax evasion; 
excessive dependence on oil revenue; and 
a narrow tax base. 
organizations  in  order  to  evaluate  competitiveness.  However,  Mexico’s  competitiveness  has 
deteriorated not because the country has not progressed but because other countries have done so at 
a faster pace. The most recent case is China, whose exports are gaining share of U.S. external trade 
at  a  faster  pace  than  exports  from  Mexico.  In  order  to  promote  a  more  favorable  scenario,  some 
countries  are  immersed  in  legal,  economic  and  institutional  reforms.  In  some  instances,  these 
processes have been called “second-generation reforms.” But beyond denominations, what is clear is 
that it is not enough to do things right, nor to do them better than before, but you should do them at 
least as well as your key competitors. To that extent, it is necessary to find new ways to continuously 
increase Mexico´s productive efficiency.  
In Mexico there are some structural reforms that are needed in order to increase competitiveness. Due 
to the importance they have, I will concentrate on three of them: 
• 
• 
• 
The  fiscal  system  in  Mexico  suffers  structural  and  managerial  problems  that  result  in  a  dearth  of 
resources. Three of them stand out: 
• 
• 
• 
For  a  long  time,  fiscal  policy  has  faced  the  challenge  of  abating  fiscal  deficits  by  reducing 
expenditures.  The  lack  of  public  resources,  added  to  the  need  for  containing  the  fiscal  deficit,  has 
resulted  in  a  public  investment  level  that  can  be  classified  as  narrow  and  that  in  recent  times  has 
fluctuated around 2 percent of GDP. This magnitude is lower or much lower that the one you observe 
in countries with the same development level of Mexico. 
The scarcity of resources to finance public investment is hindering the growth capacity of the Mexican 
economy and preventing the possibility of elevating competitiveness. In other words, the fiscal problem 
has materialized in sub-par investment levels entailing high social costs. Numerous needed physical 
and human investments, I repeat, are not materializing because of the lack of resources and because 
resources are focused on areas that do not result in large benefits. 
With  higher  fiscal  revenues,  comparable  to  those  obtained  by  countries  of  the  same  economic 
development, it  would be  possible to improve the development of our  human capital at this  historic 
moment. If we are not able to do so, it is possible that the opportunity to use the demographic bonus, 
derived from the fact that Mexico will have a large proportion of young people, will vanish. 
There  are  many  concrete  cases  in  which  budgetary  constraint  is  postponing  the  realization  of 
investments of great potential benefit. One example is natural gas. Despite the fact that we have huge 
natural gas fields, in recent years Mexico has been importing natural gas because of the lack of funds 
to finance the investments that would allow for exploration and transportation. Also, we need a proper 
legal framework that allows private-sector participation in natural gas development and exploitation.  
It is urgent that Mexico modernize the electricity industry in order to reduce the costs associated with 
the  generation  of  electricity  and  to  improve  operational  quality,  with  the  aim  of  increasing  Mexico’s 
development  capacity  and  at  the  same  time  extending  investment  in  the  sector  in  order  to  satisfy 
future electricity demand. 
Last but not least, labor reform would allow Mexico to have a much more flexible economy, with higher 
productivity. We should not forget that our main trading partners, Canada and the United States, have 
very  flexible  economies.  The  Canadian  case  stands  out  because  the  Canadians  were  capable  of 
making their public finances sound and making the labor framework more flexible. In Canada, market 
flexibility allowed for a drop in unemployment and more efficient participation of the labor force in the 
production  process.  In  fact,  Canada,  an  economy  closely  linked  to  that  of  the  United  States,  has 
avoided recession, maintaining a well-balanced and strong growth pattern.  
Although the structural reforms I have mentioned are crucial, there are other important complementary 
tasks that have to be completed at all government levels and by society itself to make it possible to 
elevate competitiveness. These do not need congressional approval, and we can mention such tasks 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 as deregulating, promoting and fomenting  business activity  and  improving security. For  example, in 
accordance with recent studies, it is well known that in Mexico the average time needed to open a new 
business is 90 days, while in Canada it takes only two. 
The  implementation  of  structural  reforms  requires  previous  political  agreements.  That  happened  in 
Canada and in other countries that have successfully completed such reforms. So let me conclude by 
highlighting the importance of building such consensus in Mexico. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
In 2002, Latin America experienced its worst year in terms of economic growth since 1983, and the 
region  has  started  to  show  what  some  are  calling  the  reform fatigue  syndrome.  The  argument  that 
adjustment policies and structural reforms are counterproductive has also been given, wrongly citing 
the Argentine case. However, this argument can be refuted with evidence from the Chilean case.  
However, it seems to me more useful to concentrate on the Mexican case. As I have tried to explain, 
our economy is stronger and more resistant to external shocks than before. The reason is simple but 
of  great  importance:  We  have  implemented  deep  transformations  in  many  of  our  institutions, 
modernizing them and making them more competitive and efficient.  
In  particular,  I  would  like  to  highlight  in  this  important  forum  progress  that  has  been  achieved  in 
maintaining  a  better  capitalized,  more  efficient  and  viable  banking  system  that  operates  under  a 
modern  regulatory  framework.  Nonetheless,  it  is  necessary  for  this  progress  to  translate  to  in  a 
balanced renewal of credit, to the end that the people worthy of receiving credit have that possibility. 
In what concerns the rest of the structural framework of the Mexican economy, the road ahead should 
be  traced  with  a  clear  understanding  of  these  achievements.  We  have  to  take  advantage  of  the 
opportunities that the openness of the Mexican economy with the rest of the world offers. We should 
not  be  afraid  of  international  competition;  instead,  we  should  do  our  best  to  make  Mexico  a  more 
competitive country. The pending issues  on  the national agenda make up an ambitious program of 
economic modernization, tough but promising. We must promote that program without delay and with 
decision, moving away from regressive claims that only delay our strategic insertion in the XXI century.  
BIS Review 19/2003 
 5
