 Thirachai Phuvanatnaranubala: The strengthening and development of regional 
bond markets 
Speech by Mr Thirachai Phuvanatnaranubala, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the APEC 
Business Advisory Council Meeting, Tokyo, 16 May 2003. 
Lessons from the Asian crisis (cid:150) a local perspective  
 Thailand(cid:146)s experience 
The crisis of 1997 brought to light weaknesses in the country(cid:146)s financial sector development and the 
sequencing of liberalization policies. Prior to 1997, the function of financial intermediation fell almost 
entirely  on  commercial  banks.  They  mobilized  funds  mainly  through  deposits,  which  accounted  for 
roughly 80 percent of domestic banking liabilities. At the same time, they held almost 70 percent of 
total financial sector assets, most of which were in the form of credits to the household and corporate 
sectors.  
Direct financing through the domestic bond market (cid:150) through both public and corporate bonds (cid:150) was 
relatively small and not well developed. Nine consecutive  years of fiscal surplus between 1988 and 
1996 provided no incentive for the government to issue regular and substantial amount of government 
bonds.  The  resultant  limited  supply  of  government  bonds  inhibited  the  development  of  a  risk-free 
benchmark against which to price corporate issues and mark to market daily trading.  
The crisis brought to the fore an imbalance in the structure and operation of the Thai financial markets. 
With financing channels limited to bank loans, Thai businesses faced severe liquidity crunch as the 
banking sector sharply curtailed their credit operations amidst high non-performing loans and massive 
recapitalization needs. This intensified the economic slowdown, as highly leveraged businesses and 
corporates were cut off from their traditional source of funding.    
Developing the local bond market  
In the aftermath of the crisis, authorities in the region mounted an effort to redress the imbalance in the 
financial  system.  In  Thailand,  development  of  the  domestic  bond  market  was  given  a  high  priority, 
partly because of the necessity to fiscalize the cost of financial sector restructuring and partly as an 
alternative-funding source to reduce reliance on bank intermediation.  
A more developed bond market provides the economy with a more balanced financial infrastructure, 
thereby diversifying the risk of intermediation across a large number of institutions and market players. 
This so-called sharing of risks through pricing of risks and trading of risks is aimed to achieve a better 
structure and balance between bank financing, equity financing, and debt financing. 
Development of a liquid bond market also provides other benefits. It allows private and public sector 
issuers to finance long-term projects at lower cost, thus reducing maturity risks. A liquid government 
bond market also provides the basis for development of other segments of the financial sector that 
could  draw  in  significant  foreign  participation  (cid:150)  including  forward  and  future  markets,  for  example, 
which are needed to support risk management functions of banks and firms. Developments in these 
markets will not only make local bond markets a more desirable investment alternative to both local 
and foreign investors, but would be vital in the development of a local-currency bond market. 
An active local bond market also supports financial system stability. Holders of bonds (cid:150) in particular 
commercial banks (cid:150) can make use of these bonds in securing emergency funding from the monetary 
authorities. An active bond market where securities are marked-to-market on a daily basis will facilitate 
commercial  banks(cid:146)  access  to  emergency  liquidity  assistance  through  their  sale  or  the  use  of  such 
instruments as collateral. This mechanism provides a more efficient and transparent process than the 
use of other types of collaterals such as land, title deeds, or receivables, which have less transparent 
market value and less liquidity. 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 1
 Development of the bond market in Thailand 
The local bond market in Thailand, like many other Asian markets, has been hindered by a number of 
institutional problems. The small size of the markets (cid:150) and the resultant low liquidity (cid:150) provided little 
incentive  for  active  participation  by  both  issuers  and  investors.  On  the  supply  side,  a  small  market 
limits the feasible range of marketable instruments and their effective tradability. On the demand side, 
a small number of market players and a narrow investor base provided insufficient demand for private 
players  to  act  as  market-makers.  A  small  number  of  market  players  and  the  dominance  of  a  few 
players hindered competition and market liquidity.  
Thai authorities have made significant strides in developing the government bond market since 1998. 
A pre-announced and regular issuance calendar for the year is now available to help investors plan 
their  investment horizon. This has  enabled the government to borrow  at  low cost and  no  longer be 
penalized  for  opportunistic  behaviour  of  irregular  issuance  schedules.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  now 
issues  on  a  regular  basis  Government  bonds  with  a  maturity  of  up  to  a  maximum  of  20  years  to 
establish  a  benchmark  rate  for  medium  to  long-term  debt  securities.  This  has  allowed  a  risk  free 
benchmark to be constructed, and the Thai Bond Dealing Center publishes a yield curve on a daily 
basis.  
The  BOT  has  appointed  10  financial  institutions  as  primary  dealers  for  bilateral  repurchase  (repo) 
transactions. This set of primary dealers will be counterparties for bilateral repo transactions with the 
BOT  and  act  as  intermediaries  in  forwarding  liquidity  adjustments  resulting  from  bilateral  repo 
transactions with the BOT to other market participants. To further enhance trading in the market and 
ensure  that  financial  institutions  have  sufficient  liquidity  for  their  day-to-day  operations,  the  Bank  of 
Thailand  is  in  the  process  of  phasing  out  the  repurchase  market  that  BOT  currently  operates  and 
introduce a full-fledged private bilateral repurchase market.  
Future challenges would center around improving the clearing and settlement system. These markets 
require a minimum turnover in order to function smoothly and cost effectively. 
A regional perspective: risks from currency and maturity mismatches 
In  addition  to  developing  local  bond  markets,  Asian  countries  have  also  embarked  on  a  regional 
initiative to promote the development of the Asian bond market. 
Asian  countries  have  long  enjoyed  the  highest  saving  rates  in  the  world.  In  recent  years  regional 
central  banks  have  also  built  up  a  large  addition  to  their  foreign  reserves.  Such  a  large  pool  of 
domestic savings should be channeled into long-term investment in the domestic markets to support 
growth and development in the region. At present however, the dominant financing tools in most Asian 
countries  still  continues  to  be  short-term  bank  loans,  and  bond  markets  in  the  region  still  remain 
underdeveloped.  
The bulk of local savings has instead been channeled to international financial centers with a wider 
alternative for investment and well-developed financial markets. At the same time, Asia is a recipient 
of short-term portfolio flows that had been destabilizing and highly volatile. These funds have further 
aggravated the problem of maturity and currency mismatches making the region more vulnerable to 
fluctuations in international capital movements.  
Creating a more stable financial system 
Developing regional bond markets for Asia: Asian savings for Asian investment 
Efficient  and  liquid  bond  markets  in  Asia  -  both  at  the  local  and  regional  levels,  would  enable  the 
private  sector  as  well  as  the  public  sector  in  Asia  to  raise  and  invest  long-term  capital  without  the 
currency and maturity risks which accompany international capital flows into the region. 
Development  of  regional  bond  markets  will  help  governments  and  businesses  in  the  region  reduce 
currency  and maturity mismatches. Aside from providing stable and  long-term financing alternatives 
for businesses and public sector agencies in the region, this would also help strengthen the financial 
system in the region by making available a diverse choice of alternatives for investment, as well as 
support economic growth through more stable financial systems in the region. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2003
 The necessity to develop a regional bond market 
While many countries in the region have begun the process of developing bond markets (cid:150) or where 
they  exist  already,  deepen  and  widen  those  markets  (cid:150)  countries  are  also  looking  to  promote  the 
development of the regional bond markets in parallel with development of their own markets. Given 
the problems of economies of scale as mentioned earlier, development of the regional bond markets 
would offer a more efficient and viable option in neighboring countries until these countries(cid:146) financial 
systems are more developed and have a more sophisticated market structure in place.  
Roadmap for the development of Asian bond markets 
Over  the  past  year,  the  development  of  Asian  bond  markets  has  been  discussed  in  various 
international  fora,  such  as  ASEAN  Finance  Ministers  Meeting,  the  Executives  Meeting  of  East 
Asia-Pacific  Central  Banks  (EMEAP),  Asian  Cooperation  Dialogue  (ACD),  and  the  Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation (APEC).  
Development of the demand side, involves promoting the pooling of investor base or the pooling of 
reserves under the Asian Bond Fund initiative, which has had a good start under the cooperation of 
central banks.     
Work on the supply sides revolves around issues of tax, legal and regulatory as well as accounting 
and should receive endorsement from the highest levels of government following the adoption of the 
Chiang Mai Declaration on the Asian Bond Market Development. 
Demand side development: establishment of the Asian Bond Fund 
On  the  demand  side,  central  banks  in  the  region  have  been  working  closely  under  the  Executives 
Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (cid:150) or EMEAP (cid:150) to establish an Asian Bond Fund. Under 
this initiative, central banks will set aside a fraction of their reserves into a pool that will be invested in 
bonds issued by Asian governments and government enterprises, with an ultimate aim to provide a 
catalyst for private investors to consider investment in Asian issues 
EMEAP has worked out the details and modalities of the operation of such a Fund and will announce 
details to the public shortly.  
Approaches to regional cooperation: work on developing the supply side  
ASEAN+3  and  APEC  are  both  working  on  the  development  side  of  bond  markets,  including  the 
removal  of  barriers  impeding  the  issuance  of  bonds  both  in  the  regional  and  domestic  contexts 
respectively. In addition, there has been cooperation in setting up the necessary infrastructure for such 
a  regional  bond  market,  including  a  regional  credit  rating  agency,  as  well  as  credit  enhancement 
facilities. 
Recognizing that the reason that investors have generally stayed away from bonds issued by Asian 
entities is  due to their  low liquidity  and  low credit ratings, APEC  is currently  active  in the design of 
instruments  that  can  be  traded  in  these  markets,  through  its  work  on  securitization  and  credit 
enhancement.    
Given that at present, a number of bonds issued by Asian entities are below investment grade, the use 
of securitization and credit guarantees to enhance the quality of these issues can act as a near-term 
solution to giving these issues a credit quality acceptable to investment managers, and give them the 
needed initial exposure to private investors. The introduction of these new instruments (cid:150) which would 
attain a credit quality acceptable to investment managers by achieving a high rating from international 
rating agencies (cid:150) would also benefit the international financial community by providing investors with a 
greater diversity of products and instruments for investment. More importantly, it would enable smaller 
corporate  entities  (cid:150)  who  would  otherwise  be  limited  to  financing  themselves  through  short-term 
commercial bank lending (cid:150) to access bond markets and find a source of funding more suitable to their 
needs. 
Cross guarantees 
A means of helping economies with less developed local bond markets to issue debt in the regional 
market may be through the use of cross guarantees. As part of regional financial cooperation and a 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 3
 step towards greater regional financial integration, cross guarantees can reduce the cost of funding for 
smaller economies with lower credit rating through guarantees provided by more advanced nations. 
The use of cross guarantees will be similar in principle to the use of credit enhancements, resulting in 
improved  credit  risk  of  bond  issuances  as  well  as  lower  funding  costs  for  bonds.  But  while  credit 
enhancement  can  be  offered  by  a  third  party,  cross  guarantees  are  made  by  countries  within  the 
region in an effort to collectively develop the region. 
A  number  of  concerns  may  arise  with  the  use  of  cross  guarantees,  namely  the  problems  of  moral 
hazard arising from any type of guarantee, the resultant price distortion, and the perceived free rider 
problem  of  the  smaller  economies.  To  lessen  the  risks  that  would  arise  from moral  hazard,  such  a 
guarantee may only be partial. The problem of price distortion will be difficult to mitigate, given that 
bonds  issued  with  cross  guarantees  by  definition  will  not  have  their  total  risk  reflected  in  price. 
However, this in turn will help benefit issuers in terms of lower cost of funding. With regards to the free 
rider problem, it is clear that a system of cross guarantees will benefit the lesser developed economies 
most, since they will not be in a position to guarantee any other issuers. However (cid:150) with the spirit of 
regional  financial  cooperation  for  development  of  Asia  as  a  whole  in  mine  (cid:150)  countries  with  more 
advanced financial systems may decide to offer these guarantees for a limited period of time. 
Proposals for development and integration: enhancing market infrastructure  
Currency arrangements 
Issuing bonds under a basket of Asian currencies may achieve a slightly lower cost of funding, given 
that the currency risk of a basket is lower than the sum of the risk of the underlying currencies. This 
lower risk should be reflected in a lower cost off capital for borrowers. 
With regards to liquidity, if bonds in the region were to be issued in a basket of currencies that could 
be  traded  in  many  Asian  bond  markets,  liquidity  of  such  a  bond  should  be  better  than  that  of  any 
individual bond. In this regard, deep and  liquid  bond  markets should also reduce transaction costs, 
making the regional market more attractive than issuing locally. 
Such a basket of currencies may enhance the natural hedging ability of market participants in each 
country  in  the  region.  Given  the  importance  of  intra-regional  trade,  exporters  cold  better  match  the 
currency exposures of their assets with their liabilities. 
Cooperative actions needed to facilitate growth of regional bond markets 
The use of these mechanisms to promote development of bond products must not detract countries 
from  taking  serious  steps  to  developing  their  bond  markets.  The  use  of  credit  guarantees,  cross 
guarantees, or credit enhancements (cid:150) to mention a few ways (cid:150) can only act as a temporary measure 
to  catalyze  interest  in  Asian  issues,  and  at  a  cost.  Such  guarantees  increase  the  issuer(cid:146)s  cost  of 
funding, and usually cannot be sustained indefinitely. The coverage of credit guarantees, for example, 
would  have  to  be  reduced  from  a  full  guarantee  to  a  partial  guarantee  as  markets  develop.  In  the 
meanwhile,  countries  must  tackle  their  fundamental  problems  that  are  hindering  the  rating  of  their 
issues, whether it is infrastructure, legal, or regulatory problems. 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2003
