 Jean-Claude Trichet: Completing the creation of a fully integrated European 
capital market 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Finance  Foundation, 
Venice, 19 June 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure to be here with you today. Let me start by expressing my thanks to the Finance 
Foundation for inviting me to speak at this conference in Venice. I would like to take this opportunity to 
share with you some thoughts on the creation and the completion of an integrated European capital 
market. 
One may first recall all the rewards of this march towards a truly integrated European capital market. 
The creation of this market is indeed the third layer of a process that began at the end of the eighties, 
with  the  Single  European  Act  which  formed  the  basis  for  the  establishment  of  the  internal  single 
market for persons, goods, services and capital. The second layer was obviously the creation of the 
euro and the launch of the Monetary Union. And it is not a coincidence that the ambitious Financial 
Services  Action  Plan,  which  serves  as  the  framework for  conducting  this  integration,  was  launched 
precisely in 1999. Clearly, achieving a full integration of financial markets will allow our countries to 
reap the full benefits of these initial steps through a reduction in the cost of capital for businesses, a 
wider range of investment opportunities, an increasingly efficient allocation of capital. Ultimately, the 
positive contribution to economic growth can be hardly disputed. An independent study carried out for 
the  European  Commission  concluded  in  November  2002  to  a  significant  macroeconomic  positive 
impact in the long run of a full integration of European financial markets, not only in terms of GDP, but 
also in terms of business investment and employment. 
Needless to say, as a central banker, I attach great importance to financial markets integration: the 
implementation of the single monetary policy would not have been possible without an efficient and 
fully integrated money market. A high degree of integration of the securities market is also required 
because central banks’ credit operations are fully collateralised and rely heavily on the smooth transfer 
of  securities.  Moreover,  efficient  and  integrated  markets  favour  a  homogenous  transmission  of 
monetary policy actions across the euro area. 
So where do we stand today? I think it is fair to recognise that significant progress has been made 
already in the integration of European Capital Markets. At the same time, one has to acknowledge that 
integration  is  an  on-going  process,  that  faces  renewed  challenges  in  a  constantly  evolving 
environment. Let me elaborate on these two aspects successively. 
European capital markets already exhibit a high degree of integration 
1. 
If  one  stands  back  and  compares  the  organisation,  functioning  and  structure  of  European  financial 
markets  today  with  the  situation  that  prevailed  five  years  ago,  the  magnitude  of  the  changes  that 
already took place is striking, not only in the various market segments but also in their infrastructures: 
indeed, the euro area already benefits from highly-integrated capital markets. 
1.1  Naturally, it is on the euro money market that the highest degree of integration can be found, 
as a result of the unification of monetary policy, and thanks to the efficiency of the cross-country large-
value  payment  system  that  support  it,  i.e.  the  TARGET  system.  Interest  rates  differentials  between 
what are nowadays regional deposit markets have quickly vanished following the advent of the euro 
and the “law of one price” applies to the transactions conducted within a deep and highly liquid euro-
area wide market. The recognition granted to money market reference rates such as EONIA and 
Euribor, the sheer development of derivatives markets based on these references - the OIS-based 
swap market and Euribor futures and options contracts, the impressive increase in cross-border 
transactions are illustrations of this already well-advanced, if not already completed unification. On 
the  inter-bank  market,  cross-border  transactions  conducted  with  EU  counterparties  represent  more 
than  50%  of  the  whole  inter-bank  euro  deposit  business.  Similar  developments  are  recorded  in  the 
BIS Review 32/2003 
 1
 repo market: the increasing share of non-domestic euro area collateral in transactions combined with 
the growing use of tri-party agreements, as well as the share of cross-border transactions - which is 
more than 50% - provide clear evidences of an increasingly integrated market. 
1.2  Changes  have  also  been  impressive,  albeit  more  contrasted,  on  the  securities  markets.  The 
euro had clearly stimulated the rapid development of the corporate bond markets. The main reason 
is  that  the  single  currency  has  made  corporate  debt  financing  more  attractive  by  creating  a  much 
larger home-currency investor base than it was the case for any single country of the area before EMU 
and  encouraged  international  underwriting  business  for  euro-denominated  corporate  bonds,  driving 
down issuing costs. In 2002, corporate issuance represented about half of the overall bond issuance 
in the euro area, that is four times more than its share in 1998. In 2002, the gross issuance of euro-
denominated bonds accounted for more than a third (38%) of all bond issues (US dollar issues: 47%). 
Not  only  have  the  size  of  the  bond  market  grown,  but  also  did  its  liquidity,  transparency  and 
standardisation. An increasingly competitive environment, and the development of electronic trading 
systems,  contemporary  to  the  launch  of  the  euro,  are  among  the  factors  that  contributed  to  these 
improvements, on the secondary market for government debt initially, and increasingly nowadays on 
the corporate segment. In that regard, it is worth reminding the success story of the MTS group, an 
original  Italian  concept  which  has  translated  over  a  few  years  into  a  true  pan  European  electronic 
platform for fixed-income products with offshoots throughout the continent. 
Developments witnessed  on the  short term securities market may  appear somewhat uneven  and 
less dynamic. And indeed, efforts remain to be done as regards for instance products characteristics, 
issuers’  information  memoranda  settlement  practices  in  order  for  cross  border  activity  to  effectively 
develop  and  market  integration  to  gather  momentum.  Reasons  for  optimism  abound  however: 
intensive  discussions  are  currently  going  on  between  market  participants  and  Eurosystem/ESCB 
experts  on  the  range  of  actions  that  are  needed  to  achieve  the  highest  desirable  level  of 
standardisation. In that regard, an harmonised and consistent implementation across member states 
of  the  recently  amended  European  directive  on  UCITS  (Undertakings  for  Collective  Investments  in 
Transferable Securities) that extends the range of money market instruments available to mutual funds 
would certainly represent a major step towards the creation of a pan-European market for short term 
securities.  Still,  it  is  worth  recalling  that  this  situation  has  not  prevented  this  market  segment  from 
experiencing a significant growth in issuance as well as in turnover. As illustrated by the developments 
on the French component of this market, the largest one in the euro zone, this trend has been fostered 
on the one hand by an increase in large issuance programs, notably by non-resident issuers, and on 
the  other  hand,  by  the  development  of  the  euro  Asset  Backed  Commercial  Paper  (ABCP)  market 
segment (19% of total outstanding amounts). 
1.3  The implications of the launch of the euro have also been highly visible on the equity markets. 
The  disappearance  of  currency  risk  within  the  euro  area  has  led  investors  to  shift  from  a  domestic 
focus to a more international, sector-related one, and asset managers to develop European oriented 
investment funds to complement their originally domestic-focused funds. The successful introduction 
of  a  broad  range  of  pan  European  and  sector-based  indexes,  and  the  subsequent  launch  of 
derivatives  and  new  investment  vehicles  such  as  Exchange  Traded  Funds  (or  “trackers”)  based  on 
these new indices, highlights this change in investors’ approach. Empirical evidence suggests indeed 
that sector-related factors are playing an increasing role in price dynamics. As integration enlarges the 
range  of  potential  investors,  it  also  fosters  the  development  of  private  equity  and  the  financing  of 
young and innovative firms, a trend that is obviously welcomed. 
1.4  Behind  the  scene,  supporting  the  evolutions  that  I  just  touched  upon,  market  infrastructures 
have undergone radical changes. As  an  example, as regards trading infrastructures, the creation 
and  expansion  of  EURONEXT  is  a  striking  illustration  of  the  on-going  consolidation  process:  the 
EURONEXT  group  now  links  the  French,  Belgian,  Dutch  and  Portuguese  stock  markets,  and  has 
concluded co-operation agreements with several other European markets. The group also significantly 
increased its presence on interest rates derivatives markets. This ongoing movement of consolidation 
affects  securities  clearing,  settlement  and  depository  infrastructures,  as  providers  aim  to 
propose an integrated transaction service covering the entire securities processing cycle. In the field of 
post-market  infrastructures,  CLEARNET  is  pursuing  its  pan-European  expansion  by  completing  its 
operational  integration  throughout  the  EURONEXT  area.  The  clearing  house  also  reached  an 
agreement with its Italian counterpart, enabling it to offer central counterparty services for transactions 
executed on the Italian government securities market. 
A  similar  consolidation  process  is  taking  place  in  the  Central  Securities  Depositaries  (CSD)  area, 
paving the  way for a more efficient functioning of Delivery  Versus  Payment (DVP) procedures,  and 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2003
 easier and safer settlement of cross-border securities transactions. This latter aspect is of particular 
interest for the Eurosystem, as a smooth functioning of securities settlement infrastructures is key for 
an  efficient  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  Structural  changes,  such  as  the  setting  up  of 
Euroclear’s  Single  Settlement  Engine,  are  of  great  interest  in  that  regard:  the  so  called  Single 
Settlement  Engine  (SSE)  by  2005  will  enable  participants  to  settle  securities  transactions  on  a 
delivery-versus-payment basis between the group’s different depositories, more effectively than today 
and at a lower cost, without changing their interface or procedure. Moreover, the central banks of the 
five countries concerned are discussing mechanisms that would allow Euroclear participants to settle 
all their transactions in central bank money and on a real-time gross settlement basis with the central 
bank of their choice. 
1.5  All  these  developments  highlight  the  necessity  to  harmonise  operational  practices,  to  define 
common standards and to adopt new procedures for co-operation between supervisory authorities. To 
function  properly,  markets  require  a  well  designed  legal  and  regulatory  infrastructure.  Since  the 
institutional  reforms  advocated  by  the  Lamfalussy  Report  were  set  in  train  in  2001,  European 
integration  has  made  significant  headway.  Let  me  emphasise  how  the  Lamfalussy  works  were  of 
utmost interest and greatly efficient. 
Indeed, the “Lamfalussy” process has proved to be effective with a readjustment of the content of the 
texts between the legislative and regulatory levels and a shortening of the timeframe for the adoption 
of directives. The four-level regulatory approach of the Lamfalussy procedure is now fully operational, 
with  the  two  bodies  in  charge  of  “comitology”  -  the  European  Securities  Committee  (ESC)  and  the 
Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR) - working on the preparation of measures to 
implement directives, sometimes in parallel with the political negotiations. 
As I have mentioned it earlier, the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) has endowed Europe with a 
coherent and market responsive regulatory framework. Up to now, 34 out of the 42 initially proposed 
measures  have  already  been  finalised,  and  I  would  like  to  remind  you  how  impressive  were  the 
progress made in implementing the Financial Services Action Plan over the last six months: in addition 
to  the  directive  on  market  abuse,  adopted  in  January  2003,  the  directive  updating  the  accounting 
provisions of the fourth and seventh Company Law directives and the directive on pension funds were 
adopted  at  the  beginning  of  May  2003.  Moreover,  in  February  2003,  the  European  Council  and 
Parliament agreed on a common position on the draft directive on prospectuses, which is expected to 
be adopted during the course of the year, as will probably be also the directive on taxation of savings 
income and even the new directive on take over bids. The majority of the key measures relating to 
securities  market  in  the  Action  Plan  are  expected  to  be  adopted  before  the  end  of  this  year  or  the 
spring 2004. Discussions and consultations continued in several crucial areas such as the overhaul of 
the Investment Services Directive - a cornerstone of the FSAP and a key area in terms of European 
financial  integration  and  investors  protection,  post  trading  activities  (clearing  and  settlement),  the 
review  of  the  capital  requirements  that  apply  to  financial  institutions  and  a  framework  for  the 
supervision of the reinsurance sector. 
2. 
Financial integration is an ongoing process with renewed challenges in a constantly 
changing environment 
We  can  easily  measure  the  significant  progress  that  have  already  been  made  in  terms  of  financial 
integration. However, and this is the second topic I wanted to touch upon, in a constantly changing 
environment,  and  as  the  integration  process  deepens,  new  challenges  arise  that  need  to  be 
addressed  and  taken  duly  into  account  in  our  reflection  on  the  integration  of  European  financial 
markets. Preserving financial stability is obviously among those challenges. In that regard, there are 
two  specific  and  crucial  issues  on  which  we  need  to  concentrate  our  efforts:  the  deepening  of 
co-ordination among financial supervisors and the restoration of public confidence in financial 
markets. 
2.1  Central  banks,  as  well  as  public  authorities  and  market  participants,  have  a  collective 
responsibility to find the ways to ensure that market globalisation goes along with financial stability. 
Financial  stability  is  a  complex  concept.  Financial  stability  is  a  situation  in  which  the  various 
components of the financial system - financial markets, payment and securities settlement systems, 
clearing  systems  and  financial  institutions  -  function  smoothly  and  without  interruption,  with  each 
component  proving  resilient  to  potential  shocks.  It  would  certainly  be  excessive  to  consider  that  an 
increasing risk of financial instability is the price to pay to benefit from the increasing sophistication, 
interconnection and integration of the world’s financial markets. This assumption remains to be borne 
BIS Review 32/2003 
 3
 out.  But  I  would  definitively  advocate  that  the  greater  the  interdependence,  the  greater  the  risks  of 
contagion, the more we need to methodically and collectively search for ways and means to preclude 
the risks of financial instability, and prevent crises from spilling over at the global level. 
By  their  very  nature  and  position  at  the  heart  of  the  financial  system,  central  banks  attach  great 
importance to financial stability: they  are responsible for price stability  which contributes to financial 
stability.  In  turn,  a  stable  financial  environment  makes  it  easier  to  ensure  price  stability.  The 
involvement  of  central  banks  in  financial  stability  is  hence  rooted  in  their  role  as  issuers  of money. 
Central banks are also responsible for the smooth functioning and fluidity of financing and settlement 
channels:  this  is  the  reason  for  their  responsibility  in  the  oversight  of  payment  and  securities 
settlement systems, as well as for the responsibility they often have as regards prudential supervision 
of credit institutions. The creation of the Monetary Union hasn’t altered these responsibilities. But it has 
clearly had an impact on the way their are conducted: the Eurosystem is by nature a teamwork, with 
built-in co-ordination mechanisms ensuring that appropriate answers are given  to specific situations 
should they occur. The management of the 9/11 crisis offered, if need be, a good illustration of the 
responsiveness of the structure. 
Let me now turn briefly to the two specific issues that I mentioned previously. 
2.2  As the integration of our Capital markets deepens, it is of utmost importance, from a financial 
stability viewpoint, to rely on an efficient financial and banking supervision framework. Let me offer 
a few remarks on this question: 
The  success  of  the  “Lamfalussy”  process  for  financial  markets  has  prompted  EU  authorities  and 
Member  States,  through  the  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  and  the  ECOFIN,  to  propose  its 
extension, inter alia, to the field of banking regulation and supervision. As a matter of principle, such 
an  approach  is  welcomed,  should  it  translate  into  a  more  flexible  regulatory  process  and  a  more 
consistent  implementation  of  EU  regulation  in  Member  States,  and  foster  the  convergence  of 
supervisory  practices.  However,  in  this  exercise,  we  must  keep  in  mind  the  specificity  of  banking 
supervision  and  build  on  the  accumulated  experience  of  the  relevant  authorities:  first,  in  this  area, 
co-ordination structures have been already set up that work effectively as underlined for instance in 
the Brouwer reports. Second, in this area particularly, co-ordination between supervisors and Central 
Banks is key. An illustration of this can be found for instance in the Memorandum of Understanding on 
high-level  principles  of  co-operation  in  crisis  management  situations  that  have  been  agreed  on,  in 
March  2003,  between  the  EU  banking  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks.  Third,  because 
banking supervision ultimately ends up into the surveillance of individual institutions, supervision at the 
national level and the role of domestic supervisors remain strategic. The specificity of this domain calls 
for the preservation of two major principles: the participation of supervisors and central banks to the 
drafting of regulation on the one hand, the permanent improvement of an efficient decentralised and 
highly  co-operative  supervisory  approach  on  the  other  hand.  Again,  Memoranda  of  Understanding 
(MOU) currently organise the bilateral exchange of supervisory information, for instance covering the 
special information needs in case of financial troubles. 
2.3  Second, I would like to focus on the necessary restoration of public confidence in financial 
markets. Over the past year, in both the United States and Europe, reforms have been undertaken in 
the area of corporate governance and financial disclosure with a view to restoring investor confidence 
in  listed  companies.  These  legal  and  regulatory  reforms mainly  concerns  three  areas:  External  and 
internal audit, financial transparency. 
Both  in  the  United  States,  through  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  Act,  and  in  Europe,  at  the  level  of  the 
Commission as well as in Member States (I will only mention here the French Financial Security bill 
which is to adopted soon), a lot of work is being undertaken to address the problems that surfaced 
during the last three years in this field. I will limit myself to two comments that both evolve around the 
simple idea that co-ordination is crucial on these questions: 
 4 
 Financial services are increasingly delivered on a global scale. The regulation and oversight 
of financial markets can no longer ignore the reality that measures taken by any country may 
have consequences outside that jurisdiction. Hence the necessity for a reinforced dialogue 
between  regulators,  central  banks  and  market  participants  as  a  means  for  managing 
regulatory  spill-overs  or  frictions  that  otherwise  could  occur  in  highly  interdependent  and 
increasingly  integrated  financial  markets,  and  more  generally  addressing  global  financial 
stability issues. Let me recall that structures such as the Financial Stability Forum already 
play  a  widely  recognised  role  in  fostering  these  exchanges  and  promoting  co-ordination. 
Such  a  dialogue  is  all  the  more  necessary  between  the  US  and  European  authorities,  as 
BIS Review 32/2003
  they represent the main financial centres. In that regard, the recent initiatives undertaken by 
the EU authorities are welcome. This dialogue should be the beginning of a sustained and 
deepening  process  of  mutual  understanding,  co  operation  and,  above  all,  commitment  on 
transatlantic regulatory equivalence. 
Second,  let  me  say  a  word  concerning  the  current  move  towards  a  uniform  body  of 
accounting  standards  and  the  implementation  of  International  Accounting  Standards  (IAS) 
for  listed  companies.  Such  a  move  is  expected  to  bring  about  greater  transparency  and 
comparability in financial reporting. However, it is crucial that all the impact of such a major 
reform  be  carefully  identified  and  analysed.  In  fact,  as  a  Central  Banker  and  a  banking 
supervisor  I  have  already  expressed  concerns  on  the  potential  impact  of  some  of  the 
proposed standards (namely IAS 32 and 39) on the balance sheets of credit institutions: the 
rationale for an extensive fair value approach needs to be pondered against the principle of 
prudence and the risk of introducing artificial volatility in banks’ earnings and equity. These 
risks clearly show that the debate here is not only a technical one, and that standard setting 
bodies  need  to  engage  in  a  continuous  dialogue  with  all  interested  parties,  among  them 
Central Banks and banking regulators. In this context, the recent decisions by the European 
Commission to re-examine this question is welcomed. More generally, any project of reform 
has to be precisely studied in order to take duly into account financial stability concerns and 
to prevent risks of hidden and counterproductive effects. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, I will have only one concluding remark. Financial Stability should not only be 
an expression for appropriate use in speeches to enrich our rhetoric. It must be a permanent goal of 
the entire International Community - as the setting up of the Financial Stabilty Forum has illustrated - 
and each and every piece of the global economic and financial system should be examined carefully 
and permanently through that grid. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 32/2003 
 5
