 Marian Jusko: Approaching the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Marian  Jusko,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Slovakia,  at  the  Conference 
"Challenges of EU Accession", Prague, 1 April 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I welcome the opportunity to address you tonight and I would like to thank the CNB for including me 
into this panel, where I can speak and discuss the most challenging and demanding topic, which is the 
EMU accession. 
We  all,  central  bankers,  know  that  the  main  role  will  not  be  played  by  us,  but  crucial  will  be  the 
decision and actual steps of national governments. 
Let me present the views and approach of the National Bank of Slovakia, which, however, cannot be 
considered as the official statement of the Slovak Republic. Nowadays, there is the joint strategy of the 
central  bank  and  the  government  under  preparation,  which  will  be  approved  by  the  Slovak 
Government in the second quarter and which will also be a part of our PEP (pre-accession economic 
programme). The intention here is to officially announce the term of our preparedness for examination, 
which also serves as the yardstick and anchor for all our current and future decisions. 
The  general  approach  of  the  NBS,  which  can  be  slightly  (in  terms  of  its  schedule)  modified  by  our 
government, is the earliest possible approach towards the euro adoption and EMU membership. At the 
same time, we prefer the shortest possible membership in the ERM II mechanism. 
The main idea behind the formulation of the earliest possible strategy of EMU accession is our belief 
that Slovakia may enter the EMU earlier, but must not become a member of the eurozone later than 
other  associated  countries.  This  is  based  on  our  latest  experience,  when  we  were  treated  as  an 
outsider in the second wave of the EU, OECD and NATO enlargement, with a long lasting effect on 
FDI inflows, costs of debt service and the overall macroeconomic development. 
I do not want to bother you with all these well-known and clear reasons for entering the EMU, which 
are,  above  all,  the  savings  on  transaction  costs  and  a  decline  in  the  exchange  rate  volatility  and 
exchange rate risk. This is extremely important for Slovakia with its high level of openness. The share 
of exports and imports of goods and services in GDP increased to 156.5% in 2001 from 117.3% in 
1993, while 60% of exports and 50% of imports were related to EU countries in 2001. After including 
the CEC5, these shares would increase to 89% for exports and 71% for imports. Considering the large 
share of the Slovak foreign trade in GDP and the territorial structure of the foreign trade, the probable 
positive  impact  of  the  increased  openness  due  to  the  EMU  membership  (an  estimated  increase  of 
1.6 percentage points) on the GDP per capita growth may oscillate around 1%. 
We are also aware of disadvantages which could be connected with the EMU membership. Among 
frequently mentioned disadvantages of the euro adoption belong the ongoing process of catching up 
with  EU  levels,  the  insufficiently  synchronised  business  cycles  and  the  loss  of  the  exchange  rate 
stabiliser. Along with this, we get the common monetary policy which is doubtful to fit to all, especially 
to a country with structural changes still ahead. 
With  regard  to  the  above  mentioned  possibly  problematic  areas,  in  our  view,  the  real  and  nominal 
convergence can be seen as complementary to each other, and should be pursued in parallel. Over 
the  short  period  of  time,  a  contradiction  between  the  real  and  nominal  convergence  has  become 
evident where GDP growth could slow down. However, at the same time, conditions for more dynamic 
and, mainly, sustainable growth will be created. Under these conditions Slovakia has a potential for 
the GDP grow of around 4-5% in the medium term. 
Regarding the independent monetary policy and the automatic stabiliser of the exchange rate, let me 
ask  the  question:  Is  it  possible,  in  such  a  small  and  open  country,  that  they  would  work freely  and 
independently? 
I  can  openly  say  that  we  do  not  see  any  serious  problem  in  meeting  all  Maastricht  criteria  in  the 
medium-term  horizon.  However,  what  could  negatively  effect  fulfilment  of  fiscal  criteria  and  slightly 
postpone the process of integration is the treatment of the pension reform expenditures, which is now 
also in question in many associated as well as member countries. 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 1
 In the end, let me stress that there is a strong incentive and first steps have already been carried out in 
the area of structural reforms, particularly those related to the pension, health-care and social benefits 
policies, and decentralisation. The price distortions are expected to narrow in 2004. The plan of the 
Ministry of Finance is to lower the fiscal deficit from around 6% in 2002 to 5% in 2003 and to 3,4% in 
2004, so that Slovakia could be ready for the examination in 2005 or 2006. 
Thank you for your attention.  
2 
 BIS Review 19/2003
