 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Emerging trends in Asia and their implications for Malaysia 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the The Asian 
Banker  Summit  2003,  (cid:147)Post-Asian  Financial  Crisis:  Securing  Financial  Stability(cid:148),  Kuala  Lumpur, 
16 September 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen  
As we advance into the 21st Century, sustainable performance demands resilience to the economic 
cycle,  resilience  to  unstable  market  conditions  and  overall  resilience  in  an  environment  of  rapid 
change.  To  prosper  in  this  new  environment,  we  need  to  have  the  capacity  to  withstand  the  entire 
business cycle, to survive the increased volatility in the financial markets and to have the capacity and 
agility to adjust to the changes taking place. Sustainable performance is key in achieving long-term 
relevance and success. To achieve this, it is important to look beyond the short-term perspective and 
build  the  capacity  and  the  resilience  to  meet  the  new  challenges  that  are  emerging  in  this  new 
environment.  
It  is  my  honour  and  pleasure  to  be  invited  to  this  Asian  Banker(cid:146)s  Summit  2003.  Let  me  join  the 
organisers in  welcoming  you to  Kuala Lumpur. It was exactly five  years since the countries in East 
Asia have emerged from the financial crisis, when stability in the financial markets was restored and 
the economic recovery resumed. Asia has now emerged as the fastest growing region. Despite a more 
difficult external environment, the Asian region has demonstrated resilience. The new trends emerging 
in Asia point to significant transformation taking place in the economies in Asia. These trends have 
contributed toward increasing the growth prospects for the region.  
Today, my remarks will focus on these fundamental trends that have emerged in Asia and the promise 
that they hold for the prospects for this region. I would also like to take this opportunity to share with 
you  the  implications  of  these  trends  for  Malaysia  and  the  strategies  and  responses  that  we  have 
adopted in addressing the challenges that we are faced with in this more difficult environment.  
Emerging trends in Asia: Economic transformation in Asia 
Asia(cid:146)s resilience can be traced to several  important  trends  which have contributed to the economic 
and financial transformation of the region. The dynamic transformations taking place in our region are 
significant and varied. The region accounts for more than half the world(cid:146)s population and 23% of the 
world economy. The growth for the region as a whole is forecast to be one and half times higher than 
the global average.  
Of significance, is the trend towards greater integration in the region on several fronts. Intra-regional 
trade in Asia has increased significantly in recent years. Intra-regional exports account for about one 
third  of  total  exports  of  the  region.  Intra-regional  trade  within  ASEAN  has  increased  significantly  to 
account for about 24% of the region(cid:146)s total trade, exceeding ASEAN(cid:146)s trade with the United States. 
Trade with China, India and Korea has increased dramatically. Since 1993, China(cid:146)s role in the region 
has reversed from that of a net exporter to a net importer. The share of East Asian exports to China 
has doubled in the recent decade.  
Previously,  the  high  economic  performance  in  Asia  was  driven  by  the  export  orientation  and 
investment driven growth. In the recent decade, greater focus has been accorded to domestic sources 
of growth. Increased emphasis has been accorded to promoting the role of consumption demand in 
the  growth  process.  Traditionally,  the  countries  in  the  region  have  high  savings,  relative  to  other 
regions. ASEAN(cid:146)s saving rate of 35% is nearly double that of NAFTA and one and a half times higher 
than  the  EU(cid:146)s.  There,  therefore,  remains  significant  potential  for  high  rates  of  consumption  without 
resulting  in  risks  to  our  system.  The  increased  consumption  demand  has  been  a  factor  that  has 
reinforced the trend toward greater intra-regional trade in Asia.  
There has also been a trend towards greater intra-Asian investment flows in the region. This includes 
increased  reinvestment  of  the  surplus  funds  back  into  the  region,  both  in  the  form  of  foreign  direct 
investment and portfolio capital flows. The recent establishment of the Asian Bond Fund is a step in 
this direction. Initiatives are in progress to promote the development of regional capital markets. The 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 1
 initiative to develop an Asian Bond Market will contribute towards recycling part of the high savings to 
finance productive activity within the region.  
While  the  Asian  regional  economies  have  common  threads  that  prevail  across  the  region,  the 
economies  are  generally  diverse  in  their  economic  activities.  While  there  are  areas  of  competition, 
there  are  trends  towards  increasing  specialisation  and  complementarities.  These  structural  shifts 
arose from new technologies, new demand  patterns  and  new production  organisation structures. In 
essence, there is a movement from bilateral inter-regional trade flows to a more fully developed intra-
regional division of labour incorporating all phases of production and markets. This has led to greater 
optimising of the comparative advantage of the region.  
Finally,  there  has  been  an  intensification  of  regional  co-operation  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian 
financial  crisis.  There  has  been  a  high  level  of  financial  co-operation  among  the  Asian  economies. 
Co-operation has been in the area of enhanced regional surveillance, standardisation of systems and 
documentation, regional capacity building programmes and regional swap facilities. This strengthened 
co-operation enhances the foundations for realising the potential that the region possesses.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
In  a  world  where  uncertainty  has  become  a  permanent  feature  of  the  environment,  the  challenge 
before  us  is  to  be  able  to  increase  our  tolerance  level  to  the  shocks  and  changes  that  may  occur. 
Building  tolerance  levels  involves  enhancing  our  capacity,  strength  and  resilience  to  cope  with  the 
changed environment. Precautionary measures can be taken to reduce the risks and vulnerabilities. 
Despite  uncertainties  and  unstable  conditions,  initiatives  can  be  taken  to  achieve  sustainable 
performance.  
In  the  current  environment,  the  pressure  is  for  greater  market  orientation  and  liberalisation  on  the 
premise  that  competition  would  lead  to  pricing  that  would  facilitate  a  more  efficient  allocation  of 
resources. This, however, is not the only objective that is to be achieved. Consideration needs to be 
given  to  the  objective  of  promoting  growth,  financial  stability  and  social  stability.  Some  of  these 
objectives are conflicting and need to be carefully balanced, taking into account the trade offs.  
Increasing the tolerance level amidst a volatile environment 
The pursuit of efficiency and competition has to be balanced with the objective of attaining soundness 
and preserving stability. Given the unique characteristics and peculiarities of emerging economies, the 
transition to a more liberalised environment would demand appropriate sequencing of measures to be 
taken.  
Factors  commonly  ascribed  as  key  in  achieving  and  safeguarding  financial  stability  include  sound 
macro-economic management, effective regulatory and supervisory framework, greater transparency 
and disclosure of information, increased market discipline, dynamic accounting and auditing standards 
as well as the existence of strong corporate governance. For emerging economies, the requirements 
extend  beyond  these  factors  to  include  other  areas,  namely  the  development  of  the  necessary 
financial infrastructure that supports a strong foundation that is able to provide depth and breadth to 
the financial system and economy as a whole. Of equal importance, is the need to develop alternative 
sources  of  funding,  such  as  the  equity  and  bond  markets,  not  simply  to  ensure  a  more  balanced 
allocation  of  financial  and  economic  resources  within  an  economy  but  more  importantly  to  attain 
greater  diversification  within  the  financial  system,  hence  ensuring  the  efficient  distribution  of  risks 
within the system. In addition, the integrity and credibility of the payments system and effectiveness of 
regulation and supervision would require the support of a comprehensive set of legislations, one that 
would  need  to  evolve  in  tandem  with  the  developments  that  are  taking  place  in  the  financial 
landscape.  
It is also recognised that good corporate governance reinforces sound regulation and supervision. It 
contributes towards maintaining market confidence, and strengthens transparency and accountability. 
For corporate governance to work, good corporate practices need to be instilled and embedded in all 
aspects of the operations and at all levels within the organisation. To succeed in the new environment, 
institutions will require qualified board members and management teams that exhibit a high degree of 
professionalism. 
In  addition,  transparency  and  disclosure  is  essential,  particularly  in  a  rapidly  changing  environment 
and  greater  attention  is  being  accorded  to  make  banking  systems  more  transparent.  While  the 
comprehensive  and  timely  availability  of  financial  information  will  enhance  market  discipline  in 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2003
 emerging market economies, the disclosure of information must be complemented with the ability of 
the market players to analyse, digest and appropriately interpret the information to achieve the desired 
results.  
Closely related to this is the need to strengthen the framework for consumer protection to provide an 
avenue  for  redress  in  cases  where  consumers  are  placed  in  a  disadvantaged  or  unfair  position 
resulting from financial transactions taken due to lack of transparency and understanding. The move 
towards  the  adoption  of  the  supervised  market  approach  requires  continuous  efforts  to  enhance 
product disclosures and to elevate the level of financial literacy of consumers. Dealing with consumer 
awareness and education require considerable time and commitment.  
While recognising the potential benefits of liberalisation to the domestic financial system, the need to 
ensure  the  proper  sequencing,  and  to  manage  the  liberalisation  process  must  be  accorded 
importance. Financial systems in emerging economies have and are expected to continue to play a 
significant  role  in  the  economy.  As  such,  the  process  of  international  integration  of  the  domestic 
financial system has to be paced with developments in the domestic system so as to ensure that the 
system  is  adequately  prepared  to  cope  with  the  challenges  arising  from  the  liberalisation  process 
without destabilising effects on the domestic economy. 
The liberalisation process must be managed with respect to identifying the potential sources of risks to 
the system. Experience has shown that the timing for opening up of the financial system will need to 
be  sequenced  and  guided  by  the  objectives  to  develop  a  more  diversified  economy  where  the 
respective sub-sectors and segments of society have access to adequate financial services; and to 
ensure the enhanced and meaningful contribution by domestic financial institutions to the economic 
growth  and  transformation  process  through  capacity  building.  In  achieving  these  objectives,  a  key 
trade off is between the need to enhance institutional capacity and the need to phase in competitive 
forces through the appropriate sequencing of market liberalisation.  
It  is  therefore,  important  that  the  liberalisation  process  is  sequenced  and  managed  effectively, 
according to the stages of development of the domestic financial system, the inherent risks and the 
strength  of  the  social  safety  net  as  well  as  the  tolerance  level  of  the  financial  system.  Successful 
implementation of this process, including evaluation of the trade-offs involved, will at the same time 
enable the emerging economies to achieve the overall national objectives.  
It must be emphasised that the tolerance level for the system as a whole will only be as strong as the 
strength of its components. Having robust financial institutions that are able to withstand any potential 
shocks and that have the agility and adaptability to embrace the future challenges are key to ensuring 
long-term sustainability and survival in the competitive future as well as the maintenance of financial 
stability.  
One of the most important aspects in enhancing the tolerance level involves building the capacity and 
institutional development.  
Wide-ranging  strategies  have  included  consolidation,  reengineering  of  business  processes  and 
reassessment of business models to fit the new financial landscape. Leveraging on advancements in 
information and communication technology is important to improve business automation and efficiency 
levels.  
To  achieve  a  higher  level  of  operational  efficiency,  rationalisation  of  business  networks  and 
outsourcing  are  gaining  greater  significance.  The  journey  is  however  never-ending,  to  adapt  to  the 
changing needs of the market, and at the same time, taking into account all the potential risks.  
The  need  to  enhance  the  capacity  at  the  firm  level  is  not  limited  to  improving  the  way  business  is 
conducted and the level of efficiency in doing business. The financial institution, as a service provider, 
relies  heavily  on  human 
innovativeness  and 
competitiveness  of  the  institution.  Thus,  human  capital  has  been  constantly  sharpened  through 
continuous development programmes and challenged to maximise its full potential. Towards this end, 
Bank Negara Malaysia has established the International Centre for Leadership in Finance to provide 
an avenue for the development of industry leaders especially in this region.  
In  the  wake  of  the  growth  in  the  volume  and  complexity  of  financial  transactions,  and  worldwide 
integration of financial markets, risk management has increasingly become a key concern. Sound risk 
management  practices  will  minimise  adverse  consequences  faced  by  financial  institutions  during 
periods  of  uncertainty.  Effective  risk  management  systems  facilitate 
the  measurement  and 
management  of  risk  exposures,  thus  minimising  potential  future  losses.  In  addition,  robust  internal 
intellectual  capital  which  contributes 
the 
to 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 3
 controls  which are designed to provide qualitative standards are also necessary to complement the 
quantitative analysis of risk and provide a check and balance in the overall risk management practices.  
institutional 
framework,  enhanced  market 
The Malaysian experience 
Let me now take the opportunity to share with you Malaysia(cid:146)s experience in addressing some of these 
issues. The blue print for the development of the financial sector in Malaysia is outlined in Financial 
Sector Masterplan that was released about three years ago. The Masterplan is all about determining 
the  future  directions  of  the  financial  system  and  to  define  the  financial  structure  that  is  most 
appropriate to our requirements as our economy moves to the next stage of development. It therefore 
provides  the  direction  and  common  purpose  for  all  the  relevant  parties  in  the  financial  sector,  the 
industry, the market participants, the regulators, and the government. In emerging economies, the role 
of  the  government  and  the  regulator  is  important  in  particular  to  prioritise  policy  goals,  build  the 
infrastructure,  provide  the  legal  and  supervisory  framework,  and  in  addressing  market  failures.  The 
key emphasis of the plan is to move toward a more diversified and balanced financial structure with a 
strengthened 
infrastructure  and  practices,  and  an 
appropriate regulatory environment in line with the transformation that has taken place.  
The Asian crisis highlighted the vulnerability associated with fragmented financial systems and the risk 
of  excessive  reliance  on  the  banking  sector.  Strategies  therefore  focused  on  introducing  reform 
measures to strengthen the banking sector and develop and enhance alternative sources of financing. 
The objective is to develop an intermediation structure that will facilitate an economic transformation 
toward a more diversified economy, namely:  
Develop the domestic bond market;  
Develop  venture  capital  industry  to  support  new  growth  areas  such  as  the  ICT  and 
bio-technology sectors;  
Enhance the framework for financing the small and medium-sized enterprises or SMEs;  
Develop micro finance services especially micro credit for micro enterprises; and  
Strengthen  the  development  financial  institutions  to  ensure  more  effective  use  of  public 
sector resources in achieving socio-economic objectives and greater complementaries with 
the banking sector.  
     Following the successful financial restructuring and consolidation of the banking sector, efforts have 
shifted  to  building  the  domestic  financial  infrastructure.  The  industry-wide  consolidation  exercise  for 
the  domestic  banking  institutions  after  the  crisis  saw  the  71  banking  institutions  pre-crisis  being 
consolidated  into  10  domestic  banking  groups.  The  consolidation  exercise  was  a  major  structural 
enhancement of the financial system. Banking institutions have now attained a minimum capital size 
that is able to benefit from economies of scale and undertake the necessary investment in technology 
important to the industry.  
A  major  transformation  of  the  structure  of  financial  intermediation  can  be  seen  in  terms  of  the 
deepening and broadening of the private debt securities market. Efforts were directed to promote a 
robust  domestic  bond  market  to  provide  a  competitive  source  of  long-term  debt  funding  and  viable 
investment alternatives for investors. The trading and information infrastructure was enhanced with the 
introduction  of  the  Fully  Automated  System  for  Tendering,  Bond  Information  and  Dissemination 
System and real-time gross settlement system. The regular issuance of MGS with various maturities 
along the active benchmark yield curve has facilitated the evolution of a benchmark yield curve. The 
introduction of new instruments such as asset-backed securities and MGS futures were facilitated, and 
liquidity in the market was improved by enlarging the size of MGS issues and widening the institutional 
investor base. The introduction of the Principal Dealer (PD) system promoted an active market-making 
mechanism for both Government and selected securities in the bond market.  
In terms of magnitude, the bond market (including both public and private sector bonds), tripled in size 
from 44.7% of GDP in 1996 to 80.6% of GDP as at end-June 2003. The private debt securities market 
accounted for 54% of bonds outstanding and 43.6% of GDP as at end-June 2003 compared to 13.5% 
of GDP in 1996. Funds raised by the private sector through the bond market increased to 16% of the 
total private sector debt financing (as at end-June 2003) from 9.3% in 1996.  
4 
 BIS Review 40/2003
 Another  development  in  our  financial  landscape  is  the  growing  significance  of  Islamic  banking  and 
finance  in  the  financial  system.  Islamic  banking  has  strongly  emerged  as  an  efficient  and  effective 
financial  intermediation  channel,  forming  an  integral  part  of  the  overall  Malaysian  financial  system. 
Today,  we  have  developed  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  covering  banking,  Islamic 
insurance,  the  money  market  and  capital  market,  that  operates  in  parallel  with  the  conventional 
system. Islamic banking now accounts for 10 percent of the market share of the total banking system.  
There has been a rapid expansion in the development of Islamic financial instruments. At the global 
front, Malaysia was the first country to issue a sovereign Islamic financial instrument launched in the 
international  financial  markets.  The  capacity  of  the  Islamic  banking  institutions  to  arrange  and  offer 
products  with  attractive  features  and  competitive  pricing,  which  are  comparable  to  the  conventional 
products  has  been  enhanced.  While  Islamic  finance  was  first  introduced  to  meet  the  needs  of  the 
Muslim  community,  today,  the  Islamic  financial  products  and  services  have  wide  appeal  to  both 
Muslim and non-Muslim customers.  
The  Malaysian  Islamic  banking  institutions  operate  under  a  robust  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework at par with the conventional banking institutions to ensure the soundness and stability of 
the system. At the international level, the establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board will 
further  harmonise  the  international  prudential  and  regulatory  standards  for  the  Islamic  financial 
institutions on a global basis.  
The  development  of  the  venture  capital  industry,  a  better  framework  for  SME  financing  and  the 
provision of micro financing continue to be important priorities to ensure that credit is made available 
to  all  segments  of  the  economy,  as  well  as  to  support  the  growth  of  new  areas  and  industries. 
Increased focus on developing these financing modes has been supported with higher public sector 
budget allocations for the venture capital industry and for specific development financial institutions to 
channel micro-credit to small micro-enterprises.  
Priority has also been accorded to investment in information and communications technology by the 
banking sector. With the completion of the consolidation exercise, domestic banking institutions have 
actively  embarked  on  upgrading  their  systems,  including  in  product  delivery,  risk  management  and 
information systems. The adoption of technology in the Malaysian banking system has predominantly 
been to automate business processes. However, more recently technology has been used as a tool to 
assess  and  drive  business  performance.  With  competition  in  the  market  becoming  increasingly 
intense, the ability to understand the drivers of performance and the ability to make prompt response 
is vital to remain competitive.  
Business delivery channels and business processes have also been reviewed to enhance efficiency 
levels  and  service  quality  to  the  customers.  Many  have  formed  strategic  alliances  with  partners  to 
enrich  their  value  proposition  to  their  customers  through  cross-selling  of  products  and  services. 
Indeed,  the  Malaysian  banking  industry  has  now  become  more  consumer-centric.  Several  banking 
institutions have embarked on customer relationship management systems to better understand the 
needs of their customers in order to provide better levels of service and to gain a better understanding 
of their drivers of profitability.  
In the area of corporate governance, the hybrid approach adopted by Malaysia includes legal reform, 
self-regulation  as  well  as  measures  to  encourage  market-based  regulation.  New  measures  were 
introduced to further improve the level of governance among banking institutions. This includes limiting 
the number of directorships of chief executive officers, reviewing the responsibility and accountability 
of the board and management as well as requiring for the setting up of various board committees.  
Emphasis on improved corporate governance goes hand in hand with the call for improvements in risk 
management  standards.  Arising  from  the  experience  during  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  greater 
emphasis has been placed on enhancing the credit skills and to create a more robust credit culture. An 
accreditation process was introduced, aimed at better equipping credit officers with the required skills. 
Efforts  are  also  on-going  to  prepare  the  industry  for  an  enhanced  risk  management  regime  under 
Basel  II  and  to  continuously  provide  the  relevant  input  towards  the  development  of  the  framework, 
particularly from the perspective of emerging market economies.  
A comprehensive 10-year consumer education programme was also introduced early this year. This is 
to raise consumer awareness and understanding on banking products and services and to educate 
the  public  on  their  rights  and  responsibilities  in  their  relationship  with  a  financial  institution.  The 
transparency  and  disclosure  standards  on  banking  products  and  services  are  also  currently  being 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 5
 enhanced to equip consumers with the ability to make informed financial decisions. It is envisaged that 
consumers will play a bigger role in instilling market discipline amongst financial players.  
A  deliberate  reform  of  our  payment  system  has  also  been  undertaken  to  ensure  that  the  payment 
system is stable and efficient. In July 1999, Bank Negara Malaysia implemented a Real Time Gross 
Settlement  System  known  as  RENTAS  for  inter-bank  funds  transfer  to  reduce  the  credit  and 
settlement  risk  in  the  financial  system.  The  RENTAS  system  also  handles  scripless  debt  securities 
trading, processing and settlement system on a real time Delivery versus Payment model that reduces 
counterparty  risk  substantially.  In  addition,  a  range  of  retail  payment  systems  has  also  been 
implemented to further increase payment system efficiency through electronic channels, which include 
the introduction of Inter-bank Giro, Internet banking, mobile banking and the electronic purse.  
Cards have also rapidly become an important payment instrument in Malaysia. In maintaining public 
confidence in using payment cards, Malaysia has taken steps to combat credit and ATM card fraud. 
Malaysia is the first country in the Asia Pacific region that had mandated the migration of ATM cards to 
chip based cards and the second country after Taiwan to implement the migration to EMV chip based 
credit cards, targeted to be completed by end-December 2005. The recent enactment of the Payment 
Systems  Act  2003  is  also  a  testimony  to  the  Bank(cid:146)s  commitment  for  greater  payment  system 
oversight, and to provide legal certainty to the finality of payment instructions carried out through major 
payment systems.  
Social responsibility of banking institutions 
Sustaining  growth  in  emerging  economies  requires  stability  to  be  preserved  in  the  macroeconomic 
environment,  the  financial  system  and  markets  as  well  as  social  environment.  The  responsibility  of 
achieving  social  stability  and  development  should  no  longer  be  the  exclusive  domain  of  the 
government. The focus on short-term returns should not be at the expense of long-term sustainability. 
It  is  increasingly  being  advocated  that  corporate  social  responsibility  is  an  important  part  of  the 
business  environment.  Corporate  social  responsibility  refers  to  operating  business  in  a  manner  will 
also contribute to economic development while improving the quality of life of the workforce and local 
community and society at large.  
The banking institutions, being the main provider of financing in the economy, need to assume a much 
greater  role  in  contributing  towards  the  long-term  development  of  the  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises  (SMEs).  In  developing  the  SME  industry  into  strong  and  resilient  enterprises,  banking 
institutions need to reassess their relationships with the SMEs as financing alone will not guarantee 
the long-term success of the SMEs. The traditional relationship between creditor and  debtor has to 
evolve  into  a  business  partnership  whereby  banking  institutions  are  expected  to  play  a  more 
participative role in identifying gaps in processes, skills and expertise as well as usage of technology. 
Gains can be reaped as the SMEs grow in significance in the economy.  
Positioning the central bank to meet the challenges ahead 
My presentation on institutional development and capacity enhancement would not be complete if it 
did not include the central bank. The new environment in which central banks are operating has also 
changed  dramatically.  Central  banks  are  continually  being  confronted  with  the  need  to  balance 
between conflicting objectives, and conflicting means to achieve the objectives. To stay at the forefront 
in dealing with the new challenges that we are faced with, our own efforts have also been focused on 
strengthening  our  capacities  and  capabilities.  This  includes  measures  to  continually  review  our 
strategic orientation and key priorities and the necessary changes that need to be made so that we 
are positioned to effectively deal with new challenges and changes taking place.  
Central banks in emerging market economies have a much broader mandate than our counterparts in 
the more advanced and mature economies. Of importance, is our developmental role in charting the 
development of the financial system, institutional development and the overall economic management. 
To  achieve  our  strategic  intent  and  build  the  infrastructure  to  support  our  strategies,  investment  in 
technology  and 
into  a 
knowledge-based organisation were among some of the major initiatives made.  
transformation  of  our  organisation 
the  appropriate  skills,  and 
the 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2003
 Conclusion 
To conclude, the East Asian region has, since the financial crisis, experienced pronounced economic 
and financial transformations. Our experience  in Malaysia shows that  a more diversified and sound 
financial sector, a more efficient and competitive financial industry and all the structural enhancements 
made, have evolved a more effective and resilient financial system. This has enhanced the tolerance 
level to withstand the more difficult and challenging environment.  
Such fundamental changes, however, cannot be expected to be achieved within a short period of time. 
Enhancing  the  tolerance  level  in  the  financial  sector  of  the  East  Asian  economies  is  one  of  the 
important elements in strengthening the  growth prospects for the region. The  overall economic and 
financial transformation that has occurred has resulted in an Asia that is a mutually reinforcing region 
of growth; an Asia that has an increasing role in the creation of wealth; and an Asia that will be an 
important region in promoting and supporting global stability and global growth. 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 7
