 Joseph O Sanusi: Central banking authority, economic stability and the rule of 
law 
Paper presented by Dr Joseph O Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the Ninth Annual 
Harvard International Development Conference, Boston, 4 April 2003 
 Introduction 
I. 
It  is  a  great  privilege  for  me  to  participate  in  this  year(cid:146)s  Harvard  International  Development 
Conference. The theme of the conference is quite relevant to developing countries. I, therefore, thank 
the  organizers  for  the  opportunity  offered  me  to  share  my  thoughts  and  experiences  with  you  on: 
Central Banking Authority, Economic Stability, and the Rule of Law.  
The world over, the development process is anchored on the pursuit of sound macroeconomic policies 
that will promote sustainable economic growth, create more jobs, and ensure equitable distribution of 
income  to  raise  the  living  standard  of  the  populace.  The  successful  pursuit  of  these  goals  requires 
policies  that  will  promote  openness  in  trade,  efficient  financial  system,  increased  capital  flows, 
development of information and communication technologies and enhanced technical capability. The 
implementation of such policies would enable a country to integrate into the world economy and derive 
the gains and, sometimes, the risks from globalization. The centrality of the central bank in forging the 
necessary  macroeconomic  environment  for  sustainable  economic  growth  and  development  is 
generally incontrovertible. The theme for this panel discussion is very appropriate in this regard. 
The key issues I seek to explore at this forum are: 
   What is the role of the central bank and monetary policy in the development process? 
What has been the experience of the Central Bank of Nigeria in the development process? 
What are the challenges and constraints facing the Bank in the process? 
In discussing these issues, my focus will be on the experience of the Central Bank of Nigeria, in the 
context of international best practices.  
The role of the Central Bank and monetary policy in the development process 
II. 
The pursuit of price stability has come to be regarded as the raison d(cid:146)etre of central banks in recent 
times.  The  near  universal  acceptance  of  price  stability  as  the  overriding  goal  of  monetary  policy 
derives from the recognition that, in the long run, monetary policy impacts on the price level and its 
dynamics.  Consequently,  policy  instruments  at  the  disposal  of  central  banks  should  be  capable  of 
influencing  the  price  level  and  expectations  in  the  desired  direction,  toward  the  achievement  of 
non-inflationary economic growth.  
The issue that arises at this juncture is whether the central bank(cid:146)s pursuit of price stability and financial 
sector soundness is the only requirement to sustain the development process. While the maintenance 
of  price  stability  has  increasingly  become  the  main  mandate  of  most  central  banks,  those  in  the 
developing countries are charged with the responsibility to promote economic development, in addition 
to the pursuit of the macroeconomic stabilization objective.  
Central banks(cid:146) direct role in the development process, especially in less developed economies, stems 
from the absence of efficient financial markets and institutional structures, which are pre-requisite for 
the  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy.  In  addition,  in  the  pursuit  of  the 
overall  economic  goals  of  the  nation,  the  stabilization  objective  of  the  central  banker  often  conflicts 
with the sectoral pursuits of the political authority. 
One thing all central banks, the world over, have in common is the maintenance of financial stability as 
a  key  factor  influencing  macroeconomic  performance  and  efficient  payments  system.  The  legal 
framework  and  institutional  arrangements  vary  widely  country  by  country  in  the  context  of  the  act 
establishing the central bank. As we are all aware, a central bank is usually established by an Act of 
Parliament that clearly states its mandate. 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 1
 The experience of the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN)  
III. 
The critical role of the CBN in the management of the Nigerian economy has been made obvious by 
the provisions of the law establishing the Bank. The core mandate of the CBN as spelt out in the CBN 
Act  of  1958  include:  issuance  of  legal  tender  currency,  banker  and  financial  adviser  to  the  Federal 
Government,  lender  of  last  resort  to  banks,  maintenance  of  external  reserves  to  safeguard  the 
international value of the currency, promotion of monetary stability and a sound and efficient financial 
system. In order to discharge its responsibility efficiently and effectively, the Bank must have credibility 
within  and  outside  the  country.  Towards  this  end,  the  Act,  with  the  subsequent  amendments,  goes 
further  to  establish  a  governance  structure  with  an  independent  Board  with  responsibility  for  policy 
formulation  and  administration  of  the  Bank,  subject  to  periodic  reports  to  both  the  Executive  and 
Legislative arms of the government. 
Although  the  original  Act  mandates  the  CBN  to  promote  monetary  stability,  it  was  in  the  1999 
amendment to the Act that actually conferred discretionary powers on the Governor, the Board and 
Management  of  the  Bank,  in  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  especially  the 
determination  of  the  appropriate  interest  rate  regime  and  exchange  rate  policy.  In  other  words,  the 
Bank was granted instrument autonomy under the amendment to the Act. In view of the destabilizing 
effect of monetary financing of Government deficits, the Acts specifies the limit of the CBN lending to 
government  in  terms  of  Ways  and  Means  Advances  to  the  Federal  Government  in  the  event  of 
temporary  deficiency  of  budget  revenue,  which  should  not  exceed  12.5  per  cent  of  its  estimated 
recurrent  budget  revenue.  Such  advances  should  be  repaid  fully  by  the  end  of  the  Government(cid:146)s 
financial year. Moreover, the total amount of Government securities of more than two years tenor held 
by the CBN should not exceed 75 per cent of the total demand liabilitiies of the Bank. 
Cognizant of the importance of central bank autonomy for and the significance of fiscal prudence to 
the effective conduct of monetary policy, the CBN  was actively  involved  in the Fiscal Responsibility 
Bill, currently under consideration by the National Assembly of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. The 
law,  if  passed,  would  establish  further  limits  on  Government  borrowing  from  the  CBN.  Under  the 
current dispensation, the effectiveness of monetary policy is often constrained by fiscal surprises. In 
particular,  monetary  financing  of  large  fiscal  deficits,  which  averaged  7.5  and  5.6  per  cent  of  GDP 
annually in the 1980s and 1990s, respectively, resulted in the over-burdening of monetary policy and 
its  effectiveness.  This  has  of  course  been  moderated  by  the  current  democratic  government  and 
reduced to annual average of 4.0 per cent in 2001 and 2002.  
In  keeping  with  the  principle  of  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  and 
financial  policies,  the  CBN  publishes  its  monetary  policy  objectives,  targets  and  measures  for  a 
two-year  period.  The  exercise  involves  the  review  of  developments  in  the  economy  during  the 
preceding year, the identification of the prospects and problems in the years ahead and the outlining 
of  the  policy  goals  and  performance  targets  for  the  period.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC) 
meets every fortnight to appraise the performance of the economy and conditions in the money and 
foreign  exchange  markets  with  a  view  to  reviewing  the  current  policy  measures,  either  in  terms  of 
adopting new policy initiatives or fine-tuning the existing ones as the need arises. The Committee is 
made up of the Governor as Chairman, four Deputy Governors and heads of relevant departments as 
members. Others are two  members of the Board of Governors, including the Permanent Secretary, 
Federal Ministry of Finance. 
In the spirit of transparency, the summary discussions and decisions of the MPC are communicated to 
the general public in newspaper publications every month. Similarly, another committee, the Financial 
Sector  Surveillance  Committee  (FSSC)  also  meets  every  fortnight  to  review  developments  in  the 
financial  sector  with  a  view  to  taking  appropriate  regulatory/supervisory  action  that  will  ensure  the 
stability and soundness of the system.  
Moreover,  in  order  to  enhance  regulatory  effectiveness  and  stability  of  the  financial  sector,  the 
Financial Services Regulation and Coordinating Committee (FSRCC), meets to coordinate activities of 
the various regulatory institutions in the sector. The CBN Governor acts as the chairman, while other 
members  include  chief  executives  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  Insurance 
Commission,  Corporate  Affairs  Commission  and  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance.  The  Committee 
works towards minimizing arbitrage opportunities that are usually created by differing regulatory and 
supervisory  standards  among  the  various  agencies;  deliberates  on  problems  experienced  by  every 
member in its relationship with any financial institution, and bridges any information gap encountered 
by any regulatory agency in its relationship with any type of financial institutions.  
2 
 BIS Review 24/2003
 The  CBN  takes  its  obligation  to  enlighten  stakeholders  in  the  economy  on  monetary  and  financial 
policies seriously. In this regard, the need to communicate to and obtain feedback from the public was 
instrumental to the establishment of the Monetary Policy Forum, as a medium for dialogue and public 
enlightenment  among  the  monetary  authorities,  the  banks,  academia,  organized  private  sector  and 
other  stakeholders  in  the  economy.  The  Forum  was  created,  bearing  in  mind  that  monetary  policy 
works best in an environment in which the views of key stakeholders are taken into consideration in 
both  its  formulation  and  implementation.  This  initiative  is  consistent  with  the  global  move  towards 
greater transparency and openness in the conduct of monetary and financial policies. The Forum also 
serves as a medium for educating the public on CBN’s monetary policy operating framework, targets 
and  outcomes.  It  meets  quarterly,  while  the  wider  forum,  the  Annual  Monetary  Policy  Conference, 
holds every November. Finally, consistent with Section 9, (a) and (b) of the Act, the Bank, from time to 
time  reports  to  the  President  and  makes  a  formal  report  to  the  National  Assembly  of  the  Federal 
Republic of Nigeria bi-annually. Clearly, these processes and structures have contributed in no small 
measure to the positive profile of the CBN in recent times.  
The  CBN,  like  most  central  banks  in  the  developing  economies,  undertakes  some  non-traditional 
central bank functions such as promotion of economic development, especially  during the formative 
years in the 1960s and 1970s. The contribution of the CBN in this regard, was focused on the creation 
of the financial environment and institutional framework conducive to the mobilization and channeling 
of financial resources into productive investment. Thus, during the first decade of its establishment, the 
Bank concentrated on the task of promoting and transformation of the rudimentary financial structure 
of  the  economy.  These  included  the  issuance  of  money  and  capital  market  securities  such  as  the 
Nigerian Treasury Bills and Federal Government Development Stocks. Moreover, it provided technical 
assistance to other relevant institutions, and start-up capital for the development of money and capital 
market  institutions.  The  CBN  nurtured  from  the  cradle  such  institutions  like  the  Nigerian  Stock 
Exchange,  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  and  Nigeria  Export-Import  Bank.  The  specialized 
finance institutions established by the CBN, in collaboration with the Federal Government, included the 
Nigerian  Industrial  Development  Bank  (NIDB),  Nigerian  Bank  for  Commerce  and  Industry  (NBCI)  (cid:150) 
both now merged to form the Bank of Industry (BOI) to provide long-term capital for development. The 
CBN  initiative  to  encourage  long-term  bank  lending  to  the  economy  included  the  establishment  of 
various  refinance  and  guarantee  schemes,  focused  on  the  priority  sectors  of  the  economy.  Two  of 
such schemes are the Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund (ACGSF), and Export Refinance 
Scheme. 
Challenges and constraints  
IV. 
As  central  bankers,  it  is  beneficial  to  evolve  the  culture  of  a  regular  critical  appraisal  of  our 
performance  with  a  view  to  improving  on  our  effectiveness  and  adapt  to  changes  in  the  economic 
environment. Clearly, every central bank faces constraints in the conduct of economic policies, some 
of  which  create  the  problem  of  policy  credibility. While  some  of  such  constraints  are  attributable  to 
external factors, most are induced from within the domestic economy. Our experience in Nigeria is not 
an exception. 
Trade off in price stability mandate  
One  of  the  major  problems  is  policy  conflict  in  the  pursuit  of  the  overall  economic  objectives  of 
government, particularly the trade-off in the pursuit of stabilization and growth objectives. Sometimes 
central banks are confronted with problems of inflation and stagnation, otherwise known as stagflation. 
If  the  central  bank  sticks  rigidly  to  the  mandate  of  price  stability,  it  might  address  the  problem  of 
inflation in such a way that the fall in aggregate output might be exacerbated. If, on the other hand, the 
problem of weak growth performance is to be addressed, policies designed to stimulate higher levels 
of economic activity might result in further acceleration of the inflation rate. The need to maintain a 
delicate balance between the two conflicting objectives is, therefore, obvious.  
Whatever policy mix is adopted, it is bound to influence the way central bank(cid:146)s policies are perceived 
by  the  public  and  the  confidence  it  engenders  in  the  financial  system.  One  of  the  ways  we  have 
addressed  this  dilemma  in  Nigeria  is  to  ensure  that,  in  the  pursuit  of  the  primary  objective  of  price 
stability, due consideration is given to developmental objectives. As much as possible, the CBN has 
avoided direct intervention in development financing, particularly where lending at interest rates below 
the  market  rates  are  involved.  The  Bank  has,  in  this  regard,  embarked  on  schemes  to  establish 
quasi-government  institutions  and  encouraged  government  funding  through  the  Budget.  There  are 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 3
 also some relevance in the provision of refinancing and credit guarantee schemes, as earlier outlined, 
particularly for the agricultural and industrial sectors. The risk is that such schemes could discourage 
the growth and efficiency of financial intermediation, particularly the mobilization of domestic savings. 
Macroeconomic policy environment  
Economic policies can only succeed where infrastructural impediments to supply response have been 
substantially minimized. Because most macroeconomic policies (especially monetary policy) work best 
through their effect on aggregate demand and supply conditions, structural problems could make the 
economy less responsive to policies. When a policy fails to achieve the intended objectives, it creates 
credibility gap for the central bank and outright pessimism in the process. Our approach to dealing with 
this problem has been to enhance public understanding of what monetary policy can and cannot do, 
while  collaborating  with  other  organs  of  government  to  ensure  the  complementarity  of  the  various 
economic policies. 
Financial market infrastructure and institutions  
The absence of efficient and sound financial institutions and necessary market infrastructure, which 
are critical to effective conduct of monetary policy and its transmission mechanism, constitutes a major 
constraint  to  the  achievement  of  policy  goals  in  most  developing  countries.  Institutional  reforms, 
enforceable  tax  policy,  simplified  accounting  framework  and  a  fair  and  efficient  judicial  system,  are 
important for effective policy implementation in a coherent, credible and consistent manner.  
Credible information  
Poor and unreliable data is another major constraint to credible policies. The lack of timely and reliable 
data renders monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation difficult and the analysis arising from 
such data, less reliable. This undermines the setting of accurate targets and causes delays in policy 
response to changes in economic conditions.  
Fiscal dominance  
The essence of complementarity between monetary  and other policies, particularly the fiscal policy, 
has  always  been  emphasized  as  critical  to  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  In  countries 
characterized  by  fiscal  expansion,  resulting  from  large  deficits  financed  by  the  banking  system, 
particularly  the  central  bank,  the  achievement  of  monetary  policy  objectives  becomes  very  difficult. 
Indeed,  the  outcome  of  the  central  bank  policies  becomes  uncertain.  This  problem  has  been 
addressed, effectively, in many countries particularly among those that have experienced intractable 
problem of inflation, through the prohibition of central bank lending to the government. Efforts to limit 
the  financing  of  government  deficits  by  the  CBN  have  not  been  successful,  despite  its  operational 
autonomy.  The  problem  of  fiscal  surprises  in  the  country  is  compounded  by  lack  of  control  in  the 
expansionary fiscal operations of the state and local governments. 
Corporate governance 
For  credibility  of  the  central  bank  to  subsist,  a  widely  accepted  corporate  governance  arrangement 
must  be  put  in  place.  In  this  regard,  good  governance  must  begin  with  internal  consistency  in  the 
bank(cid:146)s  operational  framework  and  administrative  structure  such  that  the  attainment  of  the  primary 
objective  of  monetary  and  financial  sector  stability  will  be  ensured,  while  high  quality  of  service  to 
government,  financial  institutions  and  other  stakeholders  in  the  economy  is  maintained.  Besides, 
robust contingency plans that will promote the soundness and stability of financial institutions must be 
strictly implemented. 
In recognition of the fundamental role of the effective conduct of monetary policy in any economy a 
central bank should accord special attention to enhancing its efficiency. Towards this end, the central 
bank must be mindful of the quality of its staff in terms of technical skill, competence and knowledge. 
Cognizant of the need for capacity building to ensure enhanced efficiency in meeting its mandate, the 
CBN has in the past three years embarked on a comprehensive reform agenda under which its work 
processes and procedure have been upgraded and re-engineered. 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2003
 Conclusion 
V. 
In conclusion, I would like to make some suggestions on how good governance can be enthroned and 
measured,  drawing  on  international  best  practices.  In  consonance  with  the  principles  of  good 
governance,  central  banks  should  be  autonomous  from  government  in  discharging  their  statutory 
mandates.  Such  independence  has  often  been  associated  with  the  powers  to  limit  credit  to  the 
government,  given  the  destabilizing  effect  of  central  bank  lending  to  finance  public  sector  deficits. 
Governments  should  be  forced  to  balance  their  budgets  or  borrow  at  market  rates  to  finance  their 
deficits. Although this might be a  problem for countries  with  under-developed financial markets, the 
effect in promoting fiscal discipline and facilitating the achievement of growth objectives is deemed to 
be  more  profound.  An  independent  central  bank  should  ensure  that  its  policy  intervention  is  well 
coordinated in the context of the overall government economic policies and objectives. 
Policy Credibility can also be enhanced if central banks submit themselves to third party assessments, 
e.g.  by  the  IMF,  World  Bank,  and  subscribe  to  acceptable  international  conventions  and  codes  on 
central  banking.  Such  a  convention  is  the  1988  Basel  Accord,  which  established  guidelines  on 
international minimum capital standard that limits banks(cid:146) capital requirement to their credit exposure. 
Adopting such standards would encourage central banks to reform their procedures and processes in 
line with international best practices. 
Moreover,  accountability  and 
information 
dissemination.  Central  banks  should  periodically  subject  themselves  to  public  scrutiny  on  their 
operations and frameworks. Another best practice that comes to mind is the example of the Reserve 
Bank  of  New  Zealand,  where  every  year,  an  outstanding  economist  is  appointed  and  mandated  to 
review the monetary policy of the previous year.  
These are some of my thoughts on strategies for enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy in 
achieving economic stability. I sincerely thank you all for your kind attention.  
transparency  are  best  enhanced 
through  effective 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 5
