 Bank of Japan(cid:146)s May report of recent economic and financial developments1 
Bank of Japan, 21 March 2003. 
 The Bank(cid:146)s View2 
Economic activity remains flat as a whole, but there is greater uncertainty about the economic outlook. 
With regard to final demand, business fixed investment is recovering gradually, although one of the 
leading indicators suggests possible weakness ahead. Meanwhile, private consumption continues to 
be  weak,  housing  investment  also  remains  sluggish,  and  public  investment  is  declining.  While 
domestic demand has not shown clear signs of recovery, net exports remain virtually level.  
Industrial production is basically level in response to these developments in final demand. As for the 
employment  situation,  new  job  offers  are  on  a  gradual  rising  trend.  In  addition,  the  number  of 
employees,  which  covers  various  types  of  employees  including  non-regular  employees  such  as 
temporary workers, appears to be declining at a slower pace. However, firms are still maintaining their 
stance  on  reducing  personnel  expenses,  and  household  income  continues  to  decrease  with  the 
ongoing  decline  in  wages.  The  employment  and  income  situation  of  households  overall  remains 
severe. 
Turning to the economic outlook, a widely shared view of the prospect for overseas economies is that 
the growth rate, especially that of the U.S. economy, will accelerate in the second half of this year with 
diminishing  uncertainty  regarding  Iraq-related  developments.  For  the  time  being,  however,  the 
recovery in the U.S. and European economies is projected to remain very modest. Moreover, there is 
rising concern that the growth of East Asian economies, which has been well-sustained so far, may 
slow at least temporarily, influenced by severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). In this situation, 
exports and also industrial production are expected to remain virtually level for the time being.  
With  respect  to  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  declining  trend,  and 
private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time due to the severe employment and income 
situation.  Business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to  follow  a  clear  uptrend  if  exports  and  production 
increase  clearly  again,  but  for  the  time  being,  the  increase  in  business  investment  is  expected  to 
remain very modest.  
Overall, assuming that the growth rate of overseas economies accelerates in the second half of this 
year, the uptrend in exports and production will resume sooner or later, which in turn will initiate the 
momentum  for  an  economic  recovery  in  Japan.  However,  a  self-sustaining  recovery  in  domestic 
demand  is  unlikely  to  gain  momentum  for  some  time,  since  production  is  expected  to  be  virtually 
unchanged  for  the  time  being  while  downward  pressures  such  as  excessive  labor  input  and  debt 
persist. As to the outlook for the environment for exports, there is greater uncertainty about the effects 
of  SARS  within  the  East  Asian  region,  whose  economies  are  closely  linked  to  Japan(cid:146)s,  as  well  as 
uncertainty regarding the recovery in the U.S. and European economies and the developments in the 
U.S.  dollar.  On  the  domestic  side,  how  the  developments  in  the  financial  system  will  affect  stock 
prices, corporate finance, and the economy requires careful monitoring.  
On the price front, import prices are still increasing somewhat, reflecting the rise in crude oil prices 
until early spring. Domestic corporate goods prices have stopped declining on the whole with the rise 
in  import  prices  and  the  improved  supply-demand  balance  in  materials  industries,  despite  the 
continued fall in machinery prices. Meanwhile, consumer prices and corporate  services prices have 
been declining gradually.  
Looking at the conditions influencing price developments, import prices are expected to start declining, 
in reaction to the fall in crude oil prices since early spring. On the domestic side, the supply-demand 
balance in the macroeconomy, ongoing technological innovations in machinery, and the streamlining 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
May 19 and 20, 2003. 
2   The Bank(cid:146)s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on May 19 and 20, 2003 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 1
 of  distribution  channels  will  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  prices.  In  addition,  the 
improvement in the supply-demand situation in materials industries has recently come to a halt. Based 
on  these  factors,  domestic  corporate  goods  prices  are  projected  to  return  to  a  gradual  decline. 
Meanwhile, the pace of year-on-year decline in consumer prices is projected to slow somewhat in April 
with the rise in medical costs due to public insurance reforms. The year-on-year decline in consumer 
prices thereafter is projected to remain  around the April level. While the rise in prices  of petroleum 
products is expected to peak out, the import of consumer goods, which is strongly related to low-price 
strategies, is not increasing as it once was.  
As for the financial environment, the outstanding  balance of current accounts  at the  Bank of Japan 
moved  in  the  range  of  25-30  trillion  yen  during  April,  as  the  Bank  provided  more  ample  liquidity  to 
secure financial market stability. Since the beginning of May, the Bank has been providing more ample 
liquidity in accordance with the guideline for money market operations decided at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on April 30. The outstanding balance of current accounts is recently moving at around 
25-27 trillion yen. Under these circumstances, the overnight call rate continues to hover at very close 
to zero percent. Longer-term interest rates remain steady at low levels. 
Yields on long-term government bonds declined and were temporarily moving at the 0.5-0.6 percent 
level,  as  banks  and  institutional  investors  have  further  increased  investment  in  government  bonds 
since the start of the new fiscal year. Yield spreads between private bonds (bank bonds and corporate 
bonds) and government bonds are contracting further due mainly to the increase in corporate bond 
investment by institutional investors. 
Stock prices plunged temporarily toward the end of April reflecting uncertainty regarding the domestic 
economic outlook and concern over the worsening supply-demand situation in the stock market, but 
they have since recovered following the recovery in European and U.S. stock prices. The Nikkei 225 
Stock Average is recently moving at around 8,000 yen. 
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  appreciated  reflecting  the  ongoing  weakness  of  the  U.S. 
dollar due mainly to concern about increasing fiscal deficits and current account deficits in the United 
States. The yen is currently traded in the range of 115-118 yen to the U.S. dollar.  
With regard to corporate finance, private banks remain cautious in extending loans to firms with high 
credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. Recently, 
their lending attitudes seem to be becoming slightly  more accommodative in areas such as interest 
margin  charges.  Meanwhile,  the  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  as  perceived  by  firms, 
particularly  small  ones,  remain  severe.  In  the  corporate  bond  and  CP  markets,  the  issuing 
environment for firms with high credit ratings continues to be accommodative, and the environment for 
firms with relatively low credit ratings seems to be improving slightly. 
Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because business fixed 
investment is at low levels and firms are continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks(cid:146) lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-
on-year  basis,  but  the  rate  of  decline  is  contracting  slightly.  The  amount  outstanding  of  corporate 
bonds and CP issued is moving at around the previous year(cid:146)s level.  
Meanwhile, according to business surveys, financial positions of firms, particularly those of small firms, 
remain severe. 
The year-on-year growth rate of the monetary base is about 10 percent. The year-on-year growth rate 
of the money stock slowed somewhat and is around 1.5 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market 
conditions continue to be extremely easy due partly to the additional monetary easing by the Bank. 
Long-term interest rates are declining further. The money stock and the monetary base maintain high 
growth  rates  relative  to  that  of  economic  activity  as  a  whole,  although  the  rates  have  slowed 
somewhat. In corporate finance, the fund-raising environment has not changed  significantly, that is, 
the  environment  for  firms,  particularly  with  high  credit  risks,  remains  severe,  although  slight 
improvements  are  observed  such  as  in  the  issuing  environment  of  corporate  bonds  and  CP.  Stock 
prices remain unstable. Under these circumstances, a meeting of the Financial System Management 
Council  was  held  and  it  was  decided  that  injection  of  capital  into  Resona  Bank  was  necessary. 
Including the effects arising from the decision, developments in the financial and capital markets, the 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2003
 behavior  of  financial  institutions,  and  the  situation  of  corporate  finance  continue  to  require  close 
monitoring. 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 3
