 Toshihiko Fukui: A review of the Bank of Japan(cid:146)s conduct of monetary policy 
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s Semiannual 
Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs,  House  of 
Representatives, Tokyo, 18 April 2003. 
 Introduction1  
The Bank of Japan (hereafter, the Bank) submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary 
Control  for  the  first  half  of  fiscal  2002  to  the  Diet  in  December  2002.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this 
opportunity to present an overall review of the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.  
It has been almost a month since I assumed the governorship of the Bank on March 20, 2003. The 
Bank  is  determined  to  utilize  all  of  its  intellectual  resources  and  expertise  and  do  its  utmost  as  a 
central  bank,  in  order  to  put  Japan’s  economy  back  on  a  sustainable  growth  path  and  overcome 
deflation.  
Developments in Japan(cid:146)s economy 
I.  
Economic activity in Japan remains flat as a whole. This is because, while business fixed investment 
has  started  to  recover,  there  has  been  greater  uncertainty  about  the  economic  outlook  mainly 
reflecting developments overseas, especially the effects of the situation in Iraq.  
Looking at the economic outlook in more detail, with overseas economies following a gradual recovery 
path, exports and production are expected to resume their upward trend, which in turn will initiate the 
momentum for a recovery.  
However,  there  is  uncertainty  regarding  the  outlook  for  the  United  States  and  other  overseas 
economies.  Japan’s  economy  is  very  likely  to  lack  the  momentum  for  a  self-sustained  recovery  for 
some  time,  taking  into  account  persistent  downward  pressure  on  the  economy  stemming  from  the 
excessive labor input and debts.  
Regarding prices in Japan, with the rise in import prices and an improved supply-demand balance in 
materials industries, the decline in domestic corporate goods prices has, on the whole, almost come to 
a  halt.  Consumer  prices  have  been  declining  gradually,  but  looking  forward,  the  pace  of  decline  is 
expected to become somewhat slower due to the effects of (1) the rise in crude oil prices, and (2) the 
changes in the system of social security and indirect taxes.  
Financial developments 
II. 
Financial  markets  have  been  generally  stable,  including  through  the  fiscal  year-end  at  the  end  of 
March 2003, reflecting ample liquidity provision by the Bank.  
However,  stock  prices  continue  to  be  volatile,  against  the  background  of  uncertainty  about  the 
economic  outlook  both  at  home  and  abroad.  In  particular,  the  weakness  in  banks’  stock  prices  is 
becoming  conspicuous,  mainly  reflecting  market  participants’  severe  view  of  the  profitability  of 
Japanese financial institutions.  
In  corporate  finance,  the  financing  conditions  of  firms  are  accommodative  on  the  whole,  but  the 
environment continues to be severe for firms of relatively low creditworthiness.  
                                                      
1   Governor Fukui made the same statement regarding the Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the first 
half of fiscal 2002 before the Committee on Financial Affairs, House of Councillors, on April 17, 2003. 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 1
 Conduct of monetary policy 
III.  
For  almost  a  month  now,  I  have  taken  the  initiative  to  address  the  following  two  problems: first,  to 
prevent any immediate crisis taking into account the developments in Iraq; second, to strengthen the 
effectiveness of monetary easing for the longer term.  
The Bank has been closely monitoring how the development of the situation in Iraq would affect the 
economy, especially through the stock and foreign exchange markets, and provided a large amount of 
additional  liquidity  to  ensure  financial  market  stability  with  the  approach  of  the  fiscal  year-end.  In 
addition,  the  Bank  has  decided  for  the  time  being  to  apply  the  official  discount  rate  to  the 
Lombard-type  lending  facility  on  any  business  day,  suspending  the  restriction  on  the  maximum 
number of days for such use. Use of this lending facility enables financial institutions that hold current 
accounts with the Bank to borrow funds from the Bank at need within the value of collateral submitted.  
Reflecting the above measures, liquidity concern in the money market has been dispelled, and there 
was no significant disruption at the turn of the fiscal year.  
In  its  future  conduct  of monetary  policy,  the  Bank  considers  it  an  important  task  to  ensure  that  the 
provision  of  ample  liquidity  leads  to  a  revitalization  of  economic  activity  and  the  overcoming  of 
deflation. Based on this understanding, the Bank is examining the basic framework for the conduct of 
monetary policy, with a view to enhancing the transparency of monetary policy and strengthening the 
transmission mechanism of monetary easing.  
The Bank’s current quantitative easing policy has contributed significantly to ensuring financial market 
stability and to preventing the economy from falling into a deflationary spiral. However, the financial 
intermediary  function  of  banks  has  been  weak  and  economic  activity  has  yet  to  be  sufficiently 
stimulated.  
It  is  apparent  that  the  nonperforming-loan  (NPL)  problem  is  the  largest  impediment  to  the 
effectiveness of the financial intermediary function in the financial system. Thus, it is essential for the 
private sector and policymakers to coordinate their efforts to resolve the NPL problem.  
At  the  same  time,  it  is  very  important  for  the  Bank  to  improve  its  promotion  of  smooth  corporate 
financing  and  its  implementation  of  money  market  operations  to  strengthen  the  transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  easing,  against  the  background  of  the  banks’  weak  financial  intermediary 
function, which is an important route for the transmission of the effects of monetary policy.  
In light of this, the Bank has decided, as a temporary measure, to examine the possible purchase of 
asset-backed  securities  (ABSs),  including  asset-backed  commercial  paper,  mainly  backed  by  those 
assets related to small and medium-sized firms.  
ABSs are marketable securities into which pools of specific assets such as accounts receivable held 
by  firms  are  converted.  The  ABS  market  in  Japan  is  still  in  the  process  of  development.  However, 
nurturing  the  development  of  the  ABS  market  is  expected  to  provide  various  merits  in  corporate 
finance, in particular enabling small and medium-sized firms to exploit an alternative route of raising 
funds to bank borrowing.  
The Bank hopes that the transmission mechanism of monetary easing will be strengthened through 
the  Bank’s  support  for  the  establishment  and  development  of  financial  markets  that  will  be  able  to 
provide new financing channels.  
The  Bank  is  currently  working  on  a  specific  design  for  the  ABS  purchasing  scheme  which  would 
contribute to the development of the ABS market, gathering opinions from market participants.  
Financial  markets  are  basically  expected  to  be  initiated  by  the  private  sector  and  to  evolve 
autonomously.  For  this  reason,  the  Bank’s  outright  purchases  of  private  debts  such  as  ABSs  are 
unprecedented measures for a central bank.  
Therefore,  the  Bank  will  determine  the  specific  design  of  the  purchasing  scheme,  considering  the 
following: to what extent the purchase will strengthen the transmission mechanism; whether or not the 
purchase  will distort market mechanisms; and how to maintain the financial soundness of the Bank 
and ensure its ability to conduct monetary policy in the future.  
2 
 BIS Review 24/2003
 Purchase of stocks held by commercial banks 
IV.  
Although the measure does not fall directly within the province of monetary policy, the Bank started to 
purchase stocks held by private banks in November 2002, with a view to further reducing the market 
risk  pertaining  to  these  stocks.  The  total  amount  of  stocks  purchased  as  of  April  10,  2003  was 
1,209.0 billion yen.  
The purchasing of stocks is one of the actions taken by the Bank aimed at the early restoration of the 
soundness  of  the  financial  system.  Such  restoration  of  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system  is 
considered indispensable in strengthening the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.  
Conclusion  
Japan’s economy is undoubtedly confronting important challenges.  
The  environment  surrounding  Japan’s  economy  faces  significant  changes  such  as  progress  in 
information  and  communication  technology  and  the  rapid  rise  of  emerging  economies  as  well  as 
economic maturation and globalization.  
Faced  with  such  drastic  changes,  the  Bank  believes  that  the  existing  economic  model,  which 
supported Japan’s postwar economic growth, needs to be replaced, and that the driving force of the 
new model should be innovations, both in technology and knowledge. The Bank considers it essential 
for the private sector, the government, and the Bank to coordinate their efforts toward the same goal in 
order for Japan’s economy to adapt itself boldly to the new environment.  
The  Bank  will  continue  to  do  its  utmost  to  carry  out  its  mission  of  achieving  price  stability  and 
maintaining an orderly financial system.  
BIS Review 24/2003 
 3
