 Alan Greenspan: Financial education 
Speech by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, at the JumpStart Coalition’s Annual Meeting, Washington, DC, 3 April 2003. 
 I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  to  share  with  you  my  perspective  on  the  importance  of  financial 
education. I commend the leadership of the JumpStart Coalition and the activities it has undertaken to 
support teachers working on the front-line of financial education. 
Trends in consumer finances 
As you are aware, today’s financial world is highly complex when compared with that of a generation 
ago.  An  understanding  of  how  to  maintain  a  checking  and  savings  account  at  a  local  financial 
institution may have been sufficient twenty-five years ago. Today’s consumers, however, must be able 
to  differentiate  between  a  wide  range  of  products,  services,  and  providers  of  financial  products  to 
successfully manage their personal finances. Certainly, young adults have access to credit at a much 
earlier  age  than  their  parents  did.  Accordingly,  they  need  a  more  comprehensive  understanding  of 
credit than was afforded to the previous generation--including the impact of compounding interest on 
debt  balances  and  the  implications  of  mismanaging  credit  accounts.  In  addition,  as  technological 
advances have contributed significantly to the dramatic changes within the financial services market, 
consumers more generally must be familiar with the role that computers play in the conduct of every 
traditional financial transaction, from withdrawing funds to gaining access to credit. 
While the focus of your efforts is to provide youth with a solid foundation for understanding personal 
financial management, the benefits of that objective extend to a much broader audience. Data, both 
empirical and anecdotal, point to trends  in consumer financial conditions that have caused concern 
among some consumer groups. For example, Federal Reserve statistics indicate that household debt 
outstanding  increased  more  than  9  percent  last  year--the  largest  rate  of  increase  since  1989.  And 
while  analyses  suggest  that,  overall,  this  level  of  debt  is  being  serviced  adequately,  reports  of 
nonbusiness  bankruptcy  filings  reaching  record  highs  in  2002  reveal  that  many  consumers  are 
experiencing significant financial crises. 
Regulators,  lenders,  community  leaders,  and  consumer  advocates  continue  to  be  concerned  about 
abusive  home  mortgage  lending  practices.  More  recently,  the  emergence  of  certain  deposit-linked 
products  has  also  sparked  debate  among  these  parties.  For  example,  one  product  marketed  as 
protection against bounced checks has generated concerns among consumer groups ranging from the 
appropriateness  of  assessed  fees  to  the  possible  unintended  effect  of  reinforcing  poor  account-
management practices on the part of consumers who do not properly monitor their accounts. 
that  have  occurred 
Trends in the financial services industry 
Perhaps, some may judge such information as an indication that the combination of market forces and 
industry trends has had negative effects on consumers. On the contrary, many benefits have accrued 
to  consumers  of  household  and  business  credit  as  the  result  of  the  remarkable  growth  and 
technological  developments 
financial  services.  Computer  and 
telecommunications  technologies  have  lowered  the  cost  and  broadened  the  scope  of  financial 
services.  As  a  consequence,  specialized  lenders  and  new  financial  products  tailored  to  meet  very 
specific market needs have proliferated. At the same time, the development of credit-scoring tools and 
the securitization of loan pools hold the potential for opening doors to national credit markets for both 
consumers  and  businesses.  Deregulation  has  created  important  structural  changes  in  the  financial 
services  industry  and  has  contributed  significantly  to  creating  a  marketplace  that  is  increasingly 
competitive  and  highly  innovative  as  a  result  of  the  entry  of  new  players  or  expansion  of  existing 
players. 
Throughout our banking history, we have seen significant adjustments to existing policies to enable 
markets  to  respond  to  the  demand  for  services.  These  structural  changes  have  heightened 
competition,  resulting  in  market  efficiencies  that  continue  to  help  drive  down  costs  and  foster  the 
in 
  emergence  of  increasingly  diverse  and  highly  specialized  organizations.  These  entities  range  from 
banks and brokerage firms that offer their services exclusively through  electronically based delivery 
mechanisms  to  locally  based  public-private  partnerships  that  provide  counseling  and  financing 
arrangements  to  low-  and  moderate-income  families.  Corporations,  for  example,  often  allow 
employees  to  self-direct  their  investments  in  pension  and  other  benefit  plans,  whereas  employers 
dictated  such  decisions  twenty  years  ago.  The  advent  of  on-line  brokerage  firms  has  enabled 
individual investors to directly conduct stock transactions. 
The role of financial education 
However  beneficial,  constant  change,  of  course,  can  be  unsettling,  and  one  challenge  we  face  is 
overcoming  such  anxieties.  But  just  as  the  rapid  adoption  of  new  information  technologies  has 
expanded  the  scope  and  utility  of  our  financial  products,  so,  too,  has  it  increased  our  means  for 
addressing  some  of  the  challenges  these  changes  pose.  For  example,  just  as  universities  provide 
remote learning options to allow students to pursue continuing education via the Internet, consumers 
can use software to create customized budgets to develop long-term savings strategies for retirement 
or  for  their  children’s  college  education.  In  both  scenarios,  technological  advances  represent  the 
opportunity  for  achieving  efficiencies  and  exercising  preferences,  but  only  when  the  end  users 
possess the knowledge necessary to access pertinent information and to capitalize on it. 
Fostering  education  that  will  enable  individuals  to  overcome  their  reluctance  or  inability  to  take  full 
advantage  of  technological  advances  and  product  innovation  in  the  financial  sector  can  increase 
economic  opportunity.  As  market  forces  continue  to  expand  the  range  of  providers  of  financial 
services, consumers will have more choice and flexibility in how they manage their personal finances. 
They will also need to learn ways to use new technologies and to make wise financial decisions. 
In considering means to improve the financial status of families, education can play a critical role by 
equipping  consumers  with  the  knowledge  required  to  choose  from  among  the  myriad  of  financial 
products and providers. Financial education is especially critical for populations that have traditionally 
been  underserved  by  our  financial  system.  In  particular,  financial  education  may  help  to  prevent 
vulnerable  consumers  from  becoming  entangled  in  financially  devastating  credit  arrangements. 
Regulators, consumer advocates, and policymakers all agree that consumer education is essential in 
the  quest  to  stem  the  occurrence  of  abusive,  and  at  times  illegal,  lending  practices.  An  informed 
borrower is simply less vulnerable to fraud and abuse. Financial education can empower consumers to 
be better shoppers, allowing them to obtain goods and services at lower cost. This process effectively 
increases  consumers’  real  purchasing  power,  and  provides  more  opportunity  for  them  to  consume, 
save,  or  invest.  In  addition,  financial  education  can  help  provide  individuals  with  the  knowledge 
necessary  to  create  household  budgets,  initiate  savings  plans,  manage  debt,  and  make  strategic 
investment decisions for their retirement or for their children’s education. Having these basic financial 
planning skills can help families to meet their near-term obligations and to maximize their longer-term 
financial well-being. 
The importance of basic financial skills underscores the need to begin the learning process as early as 
possible. Indeed, improving basic financial education at the elementary and secondary school level will 
provide  a  foundation  of  financial  literacy  that  can  help  prevent  younger  people  from  making  poor 
decisions that can take years to overcome. In particular, it has been my experience that competency in 
mathematics--both  in  numerical  manipulation  and  in  understanding  the  conceptual  foundations--
enhances a person’s ability to handle the more ambiguous and qualitative relationships that dominate 
our  day-to-day  financial  decisionmaking.  For  example,  through  an  understanding  of  compounding 
interest,  one  can  appreciate  the  cumulative  benefit  of  routine  saving.  Similarly,  learning  how  to 
conduct research in a library or on the Internet helps one find information to enhance decision-making. 
Focusing  on 
fundamental  mathematical  and  problem-solving  skills  can  develop 
knowledgeable consumers who can take full advantage of the sophisticated financial services offered 
in an ever-changing marketplace. 
improving 
 In the long run, better basic education at home and at the elementary and secondary school level will 
provide the foundation for a lifetime of learning. We must also be alert to the need to improve the skills 
and  earning  power  of  those  who  appear  to  be  falling  behind.  Strategies  must  be  developed  to 
overcome  the  education  deficiencies  that  all  too  many  of  our  young  people  have.  Just  as  the 
marketplace has responded to an increased demand for conceptual job skills by increasing the range 
  of education options available to individuals, efforts to provide consumers with information and training 
about financial matters throughout their lives must also be expanded. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  a  keen  interest  in  measuring  the  effectiveness  of  financial  education 
programs. For example, we hosted a forum on best practices in credit education, which focused on 
effective  educational  tools  and  techniques  and  identified  programmatic  challenges  and  issues.  In 
response to a call for papers, studies evaluating the impact of such training initiatives were presented 
at our Community Affairs Research Conference held last week. In addition, we have recently engaged 
in  collaborative  efforts  with  the  Department  of  Defense  and  with  several  Native  American  tribal 
education  councils  to  develop  programs  to  assess  their  individual  financial  education  efforts. 
Quantitative study of the quality and long-term success of education and training will be of particular 
interest to the Federal Reserve System as we develop and distribute a wide variety of financial and 
economic literacy products. 
Building  bridges  between  community  organizations,  our  educational  institutions,  and  private 
businesses will be an essential aspect of our efforts to increase familiarity with new technological and 
financial tools that are fundamental to improving individual economic well-being. And the success of 
such efforts will bear significantly on how well prepared our society is to meet the challenges of an 
increasingly knowledge-based economy. 
The advent of new technologies and other market innovations will certainly bring new challenges and 
new  possibilities  for  our  businesses,  our  workers,  and  our  educational  system.  These  changes  are 
affecting both financial and nonfinancial institutions around the world. Although we cannot know the 
precise  directions  in  which  these  changes  will  take  us,  we  can  reasonably  expect  that  the  pace  of 
technological  developments  and  competitive  pressures  will  increase.  As  in  the  past,  our  economic 
institutions and our workforce will strive to adjust. We must recognize, however, that adjustment is not 
automatic,  and  expanded  linkages  between  business  and  education  should  be  encouraged  at  all 
levels of our education system. 
In closing, let us remember that all shifts in the structure of the economy naturally create frictions and 
human stress, at least temporarily. However, if we are able to boost our investment in people, ideas, 
and processes, as well as in machines, the economy can readily adapt to change and support ever-
rising standards of living for all Americans. 
 