 David Carse: The state of the banking industry in Hong Kong 
Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, to the Hong 
Kong Foreign Bank Representatives Association, Hong Kong, 6 May 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  again  to  the  Hong  Kong  Foreign  Bank  Representatives 
Association. I want to use this opportunity to take stock of the state of the banking industry at what is a 
more than usually uncertain period for Hong Kong as it battles with the impact of atypical pneumonia. 
In Hong Kong you need to be prepared for the unexpected. At the beginning of the year, we were all 
worried about the looming war in Iraq and the damage that it might cause to the global economy and 
to Hong Kong. Little did we know that the main threat to the people and the economy of Hong Kong 
would come from the SARS virus. 
The recent performance of the banking industry 
The outbreak of the disease is one of a number of shocks that the banks in Hong Kong have had to 
cope with over the last five years. I will not dwell on the list, which will be familiar to you, but it includes 
two  recessions,  five  consecutive  years  of  consumer price  deflation,  a  collapse  in  property  prices  of 
65% from the peak in October 1997 and a surge in  personal bankruptcies. All  this has taken place 
against the background of various upheavals in the global economic and political environment, the war 
in Iraq being just one manifestation of this. 
The defining characteristic of Hong Kong banks during this difficult period has been their resilience. 
Despite the ups and downs, banks’ balance sheets have remained strong. For the locally incorporated 
authorized  institutions,  the  aggregate  capital  ratio  remains  around  16%,  twice  the  minimum 
international standard. Many of the smaller banks have ratios well above this. 
Capital  strength  has  not  been  impaired  by  losses  during  this  period.  The  banks  have  continued  to 
make  money  and  earn  a  reasonable  return  on  assets  from  their  Hong  Kong  operations,  averaging 
around 1.25% (before tax) over the last three years.1 
However, this has not been easy to come by. Growth in mortgage lending, the mainstay of profits in 
the 1990s, has stagnated, and the spread on new mortgage loans has fallen to 2.6% below prime - 
barely enough to earn a decent return on capital employed. 
Other sources of loan demand have also dried up as corporates have deleveraged since the Asian 
Crisis. 
So the banks have had to change their focus in order to generate revenue. Attention has switched to 
the liabilities side of the balance sheet as the banks seek to make best use of the large amounts of 
surplus funds that have built up. Banks have been managing down the cost of their liabilities in order 
to improve deposit margins. They have been helped by a switch by customers from time deposits to 
savings and current accounts as the opportunity cost of holding liquid balances has fallen. 
By some reckonings surplus deposits in Hong Kong are the highest in the world in relation to GDP. A 
lot of these funds have been invested in increased holdings of debt securities, which now account for 
about 22 % of the total assets of retail banks compared with only 8 % at the end of 1997. The upward 
sloping yield curve has encouraged this process and made it profitable. 
Another  approach  adopted  by  a  number  of  the  retail  banks  has  been  to  develop  sources  of 
non-interest income by moving into the wealth management business. This means using the branch 
network to cross-sell products like mutual funds, insurance and securities to the client base. These 
                                                      
1  Relates to “retail banks”, which comprise all locally incorporated banks and branches of foreign banks which are active in 
retail and commercial banking in Hong Kong. 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 1
 efforts are paying off, particularly for the larger banks, and are now having a discernible impact on the 
bottom line. 
A less successful aspect of the increased emphasis on the consumer has been the foray by a number 
of banks into the credit card business. Prior to 2002, this provided the only area of buoyant lending 
growth in Hong Kong. In retrospect, this should perhaps have flashed more of a warning signal, but 
with  credit  card  receivables  starting  from  a  very  low  base,  it  was  not  surprising  that  the  amount 
outstanding should expand rapidly. 
The  quality  of  the  card  portfolio  actually  held  up  well  for  some  time.  But  the  cumulative  effects  of 
deflation, rising unemployment and increasing indebtedness were taking an increasing toll. Coupled 
with the delayed impact of the more permissive bankruptcy regime introduced in 1998, these factors 
produced  an  explosion  of  personal  bankruptcies  in  2002.  Bankruptcy  petitions  jumped  to  almost 
27,000 in that year and the charge-off ratio for credit cards rose to 13.25%, compared with 5.46% in 
2001. 
In the first quarter of this year, the bankruptcy situation seems to have improved a bit, with the number 
of  petitions  falling  to  6,119.  Credit  card  charge-offs  have  also  shown  signs  of  slackening  off.  The 
average charge-off ratio for the first two months of 2003 was down to about 11.3% - still not good, but 
an improvement on the final quarter of 2002. The question facing the banks is whether this can be 
sustained in the current environment. 
Apart  from  credit  cards,  asset  quality  has  generally  been  benign.  In  particular,  the  all-important 
mortgage portfolio has held up well, with the three-month delinquency ratio standing at just over 1.1 %. 
This  is  despite  the  ominous  rise  in  the  number  and  amount  of  mortgages  in  negative  equity.  At 
end-2002, we estimated that there were around 78,000 cases of negative equity with a value of $129 
billion. Note that this takes into account only first mortgages held by the banks. If loans with second 
mortgages were included, the number of cases would undoubtedly be larger. 
Residential  property  prices  fell  on  average  by  7%  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  So  the  negative 
equity problem will have got worse, as the latest figures to be published shortly will show. This poses 
some threat to the profitability of banks. So far, however, even mortgage loans in negative equity have 
continued to perform reasonably well, although the delinquency ratio of around 2.5% is worse than for 
those with positive equity. 
The impact of SARS 
Even  before  SARS  arose  as  an  issue,  2003  was  expected  to  be  another  challenging  year  for  the 
banks.  But  the  prospect  of  lower  charge-offs  for  credit  cards  encouraged  a  number  of  banks  to 
forecast that they would achieve higher profits. Performance in the first quarter seemed to bear this 
out. As usual, some banks did better than others, but aggregate profits in the first quarter did show an 
improvement over the same period of last year. 
The SARS  outbreak is now affecting the business of the banks in various  ways and  the banks are 
having to react to this. 
The first priority has been to maintain business continuity and to protect the health of bank staff and 
customers.  Banks  have  therefore  activated,  and  where  necessary  reviewed  and  updated,  their 
business continuity plans, demonstrating in the process that these are not just paper exercises. 
Among the measures taken, banks have established command centres to monitor the situation and to 
take  appropriate  action  following  reports  of  confirmed  or  suspected  cases  of  infection  among  staff. 
Typically,  this  involves  sending  home  colleagues  in  contact  with  the  infected  staff  member  and 
cleansing the office or branch concerned. This is part of a more general increased focus on office and 
personal hygiene. Staff are generally being required or strongly encouraged to wear masks and gloves 
for their own protection and to limit the spread of the disease. 
The banks have also activated back-up sites for critical operational areas such as computer systems, 
dealing and settlement. Teams of staff that could man these operations in an emergency have been 
identified and have been segregated in locations outside the main office such as the back-up site or 
other branches. Some staff have also been working from home. In some cases, arrangements have 
been made with overseas branches to cover at least part of the activities of the Hong Kong operations 
in case of need. The number of overseas trips and meetings has been cut back. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2003
     So far these special arrangements seem to have been effective. Banks have been able to maintain 
their  operations  without  major  disruption,  except  for  the  temporary  closure  of  a  few  branches. 
Hopefully, it will be possible to wind down the arrangements in the near future. No doubt lessons have 
been learned from the experience that can be incorporated in the banks’ contingency plans. 
Apart from the need for banks to avoid interruptions to their business, they are also having to cope 
with the impact of SARS on the volume of their business and on their balance sheets. Based on our 
discussions with the banks, the main effects have so far been as follows: 
• 
Customer traffic in the branches has been reduced, which is limiting face-to-face contact with 
the customer and thus hampering efforts to sell wealth management products. The positive 
side is that use of internet banking is up, which provides the opportunity for banks to reach 
out to customers in a cost-effective way. While the potential of the internet was undoubtedly 
over-hyped during the tech boom, it is increasingly demonstrating its value as an alternative 
delivery channel. 
Loan  demand  has  fallen  further  from  its  already  low  levels.  In  particular,  demand  for 
mortgage loans has dropped, which is not surprising since buying, or even viewing, new flats 
has not been uppermost in people’s minds in recent weeks. 
Credit card volume is down as people cut back on retail spending, restaurants, entertainment 
and travel. There are indications from some banks however that the amount of credit card 
spending may be beginning to pick up as people begin to venture out again. 
Asset quality may suffer if businesses go bust and  more individuals become unemployed. 
SMEs in the most badly affected sectors of the economy, credit cards and mortgage loans 
are potential areas of vulnerability. So far there has been little sign of significant deterioration 
in  these  areas.  But  as  you  know,  bad  debts  are  a  lagging  indicator  of  the  state  of  the 
economy. The most reasonable assumption is that bad debt provisions and charge-offs will 
increase, though we do not yet know to what extent. 
Provisions may also increase as a result of a decline in property prices and collateral values 
caused by SARS. The value of bank premises may also be affected. 
Some of these effects may prove to be short-lived. Others may take longer to emerge, as in the case 
of the impact on asset quality. The overall impact on earnings is thus difficult to quantify. As of now, 
and assuming that the SARS problem does not drag on for too long, most banks seem to think that the 
adverse effect on profits will not be too severe. 
It bears repeating that the balance sheets of the banks remain strong. We have updated our stress 
tests to take account of the SARS outbreak, and these continue to show that the banks can withstand 
a great deal of pressure from a variety of sources. We do not expect that this will actually be put to the 
test in  practice,  but  it  is comforting to know that the banks are more than  adequately capitalised in 
case of need. 
What can the banks do to limit the potential downside risk from SARS? This is something on which 
individual banks will have to take a view, but I would like to offer some general advice. First, banks 
should accept that profits for 2003 may not reach budgetted targets as a result of the outbreak; and 
they should not strain too much to make up the difference. When profitability comes under pressure, it 
is important to  avoid the  mistakes that might arise from over-aggressive business tactics. Keep the 
bank healthy from a capital and liquidity point of view in order to benefit from the business recovery 
when it comes, as it surely will. 
Banks  should  also  monitor  closely  the  financial  position  of  their  customers  and  adopt  a  supportive 
attitude to those experiencing financial difficulties as a result of the SARS outbreak. This means being 
prepared to offer temporary relief arrangements to borrowers who find that they cannot service their 
debts in the current environment. This should not be seen as soft option for customers since the banks 
will certainly not benefit if those customers go bankrupt. Nor do I suggest that relief should be offered 
indiscriminately.  The  long-term  viability  of  the  customer  or  his  business,  his  track  record  and  his 
willingness to cooperate with the bank are all factors to be taken into account in deciding whether to 
restructure debts. Each case thus needs to be looked at on its merits. 
It is important that banks adopt a consistent approach to dealing with restructuring requests across the 
organisation and provide ready  access for customers in difficulties to approach  the bank to discuss 
relief. Working together, banks and their customers can help one another to deal with the effects of 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 3
 SARs and position themselves for recovery. I am confident that the banks have been taking the right 
action, and will continue to do so. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2003
