 Joseph O Sanusi: Management of Nigeria(cid:146)s domestic debt 
Keynote address by Dr Joseph O Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the 7th Monetary 
Policy  Forum  organised  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  at  the  CBN  Conference  Hall,  Abuja, 
22 May 2003. 
 Distinguished Senators, 
Honourable Members of the House of Representatives, 
Distinguished Invited Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my honour and privilege to welcome you to the 7th edition of the CBN Monetary Policy Forum. 
The theme of today(cid:146)s Forum (cid:147)Management of Nigeria(cid:146)s Domestic Debt(cid:148) has been chosen in view of 
the increasing concern over the rapid growth of Nigeria(cid:146)s public debt and its implications for economic 
stability.  
An  escalating  debt  profile  presents  serious  obstacles  to  a  nation(cid:146)s  path  to  economic  growth  and 
development.  The  cost  of  servicing  public  debt  (domestic  and  external)  may  expand  beyond  the 
capacity of the economy to cope, thereby impacting negatively on the ability to achieve the desired 
fiscal and monetary policy objectives. Furthermore, a rising debt burden may constrain the ability of 
government  to  undertake  more  productive  investment  programmes  in  infrastructure,  education  and 
public health. To avoid such a situation, it is imperative that the quantum and structure of the nation(cid:146)s 
debt be carefully managed in a manner that is consistent with the country(cid:146)s growth and development 
aspirations. 
To appreciate the dimension of Nigeria(cid:146)s domestic debt burden, it would be pertinent to undertake a 
brief review of its development. First, Nigeria(cid:146)s domestic debt stock stood at N23.5 million or 1.0 per 
cent of GDP in 1960 and subsequently, increased rapidly to N8,231.5 million or 16.2 per cent of GDP 
in  1980,  reaching  N1,160.0  billion  or  83.6  per  cent  of  GDP  as  at  end-December,  2002.  The  sharp 
increase in domestic debt stock, over the  years, was attributable largely to the failure to embark on 
necessary  adjustment,  particularly  at  the  time  of  declining  revenue,  that  resulted  in  growing  fiscal 
deficits and further domestic debt accumulation. Secondly, the bulk of the debt has been in short-term 
treasury securities with maturities of less than one year. Thirdly, the banking system, mainly the CBN 
remains the dominant holder of Federal Government Securities. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it bears repeating that one major problem that has hindered the attainment of 
macroeconomic  stability  and  sustainable  growth  has  been  the  excessive  reliance  by  the  Federal 
Government  on  borrowing  from  the  banking  system,  particularly  the  CBN,  to  finance  its  large  and 
unsustainable  fiscal  deficits.  As  you  are  all  aware,  such  borrowing  from  the  CBN  amounts  to  the 
injection of high-powered money into the system, which has serious adverse implications on price and 
exchange  rate  stability.  Similarly,  it  crowds  out  the  private  sector  from  the  credit  market,  thereby 
stalling investment and output growth. Empirical evidence has shown that fiscal adjustment is critical 
to successful stabilization effort in countries facing domestic debt overhang. 
It should be noted, however, that deficit budgeting, per se, is not the critical issue of concern. Rather, it 
is the size, source of financing and quality of expenditure. Over the years, the FGN has relied largely 
on the money market and less on the capital market, thus creating a mismatch between short-term 
funds  and  investment  in  capital  projects.  This  points  to  the  need  to  reactivate  the  dormant  bonds 
market  to  attract  household  and  institutional  savings.  In  addition,  the  borrowed  money  must  be 
prudently  utilized  in  the  execution  of  productive  projects  in  order  to  enhance  the  capacity  for 
repayment of both the principal and interest elements as they fall due. An effective debt management 
requires that borrowed resources must be productively utilized such that the economic and social rate 
of return is  higher  than the future servicing cost  of the  loan.  A debt problem would naturally  ensue 
when  the  resources  that  should  have  been  deployed  for  the  execution  of  productive  projects  are 
employed in the financing of current or past consumption. This raises two issues for discussion. First, 
there is need to evaluate the economic and social rate of return of all government projects. Second, 
there  is  need  to  resolve  the  question  of  inter-generational  equity  which  will  arise  when  the  present 
generation incurs debt that is left for the next generation to settle. 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 1
 Distinguished participants, until the creation of the Debt Management Office (DMO) in August 2000, 
the management of Nigeria(cid:146)s public debt statutorily rested with the Central Bank of Nigeria. Up until 
now,  the  law  establishing  the  CBN  entrusts  it  with  the  issue  and  management  of  Federal 
Government(cid:146)s  debt  instruments.  The  Bank  is  also  empowered  to  grant  temporary  advances  to  the 
Federal  Government  (Ways  and  Means  Advances)  in  respect  of  temporary  deficiency  in  budget 
revenue, subject to a limit and full repayment by the end of that year. It is pertinent to note here that 
the  discharge of these  domestic debt management responsibilities  by  the CBN could be,  and often 
had  been,  in  conflict  with  monetary  policy  objectives.  The  establishment  of  the  Debt  Management 
Office should therefore be seen as a positive development that will enhance the efficiency of not only 
domestic debt management but also the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
Indeed, in spite of the Bank(cid:146)s best endeavours in the prudent management of government(cid:146)s domestic 
debt, not much has been achieved by way of rationalizing public expenditure and trimming the size of 
domestic public debt stock. Some of the outstanding problems that call for urgent solutions include:  
     How  to  ensure  that  borrowed  resources  are  productively  utilised,  such  that  economic  and 
social rate of return is higher than the future servicing cost. 
The restructuring of the existing public debt in favour of long-term in a way to compel better 
quality evaluation of the loans. 
How the capital market can play an increasing role in the funding of the federal government 
fiscal operations. 
The problem of intergenerational equity argument arising from debt over-hang. 
How  to  reduce  CBN  funding  of  Government  and  bring  it  in  line  with  the  Government(cid:146)s 
obligation  under  the  West  African  Monetary  Zone  Protocol.  Acceptable  progress  has, 
however, been made in this regard during the last two years. 
Against this background, this Forum has been organised to proffer practical solutions on how to tackle 
the problem of the burgeoning domestic debt of the Federal Government. Participants are therefore 
challenged to come up with a credible framework that would prepare the road map, which will guide 
the Nigerian government in resolving this problem.   
To this end, Ladies and Gentlemen, we have assembled today scholars, seasoned professionals and 
other key stakeholders in the economy to lead the discussions. I therefore urge all the participants at 
this forum to discuss freely and frankly in order to come up with useful ideas that will crystallize into an 
enduring solution to the country(cid:146)s debt problem.  
Once more, I welcome you to this forum and wish you fruitful deliberations. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2003
