 Toshihiko Fukui: Economic activity and recent financial developments in Japan 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business people in Nagoya, 3 September 2003. 
I. 
Current situation of the Japanese economy and policy focuses 
 Current conditions 
A. 
Economic activity  as a  whole has  been flat since February  this  year,  as has  been  described  in the 
Bank of Japan’s Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments. Recently, however, 
we have gradually begun to observe some signs of improvement. For example, machinery orders and 
the second-quarter GDP have turned out to be better than anticipated, and stock prices continue to 
rise.  
Such  domestic  developments  should  be  understood  in  a  global  context,  as  economic  globalization 
progresses and the Japanese economy deepens its ties with overseas economies even further.  
As  you  all  know,  during  the  first  half  of  this  year,  the  world  economy  was  mired  in  the  adjustment 
process that followed the IT boom of the 1990s, which came to an end in the fall of 2000. Furthermore, 
uncertainty about the economic outlook was amplified by the war in Iraq and severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS) in  East  Asia. Uncertainty  about the financial system problem in Japan persisted, 
and the fall in stock prices, including bank shares, became rather marked.  
Fortunately, these uncertainties have decreased since the early summer. The actual operation of the 
war  in  Iraq  concluded  relatively  early,  and  the  effects  of  SARS  have  been  less  than  many  people 
feared. We have even begun to observe some signs of recovery in the demand for IT-related goods, 
although we have not yet fully confirmed the extent of their adjustment.  
In these circumstances, pessimistic views on the economic outlook have receded, and an increasing 
number of people have become confident about a rebound of world economic growth from the second 
half of this year.  
For  example,  in  the  United  States  the  so-called  central  tendency  of  projected  real  GDP  growth  for 
2003 among members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has been revised upward, to 
2.5 to 2.75 percent. This projection implies that real GDP growth would rise to the 3 percent level for 
the second half of 2003, from around 2 percent for the first half. For 2004, the FOMC members predict 
further acceleration of real GDP growth to 3.75 to 4.75 percent. In Asia, China is most likely to return 
to a stable growth path after overcoming the negative impact of SARS. With higher dependence on 
information technologies, the NIEs will expand production as the global demand for IT-related goods 
recovers, in the United States in particular. There is little likelihood that Europe will be a drag on the 
global economic recovery, although its economic outlook still seems rather unclear.  
Given  these  overseas  developments,  the  Japanese  economy  is  expected  to  gradually  increase 
exports  and  production.  In  addition  to  the  possible  increase  in  external  demand,  domestic  demand 
also shows some favorable signs. Planned business fixed investment for fiscal 2003 at the moment is 
the  largest  since  fiscal  2000,  against  the  backdrop  of  a  substantial  increase  in  corporate  profits. 
Moreover,  we  see  a  slightly  favorable  change  in  direction  in  the  job  and  income  situation  of  the 
household sector, although the situation remains severe.  
Policy focuses 
B. 
Such a path for Japan’s economic recovery has been within our standard scenario since this spring, 
and it appears increasingly likely that this scenario will be realized.  
However,  questions  remain  as  to  the  strength  and  breadth  of  the  economic  recovery  once  it  is 
achieved,  as  well  as  the  risk  that  the  standard  scenario  may  not  be  realized.  In  tackling  these 
questions, we should keep three points in focus.  
The first focus is the outlook for overseas economies, the U.S. economy in particular. In this regard, 
we should also pay attention to the global demand for IT-related goods.  
BIS Review 38/2003 
 1
 Although  the  U.S.  economy  is  on  a  mild  recovery  path  led  by  private  consumption,  business  fixed 
investment  and  production  generally  remain  weak,  and  the  labor  market  condition  continues  to  be 
severe.  With  residual  adjustment  pressure  after  the  bursting  of  the  IT  bubble,  firms  are  still  rather 
restrained in their business expansion. In spite of these subdued conditions, we have recently begun 
to  see  changes  and  hopes  for  improvement.  Global  demand  for  PCs,  semiconductors,  and  other 
IT-related  goods  is  increasing.  People  strongly  hope  that  a  substantial  tax  reduction  and  monetary 
easing will work to accelerate recovery. We will monitor how these changes and hopes are translated 
into improving business activity and the labor market condition in the United States, and subsequently 
whether such an improvement has a positive impact on the world economy.  
The second focus is the financial market in Japan. Stock prices rebounded from around May, and the 
Nikkei  225  Stock  Average  regained  the  10,000  level  after  August  18  as  views  about  the  economic 
outlook  turned  slightly  more  favorable.  Long-term  interest  rates  also  rose.  In  my  view,  these 
movements could be interpreted as the correction of overly pessimistic market expectations in the first 
half of 2003 amid various uncertainties.  
Fundamentally,  stock  prices  and  long-term  interest  rates  reflect  market  views  about  the  economic 
outlook, so we should strive to correctly understand these views. Having said this, it is also true that 
markets  can  often  move  irregularly  in  response  to  a  variety  of  factors.  For  example,  in  the  United 
States, the 10-year long-term interest rate rebounded to the mid-4 percent level after falling to around 
3 percent in June. As factors behind this gyration, many point to the deterioration of the fiscal balance 
and the hedging activity of investors in mortgage securities, in addition to changing views about the 
economic outlook. In Japan, people have already begun to talk about the possibility of overshooting of 
long-term interest rates, which cannot be justified by economic fundamentals. We will closely monitor 
financial market developments, including the possibility of large swings in long-term interest rates due 
to factors other than economic fundamentals.  
The  third  focus  is  the  extent  of  economic  recovery  spurred  by  exports  and  production  amid  the 
persisting problem of excess debt and labor.  
The problem of excess debt differs from firm to firm, and industry to industry, but broadly speaking, it is 
largely a problem for the nonmanufacturing industry. For example, the ratio of net debt to sales has 
been declining significantly for the past ten years in the manufacturing industry, but remains high in the 
nonmanufacturing  industry  due  to  the  delay  in  adjustment.  The  nonmanufacturing  industry  tends  to 
retain  various  inefficiencies  mainly  because  it  has  been  traditionally  less  exposed  to  international 
competition than the manufacturing industry.  
The manufacturing industry is the driving force behind the economic recovery if it is led by exports and 
production. But, to achieve sustainable growth, it is critically important whether such an initial recovery 
will lead to the dynamic and forward-looking improvement of the nonmanufacturing industry.  
The problem of excess labor is important when we judge whether the recovery of the corporate sector 
might lead to an increase in private consumption through a rise in income. The Tankan (Short-Term 
Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) has been showing a consistent pattern of excess labor for 
both  the  manufacturing  and  nonmanufacturing  industry  since  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  economy. 
Recent  labor  statistics  also  show  a  continued  decline  in  regular  employment.  These  data  suggest 
persistent pressure for labor market adjustment and continued severe conditions for employment and 
income.  
Looking closely at the latest statistics, it should be noted that we have begun to observe some signs of 
favorable changes in the labor market. The level of employment ceases to fall if part-time workers are 
included, and the decline in wages is bottoming out if bonus payments for the summer are taken into 
account.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
In these economic conditions, the Bank has been conducting a quantitative easing policy, maintaining 
financial  market  stability  and  strengthening  the  momentum  for  recovery  by  flexibly  providing  ample 
liquidity.  Since  I  became  Governor,  the  Bank  has  raised  the  quantitative  target  for  the  outstanding 
balance  of  current  accounts  held  at  the  Bank  twice,  in  April  and  May.  Faced  with  a  number  of 
uncertainties, including the war in Iraq, SARS, stock prices, exchange rates, and the problem related 
to Resona Bank since this spring, we have taken a preemptive approach to monetary policy so that 
these uncertainties do not jeopardize the not very robust foundation for economic recovery.  
2 
 BIS Review 38/2003
 The  Bank  has  also  made  a  strong  commitment  to  continue  the  current  monetary  easing  until  the 
year-on-year  increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  becomes  stably  zero  or  above.  This 
commitment strengthens the policy effect on interest rate stability, as participants in financial markets 
can anticipate monetary easing as long as the year-on-year increase in the CPI remains negative.  
Furthermore, the Bank has been strengthening the transmission mechanism of monetary policy so that 
the  effect  of  monetary  easing  permeates  through  the  economy.  As  part  of  such  efforts,  it  began 
purchasing  asset-backed  securities  in  August.  Underlying  assets  included  not  only  receivables  but 
also lease and loan assets, which we hope facilitate the funding of small to medium-sized firms. It was 
quite  unusual  for  the  central  bank  to  directly  assume  the  credit  risk  of  the  private  sector,  but  we 
thought such a measure was necessary in light of the prevailing economic conditions, and the state of 
the financial system and markets.  
The  Bank  has  been  taking  necessary  measures,  without  undue  regard  for  precedent,  to  return  to 
sustainable growth and overcome deflation, and it will continue to do so.  
We should also emphasize stronger global linkage when we examine the problem of deflation, in the 
same way as economic activity.  
Inflation has been declining globally, due mainly to the appropriate conduct of monetary policy and the 
increasing  penetration  of  emerging  countries  into  market  economies.  This  phenomenon  is  termed 
(cid:147)global disinflation.(cid:148) Even if the world economy recovers, there is a strong possibility that inflation will 
stay at a relatively low level, while the growth rate will increase. In fact, various private-sector forecasts 
show that for 2004 growth will be higher compared to 2003, and inflation will remain under 2 percent in 
the United States, Europe, and Asia. In such circumstances, central banks have been implementing 
monetary policy with more attention to the risk of deflation. For example, the Federal Reserve Board 
announced  in  its  FOMC  statement  in  August  that  (cid:147)policy  accommodation  can  be  maintained  for  a 
considerable period.(cid:148)  
Japan is suffering from deflation, a worse problem than disinflation. This makes a stronger case for the 
Bank to continue implementing an easy monetary policy, compared to other central banks.  
Revitalization of the corporate sector 
III. 
Stronger global linkage has some bearing on the commonly observed facts that business sentiment 
has been slow to improve and fixed investment has not become as active as anticipated in various 
countries under monetary  conditions that are easier than  in the comparable stage of past business 
cycles.  
This partly reflects residual pressure for adjustment. But it also reflects more intensified competition in 
the corporate sector together with the progress in globalization, as well as increasing difficulties firms 
face in sustaining pricing power under the new conditions in which prices are being determined. We 
may  be  approaching  a  stage  where  corporate  profits  can  only  be  increased  by  creating  new 
value-added  goods  and  services,  and  the  investment  opportunities  for  such  creation  are  becoming 
more difficult to find.  
For example, in Japan, the corporate management and economic framework established during the 
high-growth period are so firmly embedded that it is a very difficult and challenging task to transform 
them.  
In this regard, I have been advocating three directions for firms to pursue with a view to building a new 
framework for the Japanese economy. The first is to boost their competitiveness and generate new 
consumer demand by creating new value-added goods and services. The second is to increase their 
business  activity  in  the  expanding  Chinese  and  other  Asian  markets,  and  further  deepen  economic 
interdependence with them. And the third is to address global challenges such as the development of 
sustainable energy sources and environmental protection. If firms can make positive contributions in 
these  directions,  they  will  certainly  be  able  to  expand  the  frontier  of  innovation  to  revitalize  the 
Japanese economy. I hope that such efforts will place the Japanese economy in a unique position in 
terms of the sustainable development of the world economy.  
BIS Review 38/2003 
 3
 Current situation of the financial system and challenges 
IV. 
The Japanese financial system, although still facing severe conditions as a whole, is steadily moving 
toward restoring its effective functioning.  
Since last fall, there has been a growing recognition among financial institutions and related parties 
that  an  appropriate  evaluation  of  the  economic  value  of  nonperforming  loans  (NPLs),  and  higher 
provisioning and more aggressive write-offs of these loans based on such an evaluation, are important 
in accelerating the disposal of NPLs. Further efforts have been made in this direction. In fiscal 2002, 
Japanese  banks  recorded  a  large  net  loss  for  the  second  consecutive  year.  This  result  clearly 
reflected the severe conditions faced by the Japanese financial system. At the same time, it signified 
the aggressive disposal of NPLs as shown by the substantial decrease in NPLs outstanding at major 
banks.  
The time has now come to move to the final stage to restore the effective functioning of the financial 
system, keeping in mind the complete removal of blanket deposit protection scheduled in April 2005.  
This  removal,  in  my  view,  should  not  be  perceived  simply  as  a  change  in  the  type  of  coverage  of 
deposit  insurance  protection.  Instead,  it  should  be  recognized  as  a  turning  point  for  financial 
institutions in the reform of their management. Protection has been provided as a temporary buffer to 
avoid  potential  confusion.  Following  the  complete  removal,  financial  institutions  must  pursue  a 
dynamic management strategy based on their own judgment.  
To this end, it is the financial institutions themselves, not the regulatory authorities, that should take 
the  initiative  in  dealing  with  NPLs.  Moreover,  they  should  redouble  their  efforts  to  strengthen  their 
earnings power besides accelerating the disposal of NPLs.  
Disposal of NPLs and corporate revitalization 
V. 
In  addition  to  the  appropriate  evaluation,  higher  provisioning,  and  more  aggressive  write-offs  in  the 
disposal of NPLs, increasing attention is being paid to the importance of corporate revitalization from 
the viewpoint of promoting the reform of industrial structure.  
The  Industrial  Revitalization  Corporation  of  Japan  (IRCJ),  which  began  operation  in  May  this  year, 
recently decided to support four firms. The IRCJ will subsequently purchase the loan assets of these 
four firms from lenders other than their main bank, decide on a restructuring plan and then implement 
it. Individual financial institutions, major banks in particular, are establishing a subsidiary specializing in 
corporate  revitalization.  Moreover,  we  observe  an  increasing  number  of  cases  in  which  financial 
institutions  set  up  an  internal  section  specifically  devoted  to  corporate  revitalization,  and  form  an 
alliance with outside experts like lawyers and certified accountants.  
The success of corporate revitalization requires a speedy and decisive response on the part of both 
firms  and  financial  institutions.  Some  firms  with  useful  technology  and  expertise  find  it  difficult  to 
improve their business performance because of the large financial legacy from the past. Often these 
firms,  in  collaboration  with  financial  institutions,  can  solve  their  problem  by  boldly  eliminating 
unprofitable  businesses  and  concentrating  their  managerial  resources  on  core  businesses.  In  this 
regard, it is mutually beneficial for both firms and financial institutions to promote a sufficient dialogue 
and reach a shared recognition about the present and future of the firms’ management.  
To  smoothly  promote  corporate  revitalization,  we  need  to  improve  and  expand  the  market  for  loan 
asset liquidation, including NPLs. The expansion would help banks take NPLs off their balance sheets, 
but it  would also invite  a variety of investors  with diversified risk preferences and expertise into the 
corporate  revitalization  business.  If  the  market  expands  and  prices  for  loan  assets  are  formed 
efficiently, these prices will indicate the market’s evaluation of corporate revitalization.  
Earnings power of financial institutions and a stronger capital position 
VI. 
When the effective functioning of the financial system is finally restored, major banks will enjoy strong 
international  competitiveness,  and  local  banks  will  be  able  to  provide  new  financial  services  for 
regional development. These benefits will only be possible with the strengthening of earnings power.  
To  strengthen  earnings  power,  individual  financial  institutions  must  form  their  own  judgments  on  a 
number  of  issues.  For  example,  how  should  they  change  their  traditional  practice  for  transactions? 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2003
 What kind of new businesses should they develop? How should they reorganize their business model? 
The  Bank  would  like  to  support  the  efforts  of  financial  institutions  toward  this  end  by  providing 
appropriate advice through on-site examinations and daily monitoring.  
In this process, financial institutions must ask themselves whether their capital position is sufficient to 
pursue a new business model, and if not, they of course need to boost their capital position. Needless 
to say, financial institutions should raise capital in the markets. In the limited time before the complete 
removal  of  blanket  deposit  protection,  however,  some  may  not  be  able  to  do  so  sufficiently.  In  this 
case,  fundamentally  there  are  two  options:  either  reducing  their  business  scope  in  line  with  their 
existing capital position or accepting the public injection of capital. I think the latter option is desirable 
under the current conditions in Japan. In other words, we should facilitate the process of restoring the 
effective  functioning  of  the  financial  system  through  a  new  system  of capital  injection,  which  differs 
from the existing system that seeks to preempt crises.  
Conclusion 
A  number  of  developments  indicate  that  the  Japanese  economy  is  moving  in  a  desirable  direction, 
even though it continues to face severe conditions. I believe it is the competitiveness of the private 
sector, both firms and financial institutions with progressive technology and expertise, that will bring 
about the reemergence of a truly strong Japanese economy. The Bank stands ready to provide full 
support to the private sector’s efforts toward this end by maintaining an easy monetary policy.  
BIS Review 38/2003 
 5
