 William J McDonough: Implementing the New Basel Accord 
Remarks by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, before the Global Association of Risk Professionals, New York, 11 February 2003. 
 Introduction  
1. 
Thank  you  for  that  kind  introduction.  It(cid:146)s  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  in  my  capacity  as 
Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and President of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York.  
The topics to be discussed at this conference certainly are timely. One need not look any further than 
recent  news  headlines  to  understand  why  the  work  of  a  risk  management  professional  matters  so 
much.  Current  events  remind  us  that  when  companies  lack  the  commitment  to  manage  their  risks 
prudently, they will quickly fail to uphold their responsibilities to their shareholders, to their employees, 
and, ultimately, to the public at large. Those failures are felt not just as a loss of jobs, or investments, 
or savings, but also as the loss of public confidence in the soundness of our economy. 
Sound corporate governance only comes about when there is a genuine commitment to do the right 
thing and to manage risks in whatever form they arise. Risk managers must provide timely, objective 
and accurate information to their senior management. In turn, senior management and a bank(cid:146)s board 
of  directors  need  to  ensure  that  there  is  an  atmosphere  of  transparency  within  the  firm  -  one  that 
promotes healthy, disciplined risk taking. 
The challenge of managing risks in the financial sector is made greater by the tremendous spirit of 
innovation that fuels growth and healthy competition among banks and other firms. Bankers have long 
competed  on  their  abilities  to  tailor  products  and  services  to  each  client(cid:146)s  unique  needs.  New 
opportunities for profit often change the nature of the known risks a bank may face - they may also 
expose an institution to unknown pitfalls. 
As a former commercial banker, I know that responsibility for understanding and managing risks and 
potential pitfalls rests with senior management and its board of directors. As a supervisor, I believe 
that  we  should  create  incentives  to  help  motivate  responsible  behavior  within  firms.  Further,  as 
Chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee,  I  see  the  work  of  the  Committee  as  helping  to  foster  safe  and 
sound  banking  systems  by  creating  incentives  for  banks  to  improve  their  understanding  and 
management of risk, and, in turn, to contribute to greater stability within the financial sector. 
Encouraging the improvement of risk management in banks, is, indeed, the overarching goal of the 
Committee’s efforts to revise the Basel Capital Accord. In my remarks today, I(cid:146)d like to focus on the 
challenges  associated  with  implementation  of  the  new  framework  now  that  the  revision  process  is 
coming to an end. First, I’ll spend a few moments discussing the evolution and structure of the New 
Accord. Then, I would like to provide some insights into the preparations banks and supervisors are 
making to implement the new framework - both internationally and here in the U.S. I(cid:146)ll end my remarks 
with some thoughts on where we are in the Capital Accord revision process.  
Objectives for revising the Capital Accord  
2. 
As you may know, the Committee(cid:146)s process to revise the Capital Accord began in the late 1990s. It 
became clear at that time that the original Accord was becoming outdated. Its broad-brush nature - 
where required capital generally does not differ by degree of risk (cid:150) has had a tendency to discourage 
certain  types  of  bank  lending.  It  has  also  tended  to  encourage  transactions  whose  sole  benefit  is 
regulatory capital relief. 
Further, banks have been developing new methods for monitoring and managing risk in a manner that 
the 1988 Accord did not anticipate or address. It is due to the hard work of risk professionals and the 
ideas advanced through organizations like GARP that banks today have an ever improving tool box for 
identifying, measuring, and controlling risk. In light of those new tools, it is quite clear that the current 
Accord provides internationally active banks, for which it was originally intended, with less meaningful 
measures of the risks they face and of the capital they should hold against them. 
BIS Review 7/2003 
 1
 To respond to these challenges, the Committee has sought to develop a more flexible and forward-
looking capital adequacy framework - one that better reflects the risks facing banks and encourages 
them to make ongoing improvements in their risk assessment capabilities. The Committee believes 
that  all  banks  should  be  subject  to  a  capital  adequacy  framework  comprising  minimum  capital 
requirements, supervisory review, and market discipline. As you know, these are the three "pillars" of 
the  New  Accord.  Each  is  an  essential  element  for  ensuring  the  safety  and  soundness  of  banks 
worldwide. In contrast, the current Accord only has one pillar - minimum capital requirements.  
As  we  all  agree,  risk  management  is  a  dynamic  process  and  one  that  will  continue  to  evolve. 
Consequently,  the  New  Accord  is  designed  to  accommodate  future  changes  in  the  way  banks 
measure and manage their risks by giving banks a range of options for calculating capital charges and 
incentives for using best practices. Banks will be expected to apply the option most appropriate to the 
complexity of their own operations and risk management capabilities.  
For credit risk, the range of options begins with the standardized approach and extends to the internal 
ratings based (IRB) approach. The standardized approach, as you know, is structurally similar to the 
1988 Accord, where banks are required to differentiate their exposures into broad categories, such as 
loans they have made to corporate and sovereign borrowers or banks. It improves on the 1988 Accord 
by aligning risk weights with a borrower(cid:146)s creditworthiness as indicated by an external credit rating.  
The IRB approach goes further and is one of the most innovative features of the New Accord. It has 
been constructed to build upon and further encourage investments banks are already making in their 
internal  risk  management  systems.  As  you  know,  these  systems  have  been  developed  and  further 
refined to promote a bank(cid:146)s competitiveness and to protect it against loss - and not just to respond to a 
regulatory mandate. 
Banks  using  the  IRB  approach  will  be  permitted  to  quantify  key  measures  of  a  borrower(cid:146)s 
creditworthiness in determining the corresponding capital requirement. This will include estimating the 
likelihood that the borrower will default. Many banks will also be able to provide internal estimates of 
other  key  variables,  such  as  the  recovery  rate  if  a  borrower  were  to  default  and  the  likelihood  of  a 
credit line being drawn upon. While banks adopting the IRB approach will have the flexibility to rely on 
their  own  estimates  of  key  risk  parameters,  those  estimates  will  be  subject  to  a  set  of  minimum 
operational  requirements.  The  aim  of  these  standards  is  to  ensure  that  these  critical  inputs  have 
integrity and are the product of a system the bank relies upon to perform its day-to-day operations. 
Further, through pillars two and three, the new framework builds in additional checks and balances to 
ensure that banks(cid:146) systems will generate accurate and timely credit assessments.  
The Committee believes it critical to complement the more risk reflective capital requirements with the 
added incentives of supervisory review and market discipline. The second pillar of the new framework 
focuses on the need for banks to conduct their own assessments of the amount of capital they should 
hold relative to their risk. Supervisors will be expected to review and respond to these assessments. I 
believe  that  discussions  between  bankers  and  their  supervisors  will  create  added  incentives  for 
management to assess its risks carefully. No longer will the emphasis solely be on whether a bank 
complies with regulatory minimums. Rather, banks will be expected to manage their economic needs 
and operate with a capital buffer at levels above the regulatory minima. Accordingly, there will be a 
need  for  strong  capabilities  by  banks  and  supervisors  alike  to  evaluate  banks(cid:146)  level  of  risk 
appropriately.  
Market participants also will play an important role in evaluating the adequacy of bank capital. Greater 
disclosure  of  key  risk  elements  and  capital  by  banks  will  provide  important  information  to 
counterparties and investors, who need these data to develop an informed view of a bank(cid:146)s risk profile. 
By bringing greater market discipline to bear through enhanced disclosures, I believe the third pillar of 
the  New  Accord,  the  market  discipline  component,  can  produce  significant  benefits.  It  will  help  to 
encourage banks to manage their risks prudently and, by supplementing official supervision, thereby 
also improve financial stability.  
3. 
Implementation of the New Accord 
Overview 
(a) 
Today, the Committee is close to finalizing the new capital framework, and I know that many banks 
and  supervisors  in  different  countries  have  already  begun  to  think  about  the  practical  implications 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2003
 surrounding implementation. This second stage of the Basel II effort is close on the horizon, and both 
banks  and  supervisors  must  give  serious  thought  to  what  they  need  to  do  to  get  ready.  I(cid:146)d  like  to 
spend a few moments describing some of the efforts currently underway.  
It is no secret that implementation of the New Accord will require a substantial resource commitment 
on the part of banks and supervisors alike. I think it is important to emphasize that the efforts banks 
will need to undertake to comply with Basel II build on the efforts that some large and well-managed 
banks already had in train before the new framework was contemplated. I know that many banks are 
devoting more attention to enhance tracking and assessment of the quality of the loans they make. 
Further, banks have been looking to strengthen their credit assessments by employing experts who do 
not stand to gain from overly favorable reviews. Time and effort has also been invested in working to 
pull  all  of  this  together  in  a  management  information  and  control  system  that  produces  timely  and 
accurate reports for senior management review. I expect that much of the cost to banks of adopting 
the advanced approaches of Basel II will come from precisely these types of initiatives. 
While it will not be inexpensive to achieve these capabilities, particularly for a very large and diverse 
organization, I believe that it is essential for the largest and most complex U.S. banking organizations 
to continue down this path. We know all too well the costs to society of bank weakness and ultimately 
bank failures. As our largest banks continue to grow, to prosper and to pursue new opportunities, they 
must simultaneously make the investments required to manage themselves appropriately.  
Likewise, the new framework is providing supervisors with an opportunity to enhance their ability to 
identify and respond to sources of banking risk, and to share this knowledge within the supervisory 
community.  The  Basel  Committee  was  established  precisely  to  maintain  an  open  and  constructive 
dialogue among banking supervisors. This spirit of communication will be more crucial than ever as 
the new framework is adopted across national jurisdictions. To help ensure that market competition is 
driven by each bank(cid:146)s strengths, rather than by differences in each country(cid:146)s regulatory capital rules, 
the  Committee  established  the  Accord  Implementation  Group.  This  group,  comprised  of  senior  line 
supervisors,  is  responsible  for  promoting  the  consistency  and  quality  of  implementation  of  the  New 
Accord.  Further,  the  group  has  been  established  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  information  among 
national  supervisors  about  bank  and  supervisory  practices.  This  is  something  that  I  view  as  being 
critical to successful implementation of the New Accord.  
Challenges for banks  
(b) 
Within the United States, supervisors have long considered how the new framework will apply to our 
banks. Recently, our efforts have focused on the preparations and challenges ahead for some of the 
largest U.S. banks as they look towards implementing the IRB approach to credit risk. Among other 
important topics, the dialogue has focused on application of the minimum standards for entry and on-
going use of the IRB approach. 
Our  sense  from  this  interaction  is  that  banks  have  both  the  desire  and  commitment  to  continue  to 
develop  their  internal  ratings  systems  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  ideals  embodied  in  the  IRB 
framework. The discussions with the industry have also highlighted a number of areas where banks 
may  need  to  expand  their  efforts  in  preparing  for  implementation.  These  include  the  design  and 
structure  of  rating  systems;  the  availability  and  quality  of  credit  data;  and  the  role  of  corporate 
governance in evaluating bank assessments. I will touch on each of these in turn. 
Rating system design 
The  design  of  a  risk  rating  system  is  key  to  its  effectiveness.  The  Basel  Committee  believes  that 
banks(cid:146) internal rating systems should accurately and consistently differentiate between degrees of risk. 
The minimum IRB standards in this area build on leading risk management practices observed in the 
industry. For example, many organizations either already have, or are in the process of developing, a 
ratings system that captures both the risk of borrower default, as well as transaction-specific factors 
that shed light on the amount that could be collected if things were to go poorly. In other words, these 
banks(cid:146) systems are generally oriented to capturing the essential components in estimating credit risk. 
As the methods for measuring credit risk improve,  we expect that banks will incorporate these new 
insights  in  their  ratings  practices.  For example,  banks  may  look  to  expand  the  number  of  ratings 
categories  to  more  finely  distinguish  between  exposures  of  different  credit  quality.  However,  the 
challenge is for banks to clearly and objectively define the criteria for these ratings categories in order 
to  provide  more  meaningful  assessments  of  both  individual  credit  exposures  and,  ultimately,  their 
  overall risk profile. The clarity and transparency of the ratings criteria will be critical to ensuring that 
ratings are assigned in a disciplined and reliable manner. 
It is also important to note that it is not enough to have a well-designed internal risk rating system - it 
must  also  be  an  integral  part  of  a  bank’s  day-to-day  credit  risk  management  processes.  The 
expectation is for banks to rely on their internal risk rating systems not just when making decisions 
about whether to extend credit. We also encourage banks to incorporate ratings information into other 
key  processes,  such  as  pricing  and  reserving  determinations  and  when  allocating  economic  capital 
internally. The more a bank makes use of its risk rating system, the more confidence supervisors are 
likely to have in the results of the banks(cid:146) assessments of their capital needs.  
Data requirements and validation 
Clearly,  a  system  is  only  as  good  as  the  inputs  that  go  into  it.  Accordingly,  banks  using  the  IRB 
approach will need to be able to measure the key statistical drivers of credit risk. The minimum Basel 
operational  standards  provide  banks  with  the  flexibility  to  rely  on  data  based  either  on  internal 
experience or generated by an external source, as long as the bank can demonstrate the relevance of 
the external data to its own exposures. Regardless of source, sound data are critical for formulating 
meaningful internal risk assessments. From a broader risk management perspective, access to high 
quality data will enable a bank to evaluate the performance of its internal rating and risk estimation 
systems in a consistent and meaningful manner.  
The Basel standards outline the data history banks will need to use the IRB approach. The Committee 
recognizes that banks may not currently have all of the required information on hand. For this reason 
we have continued to engage market participants in a dialogue on this issue. As implementation of the 
New  Accord  approaches,  we  encourage  banks  to  consider  their  data  needs  very  seriously  and  to 
comprehend fully the techniques they will need to use to derive appropriate estimates of loss based on 
those data. Critical to this process is the need for banks to understand how the estimates produced by 
their internal ratings systems compare with the actual performance of a borrower. In practical terms, 
banks  will  be  expected  to  have  in  place  -  or  be  actively  developing  -  a  data  "warehouse".  By  data 
warehouse, I mean a process that enables a bank to collect, to store, and to draw upon loss statistics 
in an efficient manner over time. 
Corporate governance 
I mentioned earlier that responsibility for managing risk lies squarely with senior management and its 
board  of  directors,  and  I  know  that  the  involvement  of  senior  management  will  be  critical  to  the 
successful implementation of the New Accord. This will be particularly true for those banks seeking to 
adopt  the  more  advanced  approaches  to  calculating  regulatory  capital.  As  a  bank(cid:146)s  capital 
requirements will more closely reflect the actual risk to which the bank is exposed, there will be a need 
for  its  board  of  directors  and  senior  management  to  gain  a  deeper  understanding  of  their  bank(cid:146)s 
internal rating systems.  
How will this be put into practice? It will be the responsibility of bank management to expose its board 
members to the key elements of the organization(cid:146)s ratings process. Members of the board will need to 
be fully aware of whether the system complies with the Basel standards, makes use of the necessary 
data and produces reliable quantitative estimates. Ensuring that everyone understands the nature and 
level of risks facing a bank will depend on the timely delivery of the right information. We expect many 
banks will need to make greater investments in their reporting systems with the aim of facilitating the 
flow of information about a bank(cid:146)s ratings practices to senior management and directors.  
Challenges for supervisors 
(c) 
I’ve  focused  on  the  challenges  banks  may  confront  in  implementing  the  new  Accord.  Let  me  now 
spend a few moments discussing how our supervisory approach is also likely to evolve over time.  
The New Accord will present supervisors with an opportunity to re-evaluate and further develop their 
current  approaches  to  looking  at  banks.  Going  forward,  supervisors,  like  banks,  will  have  to  take  a 
more dynamic view of risk management. Change will occur in response to the new Basel framework. I 
must add that change would also occur as part of the natural evolution of banking supervision. Basel 
II(cid:146)s emphasis on risk management strongly supports our current effort to make evaluations of banks(cid:146) 
internal processes the heart of a more forward-looking supervisory approach. 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2003
 In terms of credit risk, we will focus less on point-in-time assessments of financial condition, and much 
more on internal processes and control structures that are intended to help safeguard the health of 
banks. Some of the conventional, static metrics that we now use - such as those to judge asset quality 
and to assess the adequacy of credit loss reserves - are likely to be supplanted by more quantitative 
and more sophisticated measures. Supervisors will increasingly have to assess the bank(cid:146)s ability to 
properly rate all exposures across the spectrum of its internal rating grades - not just its classified or 
problem assets. In addition to ensuring the integrity of banks’ internal rating assignments, supervisors 
will  also  need  to  understand  how  these  ratings  feed  into  the  models  and  tools  used  by  banks  to 
manage credit risk. They will also need to understand the implications of using these new tools.  
I also see a significant shift on the horizon in our examination approach to operational risk, as we bring 
together operational risk management assessments with operational risk capital analyses. Examiners 
will  have  to  understand,  and  be  able  to  evaluate  critically  -  much more so  than  today  -  how  banks 
combine  qualitative  and  quantitative  techniques.  Here  I  am  thinking  of  the  need  to  consider  self-
assessments  banks  may  make  of  their  control  environments,  as  well  as  their  processes  for  data 
collection and statistical analyses.  
It  clearly  will  be  important  to  devote  the  necessary  supervisory  resources  -  in  terms  of  skilled 
personnel, technical training, and a targeted strategy - to these new supervisory efforts. As we prepare 
to traverse this uncharted regulatory landscape, there is an opportunity for supervisors to take a fresh 
look at how they do their work. In doing so, it is important that we not lose sight of one of the longer-
term goals of the New Capital Accord - that it will enhance the capabilities of banks and supervisors to 
better understand and address risk. 
Next steps in finalizing the New Accord 
4. 
Most of my remarks today have been centered on implementation of the new framework. I(cid:146)d like to 
conclude  by  spending  a  few  moments  discussing  where  we  are  in  the  process  to  finalize  the  New 
Accord.  
As you may be aware, the Committee has just finished gathering data from the industry for its third 
impact study. The aim of the study was to collect and to analyze information from banks worldwide 
regarding the capital impact of the new proposals on their existing portfolios. The results are under 
review and will help us to determine whether any adjustments will be needed prior to release of the 
final  consultative  package  this  spring.  This  information,  as  well  as  feedback  received  through  our 
ongoing discussions with industry participants, will be critical in shaping the final document. It will also 
help to ensure that the final framework meets the objectives the Committee has set out for itself in 
developing  the  New  Accord.  I’m  very  pleased  to  say  that  the  preliminary  indications  from  all  of  our 
efforts suggest that we look to be on track in meeting our primary goals. That is, not to introduce large 
changes in the aggregate amount of capital currently held in the banking system while at the same 
time  to  provide  tangible  incentives  for  banks  to  adopt  the  most  advanced  and  sophisticated 
approaches to capital adequacy. 
As  we  near  completion  of  the  New  Accord,  I  am  reminded  that  the  tremendous  progress  we  have 
made  is  a  reflection  of  the  steadfast  commitment  that  so  many  have  put  forth  to  see  the  revision 
process through to its completion. The success of the New Accord will be directly attributable to the 
enormous support and assistance provided by both bankers and supervisors. Yet a Chinese proverb 
reminds us that, "On a journey of one hundred miles, ninety is but halfway." I suppose the last miles of 
any marathon are the toughest to finish. The wisdom of that proverb is borne out by the critical nature 
of the tasks ahead of us to complete, and then to implement, the new capital framework.  
Adopting the New Accord will be a challenging but also an exciting undertaking for us all. The potential 
benefits  are  many  -  including  improving  the  management  of  risk,  enhancing  transparency  and 
promoting  greater  financial  stability.  In  short,  this  new  framework  will  make  all  of  us  -  bankers, 
supervisors and others - better at what we do.  
Thank you very much. 
 