 Jaime Caruana: Consequences of Basel II for SMEs 
Address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, to the European Parliament Workshop on the "Consequences of Basel II for 
SMEs", Brussels, 10 July 2003. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. I would like to thank the European Parliament for organising this important workshop 
on the New Basel Accord and its implications for small- and medium-sized enterprises in Europe, and 
for inviting me to participate. I’m privileged to join you as the new chairman of the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision, and I welcome this opportunity to offer our views. 
As you know, the Basel Committee was founded almost thirty years ago to help promote safety and 
soundness in the banking sectors. We believe that, when banks are adequately capitalised and well-
managed, they are better  able to promote growth by providing credit to consumers and businesses 
alike.  But  more  broadly,  when  banking  systems  worldwide  are  adequately  capitalised  and  well-
managed, the international financial system becomes more stable, better able to promote sustainable 
growth, and more resilient during periods of distress. 
Of course, simply providing credit does not guarantee growth. Indeed, how credit is applied matters 
greatly to the development of an economy. And in every economy, small businesses have long been 
the true engines of economic growth. Small and medium-sized enterprises traditionally produce much, 
or even most, of the technological innovations in business and  industry. They create new jobs at a 
faster pace than larger companies do. Their significance can furthermore be measured in the sizeable 
contributions they make to nearly all countries’ gross national products. 
Your  workshop  today  reminds  us  that,  if  we  are  to  promote  growth  by  strengthening  the  banking 
sector, the Basel Committee must act in a manner that benefits banks and their ultimate customers as 
well.  We  must  recognise  that  fair  and  reasonable  access  to  credit  matters,  not  just  because  credit 
helps small businesses to grow, but more importantly because small businesses help the economy to 
grow. 
So we have taken seriously the need to ensure SMEs of continued favourable access to credit under 
the New Basel Accord. This afternoon I would like to share with you some of my and the Committee’s 
views on why the New Accord is necessary. I shall then illustrate how the proposals will bear positively 
on small business lending. I’ll conclude with an update on the status of our work, after which I look 
forward to a discussion on issues you may wish to raise. 
The goals of the New Basel Accord 
Let  me  begin  with  some  thoughts  on  why  we  need  a  new  capital  accord.  From  the  supervisor’s 
perspective, capital is the last line of defence in a bank. When risk management is not enough, when 
provisions are exhausted, capital is a bank’s last hope. But when capital fails, the bank itself fails. The 
age-old question has been determining how much capital is enough. 
In this regard, the 1988 Basel Capital Accord was a milestone. For the first time, supervisors in the 
major  banking  markets  agreed  on  a  definition  of  capital  and  a  minimum  requirement.  While  we  all 
recognise that these rules are not sophisticated, they are easy to apply, a fact proven by their ultimate 
adoption in over 100 countries. More importantly, they reversed a downward trend in internationally 
active  banks’  capitalisation,  thereby  strengthening  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  international 
banking system and enhancing competitive equality among internationally active banks. 
However,  in  the  years  since  1988,  the  drawbacks  of  a  simple  approach  to  capital  regulation  have 
become  more  apparent.  Advances  in  technology  and  telecommunications,  innovation  in  banking 
products  and  services,  and  the  increasing  globalisation  of  financial  markets  have  changed  the  way 
banks measure and manage risk. Today, the 1988 Accord no longer provides these banks - and their 
supervisors - with reliable measures of the actual risks they face. 
BIS Review 32/2003 
 1
 In  response,  the  Committee  decided  in  the  late  1990’s  to  refine  the  measures  for  assessing  and 
managing risk. Rather than treating all loans to corporate borrowers the same way, for example, the 
New  Accord  will  permit  banks  with  less  complex  exposures  to  rely  partly  on  external  credit  ratings 
when determining their capital requirements under the “standardised” approach to credit risk. In turn, 
more advanced banks will rely  in part on their own internal assessments of a borrower’s credit risk 
under the “internal ratings-based” approach. 
Both  the  “standardised”  and  the  more  sophisticated  “internal  ratings-based”  approaches  will  help  to 
align capital requirements more closely with a bank’s actual risks. Both will also help us realise two 
key goals: to make our capital rules more sensitive to the potential for loss, and to encourage ongoing 
improvements  in  banks’  risk  management.  Understandably,  aligning  a  bank’s  capital  requirements 
more closely with its borrowers’ creditworthiness has generated discussion among small business and 
others  who  want  to  ensure  that  the  new  rules  do  not  encumber  lending  to  that  sector.  The  Basel 
Committee has worked hard to avoid creating such burdens. In fact, our studies have identified those 
characteristics of SME lending that reduce the risk to banks and hence the need for additional capital. 
In that vein, I’d like to turn now to the rules that will apply to SME lending, which is my second topic. 
The treatment of SMEs under the New Accord 
If you’ve followed our work over the years, you’ll know that our proposals have evolved considerably. 
For  instance,  after  the  Committee  published  drafts  of  the  rules  in  1999  and  2001,  we  heard  the 
message loud and clear from small business that the rules did not fully distinguish between exposures 
to  very  large  corporations  as  opposed  to  SMEs.  Likewise,  bankers  themselves  indicated  that  they 
typically view lending to large corporations and to smaller enterprises as very different businesses. 
We have investigated thoroughly the economics of SME lending. Even though probabilities of default 
may  be higher for individual SMEs, our research identified  persuasive  empirical evidence that most 
banks’ holdings of loans to SMEs benefit from a greater degree of diversification than their holdings of 
loans to larger corporations do. Diversification helps to reduce both a bank’s exposure to the credit risk 
posed by SME lending and the commensurate need for capital. Moreover, we’ve taken a closer look at 
the  precautions  banks  take  when  lending  to  smaller  businesses,  such  as  asking  for  guarantees  or 
collateral. These measures help to lower further the potential losses a bank might incur in lending to a 
small business and can similarly reduce the need for capital. 
Our  findings  motivated  revisions  to  the  proposals  that  will  prevent  an  across-the-board  increase  in 
capital requirements for SME lending. What’s more, our “quantitative impact studies” have generated 
solid proof showing that, on average, many banks’ requirements will actually decrease. Three changes 
to the New Accord are especially relevant. 
   2 
 First,  in  addition  to  an  overall  flattening  of  the  risk-weight  curve  for  corporate  credits,  we 
have  reduced  directly  the  capital  charges  for  loans  to  smaller  businesses.  For  example, 
banks on the IRB approach will be permitted to adjust downward the capital requirements on 
exposures to small businesses with up to €50 million in annual sales. This adjustment will 
reduce the capital charges on a loan to an SME by as much as 20% compared to the new 
requirements  for  larger  companies  and  may  in  many  cases  be  lower  than  the  current 
requirements. 
Second, the New Accord will recognise that some banks treat their smallest business credits 
as retail exposures. In these cases, banks group and administer their small business loans 
on a “pooled basis,” similar to the way  they manage most small personal loans. The New 
Accord will permit aggregate exposures to a single business borrower of up to €1 million to 
be treated as retail exposures. Because retail exposures enjoy a preferential treatment under 
both the standardised (reduction of risk weights by 25 percentage points, from 100% to 75%) 
and IRB (a different risk-weight curve) approaches to credit risk, banks making such loans 
may face lower capital requirements than are currently applicable. 
Moreover, for those who have monitored our work closely, the Committee recently eliminated 
a controversial requirement governing the “granularity” of such loans. In plain language, the 
rules will no longer require that retail portfolios contain exposures to a minimum number of 
unrelated parties. Instead, national supervisors will determine whether such portfolios qualify 
for retail treatment. Although the media has not reported on this change  widely, it is quite 
important because it will help more banks to enjoy the preferential retail treatment for their 
smallest business credits. 
BIS Review 32/2003
  Finally, the New Accord will recognise a far wider range of collateral and guarantees than the 
current  rules  do.  When  borrowers  pledge  eligible  collateral  or  guarantees,  and  thereby 
reduce the potential loss on an exposure, banks will be able to hold less capital against that 
exposure  than  the  1988  Accord  stipulates.  This  change  is  especially  pertinent  to  SME 
lending, since national supervisors will be able to recognise several of the types of collateral 
and guarantees that SMEs provide. 
Results of QIS 3 
How do we know that these adjustments will help SMEs? To ensure that we’ve got it right, the Basel 
Committee  has  conducted  a  series  of  “quantitative  impact  studies”  with  the  active  support  of  many 
commercial  banks.  Our most  recent  study,  under  the  name  “QIS  3,”  was  the  most  comprehensive, 
involving an extremely detailed survey of how capital requirements will change for over 350 individual 
banks in more than 40 countries, including in all EU countries. 
QIS 3 demonstrates clearly that the new rules will not increase the capital required for banks’ credit 
exposures to SMEs if we compare the new proposals to the current solvency rules. In fact, our studies 
show that, on average, banks’ capital charges on loans to SMEs included in the corporate portfolio will 
remain largely stable for banks using the standardised approach to credit risk and will decline by an 
average of between 3% and 11% for banks on the IRB approach. The capital savings are even more 
dramatic  for  SME  loans  that  qualify  for  retail  treatment:  participating  banks  from  Basel  Committee 
member  countries  reported  that  their  capital  requirements  on  SME  exposures  qualifying  for  retail 
treatment would decline by an average of 12-13% under the standardised approach and up to 31% 
under the IRB approach. 
Similar conclusions can be drawn for those European banks participating in this study. Actually, EU 
banks in general reduce their capital charges for loans to SMEs compared to the current rules, and 
this decline is slightly stronger than the average of all banks providing data. 
I should note that QIS 3 did not fully recognise the risk-mitigating effects of collateral and guarantees, 
so we expect that, in some cases, banks may experience even larger “savings” when the New Accord 
comes into force. 
Other studies concur. For example, researchers at my home institution, the Bank of Spain, combed 
through  a  database  covering  almost  every  loan  made  by  a  Spanish  bank  to  evaluate  the  potential 
effects of the New Accord on SME lending. Their findings, which, if you are interested, I can share in 
written form with you, agree that the New Accord will not create tougher capital requirements for loans 
to Spanish SMEs and may, indeed, reduce them. 
We are extremely pleased now to have tangible evidence that the New Accord will not create burdens 
for banks that lend to SMEs. As the savings show, our new rules do an even better job of recognising 
the characteristics associated with lending to pools of SMEs compared to other forms of credit-giving. 
The status of the New Accord 
Let  me  conclude  with  a  word  on  the  status  of  our  work.  The  Committee  has  asked  for  final  public 
comments  on  the  “third  draft”  of  the  rules  by  July  31  of  this  year.  We  would  certainly  welcome 
comments on any aspect of the proposals related to SME lending and will give full consideration to 
whether any final changes may be necessary. 
The Committee expects to approve and publish the final text of the New Accord this year, and for the 
new rules to be implemented at the end of 2006, which gives bankers and supervisors three years to 
prepare. Other countries are likely to seek to adopt the New Accord in roughly the same timeframe, or 
perhaps thereafter, depending on national circumstances. 
While this will require substantial efforts from bankers and supervisors, we all acknowledge that better 
tools  are  needed  for  measuring  the  risks  that  banks  face.  Likewise,  we  know  that,  for  banking 
supervision to remain robust and relevant, our rules must keep pace with changes in the industry. This 
includes incorporating what we’ve learned about the unique characteristics of small business lending 
in recent years. We are confident that the New Accord will be worthy of the efforts made. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be very happy to answer any questions you may have. 
BIS Review 32/2003 
 3
