Alan Greenspan: Deposit insurance  
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  U.S.  Senate,  Washington, 
D.C., 26 February 2003.  
 Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, it is a pleasure to appear once 
again before this Committee to present the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System on deposit insurance. Rather than refer to any specific bill, I will express the broad views of 
the Federal Reserve Board on the issues associated with modifications of deposit insurance. Those 
views have not changed since our testimony before this Committee on April 23, 2002.  
At  the  outset,  I  note  that  the  2001  report  of  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  on 
deposit  insurance  highlighted  the  significant  issues  and  developed  an  integrated  framework  for 
addressing  them.  Although  as  before  the  Board  opposes  any  increase  in  coverage,  we  continue  to 
support the framework constructed by the FDIC report for addressing other reform issues.  
Benefits and costs of deposit insurance 
Deposit insurance was adopted in this country as part of the legislative effort to limit the impact of the 
Great  Depression  on  the  public.  Against  the  backdrop  of  a  record  number  of  bank  failures,  the 
Congress  designed  deposit  insurance  mainly  to  protect  the  modest  savings  of  unsophisticated 
depositors  with  limited  financial  assets. With  references  being  made  to  "the  rent  money,"  the  initial 
1934  limit on deposit insurance  was $2,500; the Congress promptly doubled the limit to $5,000 but 
then kept it at that level for the next sixteen years. I should note that the $5,000 of insurance provided 
in 1934, an amount consistent with the original intent of the Congress, is equal to slightly less than 
$60,000  today,  based  on  the  personal  consumption  expenditures  deflator  in  the  gross  domestic 
product accounts.  
Despite its initial quite limited intent, the Congress has raised the maximum amount of coverage five 
times since 1950, to its current level of $100,000. The last increase, in 1980, more than doubled the 
limit and was clearly designed to let depositories, particularly thrift institutions, offer an insured deposit 
free of the then-prevailing  interest rate ceilings on such instruments, which  applied only to deposits 
below $100,000. Insured deposits of exactly $100,000 thus became fully insured instruments in 1980 
but were not subject to an interest rate ceiling. The efforts of thrift institutions to use $100,000 CDs to 
stem  their  liquidity  outflows  resulting  from  public  withdrawals  of  smaller,  below-market-rate  insured 
deposits  led  first  to  an  earnings  squeeze  and  an  associated  loss  of  capital  and  then  to  a  high-risk 
investment strategy that led to failure after failure. Depositors acquiring the new larger-denomination 
insured  deposits  were  aware  of  the  plight  of  the  thrift  institutions  but  unconcerned  about  the  risk 
because  the  principal  amounts  of  their  $100,000  deposits  were  fully  insured  by  the  federal 
government.  In  this  way,  the  1980  increase  in  deposit  insurance  to  $100,000  exacerbated  the 
fundamental problem facing thrift institutions - a concentration on long-term assets in an environment 
of high and rising interest rates. Indeed, it significantly increased the taxpayer cost of the bailout of the 
bankrupt thrift institution deposit insurance fund.  
Despite this problematic episode, deposit insurance has clearly played a key - at times even critical - 
role  in  achieving  the  stability  in  banking  and  financial  markets  that  has  characterized  the  nearly 
seventy years since its adoption. Deposit insurance, combined with other components of our banking 
safety net (the Federal Reserve's discount window and its payment system guarantees), has meant 
that  periods  of  financial  stress  no  longer  entail  widespread  depositor  runs  on  banks  and  thrift 
institutions. Quite the opposite: Asset holders now seek out deposits - both insured and uninsured - as 
safe havens when they have strong doubts about other financial assets.  
Looking  beyond  the  contribution  of  deposit  insurance  to  overall  financial  stability,  we  should  not 
minimize the importance of the security it has brought to millions of households and small businesses 
with relatively modest financial assets. Deposit insurance has given them a safe and secure place to 
hold their transaction and other balances.  
BIS Review 10/2003 
 1
The benefits of deposit insurance, as significant as they are, have not come without a cost. The very 
process that has ended deposit runs has made insured depositors largely indifferent to the risks taken 
by their depository institutions, just as it did with depositors in the 1980s with regard to insolvent, risky 
thrift  institutions.  The  result  has  been  a  weakening  of  the  market  discipline  that  insured  depositors 
would otherwise have imposed on institutions. Relieved of that discipline, depositories naturally feel 
less cautious about taking on more risk than they would otherwise assume. No other type of private 
financial institution is able to attract funds from the public without regard to the risks it takes with its 
creditors'  resources.  This  incentive  to  take  excessive  risks  at  the  expense  of  the  insurer,  and 
potentially the taxpayer, is the so-called moral hazard problem of deposit insurance.  
Thus,  two  offsetting  implications  of  deposit  insurance  must  be kept  in  mind.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is 
clear  that  deposit  insurance  has  contributed  to  the  prevention  of  bank  runs  that  could  have 
destabilized the financial structure in the short run.  On the other, even the current levels of deposit 
insurance may have already increased risk-taking at insured depository institutions to such an extent 
that future systemic risks have arguably risen.  
Indeed, the reduced market discipline and increased moral hazard at depositories have intensified the 
need for government supervision to protect the interests of taxpayers and, in essence, substitute for 
the reduced market discipline. Deposit insurance and other components of the safety net also enable 
banks  and  thrift  institutions  to  attract  more  resources,  at  lower  costs,  than  would  otherwise  be  the 
case. In short, insured institutions receive a subsidy in the form of a government guarantee that allows 
them both to attract deposits at lower interest rates than would be necessary without deposit insurance 
and  to  take  more  risk  without  the  fear  of  losing  their  deposit  funding.  Put  another  way,  deposit 
insurance misallocates resources by breaking the link between risks and rewards for a select set of 
market competitors.  
In  sum,  from  the  very  beginning,  deposit  insurance  has  involved  a  tradeoff.  Deposit  insurance 
contributes  to  overall  short-term  financial  stability  and  the  protection  of  small  depositors.  But  at  the 
same  time,  because  it  also  subsidizes  deposit  growth  and  induces  greater  risk-taking,  deposit 
insurance misallocates resources and creates larger long-term financial imbalances that increase the 
need for government supervision to protect the taxpayers' interests. Deposit insurance reforms must 
balance these tradeoffs. Moreover, any reforms should be aimed primarily at protecting the interest of 
the economy overall and not just the profits or market shares of particular businesses.  
The Federal Reserve Board believes that deposit insurance reforms should be designed to preserve 
the  benefits  of  heightened  financial  stability  and  the  protection  of  small  depositors  without  a  further 
increase in moral hazard or reduction in market discipline. In addition, we urge that the implementing 
details be kept as straightforward as possible to minimize the risk of unintended consequences that 
comes with complexity.  
Issues for reform 
The FDIC has made five broad recommendations.  
Merge BIF and SAIF 
1.  
The Board supports the FDIC's proposal to merge the Bank Insurance Fund (BIF) with the Savings 
Association  Insurance  Fund  (SAIF).  Because  the  charters  and  operations  of  banks  and  thrift 
institutions have become so similar, it makes no sense to continue the separate funds. Separate funds 
reflect the past but neither the present nor the future. Merging the funds  would diversify  their risks, 
reduce  administrative  expense,  and  widen  the  fund  base  of  an  increasingly  concentrated  banking 
system.  Most  important,  because  banks  and  thrift  institutions  receive  the  same  level  of  federally 
guaranteed insurance coverage, the premiums faced by each set of institutions should be identical as 
well.  Under  current  arrangements,  the  premiums  faced  by  equally  risky  institutions  could  differ 
significantly  if  one  of  the  funds  falls  below  the  designated  reserve  ratio  of  1.25  percent  of  insured 
deposits and the other fund does not. Should that occur, depository institutions would be induced to 
switch charters to obtain insurance from the fund with the lower premium, a result that could distort our 
depository structure. The federal government should not sell a single service, like deposit insurance, at 
different prices.  
Reduce statutory restrictions on premiums 
2. 
Current law requires the FDIC to impose higher premiums on riskier banks and thrift institutions but 
prevents  it  from  imposing  any  premium  on  well-capitalized  and  highly  rated  institutions  when  the 
corresponding fund's reserves exceed 1.25 percent of insured deposits. The Board endorses the FDIC 
recommendations  that  would  eliminate  the  statutory  restrictions  on  risk-based  pricing  and  allow  a 
premium to be imposed on every insured depository institution, no matter how well capitalized and well 
rated it may be or how high the fund's reserves.  
The  current  statutory  requirement  that  free  deposit  insurance  be  provided  to  well-capitalized  and 
highly rated institutions when the ratio of FDIC reserves to insured deposits exceeds a predetermined 
ratio  maximizes  the  subsidy  provided  to  these  institutions  and  is  inconsistent  with  efforts  to  avoid 
inducing  moral  hazard.  Put  differently,  the  current  rule  requires  the  government  to  give  away  its 
valuable  guarantee  to  many  institutions  when  fund  reserves  meet  some  ceiling  level.  This  free 
guarantee is of value to institutions even when they themselves are in sound financial condition and 
when macroeconomic times are good. At the end of the third quarter of last year, 91 percent of banks 
and thrift institutions were paying no premium. That group included many institutions that have never 
paid  a  premium  for  their,  in  some  cases  substantial,  coverage,  and  it  also  included  fast-growing 
entities whose past premiums were extraordinarily small relative to their current coverage. We believe 
that these anomalies were never intended by the framers of the Deposit Insurance Fund Act of 1996 
and should be addressed by the Congress.  
The Congress did intend that the FDIC impose risk-based premiums, but the 1996 act limits the ability 
of  the  FDIC  to  impose  risk-based  premiums  on  well-capitalized  and  highly  rated  banks  and  thrift 
institutions. And these two variables - capital strength and overall examiner rating - do not capture all 
the risk that institutions could create for the insurer. The Board believes that the FDIC should be free 
to  establish  risk  categories  on  the  basis  of  any  economic  variables  shown  to  be  related  to  an 
institution's risk of failure,  and  to  impose premiums commensurate with that risk. Although  a robust 
risk-based premium system would be technically  difficult to design, a closer link between insurance 
premiums  and  the  risk  of  individual  institutions  would  reduce  moral  hazard  and  the  distortions  in 
resource allocation that accompany deposit insurance.  
We note, however, that although significant benefits from a risk-based premium system are likely to 
require a substantial range of premiums, the FDIC concluded in its report that premiums for the riskiest 
banks would probably need to be capped in order to avoid inducing failure at these weaker institutions. 
We believe that capping premiums may end up costing the insurance fund more in the long run should 
these weak institutions fail anyway, with the delay increasing the ultimate cost of resolution. The Board 
has concluded, therefore, that if a cap on premiums is required, it should be set quite high so that risk-
based  premiums  can  be  as  effective  as  possible  in  deterring  excessive  risk-taking.  In  that  way,  we 
could  begin  to  simulate  the  deposit  insurance  pricing  that  the  market  would  apply  and  reduce  the 
associated subsidy in deposit insurance.  
Nonetheless, we should not delude ourselves into believing that even a wider range in the risk-based 
premium structure would eliminate the need for a government back-up to the deposit insurance fund, 
that  is,  eliminate  the  government  subsidy  in  deposit  insurance.  To  eliminate  the  subsidy  in  deposit 
insurance - to make deposit insurance a real insurance system - the FDIC average insurance premium 
would have to be set high enough to cover fully the very small probabilities of very large losses, such 
as  those  incurred  during  the  Great  Depression,  and  thus  the  perceived  costs  of  systemic  risk.  In 
contrast  to  life  or  automobile  casualty  insurance,  each  individual  insured  loss  in  banking  is  not 
independent  of  other  losses.  Banking  is  subject  to  systemic  risk  and  is  thus  subject  to  a  far  larger 
extreme loss in the tail of the probability distributions from which real insurance premiums would have 
to  be  calculated.  Indeed,  pricing  deposit  insurance  risks  to  fully  fund  potential  losses  -  pricing  to 
eliminate subsidies - could well require premiums that would discourage most depository institutions 
from offering broad coverage to their customers. Since the Congress has determined that there should 
be broad coverage, the subsidy in deposit insurance cannot be fully eliminated, although we can and 
should eliminate as much of the subsidy as we can.  
I note that the difficulties of raising risk-based premiums explain why there is no real private-insurer 
substitute for deposit insurance from the government. No private insurer would ever be able to match 
the actual FDIC premium and cover its risks. A private insurer confronted with the possibility, remote 
as it may be, of losses that could bankrupt it would need to set especially high premiums to protect 
itself, premiums that few, if any, depository institutions would find attractive. And if premiums were fully 
priced  by  the  government  or  the  private  sector,  the  depository  institutions  would  likely  lower  their 
offering  rates,  thereby  reducing  the  amount  of  insured  deposits  demanded,  and  consequently  the 
amount outstanding would decline.  
Relaxing the reserve ratio regime to allow gradual adjustments in premiums 
3.  
Current law establishes a designated reserve ratio for BIF and SAIF of 1.25  percent. If that ratio  is 
exceeded,  the  statute  requires  that  premiums  be  discontinued  for  well-capitalized  and  highly  rated 
institutions.  If  the  ratio  declines  below  1.25  percent,  the  FDIC  must  develop  a  set  of  premiums  to 
restore the reserve ratio to 1.25 percent; if the fund ratio is not likely to be restored to its statutorily 
designated level within twelve months, the law requires that a premium of at least 23 basis points be 
imposed on all insured entities.  
These  requirements  are  clearly  procyclical:  They  lower  or  eliminate  fees  in  good  times,  when  bank 
credit  is  readily  available  and  deposit  insurance  fund  reserves  should  be  built  up,  and  abruptly 
increase  fees  sharply  in  times  of  weakness,  when  bank  credit  availability  is  under  pressure  and 
deposit  fund  resources  are  drawn  down  to  cover  the  resolution  of  failed  institutions.  The  FDIC 
recommends  that  surcharges  or  rebates  be  used  to  bring  the  fund  back  to  the  target  reserve  ratio 
gradually.  The  FDIC  also  recommends  the  possibility  of  a  target  range  for  the  designated  reserve 
ratio,  over  which  the  premiums  may  remain  constant,  rather  than  a  fixed  target  reserve  ratio  and 
abruptly changing premiums.  
We support such increased flexibility and smoothing of changes in premiums. Indeed, we recommend 
that the FDIC's suggested target reserve range be widened to reduce the need to change premiums 
abruptly.  Any  floor  or  ceiling,  regardless  of  its  level,  could  require  that  premiums  be  increased  at 
exactly the time when banks and thrifts could be under stress and, similarly, that premiums be reduced 
at the time that depositories are in the best position to fund an increase in reserves. Building a larger 
fund in good times and permitting it to decline when necessary are prerequisites to less variability in 
the premium.  
In  addition  to  supporting  a  widening  of  the  range  for  the  designated  reserve  ratio,  the  Board 
recommends that the FDIC be given the latitude to temporarily relax floor or ceiling ratios on the basis 
of  current  and  anticipated  banking  conditions  and  expected  needs  for  resources  to  resolve  failing 
institutions. In short, to enhance macroeconomic stability, we prefer a reduction in the specificity of the 
rules  under  which  the  FDIC  operates  and,  within  the  broad  guidelines  set  out  by  the  Congress,  an 
increase in the flexibility with which the board of the FDIC can operate.  
Modify the rebates system 
4. 
Since its early days, the FDIC has rebated "excess" premiums whenever it considered its reserves to 
be adequate. This procedure was replaced in the 1996 law by the requirement that no premium be 
imposed  on  well-capitalized  and  highly  rated  institutions  when  the  relevant  fund  reached  its 
designated  reserve  ratio.  The  FDIC's  2001  proposals  would  re-impose  a  minimum  premium  on  all 
banks and thrift institutions and a more risk-sensitive premium structure. These provisions would be 
coupled  with  rebates  for  the  stronger  entities  when  the  fund  approaches  the  upper  end  of  a  target 
range and surcharges when the fund trends below the lower end of a target range.  
The FDIC also recommends that the rebates not be uniform for the stronger entities. Rather, the FDIC 
argues that rebates should be smaller for those banks that have paid premiums for only short periods 
or  that  have  in  the  past  paid  premiums  that  are  not  commensurate  with  their  present  size  and 
consequent FDIC exposure. The devil, of course, is in the details. But varying the rebates in this way 
makes considerable sense, and the Board endorses it. More than 900 banks - some now quite large - 
have never paid a premium, and without this modification they would continue to pay virtually nothing, 
net of rebates, as long as their strong capital and high supervisory ratings were maintained. Such an 
approach is both competitively inequitable and contributes to moral hazard. It should be addressed.  
Indexing ceilings on the coverage of insured deposits 
5. 
The FDIC recommends that the current $100,000 ceiling on insured deposits be indexed to inflation. 
The  Board  does  not  support  this  recommendation  and  believes  that  the  current  ceiling  should  be 
maintained.  
In the Board's judgment, increasing the coverage, even by indexing, is unlikely to add measurably to 
the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  Macroeconomic  policy  and  other  elements  of  the  safety  net  - 
combined  with  the  current,  still-significant  level  of  deposit  insurance  -  continue  to  be  important 
bulwarks against bank runs. Thus, the problem that increased coverage is designed to solve must be 
related  either  to  the  individual  depositor,  the  party  originally  intended  to  be  protected,  or  to  the 
individual  bank or thrift institution. Clearly,  both  groups would prefer higher coverage  if it cost them 
nothing.  But  the  Congress  needs  to  be  clear  about  the  nature  of  a  specific  problem  for  which 
increased coverage would be the solution.  
Depositors.  Our  most  recent  surveys  of  consumer  finances  suggest  that  most  depositors  have 
balances well below the current insurance limit of $100,000, and those that do have larger balances 
have  apparently  been  adept  at  achieving  the  level  of  deposit  insurance  coverage  they  desire  by 
opening multiple insured accounts. Such spreading of assets is perfectly consistent with the counsel 
always given to investors to diversify their assets - whether stocks, bonds, or mutual funds - across 
different issuers. The cost of diversifying for insured deposits is surely no greater than doing so for 
other assets. A bank would clearly prefer that the depositor maintain all of his or her funds at that bank 
and would prefer to reduce the need for depositor diversification by being able to offer higher deposit 
insurance  coverage.  Nonetheless,  depositors  appear  to  have  no  great  difficulty  -  should  they  want 
insured deposits - in finding multiple sources of fully insured accounts.  
In addition, one of the most remarkable characteristics of household holdings of financial assets has 
been the increase in the diversity of portfolio choices since World War II. And, since the early 1970s 
the share of household financial assets in bank and thrift deposits has generally declined steadily as 
households have taken advantage of innovative, attractive financial instruments with market rates of 
return. The trend seems to bear no relation to past increases in insurance ceilings. Indeed, the most 
dramatic substitution out of deposits has been the shift from both insured and uninsured deposits into 
equities  and  into  mutual  funds  that  hold  equities,  bonds,  and  money  market  assets.  It  is  difficult  to 
believe that a change in ceilings during the 1990s would have made any measurable difference in that 
shift. Rather, the data indicate that the weakness in stock prices in recent years has been marked by 
increased flows into bank and thrift deposits even without changed insurance coverage levels.  
Depository  Institutions.  Does  the  problem  to  be  solved  by  increased  deposit  insurance  coverage 
concern the individual depository institution? If so, the problem would seem disproportionately related 
to small banks because insured deposits are a much larger proportion of total funding at small banks 
than at large banks. But smaller banks appear to be doing well. Since the mid-1990s, adjusted for the 
effects of mergers, assets of banks smaller than the largest 1,000 have grown at an average annual 
rate of 13.8 percent, more than twice the pace of the largest 1,000 banks. Uninsured deposits, again 
adjusted for the effects of mergers, have grown at  average annual rates of 21 percent at the small 
banks versus 10 percent at the large banks. Clearly, small banks have a demonstrated skill and ability 
to compete for uninsured deposits. To be sure, uninsured deposits are more expensive than insured 
deposits, and bank costs would decline and profits rise if their currently uninsured liabilities received a 
government  guarantee.  But  that  is  the  issue  of  whether  subsidizing  bank  profits  through  additional 
deposit  insurance  serves  a  national  purpose.  I  might  add  that  throughout  the  1990s  and  into  the 
present century, return on equity at small banks has been well maintained. Indeed, the attractiveness 
of  banking  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  more  than  1,350  banks  were  chartered  during  the  past 
decade, including more than 600 from 1999 through 2002.  
Some small banks argue that they need enhanced deposit insurance coverage to compete with large 
banks because depositors prefer to put their uninsured funds in an institution considered too big to fail. 
As  I  have  noted,  however,  small  banks  have more  than  held  their  own  in  the  market for  uninsured 
deposits.  In  addition,  the  Board  rejects  the  notion  that  any  bank  is  too  big  to  fail.  In  the  FDIC 
Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA), the Congress made it clear that the systemic-risk exception to the 
FDIC's  least-cost  resolution  of  a  failing  bank  should  be  invoked  only  under  the  most  unusual 
circumstances.  Moreover,  the  resolution  rules  under  the  systemic-risk  exception  do  not  require  that 
uninsured depositors and  other creditors, much less stockholders, be made whole. The market has 
clearly evidenced the view, consistent with FDICIA, that large institutions are not too big for uninsured 
creditors  to  take  at  least  some  loss  should  the  institution  fail.  For  example,  no  U.S.  banking 
organization, no matter how large, is AAA-rated. In addition, research indicates that creditors impose 
higher risk premiums on the uninsured debt of relatively risky large banking organizations and that this 
market discipline has increased since the enactment of FDICIA.  
To  be  sure,  the  real  purchasing  power  of  deposit  insurance  ceilings  has  declined.  But  there  is  no 
evidence of any significant detrimental effect on depositors or depository institutions, with the possible 
exception of a small reduction in those profits that accrue from deposit guarantee subsidies that lower 
the  cost  of  insured  deposits.  The  current  deposit  insurance  ceiling  appears  more  than  adequate  to 
achieve the positive benefits of deposit insurance that I mentioned earlier, even if its real value were to 
erode further.  
Another argument is often raised by smaller banks regarding the need for increased deposit insurance 
coverage.  Some  smaller  institutions  say  that  they  are  unable  to  match  the  competition  from  large 
securities firms and bank holding companies with multiple bank or thrift institution affiliates because 
those  entities  offer  multiple  insured  accounts  through  one  organization.  I  note  that  since  the 
Committee's  last  hearings  on  this  issue,  the  force  of  small  banks'  concerns  has  been  reduced  by 
recent  market  developments  in  which  small  banks  and  thrift  institutions  can  use  a  clearinghouse 
network for brokered deposits that allows them to offer full FDIC insurance for large accounts. The 
Board  agrees  that  such  practices  by  both  large  and  small  depositories  are  a  misuse  of  deposit 
insurance.  Moreover,  raising  the  coverage  limit  for  each  account  is  not  a  remedy  for  small  banks 
because  it  would  also  increase  the  aggregate  amount  of  insurance  coverage  that  multidepository 
organizations would be able to offer. The disparity would remain.  
Conclusion 
Several  aspects  of  the  deposit  insurance  system  need  reform.  The  Board  supports,  with  some 
modifications, all of the recommendations the FDIC made in the spring of 2001 except indexing the 
current  $100,000  ceiling  to  inflation.  The  thrust  of  our  recommendations  would  call  for  a  wider 
permissible  range  for  the  size  of  the  fund  relative  to  insured  deposits,  reduced  variation  of  the 
insurance premium as the relative size of the fund changes with banking and economic conditions, a 
positive and more risk-based premium net of rebates for all depository institutions, and the merging of 
BIF and SAIF.  
There may come a time when the Board finds that households and businesses with modest resources 
are having difficulty in placing their funds in safe vehicles or that the level of deposit coverage appears 
to  be  endangering  financial  stability.  Should  either  of  those  events  occur,  the  Board  would  call  its 
concerns to the attention of the Congress and support adjustments to the ceiling by indexing or other 
methods.  But  today,  in  our  judgment,  neither  financial  stability,  nor  depositors,  nor  depositories  are 
being  disadvantaged  by  the  current  ceiling.  Raising  the  ceiling  now  would  extend  the  safety  net, 
increase  the  government  subsidy  to  depository  institutions,  expand  moral  hazard,  and  reduce  the 
incentive for market discipline without providing any clear public benefit. With no clear public benefit to 
increasing  deposit  insurance,  the  Board  sees  no  reason  to  increase  the  scope  of  the  safety  net. 
Indeed,  the  Board  believes  that  as  our  financial  system  has  become  ever  more  complex  and 
exceptionally  responsive  to  the  vagaries  of  economic  change,  structural  distortions  induced  by 
government guarantees have risen. We have no way of ascertaining at exactly what point subsidies 
provoke  systemic  risk.  Nonetheless,  prudence  suggests  that  we  be  exceptionally  deliberate  when 
expanding government financial guarantees.  
