 Willem F Duisenberg: New economy, financial markets and monetary policy 
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the meeting of the 
Z(cid:252)rcher Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft, Zurich, 19 May 2003. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  to  address  you  this  evening,  and  I  should  like  to  start  by  thanking  the 
Z(cid:252)rcher Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft for inviting me to do so.  
Being trained economists, you all know that in the course of the past century, monetary theory has 
faced  significant  challenges  from  various  angles  -  the  Keynesian  revolution,  the  neo-classical 
synthesis,  the  monetarist  counter-revolution,  the  emergence  of  new  classical  economics  with  the 
introduction of the concept of rational expectations, and real business cycle theories.  
Similar to the experience of monetary theory, monetary policy has had to cope with major challenges 
as  well. We  all  know  that  the  economic  and  financial  environment  in  which  monetary  policy  has  to 
operate  is  continuously  changing.  During  the  past  few  years  -  as  has  been  rather  obvious  -  these 
changes  have  included  the  discussion  about  a  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148)  and,  driven  by  the  interrelated 
processes  of  financial  liberalisation  and  financial  globalisation,  the  growing  importance  of  financial 
markets. You may wonder why someone should raise the topic of the (cid:147)new economy(cid:148) again, as it has 
been discussed so extensively by many, including myself, on many an occasion before. Is this not a 
topic which has actually become rather (cid:147)old(cid:148) by now; another chapter in the history books of economic 
science? 
I do understand these concerns. Let me assure you now that I will not bore you with a recollection of 
past  events.  I  intend  my  exposØ  today  to  be  forward-looking,  as  should  the  exposØ  of  any  central 
banker. I want to discuss what lessons for the future we can draw from over-optimistic expectations 
related to so-called regime shifts, such as the supply-side shock of a perceived (cid:147)new economy(cid:148), and 
the  subsequent  financial  boom  and  bust  cycle  in  asset  prices.  How  should  monetary  policy-makers 
deal with the resulting financial imbalances and reconcile monetary stability with financial stability? 
In my presentation today, I shall first briefly discuss the challenges that have been presented by the 
new  environment  for  monetary  policy-makers,  in  particular  by  the  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148)  and  the  growing 
importance of capital markets. Then, I shall look at what I call the excesses of this new environment, 
which for me are the speculative boom in asset markets and evidence of a corporate culture infatuated 
by short-term considerations. Finally, I shall look at the financial stability concerns and conclude by 
presenting some lessons for the future. 
The paradigm of the (cid:147)new economy(cid:148) 
Without  a  doubt,  the  world  has  experienced  overwhelming  progress  in  technology  and  productivity 
over the previous century, resulting in enormous growth in economic activity and individual wealth. It 
has been calculated that the industrialised countries were about 20 times better off at the end of the 
20th century than they were a hundred years earlier.1  
Developments in the technological infrastructure have increasingly been at the forefront of economic 
discussions in the second half of the 1990s. One of the most striking economic events of the last years 
has been the pace and depth of change in information and communications technologies (ICT), and 
the  discussion  about  a  so-called  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148)  in  the  euro  area.  There  has  been  no  undisputed 
definition  of  what  should  be  understood  by  the  term  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148),  but  generally  it  included  the 
following characteristics. A (cid:147)new economy(cid:148) seemed to manifest itself mainly in a permanently higher 
rate of potential output growth, with gains in productivity driven by technological innovation being the 
main force behind the upsurge. 
                                                      
1   D. Coyle, (cid:147)The Weightless World: Strategies for Managing the Digital Economy(cid:148), MIT Press, 1998, p.VII. 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 1
 The problem with the (cid:147)new economy(cid:148), however, was that the evidence available for the existence of it 
was fairly mixed, both for the United States and - even more so - for the euro area. On the one hand, 
some studies, undertaken at the aggregate level, tended to conclude that the data did not warrant an 
affirmation of a (cid:147)new economy(cid:148). On the other hand, several microeconomic studies found evidence of 
significant effects of information technology on firm-level productivity. 
From the beginning, there was, however, only limited, if any, evidence of a (cid:147)new economy(cid:148) in the euro 
area. It was clear that advances in information and telecommunication technology had a major impact 
on the financial services industry, generating various financial innovations and new business methods, 
such as internet banking, electronic money, on-line broking services and electronic trading systems. 
For  the  real  economy,  however,  the  impact  was  much  harder  to  assess,  not  least  due  to  a  lack  of 
reliable  statistics  and  interpretation  difficulties  regarding  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148)-related  developments  in 
productivity.  As  Nobel  Prize  Laureate  Robert  Solow  said  in  1987:  (cid:147)You  can  see  the  computer  age 
everywhere  but  in  the  productivity  statistics(cid:148).2  The  difficulty  in  interpreting  these  developments 
therefore suggested caution on the part of policy-makers. 
The interaction of the (cid:147)new economy(cid:148) with developments in financial markets 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  interaction  of  the  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148)  with  financial  markets.  It  has  been  long 
debated  what  role  the  development  of  financial  markets  played  in  fostering  belief  in  the  (cid:147)new 
economy(cid:148).  In  most  industrialised  nations,  on  the  waves  of  financial  liberalisation  and  globalisation, 
capital markets have been growing tremendously over the past two decades, both in terms of volume 
and value of transactions and in the development of new types of securities. For the euro area, the 
preparations for and the actual introduction of the euro have undoubtedly been an important catalyst, 
improving  the  efficiency  of  the  euro  area  capital  markets  and,  to  some  extent,  reducing  existing 
information  asymmetries,  for  both  the  equity  and  debt  markets  in  the  euro  area.  This  has  certainly 
been a very positive development which I wholeheartedly support.  
Coinciding  with  the  stock  market  boom  in  the  late  1990s  and  2000,  corporations  in  the  euro  area 
raised  significant  amounts  of  equity  capital.  New  companies,  often  in  the  high-tech  field,  obtained 
listings at specialised (cid:147)new markets(cid:148) stock exchanges for high-growth companies. The amount of new 
capital raised on euro area stock markets increased from (cid:128)130 billion in 1998 to (cid:128)320 billion in 2000, 
when stock prices were at their peak. The growth of the euro area stock markets, in terms of the ratio 
between  market  capitalisation  and  nominal  gross  domestic  product,  has  been  staggering.  Over  a 
period of ten years, from 1990 to 2000 - when prices were at their highest level - this ratio increased 
about fourfold. 
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  the  belief  in  enormous  potential  profits  stemming  from  investments  in 
(cid:147)new  economy(cid:148)  corporations  resulted  in  a  stock  market  rally,  which  broke  all  previous  records. 
Valuations  of  internet-related  companies  reached  levels  that  were  extraordinary  by  basically  all 
standards. In March 2000, the monthly average price-earnings ratio of stocks in the technology, media 
and  telecommunications  sectors  peaked  at  70,  compared  with  an  average  of  around  13  over  the 
previous 25 years. It seemed that the sky had finally become the limit indeed and that a new era had 
arrived. In parallel with the rise in stock prices, stock market volatility jumped: the historical volatility of 
the Nasdaq Composite Index almost doubled from 1999 to 2000. 
The excesses, which were particularly evident in the stock markets, are the most notable expression 
of the interaction of the belief in the (cid:147)new economy(cid:148) with developments in financial markets. However, 
the growth in debt markets also played its role. The introduction of the euro and the start of the single 
monetary policy seem to have had a strong, positive impact on the possibilities for corporate issuers - 
both  financial  and  non-financial  -  to  resort  to  corporate  bond  issuance  as  a  financing  source.  In 
addition,  this  process  was  fuelled  by  the  surge  in  mergers  and  acquisitions,  as  more  and  more 
companies  prepared  to  grasp  the  opportunities  of  the  new  dynamic  environment.  Furthermore, 
issuance activity by certain sectors linked to the (cid:147)new economy(cid:148), such as the telecommunications and 
high-tech sectors, promoted the development of certain segments of the bond markets, for example 
the market for high-yield bonds. 
                                                      
2  B. van Ark, (cid:147)Measuring Productivity in the (cid:147)New Economy(cid:148): Towards a European Perspective(cid:148), De Economist 148, No.1, 
2000, pp.87-105. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2003
 We  all  know  where  all  this  optimism  about  the  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148)  led  to.  Since  March  2000,  we  have 
seen both a substantial decline in stock prices and rising financial imbalances. I shall now discuss the 
aftermath of the boom and burst period that we experienced in financial markets.  
The aftermath 
If the famous philosopher Erasmus of Rotterdam were to have lived in our times, he would certainly 
have  added  an  additional  chapter  to  his  satirical  masterpiece  (cid:147)The  Praise  of  Folly(cid:148),  with  its  pointed 
attacks on human weaknesses and excesses, to describe some of the practices in financial markets 
and  corporate  behaviour  that  have  been  so  blatantly  evident  in  recent  years.3  Some,  as  we  know, 
have  used  the  expressions  (cid:147)irrational  exuberance(cid:148)  and  (cid:147)infectious  greed(cid:148)  to  describe  these 
developments.4 I have nothing to add to these statements. 
Unfortunately,  when  stock  prices  came  down  sharply,  the  costs  of  the  excesses  became  evidently 
clear. Since their peak in March 2000, stock prices in the euro area - as measured by the broad Dow 
Jones  Euro  Stoxx  index  -  have  fallen  by  roughly  57%  as  at  the  end  of  April  2003.  It  has  been 
calculated that buying a thousand Deutsche Marks’ worth of beer would have been a better investment 
than investing the same amount of money in Frankfurt’s Neuer Markt at the height of the bubble - at 
least with the beer you could have made some return by selling the empty cans. The fall in the value of 
financial assets since 2000, associated with the fall in equity prices, has led to an increase in leverage 
ratios of non-financial corporations. The decline in the value of collateral has led to an increase in risk 
premia when taking up loans or issuing debt securities. This was shown clearly in the spreads of retail 
bank  lending  rates  over  corresponding  market  rates  and  in  the  increasing  risk  premia  on  corporate 
bond interest rates.  
The ratio of debt of non-financial corporations to GDP, which increased substantially in the second half 
of  the  nineties,  only  started  to  stabilise  last  year.  The  relatively  high  debt  levels  of  non-financial 
corporations,  combined  with  the  decline  in  the  value  of  financial  assets,  has  had  adverse 
consequences  on  firms’  financing  conditions  via  balance  sheet  effects  and  therefore  on  private 
investment in particular over the past few years. Furthermore, corporations have become increasingly 
reluctant or have found it more difficult to issue equity capital on public stock exchanges. In 2002, total 
gross  issuance  of  equity  only  accounted  for  around  45%  of  the  annual  average  for  the  period 
1999-2002. In fact, in the second half of 2002, the value of quoted shares issued in the euro area was 
at its lowest level since the mid-nineties. The slowdown in equity issuance activity in 2001 and 2002 
was accompanied by a similar decline in debt securities issuance by non-financial corporations. These 
declines in securities financing partly point to lower capital demand following the economic slowdown, 
but the worsening of capital market sentiment in recent years may also have induced companies to 
increasingly rely on other sources of finance. 
Furthermore,  stock  market  participation  of  households  in  the  euro  area  steadily  increased  in  the 
1990s.  When  share  prices  collapsed,  households  experienced  substantial  losses  in  their  financial 
wealth,  bringing  the  ratio  of  financial  wealth  to  disposable  income  back  to  levels  similar  to  those 
witnessed at the end of 1997.  
The costs of the developments in financial markets over the past few years, which were often linked to 
the  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148),  can  also  be  measured  by  a  critical  erosion  of  trust.  Examples  of  accounting 
malpractice,  corporate  greed  and  imprudent  stock  market  valuations  have  started  to  appear  in 
increasing  numbers,  undermining  the  basic  trust  and  confidence  of  investors  in  financial  markets. 
There has been a lot of discussion about whether this unfortunate behaviour has been promoted by 
                                                      
3   D. Erasmus, (cid:147)The Praise of Folly(cid:148), (translated by J. Wilson), Great Mind Series, Prometheus Books, 1994. 
4   See for (cid:147)irrational exuberance(cid:148): A. Greenspan, (cid:147)The Challenge of Central Banking in a Democratic Society(cid:148), 5 December 
1996,  speech  at  the  Annual  Dinner  and  Francis  Boyer  Lecture  of  The  American  Enterprise  Institute  for  Public  Policy 
Research, Washington, D.C.: (cid:147)How do we know when irrational exuberance has unduly escalated asset values, which then 
become subject to unexpected and prolonged contractions as they have in Japan over the past decade? And how do we 
factor that assessment into monetary policy?(cid:148); R.J. Schiller, (cid:147)Irrational Exuberance(cid:148), Princeton University Press, 2000; See 
for (cid:147)infectious greed(cid:148): A. Greenspan in his Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. 
Senate, 16 July 2002: (cid:147)Why did corporate governance check and balances that served us reasonably well in the past break 
down?  At  root  was  the  rapid  enlargement  of  stock  market  capitalisations  in  the  latter  part  of  the  1990s  that  arguably 
engendered  an  outsized  increase  in  opportunities for  avarice.  An infectious  greed seemed to  grip much  of  our  business 
community.(cid:148) 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 3
 the  widespread  use  of  certain  reward  mechanisms  such  as  stock  option  schemes.5  As  Alan 
Greenspan  aptly  put  it:  (cid:147)The  highly  desirable  spread  of  shareholding  and  options  among  business 
managers perversely created incentives to artificially inflated reported earnings in order to keep stock 
prices high and rising(cid:148).6 
Trust, as has been demonstrated for example by Francis Fukuyama in his best-seller Trust: The Social 
Virtues  and  the  Creation  of  Prosperity,  may  be  invaluable  for  economic  processes,  as  it  facilitates 
economic  interactions  and  lowers  transaction  costs.7  Recent  economic  research  is  increasingly 
emphasising  that  social  capital  represented  by  trust  may  be  as  important  as  physical  capital  for 
economic growth and prosperity.8  
Policy-makers and regulators can help to restore trust in financial markets and auditing processes by 
enhancing  corporate  governance  mechanisms.  I  fully  support  measures  which  promote  adequate 
governance  of  corporate  behaviour  and  thereby  contribute  to  the  restoration  of  trust  in  financial 
statements and capital markets. However, at the end of the day the crucial contribution to restoring 
trust has to come from the corporate sector itself. The sector has to recognise that easy profits are like 
killing the goose that lays the golden eggs. Executives in private business have a collective interest in 
promoting high standards of ethical behaviour.  
Monetary policy and financial stability  
The  recent  worldwide  episodes  of  substantial  asset  price  swings,  with  their  strong  links  to  the 
emergence  of  the  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148),  have  intensified  the  debate  among  policy-makers  regarding  the 
relationship between financial stability and monetary policy. The question arises as to how monetary 
policy  needs  to  deal  with  asset  price  bubbles,  which  have  often  been  linked  to  financial  stability 
concerns.  
As is generally accepted, bubbles are situations in which the prices of various types of assets differ 
from  their  fundamental  market  values.  Asset  price  bubbles  originate  in  the  existence  of  imperfect 
information in financial markets, leading  to  the mispricing  of assets and,  in turn, to the distortion of 
investment and consumption decisions. Often, asset price bubbles occur in an environment of regime 
shifts,  prompted  by  major  technological  innovations,  which  gave  rise  to  the  belief  among  a  broad 
spectrum  of  economic  agents  that  a  new  era  had  started.  In  this  respect,  the  impact  of  the  (cid:147)new 
economy(cid:148) on stock prices that we have experienced in recent years has not been that exceptional. 
However,  the  importance  of  asset  price  bubbles  and  their  potentially  distorting  impact  on  economic 
and financial processes does not mean that central banks should make asset prices an explicit goal 
for their monetary  policies. This idea  has  been refuted by many, and rightfully  so. Asset prices  are 
predominantly  driven  by  real  factors  such  as  technological  and  demographic  developments  and 
preferences, which cannot be controlled by monetary policy.  
Furthermore, economic agents should not be given any cause to act on the basis of expectations that 
central banks would insure financial markets against considerable losses. Otherwise, there would be 
serious moral hazard problems and the public would hold the central banks accountable for specific 
developments in financial markets such as the performance of the stock market. This might seriously 
impair the central banks’ goal of pursuing price stability, and thus their credibility.  
Central  banks  also  face  considerable  problems  in  terms  of  identifying  financial  bubbles.  After  all,  a 
bubble can only be confidently identified as such once it has burst. 
                                                      
5   J.E. Core, W.R. Guay and D.F. Larcker, (cid:147)Executive Equity Compensation and Incentives: A Survey(cid:148), Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, Economic Policy Review, April 2003, pp.27-45. 
6  A. Greenspan in his Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, 16 July 2002; 
see also A. Greenspan, (cid:147)Stock Options and Related Matters(cid:148), remarks at the 2002 Financial Markets Conference of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 3 May 2002. 
7   P. Maidment, (cid:147)In Nothing We Trust(cid:148), Forbes Magazine, 7 January 2001; F. Fukuyama, (cid:147)Trust: The Social Virtues and the 
Creation of Prosperity(cid:148), Free Press, 1995. 
8   F.  Fukuyama,  (cid:147)Social  Capital  and  Civil  Society(cid:148),  1  October  1999,  paper  presented  at  the  IMF  Conference  on  Second 
Generation  Reforms;  J.  Sobel,  (cid:147)Can  We  Trust  Social  Capital?(cid:148),  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  Vol.  XL,  March  2002, 
pp.139-154. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2003
 However,  this  does  not  mean  that  developments  in  financial  markets,  and  especially  asset  price 
bubbles,  are  not  important  for  central  bank  behaviour.  On  the  contrary,  we  clearly  need  to  monitor 
movements in asset prices, as they reflect expectations about future economic developments and are 
important for the monetary policy transmission mechanism. Furthermore, central banks should always 
be aware of strong movements in asset prices because of their possible repercussions for financial 
stability. In this sense, asset price developments play a role in our monetary policy decisions to the 
extent  that  they  reveal  relevant  information  for  the  state  of  the  economy  and  the  outlook  for  price 
stability. In this respect, our monetary policy strategy, which gives money and credit a very prominent 
indicator role, is a great aid. Economic history has shown that in many instances strong money and 
credit  growth  has  accompanied  financial  bubbles,  whose  subsequent  bursting  then  endangered 
financial stability. 
To  summarise,  the  best  contribution  a  central  bank  can  make  to  prevent  financial  bubbles  from 
forming  and  bursting  is  to  continue  pursuing  a  monetary  policy  aimed  at  maintaining  price  stability, 
thereby contributing to a stable macro-economic environment.  
Conclusions 
I would now like to conclude. The famous English economist and essayist Walter Bagehot once said 
that  (cid:147)No  real  English  gentleman,  in  his  secret  soul,  was  ever  sorry  for  the  death  of  a  political 
economist(cid:148).9  This  statement  makes  us  wonder  not  only  about  the  state  of  economic  science  in  the 
19th century but about the way of thinking of English gentlemen as well. 
Something I do not wonder about is how the increasing importance of new technologies and financial 
markets clearly presents new challenges for monetary policy. Underestimating these challenges can 
be costly. However, there are no easy solutions available for monetary policy to deal with asset price 
bubbles.  
With the benefit of hindsight, I can say that the ECB was right to have reacted relatively cautiously 
when the  world discussed  the (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148). I remember well the criticism we faced  in late  1999 
when we did not want to revise our assumptions for trend potential GDP growth for the euro area. Now 
these critics have become quiet. Some of them have even gone to the other extreme and, in my view, 
have now become excessively pessimistic about the prospects for the euro area.  
Recent years have shown that the economic cost of adjusting to a phase of over-optimism is high. We 
have now seen two years of rather sluggish economic growth. Many of the new businesses set up in 
the late 1990s no longer exist. But costs have also had to be reduced in other, more traditional sectors 
and structural adjustments needed to be made to correct the imbalances which arose in the (cid:147)boom(cid:148) 
period. 
With these structural adjustments or, as Schumpeter put it, (cid:147)the process of creative destruction(cid:148), the 
chances  of  the  phase  of  low  economic  growth  gradually  coming  to  an  end  have  now  increased. 
Indeed,  although  there  are  still  some  downside  risks  to  this  scenario,  and  ongoing  balance  sheet 
adjustments  make  a  steep  and  swift  rise  in  economic  activity  unlikely,  the  ECB  expects  a  gradual 
recovery to occur in the course of this and next year, as imbalances that have built up are gradually 
unwinding. The ECB will continue to monitor these developments in view of its primary objective, i.e. to 
maintain price stability in the euro area. 
Thank you. 
                                                      
9  
In W. Bagehot, (cid:147)Estimates of some Englishmen and Scotsmen(cid:148), 1858. 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 5
