 Ewart Williams: The Central Bank and preparations for integrated supervision 
Address by Mr Ewart Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at a Breakfast 
Seminar  hosted  by  the  Association  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Insurance  Companies  and  the  Trinidad 
and Tobago Insurance Institute, Port of Spain, 8 July 2003. 
 Let  me  first  thank  the  Executive  of  the  Association  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Insurance  Companies 
(ATTIC), the Trinidad and Tobago Insurance Institute (TTII), as well as the entire membership for the 
invitation to address you at this Breakfast Meeting. I would hope that this is the start of a process of 
dialogue and consultation between the Central Bank, earmarked to become the regulator, and all the 
stakeholders in the industry. 
This (cid:147)integrated supervision project(cid:148) which essentially focuses on bringing the insurance companies 
and pension funds under the supervisory authority of the Central Bank is in principle part of a larger 
strategy  geared  towards  reinforcing  safety  and  soundness  while  at  the  same  time  preparing  our 
financial system to play a pivotal role in the future development of the economy. This broader financial 
sector  strategy  involves,  inter  alia,  improving  the  regulatory  framework  governing  mutual  funds  and 
credit unions, strengthening the Securities and Exchange Commission and building an efficient capital 
market that would mobilize and channel savings into long term investment. 
The planning for the Integrated Supervision Project started several years ago and was supported by a 
team of Canadian Consultants (Lawrie Savage and Associates) who worked closely with the Central 
Bank, the Ministry of Finance and major stakeholders in the Insurance Industry. 
But all this is by way of background. What I would like to do this morning is: 
(i) 
Take some time to explain the rationale behind the impending shift of supervisory authority 
for the insurance industry from the Office of the Supervisor of Insurance (OSI) to the Central 
Bank; 
Tell you what we have been doing in preparation for this shift; and 
Clarify what you can expect from us. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
You should know that very many countries, both developed and developing, have moved to integrate 
their  specialised  regulatory  agencies  into  a  single  entity.  In  a  few  cases  the  single  entity  has  been 
outside the Central Bank; the best known of these cases is the United Kingdom which has a Financial 
Services Authority (FSA) which regulates all financial institutions. The FSA is however separate and 
apart from the Bank of England. There is a variant of this model, for instance in Canada and Australia, 
where the supervision of the banking and insurance sector is done by one regulatory agency outside 
the  Central  Bank,  but  where  there  are  other  regulatory  agencies  for  other  financial  sub-sectors.  In 
Jamaica, the Central Bank continues to regulate and supervise the commercial banks and non-banks, 
but  the  rest  of  the  financial  system  is  supervised  by  a  separate  entity,  the  Financial  Services 
Commission (FSC). 
Our  Government  has  indicated  that  bringing  the  insurance  industry  and  pension  funds  within  the 
regulatory ambit of the Central Bank is a first phase and that over the longer term consideration is to 
be given to a Super Regulatory Agency which will supervise all financial services (credit unions, the 
securities industry etc.). 
What is the rationale for a single regulatory entity? 
(i) 
The increasing complexity of the financial services industry, as evidenced by the emergence 
of financial conglomerates, requires a strong institution to supervise the conglomerate as a 
whole, rather than a series of agencies supervising parts of the complex. 
Many  products  and  services  offered  to  consumers  by  the  insurance  industry  (or  the 
securities industry, for that matter) are becoming difficult to distinguish from those offered by 
deposit taking institutions. Accordingly, integrated supervision avoids the different regulatory 
treatment  of  similar  products:  it  eliminates  gaps  in  consumer  protection  and  reduces  the 
scope for regulatory arbitrage. 
(ii) 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 1
 (iii) 
Trinidad and Tobago, like most other developing countries is unfortunately short on human 
capital. The creation of a single agency avoids the problem of spreading our limited human 
resources too thinly among different specialized agencies. 
In addition to these reasons, the Central Bank sees integrated supervision as a way of facilitating the 
task of maintaining the soundness of the financial system. Recent examples worldwide have shown 
that weaknesses or breakdowns in the financial system, occurring at various points in the chain can 
lead to widespread economic crisis. We don(cid:146)t have to look too far: we have as ample evidence the 
case of Jamaica, where the collapse of the financial system in the mid 1990(cid:146)s is estimated to have 
cost taxpayers some 10% of GDP. 
In  discussing  some  of  the  factors  leading  up  to  the  financial  crisis  in  Jamaica,  the  Chairman  of 
FINSAC (the government agency charged with resolving the crisis) pointed to the country(cid:146)s indigenous 
financial sector entrepreneurs whom he thought were, (and I quote): 
     too eager to get rich; 
too bullish in risking other people(cid:146)s money; 
too eager to start at the top; 
too competitive with one another in demonstrating the trappings of success, reflected in the 
rush to form larger and more complex groups; and 
too prone to bend prudential norms and regulations. 
The FINSAC head also blamed the crisis on Jamaica(cid:146)s failure to adequately regulate and supervise 
the financial sector. He noted, in particular, that the Office of the Superintendent of Insurance, was not 
adequately  staffed  and  as  a  department  within  the  Ministry  of  Finance  did  not  appear  to  have  the 
stature needed to deal (cid:147)at eye level(cid:148) with the moguls of the insurance industry. 
This was the Jamaican situation  in the 1990s. It may  not be  our present circumstance, but  let(cid:146)s be 
frank, we have our own skeletons and we should learn from the Jamaican experience and seek to put 
our house in order. 
In the context of the integrated supervision project conducted by the Lawrie Savage group, diagnostic 
studies on several insurance companies were conducted. The data obtained from these studies, as 
well  as  information  from  the  Office  of  the  Supervisor  of  Insurance,  suggest  that  while  several 
companies operate in conformity with the statutory requirements, there are too many cases, similar to 
the Jamaican example, where the prudential norms and regulatory requirements are flouted. 
The evidence suggests that there are far too many cases of chronic statutory fund deficits, late 
filing  of  returns,  inadequate  reinsurance  and  other  areas  of  non-compliance.  The  diagnostic 
studies  also  indicate  that  the  investment  strategy  of  some  companies  requires  stricter  regulatory 
attention, in part because of limited portfolio diversification and related party transactions. 
The latest Insurance Industry Report makes reference to the need for companies to upgrade corporate 
governance  and  risk  management  structures.  It  also  identifies  market  conduct  in  the  industry  as 
another  matter  of  concern.  In  this  regard,  there  are  clearly  too  many  instances  of  inadequate  and 
delayed  settlement  of  legitimate  claims  of  policyholders  as  well  as  questionable,  if  not,  unfair  and 
deceptive marketing practices. The capacity of intermediaries to competently fulfill their role is also an 
issue  that  reportedly  comes  up  with  some  frequency.  Specifically,  there  is  a  perception  that  the 
training of intermediaries does not always keep pace with the evolution of products offered by some 
companies. 
These  are  but  some  of  the  issues  that  call  for  stronger  regulation  and  more  focused 
supervision. 
And so, what are we doing? 
As you know, Cabinet has approved that the supervision of insurance companies and pension funds 
be  integrated  with  that  of  banking  institutions  under  the  authority  of  the  existing  Bank  Inspection 
Department of the Central Bank. The legislation to effect this transfer is currently being finalized and is 
expected  to  be  presented  to  Parliament  by  the  end  of  July  or  early  August.  In  the  meantime 
preparations for the transfer are proceeding apace. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2003
 Internal re-organisation 
   A  new  structure  in  the  Bank  Inspection  Department  has  been  adopted  to  deal  with  these 
expanded supervisory responsibilities. 
The  staff  of  our  Bank  Inspection  Department  has  been  increased,  through  the 
recruitment of new graduates with finance and accounting qualifications. This cadre 
of  recruits  has  undergone  intensive  training  in  insurance  supervision.  {Incidentally, 
experience has shown that people who have worked in the insurance industry make the best 
insurance supervisors and regulators, so be on notice that we are in the market for suitable 
insurance staff.} 
We intend to supplement our domestic resources with senior-level technical assistance from 
the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, Canada. Insurance supervision is a 
highly technical and involved business and the Canadians are recognized to have developed 
a high level of expertise in this area. 
We are in the process of incorporating some of the staff of the Office of the Supervisor of Insurance of 
the Ministry of Finance into the Bank Inspection Department of the Central Bank. 
A major focus of the Central Bank will be preparing for the updating of the Insurance Act (1980) 
Because  of  rapid  financial  sector  innovation,  the  Central  Bank  is  in  the  process  of  introducing 
amendments  to  the  Financial  Institutions  Act  (FIA)  to  strengthen  the  Bank(cid:146)s  ability  to  effectively 
regulate and supervise the deposit taking institutions - for example, to deal with the new realities of 
increased cross-border lending; to conduct consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates; and 
generally, to strengthen the hand of the regulator to ensure compliance. 
It is exactly the same thing that we need to do with the insurance industry. The current insurance 
legislation (the Insurance Act 1980) was framed at a time when insurance companies operated in an 
entirely  different  environment.  Proposals  put  forward  to  amend  this  legislation  during  the  1990(cid:146)s,  to 
keep pace with industry changes, were not enacted for various reasons. In our view, there is now 
urgent need for new insurance legislation, to deal with the reality of the current day industry 
and  to  give the Central  Bank, as regulator, the required  level of authority and empowerment to act 
effectively  to  strengthen  and  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  insurance  sector.  The  new 
legislation should also bring the supervisory framework in Trinidad and Tobago into closer compliance 
with international insurance core principles, in the context of a local environment. 
A first draft of new insurance legislation was prepared last year by the Canadian consultants, (Lawrie 
Savage  and  Associates)  with  local  legal  support.  There  is  much  disagreement  as  to  the  amount  of 
industry input in the draft and there is also disagreement about the opportunity that was provided for 
local stakeholders(cid:146) comment. My understanding is that the local industry has several issues with the 
draft  and  that  a  Working  Committee  of  ATTIC  is  in  the  process  of  articulating  these  concerns  and 
making recommendations. 
I  gave  this  commitment  to  the  Executive  of  ATTIC,  when  we  met  at  the  Central  Bank  a  couple  of 
months ago and I am repeating the commitment again - that the Central Bank would work closely 
with  the  industry,  through  ATTIC,  to  formulate  legislation  that  is  appropriate  to  the  local 
environment, that is feasible to implement, but also and very importantly, that is in line with 
international  best  practices.  We  cannot  be  marching  towards  developed  country  status  and 
acquiesce into outdated financial sector legislation befitting the 1980(cid:146)s. We are ready to begin to work 
with ATTIC on this new legislation, as soon as the working group is ready with its comments. I(cid:146)m sure 
that, as reasonable people, we will arrive at the best insurance legislation for Trinidad and Tobago. 
In  terms  of  the  need  to  adopt  international  best  practices,  we  feel  strongly  that  the  new  legislation 
should cover a number of critical areas including: 
adequate minimum capital requirements 
modern standards of corporate governance 
restrictions on related party transactions 
new standards of market conduct 
corporate transactions (mergers, transfers of business, etc.) 
     BIS Review 36/2003 
 3
    financial reporting and records 
enhanced powers for the Supervisor 
clear exit rules 
Let me turn to the kinds of changes that could be expected under the new supervisory regime 
When the transfer of supervisory authority is effected, supervision will continue to be on the basis of 
the  existing  Insurance  Act.  However,  we  envisage  several  significant  changes  in  our  operational 
approach. 
Firstly, on-site examinations and continuous monitoring would supplement the current of off-site 
reporting and (cid:147)hands-off(cid:148) supervision. It is important to note that under the current legislation the OSI 
had the authority to do on-site supervision, but no inspections have ever taken place, partly because 
of  resource  constraints.  The  Central  Bank  staff  has  the  experience  with  on-site  supervision  of  the 
commercial banks for several  years, and training has been provided to the new staff that has been 
recruited to work in insurance supervision. We intend to make supervisory insurance training an 
on-going activity. 
Secondly,  while  supervision  will  continue  to  involve  the  monitoring  of  legal  compliance  and  critical 
performance ratios, as we currently do with the commercial banks, we intend to incorporate the risk-
based  approach  into  our  operational  policies  and  procedures  vis-(cid:224)-vis  the  insurance  industry.  I  am 
certain  that  many  insurance  companies  have  already  incorporated  risk  management  techniques  in 
their operations and are very familiar with the approach. 
In  summary,  as  regulator,  our  approach  will  be  to  identify  areas  of  higher  risk  in  each  institution(cid:146)s 
operations  and  to  work  with  the  management  to  reduce  these  risks  to  acceptable  levels.  The  risk-
based supervisory approach is recognized to be ideal for identifying problems at an early stage rather 
than attempting to fix them after they have developed. This approach will place focus on corporate 
governance requiring the Board of Directors and Senior Management to take full responsibility that 
their corporations operate in accordance with sound business and financial practices. 
I would like to emphasise that with the risk-based approach our supervisory teams will need to 
have access to senior management to discuss business strategy and future plans. That(cid:146)s what 
we currently do with the banks and that(cid:146)s what we would expect to do with the insurance companies. 
Procedures  and  policy  manuals  to  allow  for  risk-based  supervision  and  regulatory  compliance  are 
being finalized. The Central Bank is also developing new prudential and solvency requirements for the 
insurance industry that conform to best practice. We plan to engage the industry in consultations on 
these matters. 
We propose to commence these on-site visits soon after assuming our responsibilities and after we 
have  conducted  a  number  of  outreach  sessions  so  that  the  industry  is  prepared  for  the  process. 
Obviously,  with some thirty (30) insurance companies we  would need to start  with a small carefully 
selected  sample.  As  we  currently  do  with  the  commercial  banks,  the  findings  of  each  on-site 
examination will be documented in a formal report which will be discussed with the management of the 
institution  before  we  finalize  and  submit  to  the  Minister  of  Finance.  The  report  will  also  include 
recommendations for correcting the deficiencies identified, within specified timeframes. 
In closing, let me re-affirm that we at the Central Bank are looking forward to the challenge that the 
transfer of supervisory responsibility will surely bring. We are committed to working with the insurance 
industry  in  an  atmosphere  of  understanding  and  mutual  respect,  to  have  integrated  supervision 
implemented  in  an  effective  manner  that  benefits  the  industry  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Our 
mission is the same as yours: we want an industry that adequately satisfies the expectations of 
policy  holders:  that  instills  confidence  and  respect:  that  contributes  to  the  strengthening  of 
savings and investment, in the interest of long term economic viability. 
Let me assure  you that the objective of the Central Bank as regulator is not to stand in the  way of 
structural changes in the industry. Insurance companies - like all other firms in the financial sector - 
need to respond constructively to changing conditions; this could mean more mergers, more product 
innovation and the taking on of new risks. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2003
 Well-managed institutions in strong financial condition should have great freedom. The Central Bank 
will give weak companies time to manage themselves back to financial health and will also develop 
appropriate exit strategies for those which can no longer be viable. 
I  invite  the  stakeholders  in  the  industry  -  ATTIC,  TTII,  the  Brokers  Association  -  to  work  with  the 
Central  Bank  to  meet  these  objectives.  It(cid:146)s  in  all  our  interest  to  have  strong  and  effective 
regulation that meets international standards. Stakeholders can and should bring peer pressure to 
bear on companies that do not play by the rules or flaunt best practices, since a few non-compliant 
operations can present industry-wide risks or even threaten the stability of the financial system. 
Thanks again for inviting me. 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 5
