 John Hurley: Economic developments in Ireland and other issues 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, at the presentation of the Annual Report 2002, Dublin, 23 June 2003. 
 The international context for the Irish economy has been difficult for some time. The expected pick-up 
in  economic  growth  internationally  has  failed  to  materialise,  primarily  due  to  a  series  of  adverse 
shocks.  Growth  in  the  US,  though  weak,  is  still  better  than  that  of  the  euro  area  where  economic 
performance has been disappointing. It would now appear that the euro area recovery will not begin to 
gather  pace  until  early  2004.  Against  this  background,  it  is  not  surprising  that  economic  growth  in 
Ireland has decelerated sharply over the past few years. Real GNP growth last year was only 0.6 per 
cent. Our forecast at this point for the Irish economy this year is for GNP growth of about 1‰ percent 
(GDP 2(cid:190) per cent). This represents a small downward revision of the GNP forecast of 1(cid:190) per cent 
(GDP 3(cid:190) per cent) in the Spring Bulletin; the revision reflects the postponement of a global recovery. 
Our GNP forecast is an improvement on last year, but it is still well below potential growth.  
On  balance,  the  economy  has  been  performing  as  well  as  can  be  expected  in  this  difficult  global 
environment  and  after  a  period  of  domestic  overheating.  While  growth  was  modest  last  year, 
nonetheless,  the  economy  has  retained  the  substantial  gains  in  living  standards  and  employment 
achieved since 1994. Between 1994 and 2001, GNP and employment growth averaged 8 per cent and 
5 per cent a year, respectively. To date, the Irish economy has proved to be fairly resilient in the face 
of the weaker international economy. There is now a greater degree of flexibility in the economy than 
in previous years and this is essential in a less benign economic environment.  
Even though  the economy has, to date, performed relatively  well,  there are  a  number of significant 
risks to the resumption of trend growth. Apart from the weak international economy, there are issues of 
deteriorating competitiveness driven by domestic inflation and a rapidly appreciating euro; since the 
start  of  2002  the  euro  has  appreciated  by  32  per  cent  and  14  per  cent  against  the  US  dollar  and 
sterling,  respectively.  The  threats  to  competitiveness  have  become  more  stark,  with  the  Irish  price 
level  currently  estimated  to  be  some  12  per  cent  higher  than  that  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole. 
Although our inflation rate by year-end may be less than 3 per cent, it is still likely to be twice that of 
the  euro  area.  This  underlines  the  need  to  continue  to  focus  domestic  policies  on  promoting 
competitiveness.  
So far as fiscal policy is concerned, the commitment to limit the increase in public spending to 7 per 
cent and to hold the General Government deficit to 0.7 per cent of GDP is to be welcomed. Adherence 
to this target should help to restrain inflation and help competitiveness.  
In  the  pay  area,  the  increase  in  private  sector  pay  this  year,  on  foot  of  the  new  social  partnership 
agreement, will be of the order of 3‰ per cent, assuming no upward drift. This is close to that in the 
euro area generally. However, public sector pay increases will be significantly higher than 3‰ per cent. 
This underlines the imperative of delivering productivity improvements that are linked to benchmarking 
increases  in  the  period  ahead.  Continuing  efforts  are  required  to  improve  productivity  performance 
generally, particularly in the sheltered sectors of the economy and in the indigenous traded sectors. 
This is especially important in the light of the rapid strengthening of the euro in the recent past and the 
risk that it could further appreciate.  
The Bank has repeatedly expressed its concern about the excessively high level of mortgage credit 
growth. There has been very little improvement in this, with the increase still running at 24 per cent. 
The  Bank  has  written  to  the  credit  institutions  on  this  matter  and  it  has  followed  this  up  by  on-site 
inspections. The results of these are being processed at the present time.  
The Bank has also been concerned about the pick up in house prices in 2002 which continued into the 
early months of 2003. The property market now appears to have slowed somewhat. It appears that 
this easing has been underpinned by the fact that the market is now closer to balance than previously. 
However,  we  do  not  consider  that  a  sharp  downward  correction  is  likely  unless  there  were  some 
external shock that would cause a hard landing of the economy  
BIS Review 31/2003 
 1
 Financial Stability  
As  was  the  case  last  year,  this  year(cid:146)s  Annual  Report  contains  an  extensive  Chapter  on  Financial 
Stability. The key conclusion is that the Irish financial system continues to be stable. It is sufficiently 
well capitalised, diversified and healthy to weather an adverse shock. However, the deterioration of the 
performance  of  the  global  economy  -  especially  the  delayed  recovery  -  and  uncertainty  in  financial 
markets since the last Financial Stability Report has eroded its resilience somewhat over the last year.  
Monetary Policy  
The decision of the ECB Governing Council at its meeting on 5 June to reduce its key interest rates by 
0.5 percentage points to 2 per cent was made in the context of a more benign outlook for inflation and 
of subdued economic growth in the euro area. This brings the total reduction to 1.25 percentage points 
since last December.  
As  you  are  aware,  following  its  review  of  monetary  policy  strategy  at  its  meeting  of  8  May,  the 
Governing Council clarified its definition of price stability. Price stability is now defined as year-on-year 
price increases of close to, but below, 2 per cent over the medium term. The Governing Council also 
confirmed that its monetary policy decisions would continue to be based on a comprehensive analysis 
of the risks to price stability under both pillars of the monetary policy strategy: the general economic 
assessment and the monetary dimension.  
Supervision  
The Government(cid:146)s decision to establish the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority was passed 
into  law  on  1  May  2003.  We  have  worked  closely  throughout  the  implementation  phase  with  the 
Chairman,  Brian  Patterson,  and  the  Interim  Board  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  to  the  new 
arrangement.  
The principal task of the new Financial Regulator is the regulation of all financial institutions in Ireland. 
In line with the legislation there is an enhanced focus on consumer protection.  
The  Financial  Regulator  is  independent.  There  is,  however,  a  functional  relationship  between  the 
prudential  area  of  the  Financial  Regulator  and  the  Central  Bank  with  regard  to  overall  financial 
stability.  The  Annual  Report  gives  a  comprehensive  account  of  supervisory  practices  and  policy 
developments during 2002. In future, the Financial Regulator will publish a separate Annual Report.  
Financial Results  
The Bank(cid:146)s profits for 2002 amounted to (cid:128)829 million, an increase of (cid:128)266 million over 2001. Of this 
increase,  (cid:128)240  million  arose  from  the  write-off  of  unredeemed  Irish  pound  banknotes.  Bank  profits 
since 2000 have been exceptionally high primarily due to net exchange rate gains; these amounted to 
(cid:128)311 million in 2002.  
We had a successful year managing the Bank(cid:146)s large investment portfolio of (cid:128)8.4 billion. This yielded 
a rate of return of 5.47 per cent, a little more than that on the benchmark portfolio. This rate of return 
does not include exchange rate gains.  
Miscellaneous  
I should also say that, at my invitation, Dr. T.K. Whitaker was kind enough to contribute to the Report 
some personal reflections. The Report also contains a Chronology of Developments pertinent to the 
Bank over the past decade.  
2 
 BIS Review 31/2003
