 Alan Greenspan: The economic outlook 
Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Joint Economic Committee, US Congress, Washington, 21 May 2003. 
 Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before the Joint Economic Committee. As you will 
recall, when I appeared here last November, I emphasized the extraordinary resilience manifested by 
the United States economy in recent years - the cumulative result of increased flexibility over the past 
quarter  century.  Since  the  middle  of  2000,  our  economy  has  withstood  serious  blows:  a  significant 
decline  in equity  prices, a  substantial fall in capital spending, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 
confidence-debilitating revelations of corporate malfeasance, and wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Any 
combination of these shocks would arguably have induced a severe economic contraction two or three 
decades  ago.  Yet  remarkably,  over  the  past  three  years,  activity  has  expanded,  on  balance  -  an 
outcome offering clear evidence of a flexible, more resilient, economic system.  
Once again this  year, our economy has struggled to  surmount new  obstacles. As the tensions  with 
Iraq  increased  early  in  2003,  uncertainties  surrounding  a  possible  war  contributed  to  a  softening  in 
economic activity. Oil prices moved up close to $40 a barrel in February, stock prices tested their lows 
of last fall, and consumer and business confidence ebbed. Although in January there were some signs 
of  a  post-holiday  pickup  in  retail  sales  other  than  motor  vehicles,  spending  was  little  changed,  on 
balance,  over  the  following  three  months  as  a  gasoline  price  surge  drained  consumer  purchasing 
power and severe winter weather kept many shoppers at home.  
Businesses, too, were reluctant to initiate new projects in such a highly uncertain environment. Hiring 
slumped,  capital  spending  plans  were  put  on  hold,  and  inventories  were  held  to  very  lean  levels. 
Collectively, households and businesses hesitated to make decisions, pending news about the timing, 
success,  and  cost  of  military  action  -  factors  that  could  significantly  alter  the  outcomes  of  those 
decisions.  
The start of the  war  and  its early successes, especially the safeguarding  of the Iraqi oilfields,  were 
greeted positively by financial and commodities markets. Stock prices rallied, risk spreads narrowed, 
oil prices dropped sharply, and the dour mood that had gripped consumers started to lift, precursors 
that  historically  have  led  to  improved  economic  activity.  The  quick  conclusion  of  the  conflict 
subsequently added to financial gains.  
We do not yet have sufficient information on economic activity following the end of hostilities to make a 
firm  judgment  about  the  current  underlying  strength  of  the  real  economy.  Incoming  data  on  labor 
markets and production have been disappointing. Payrolls fell further in April, and industrial production 
declined  as  well.  Because  of  the  normal  lags  in  scheduling  production  and  in  making  employment 
decisions, these movements likely reflect business decisions that, for the most part, were made prior 
to  the  start  of  the  war,  and  many  more  weeks  of  data  will  be  needed  to  confidently  discern  the 
underlying trends in these areas.  
One  reassuring  development  that  has  been  sustained  through  this  extended  period  of  economic 
weakness  has  been  the  performance  of  productivity.  To  the  surprise  of  most  analysts,  labor 
productivity  has  continued  to  post  solid  gains.  Businesses  are  apparently  continuing  to  discover 
unexploited  areas  of  cost  reduction  that  had  accumulated  during  the  boom  years  of  1995  to  2000 
when the projected huge returns from market expansion dulled incentives for seemingly mundane cost 
savings. The ability of business managers to reduce costs, especially labor costs, through investment 
or restructuring is, of course, one reason that labor markets have been so weak.  
Looking  ahead,  the  consensus  expectation  for  a  pickup  in  economic  activity  is  not  unreasonable, 
though the timing and extent of that improvement continue to be uncertain. The stance of monetary 
policy remains accommodative, and conditions in financial markets appear supportive of an increased 
pace  of  activity.  Interest  rates  remain  low,  and  funds  seem  to  be  readily  available  to  creditworthy 
borrowers.  These  factors,  along  with  the  ability  of  households  to  tap  equity  accrued  in  residential 
properties, should continue to bolster consumer spending and the purchase of new homes.  
The recent declines in energy prices are another positive factor in the economic outlook. The price of 
West Texas intermediate crude oil dropped back to below $26 per barrel by the end of April, but as 
indications of a delay in the restoration of Iraqi oil exports became evident and geopolitical risks crept 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 1
 back in, prices have risen to near $30 a barrel - a worrisome trend if continued. Nonetheless, the price 
of crude oil is still about $10 per barrel below its peak in February. This decline has already shown 
through  to  the  price  of  gasoline  in  May.  Some  modest  further  declines  in  gas  prices  are  likely  in 
coming weeks, as marketers(cid:146) profit margins continue to back off from their elevated levels of March 
and April to more normal levels.  
In contrast, prices for natural gas have increased sharply in response to very tight supplies. Working 
gas  in  storage  is  presently  at  extremely  low  levels,  and  the  normal  seasonal  rebuilding  of  these 
inventories seems to be behind the typical schedule. The colder-than-average winter played a role in 
producing  today(cid:146)s  tight  supply  situation  as  did  the  inability  of  heightened  gas  well  drilling  to 
significantly  augment  net  marketed  production.  Canada,  our  major  source  of  gas  imports,  has  little 
room  to  expand  shipments  to  the  United  States.  Our  limited  capacity  to  import  liquified  natural  gas 
effectively  restricts  our  access  to  the  world(cid:146)s  abundant  supplies  of  natural  gas.  The  current  tight 
domestic  natural  gas  market  reflects  the  increases  in  demand  over  the  past  two  decades.  That 
demand has been spurred by myriad new uses for natural gas in industry and by the increased use of 
natural gas as a clean-burning source of electric power.  
On balance, recent movements in energy prices seem likely to be a favorable influence on the overall 
economy. In the short run, lower energy bills should give a boost to the real incomes of households 
and to business profits. To be sure, world energy markets obviously remain susceptible to politically 
driven supply disruptions, as has been evident recently from the events in Venezuela and Nigeria. But, 
even taking account of these risks, futures markets project crude oil prices to fall over the longer run, 
consistent with the notion that current prices are above the long-term supply price of oil.  
As has been the case for some time, the central question about the outlook remains whether business 
firms  will  quicken  the  pace  of  investment  now  that  some,  but  by  no  means  all,  of  the  geopolitical 
uncertainties  have  been  resolved.  A  modestly  encouraging  sign  is  the  backlog  of  orders  for 
nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft, which has been moving up in recent months. Moreover, 
recent earnings reports suggest that the profitability of many businesses is on the mend. That said, 
firms  still  appear  hesitant  to  spend  and  hire,  and  we  need  to  remain  mindful  of  the  possibility  that 
lingering business caution could be an impediment to improved economic performance.  
One new uncertainty in the global economic outlook has been the outbreak of severe acute respiratory 
syndrome  (SARS)  in  Southeast  Asia  and  elsewhere.  This  epidemic  has  hit  the  economies  of  Hong 
Kong and China particularly hard, as tourism and business travel have been severely curtailed and as 
measures to contain the spread of the virus have held down retail sales.  
To  date,  the  effects  of  SARS  on  the  U.S.  economy  have  been  minimal.  Airlines  have  obviously 
suffered another serious blow, and some U.S. multinational corporations are reporting reduced foreign 
sales. But the effects on other industries have been small. Initially, there had been some concern that 
SARS would disrupt the just-in-time inventory systems of U.S. manufacturers. Many of those systems 
rely on components from Asia, and any disruption in the flow of these goods has the potential to affect 
production in the United States. So far, however, U.S. manufacturing output has not been noticeably 
affected.  
In recent months, inflation has dropped to very low levels. As I noted earlier, energy prices already are 
reacting to the decline in crude oil prices, and core consumer price inflation has been minimal. Inflation 
is now sufficiently low that it no longer appears to be much of a factor in the economic calculations of 
households and businesses. Indeed, we have reached a point at which, in the judgment of the Federal 
Open Market Committee, the probability of an unwelcome substantial fall in inflation over the next few 
quarters, though minor, exceeds that of a pickup in inflation.  
Mr. Chairman, the economic information received in recent weeks has not, in my judgment, materially 
altered  the  outlook.  Nonetheless,  the  economy  continues  to  be  buffeted  by  strong  cross  currents. 
Recent  readings  on  production  and  employment  have  been  on  the  weak  side,  but  the  economic 
fundamentals  -  including  the  improved  conditions  in  financial  markets  and  the  continued  growth  in 
productivity - augur well for the future.  
2 
 BIS Review 23/2003
