 Ishrat Husain: Regulatory strategy of the State Bank of Pakistan 
Address delivered by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the 18th Annual 
General  Conference  on  Pakistan  Society  of  Development  Economics  held  at  Islamabad  on 
15 January 2003. 
 The two major determinants of functional efficiency of financial system are market structure and the 
regulatory framework and the challenge for any Central Bank is to strike a right balance between the 
two. Over regulation can stifle financial innovation while an imperfect market structure can impair the 
efficiency of the system and penalize the consumer interests.  
Market  structure  consists  of  the  degree  of  competition,  and  interlocking  control  between  financial 
institutions and business enterprises as well as the degree of specialization within the financial sector. 
It is influenced by the internal organization and management of financial intermediation. These in turn, 
are affected by the degree of government ownership and control. 
The regulatory framework includes regulations imposed both for monetary policy as well as prudential 
purposes.  An  adequate  framework  can  help  ensure  financial  stability  by  reducing  the  probability  of 
bank  failures  and  the  costs  of  those  that  do  occur.  Regulation  is  about  changing  the  behavior  of 
regulated institutions because unconstrained market behavior tends to produce socially sub-optimum 
outcomes.  The  regulator  therefore  has  the  responsibility  to  move  the  system  towards  a  socially 
optimum outcome. 
The  strategy  followed  by  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  aims  at  improving  the  market  structure  and 
competition on one hand and optimizing the overall regulatory regime on the other.  
The steps taken to stimulate completion and improve the market structure consist of lowering entry 
barriers, abolishing interest rate ceilings, privatizating government owned banks, promoting mergers 
and  consolidation  of  financial  institutions,  enlarging  the  economies  of  scope  for  banks,  liberalizing 
bank branching policy, and removing directed credit regulations. 
The so called dichotomy between regulation and market mechanism is in practice a false one. There 
needs to be appropriate internal incentives for management to behave in appropriate ways and the 
regulator has a role in ensuring that internal incentives are compatible with the regulatory objectives. 
Market  imperfections  and  failures,  information  asymmetries,  externalities  and  moral  hazards 
associated  with  safety  net  arrangements  make  it  difficult  in  developing  countries  for  incentive 
structures within financial institutions to be aligned with regulatory objectives. 
Let us first define as to what the regulatory objectives of the State Bank of Pakistan are. These can be 
summarized as: 
(a) 
Avoiding adverse selection in bank entry by ensuring that individuals likely to misuse banks 
do not get bank licenses. For this purpose, the owners are required to provide equity capital 
of  some  considerable  magnitude,  cross  ownerships  are  discouraged  and  character 
stipulations for bank ownership are laid down. 
Aligning the incentives of bank owners with those of depositors by making sure that the bank 
owners  stand  to  make  substantial  losses  in  the  event  of  insolvency.  Capital  adequacy 
requirements and loan loss provisions fulfill this role. 
Preventing  excessive  risk  taking  more  generally.  This  means  limiting  bank  holdings  of 
excessively risky  assets, preventing lending to related parties, requiring diversification and 
making  sure  that  banks  have  appropriate  credit  appraisal,  evaluation  and  monitoring 
procedures in place. 
(b) 
(c) 
Components of regulatory regime 
What are the various components of the regulatory regime which can help achieve these regulatory 
objectives and  what is the State  Bank doing in respect to  each  of these components. There are at 
least seven core components which form the basis of the regulatory regime in Pakistan. 
BIS Review 3/2003 
 1
 First, prudential regulations have been established by the SBP, disseminated widely and act as the 
ground  rules  and  guidelines  for  the  financial  industry.  Mostly  these  regulations  pertain  to  capital 
adequacy, quality of assets, classification and provisioning of loan losses, liquidity requirements, risk 
concentration and management etc. Basel I capital ratios are enforced strictly and action taken against 
those falling short.  Although the stock of non-performing loans is being tackled through a variety  of 
measures  the  flow  of  loans  does  not  suffer from  this  problem.  Since  1997,  only  5  percent  of  loans 
disbursed  have  become  non-performing  indicating  an  overall  improvement  in  the  quality  of  banking 
assets in Pakistan.  
Second,  once  the  regulations  have  been  put  in  place  the  SBP  monitors  and  supervises  the  banks. 
This  is  done  through  an  integrated  approach  of  on-site  inspection,  off-site  surveillance  and  market 
information. Supervision techniques have been aligned with the best practices of other Central banks 
in the world and the CAMELs rating system is used to assess the health of the banks. A banking desk 
responsible for monitoring a few banks continuously reviews the available data and flags early warning 
in cases where prompt corrective actions are required. The Enforcement Unit then moves in and gets 
the remedial action implemented. 
Third, the incentive structures faced by regulatory agencies, consumers and banks have to be aligned 
to the maximum extent feasible. Mark-to-market valuation of assets, forced sale value of collaterals, 
greater and regular disclosure of financial information, mandatory credit ratings of the banks are some 
of the tools, which have been used for this purpose. Consultation between regulators and regulated 
institutions ensures consistency between external regulations and internal risk control procedures. The 
SBP has developed a regular consultative mechanism whereby the views and comments of Pakistan 
Banking Association are sought and incorporated in the draft policies, circulars and regulations. 
Fourth, the role of market discipline and monitoring has to be enhanced. Privatization of nationalized 
commercial banks (NCBs) is largely motivated by this particular consideration because these banks 
have  ill-defined  incentive  structure  and  are  not  subject  to  the  normal  disciplinary  pressures  of  the 
market. Their owners - the Government - do not systematically monitor their behavior and the market 
cannot exercise the corporate controls which, through the threat of removing incumbent management, 
is a discipline on managers to be efficient and not endanger the solvency of their banks. It is quite well 
known that management of the NCBs have faced pressures to make loans on political considerations. 
Interference  by  the  ministers  and  bureaucrats  in  the  operations  of  such  banks  and  the  unwitting 
encouragement  of  bad  banking  practices  can  itself  become  a  powerful  ingredient  in  bank  distress. 
After Habib Bank’s impending privatization, 80 percent of the banking assets in Pakistan will be owned 
and managed by the private sector and thus become subject to market discipline and monitoring. It is 
for this reason that 20 percent of the shares of National Bank of Pakistan have been off-loaded for 
flotation at the Karachi Stock Exchange. The feedback from the market in terms of its share prices will 
act as a powerful disciplining tool to the management and the board. 
Fifth, intervention arrangements in the event of compliance failures ought to be credible and biting as 
they provide a deterrent against errant behavior by the bank managers, owners and directors. In the 
last three years, the SBP has cancelled the licence of one of the commercial banks - the first of its 
kind, has changed the ownership of two banks, allowed mergers and amalgamation of half a dozen 
banks, forced change in boards of directors and debarred a few directors and managers from banking 
profession.  These  punitive  measures  and  weeding  out  process  have  helped  strengthen  the  overall 
health and soundness of financial system in Pakistan. 
Sixth,  the  role  of  internal  corporate  governance  arrangements  within  financial  institutions  has  been 
defined, reinforced and closely monitored. In addition to the code of corporate governance prescribed 
by  the  SECP  the  banks  have  been  provided  explicitly  defined  criteria  for  the  selection  of  Chief 
Executives and Directors. Family representation on the Boards has been limited to 25 percent and the 
remaining  directors  have  to  be  drawn  from  non-family  members.  External  audit  firms  have  been 
screened, categorized and rated for purpose of auditing the financial institutions. Two top firms were 
blacklisted and this sent a strong message to the audit community for upgrading the quality of their 
audit. Conflict of interest rules have been explicitly laid down barring those having any potential conflict 
from becoming involved in the management and oversight of banks. 
Seventh,  the  accountability  arrangements  applied  to  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  have  been 
strengthened  to  minimize  the  potential  dangers  arising  from  its  monopolist  regulator  position.  An 
independent Board of Directors consisting of seven eminent persons of repute and integrity provide 
the  overall  oversight  on  the  affairs  of  the  SBP  and  its  management.  Greater  disclosure  and 
transparency have been introduced and International accounting standards with a new Audit Charter 
  have been put in place. The financial reports and accounts of the SBP are audited both by the Auditor 
General of Pakistan and firms of established external auditors. A Monetary  and Fiscal Coordination 
Board headed by the Minister of Finance reviews the monetary and exchange rate policies of the SBP. 
Quarterly and Annual Reports on the state of economy and the affairs of SBP are regularly submitted 
to the Parliament which, at times, holds hearings and asks questions on important issues. The IMF 
has  made  an  assessment  of  the  SBP’s  corporate  governance  and  Internal  Controls  under  its 
safeguards  clause  and  found  them  in  consonance  with  international  practices.  We  also  observe 
various International Codes and standards on Corporate governance, Auditing and Accounting. 
Capacity building within the SBP 
Most importantly, the State Bank has to have a strong capacity and core competencies to implement 
the above strategy. To this end, a major restructuring and reform program is under implementation for 
the last several years. The largest automation project in Pakistan today is the Technology upgradation 
program  at  the  S.B.P.  It  will  cost  more  than  $24  million  at  its  completion  but  equip  the  SBP  with 
automated  banking  solutions,  enterprise  resource  planning  tools,  data  warehouse  and  connectivity 
and net working among its field offices and the headquarters. SBP will be able to access real on-time 
information on the banking institutions and not wait for three months to receive the reports. The ability 
of the SBP to take timely corrective and remedial actions will thus be enhanced. 
The most critical asset of a regulating institution is its human resource base. The SBP is undertaking 
massive  retraining  of  its  professional  staff  in  technical  skills  and  recruiting  talented  young  men  and 
women directly from the market through a rigorous merit based competitive process at all levels. For 
example,  11000  applications  were  received  for  entry  level  Banking  Officers’  positions.  About  2600 
qualified at the written exam and 50 were finally selected after interview. Those selected receive a 9 
months extensive training at NIBAF and 6 months on-the-job training in commercial banks and various 
departments  of  the  SBP.  Middle  level  managers  have  also  been  recruited  through  the  same 
competitive  process.  We  have  hired  more  than  20  Chartered  and  Management  Accountants,  more 
than  100  high  level  IT  Professionals  including  three  from  Wall  Street  to  fill  in  our  skill  gap.  Higher 
educational  opportunities  are  available  to  staff  to  improve  their  academic  qualifications  or  upgrade 
their  professional  skills.  Foreign  training  and  attachment  with  Central  Banks  in  England,  Australia, 
Malaysia, Singapore and Federal Reserve keep the staff abreast with the recent developments and 
techniques of central banking. The SBP provides full scholarships to young Pakistanis who can obtain 
admission to Ph.D. program in Economics and Finance at any of the top 20 universities of the world. 
The Bank has also set up endowed chairs at Economics Departments of five Pakistani universities to 
upgrade the quality of Economics Education. 
Another element of SBP reform program is business process re-engineering under which the existing 
procedures, processes and reporting requirement are being streamlined, simplified and redundancies 
eliminated. With the commissioning of the data  warehouse project the banks will no longer need to 
earmark  dozens  of  their  employees  to  fill  in  the  various  forms  and  reports  required  by  the  SBP. 
Delegation of authority has empowered officials at the various rungs of hierarchy to take decisions and 
dispose of the cases. 
As part of its organizational restructuring the SBP has set up an independent subsidiary - the Banking 
Services Corporation (BSC) to handle all retail banking functions. All the 16 field offices have been 
transferred  to  the  control  of  the  BSC  which  is  run  by  a  Managing  Director.  This  arrangement  has 
allowed the Governor and Senior Management to concentrate their attention and energies on the core 
central banking functions. 
Despite the above achievements we are fully aware that there is no room for complacency. The world 
around  us  is  changing  rapidly  and  we  have  to  keep  up  with  these  changes  and  adapt  ourselves 
constantly  to  the  new  requirements.  A  dynamic  organization  cannot  afford  to  stand  still  we  will  be 
faced  with  unforeseen  events.  But  if  the  SBP  is  transformed  into  a  flexible,  agile  and  competent 
organization the chances of meeting the new challenges successfully will be high. We have still a long 
and arduous path to travel.  
 