 Jarle Bergo: Monetary policy and its role in economic policy 
Address  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Confederation of Vocational Unions, Oslo, 7 February 2003.  
The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive 
Board’s monetary policy meeting on 22 January and on previous speeches. Please note that the text below may 
differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
 The objective of monetary policy is to ensure nominal stability.  
There  were  wide  fluctuations  in  the  Norwegian  economy  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Economic 
developments were marked by high and variable inflation. Inflation accelerated in the beginning of the 
1980s and it took a long time before it fell. 
The absence of a nominal anchor was one of the main reasons behind these pronounced swings in 
the  Norwegian  economy.  With  a  policy  of  low  interest  rates  and  devaluations,  inflation  took  root. 
Nominal interest rates were kept at a low level even though inflation and the value of tax-deductible 
interest expenditure rose. Frequent devaluations from 1976 were not able to prevent a decline in the 
manufacturing  sector.  On  the  contrary,  they  proved  to  be  self-reinforcing.  The  wide  fluctuations 
culminated in a credit boom in the mid-1980s, followed by a deep recession and high unemployment 
towards the end of the 1980s.  
From the mid-1980s, during and after the credit bubble, it was recognised that a substantial revision of 
economic  policy  would  be  necessary  and  that  the  problems  created  by  inflation  had  to  be  taken 
seriously. The exchange rate was chosen as the nominal anchor. Deteriorating competitiveness due to 
high wage growth would no longer be remedied by means of devaluations. Instead, imbalances in the 
labour market would be addressed by means of a counter-cyclical policy. Substantial emphasis was 
placed  on  the  importance  of  wage  formation  for  developments  in  employment.  Only  when  wage 
growth  dropped  below  the  level  of  our  trading  partners  did  unemployment  begin  to  fall  and  the 
manufacturing  sector  began  to  pick  up. Thus,  the  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  was  not  introduced  in 
order to strengthen the internationally exposed business sector. On the contrary, it was a breach in the 
approach  whereby  monetary  policy  and  “exchange  rate  policy”  had  been  oriented  towards 
safeguarding these sectors. The fixed exchange rate was an intermediate target for achieving low and 
stable inflation.  
The exchange rate remained stable up to the autumn of 1986, partly because wage growth was low 
and aggregate demand did not fuel pressures in the economy. Gradually, the krone began to show 
wider  fluctuations.  The  experience  of  the  last  half  of  the  1990s  demonstrated  that  monetary  policy 
cannot  fine-tune  the  exchange  rate.  Developments  in  international  financial  markets  led  to  more 
pronounced fluctuations. High petroleum revenues, fiscal slippage and expectations of increased use 
of  petroleum  revenues  also  contributed  to  this.  Wage  growth  increased.  The  exchange  rate  was 
therefore no longer suitable as a nominal anchor.  
A little less than two years ago, the Storting and the Government adopted new guidelines for economic 
policy. According to the mandate, Norges Bank shall orient monetary policy towards low and stable 
inflation. The inflation target is set at 2.5%. The introduction of new guidelines for economic policy in 
March  2001  and  the  conduct  of  fiscal  policy  have  altered  the  interplay  between  economic  policy 
components. 
In the past, growth in public spending was to be reduced or other fiscal policy measures implemented 
if the labour market was tight and wage growth high. With today’s guidelines, it is primarily monetary 
policy that is tightened in a similar situation. The rise in labour costs is important when Norges Bank 
assesses the inflation outlook and sets interest rates. Excessive wage growth, in both manufacturing 
and  other  industries,  will  affect  the  internationally  exposed  sector  through  two  channels.  First,  high 
wage growth will in itself reduce earnings and employment. Second, the interest rate will be increased. 
Normally,  this  will  lead  to  an  appreciation  of  the  krone,  with  a  further  reduction  in  earnings  and 
employment. The manufacturing sector will therefore feel the effects of excessive wage growth to an 
even  greater  extent  than  earlier.  Since  the  new  fiscal  guidelines,  which  entail  an  increased  use  of 
petroleum revenues, were introduced during a period with a tight labour market, it was to be expected 
that the krone would be strong at times.  
BIS Review 6/2003 
 1
 Interest rates influence inflation throught their impact on domestic demand and on the market for NOK. 
When interest rates rise, it becomes more profitable to save and more costly to borrow. This dampens 
consumption and investment and thereby aggregate demand. Lower demand in turn curbs the rise in 
prices and wages.  
Higher  interest  rates  make  it  more  attractive  to  invest  in  NOK  and  borrow  in  foreign  currency. 
Therefore, higher interest rates normally lead to an appreciation of the krone. This makes imported 
goods cheaper. In addition, a strong krone reduces activity, profitability and the ability to pay in the 
internationally exposed sector. 
It is important to be aware of the relationships between employment, output and inflation. If there is a 
shortage of labour and other economic resources, a tight monetary policy stance will reduce inflation 
by  affecting  aggregate  demand.  Conversely,  when  unemployment  is  high,  low  interest  rates  will 
stimulate demand and contribute to stable wages and prices. A monetary policy stance that is aimed 
at stabilising inflation will thus also contribute to stabilising aggregate output and employment.  
The time it takes for a change in interest rates to affect demand and inflation will vary. Our analyses1 
indicate that an interest rate increase of 1 percentage point over two years reduced mainland GDP by 
¾ -1 percentage point after two years. The effect is thereafter reversed. The inflation rate is reduced 
by an estimated 0.20-0.35 percentage point after two years and 0.30-0.40 percentage point after three 
years. We have taken into account that an interest rate change will affect the krone exchange rate. It is 
assumed that monetary policy credibility remains intact.  
Developments in the krone exchange rate have a considerable impact on inflation in a small economy 
such as Norway. Our analyses, which are based on relationships in the Norwegian economy over the 
past 20-30 years, indicate that it takes some time for the effects of a lasting change in the exchange 
rate to pass through to consumer price inflation. The effect seems to be strongest the second year and 
then shows a gradual decline.  A sustained appreciation of the effective krone exchange rate of 5% 
could reduce the rise in consumer prices by a quarter percentage point the first year, by close to half a 
percentage point the second year and about a quarter percentage point the third year2. 
Our analyses indicate that a sustained increase in wage growth of 1 percentage point will, in isolation, 
push up consumer price inflation by a quarter percentage point the first year and half a percentage 
point the second year. 
The mandate implies that the interest rate must be adapted to the outlook for the Norwegian economy. 
If it appears that inflation will be higher than 2½% with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will 
be  increased.  If  it  appears  that  inflation  will  be  lower  than  2½%  with  unchanged  interest  rates,  the 
interest  rate  will  be  reduced.  This  orientation  of  monetary  policy  will  normally  also  contribute  to 
stabilising output and employment. 
The  impact  of  monetary  policy  occurs  with  long  and  variable  lags.  Our  analyses  indicate  that  a 
substantial  share  of  the  effects  occurs  within  two  years.  A  time  horizon  of  two  years  when  setting 
interest  rates  allows  monetary  policy  to  contribute  to  stabilising  production.  This  horizon  prevents 
monetary policy in itself from causing unnecessary fluctuations in the economy.  
The sharp rise in labour costs in recent years carries with it a potential for higher unemployment. The 
interest rate is an effective instrument for countering lower demand and growing unemployment when 
measures to stimulate demand do not translate into higher wage growth or unstable financial markets. 
However, there is little monetary policy can do to prevent an increase in unemployment that is driven 
by  high  cost  inflation.  A  pre-condition  for  an  effective  interplay  between  wage  settlements  and 
monetary policy is that the response pattern in monetary policy  is known and consistent. When the 
response pattern in monetary policy is known and consistent over time, the social partners can take 
into account monetary policy responses when negotiating wages.  
In 2002, wage growth was higher than we had expected up to the wage settlement in the spring of 
2002.  In  spite  of  the  rise  in  unemployment,  the  wage  settlement  in  2002  indicated  that  the  social 
partners  still  perceived  the  labour  market  as  tight.  Preliminary  figures  indicate  annual  wage  growth 
between  5½  og  6%  in  2002,  which  is  substantially  higher  than  projected.  The  high  level  of  wage 
                                                      
1   See box in Inflation Report 2000/4: Effects of an interest rate change. 
2   See box in Inflation Report 2002/2: How does the krone exchange rate influence the CPI. 
  growth fuelled expectations of continued high interest rates in Norway relative to other countries and 
appears to have contributed to the appreciation of the krone.  
The unexpected high level of wage growth required a tight monetary stance. Norges Bank increased 
its key rate last summer. The interest rate differential against trading partners widened and the krone 
appreciated. This appreciation also reflected other factors, such as uncertainty in stock markets and 
higher  demand  for  NOK-denominated  assets,  which  were  perceived  as  a  safe  investment  in  an 
otherwise turbulent period.  
In  the  long  run,  wages  must  be  commensurate  with  the  value  added  that  is  generated  by  workers. 
Real wage growth is thus determined over time by developments in labour productivity in all sectors of 
the economy. 
If  historical  productivity  growth  trends  persist,  the  long-term  rate  of  growth  in  labour  costs  that  is 
compatible with the inflation target is 4½%. The outcome of the wage settlements we have observed in 
recent years is not consistent with this.  
If monetary policy is to have an impact, it is important that wage growth responds to labour market 
tightness. 
Since the mid-1980s, wage growth has been markedly higher in Norway than among trading partners. 
Earlier,  the  krone  was  devalued  in  response  to  high  wage  growth,  which  contributed  to  veiling  the 
effect  of  relatively  high  wage  growth  on  manufacturing  industry’s  competitiveness. With  an  inflation 
target, monetary policy has become forward-looking. The high pay increases awarded in last  year’s 
wage  settlements  therefore  engendered  expectations  of  higher  interest  rates.  This  led  to  an 
appreciation  of  the  krone.  Manufacturing  industry  is  thus  faced  with  a  double  burden:  high  wage 
growth and a strong krone. 
Over  the  last  30  years,  manufacturing  has  been  scaled  back  in  waves,  particularly  in  the  years 
between  1977  and  1987.  In  the  years  leading  up  to  the  periods  of  contraction,  profitability  in  the 
manufacturing  sector  deteriorated.  It  can  take  time  for  such  a  deterioration  to  translate  into  lower 
output and employment. But when the turnaround does occur, it tends to be swift and pronounced. It 
now appears that a new period of downscaling is under way. 
Several  factors  point  to  this.  First,  a  trend  analysis  suggests  that  manufacturing  employment  will 
decline in the years ahead. This is partly related to an expected decline in petroleum investment and 
somewhat higher productivity growth in manufacturing than in other industries.  
Second,  manufacturing  costs  have  increased  sharply  since  1988  as  a  consequence  of  high  wage 
growth. The appreciation of the krone since the summer of 2000 has amplified the deterioration in cost 
competitiveness. 
Third,  as  a  result  of  the  fiscal  guideline,  the  internationally  exposed  sector  is  exposed  to  additional 
pressure. Over time, the phasing in of petroleum revenues will lead to restructuring and the transfer of 
resources from the exposed to the sheltered sector. 
Fourth, the response patterns in stabilisation policy function in a different way than previously. In the 
past, it was generally understood that high wage growth and overheating of the economy must be met 
by fiscal tightening. Today, with the fiscal guideline and inflation targeting, it is monetary policy that is 
tightened  to  a  greater  extent  in  such  a  situation.  The  burden  of  stabilisation  policy  is  thus  at  times 
transferred to the internationally exposed sector. 
Public  expenditure  grew  by  7%  from  2001  to  2002.  This  is  considerably  higher  than  the  growth  in 
value-added in the private sector of the mainland economy, which is estimated at around 4%. 
Real growth in public consumption is estimated at 1¾%. In other words, there will only be moderate 
growth  in  the  production  of  public  services  even  with  a  sharp  increase  in  central  government 
allocations. According to the National Budget, there will be virtually no growth in public consumption 
this year. 
This is because the cost of producing public services is rising substantially, to some extent reflecting 
the very high level of wage growth in the public sector. There have also been substantial increases in 
transfers to the household sector through our social security system.  
The room for public consumption is influenced by the outcome of wage settlements. If wage growth in 
the general government sector is 1 percentage point higher than assumed, labour costs will increase 
  by a little more than NOK 2 billion. This is the equivalent of the entire increase in the use of petroleum 
revenues over the central government budget for 2003.  
The  bulk  of  the  high  growth  in  central  government  allocations  translates  into  strong  growth  in 
household  consumption,  while  growth  in  public  services  production  is  moderate.  This  is  only  to  be 
expected when there is a steep increase in public sector allocations in an economy where there are no 
available resources. 
The high level of wage growth is thus having a negative impact on both the internationally exposed 
sector and the more sheltered sectors of the economy. Public sector budgets are being consumed by 
wage growth, and growth in service production is being stifled. Teachers are being made redundant. 
The  internationally  exposed  sector  is  feeling  the  double  impact  of  high  wage  growth  and  a  strong 
krone. 
Norges Bank has one instrument, the key rate, which has effects on the wider economy. This means 
that monetary policy cannot be oriented  towards stabilising developments only in the internationally 
exposed sector. This would cause considerable imbalances in the Norwegian economy. 
It is important to  be  aware that  low  wage  growth  will be of double  benefit to the exposed business 
sector. If wage growth  were as low as the level  achieved partly through  incomes policy  in the mid-
1990s, and other things being equal, the interest rate would probably have to be set in such a way that 
the krone would fall in value in order to bring inflation up to 2.5%. 
Lower wage growth will also, other things being equal, provide room for higher production in the public 
sector within the fiscal policy guideline.  
 
Inflation and the output gap
Percentage price rise and output gap as a percentage of trend GDP
20
15
10
5
0
-5
Consumer price
inflation
Output gap
1970
1974
1978
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002
Sources: Statistics Norway and Norges Bank
JB 7. februar 2003
Relationships in monetary policy
Exchange rate
Imported
price inflation
Norges 
Bank's
interest
rates
Consumer
price
inflation
Consumption
Investment
Employment
Output
Wages and 
margins
JB 7. februar 2003
         Effects of a 1 percentage point increase in the interest 
rate over 2 years. Percentage change in mainland GDP
0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1
-1.25
1
Source: Norges Bank
JB 7. februar 2003
Year
2
3
4
Effects of a 1 percentage point increase in the interest 
rate over 2 years. Change in consumer price inflation in 
percentage points
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
1
Source: Norges Bank
JB 7. februar 2003
0 .2
0 .1
-0
-0 .1
-0 .2
-0 .3
-0 .4
-0 .5
-0 .6
Source: Norges Bank
JB 7. februar 2003
År
2
 3
4
Effects on consumer price inflation of a persistent 
appreciation of 5 per cent of the import-weighted krone
exchange rate. Percentage points
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Sub-index model
RIMINI
RIMINI
   Isolated effect on consumer price inflation of a 
persistent rise in labour costs of 1 percentage point 
Year 4
Year 3
Year 2
Year 1
0 .8
0 .6
0 .4
0 .2
0
Source: Norges Bank
JB 7. februar 2003
Annual wage growth1) and unemployment2)
Per cent
8 .2
7 . 7
Unemployment
Annual wage growth
6 . 2
5 . 1
5 .3
5 . 5
5.83)
6 . 7
5 . 8
4 .4
4 .3
2 .9
2 . 7
3 .0
3 .1
2 . 9
3 . 2
3 .1
3 .6
1 0
8
6
4
2
0
1 0 .0
8 .0
6 .0
4 .0
2 .0
0 .0
1 9 9 3
1 9 94 1 99 5
1 99 6
1 99 7 1 9 9 8
19 9 9
20 0 0 2 0 0 1 2 0 0 2
1) Average for all groups. Including costs of additional vacation days
2) Registered unemployed and persons on labour market programmes. Per cent of labour force
3) Projection
Sources: TRCIS, the Directorate of Labour and Norges Bank
JB 7. februar 2003
 Annual wage growth1) in 2002
Forecasts made at different points in time by Norges Bank, Statistics 
Norway and the Ministry of Finance. Per cent
NB SN MF
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Dec 00
Feb 01
Apr 01
Jun 01
Aug 01
Oct 01
Dec 01
Feb 02
Apr 02
Jun 02
Aug 02
Oct 02
1)  Statistics Norway: Wages per normal person-year
Sources: Norges Bank, Statistics Norway and the Ministry of Finance
JB 7. februar 2003
      Relative labour costs: deviation from historical average 
1970-2003
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
Local currency
Common currency
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
Sources: Statistics Norway, TRCIS/IMF and Norges Bank
JB 7. februar 2003
Manufacturing employment, 1970-2001
In thousands employed
450
400
350
300
250
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
Source: Statistics Norway
JB 7. februar 2003
    