 Nout Wellink: The business cycle in perspective 
Address  by  Mr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, on the occasion of AkzoNobel’s New Year’s function for its management, 8 
January 2003. 
 You are of course familiar with the phenomenon of perspective distortion, which makes things close by 
look  bigger.  Interestingly,  the  effect  becomes  less  strong  as  the  distance  from  onlooker  to  object 
increases.  Similarly,  a  certain  distance  in  time  is  often  required  in  order  to  put  things  in  their  right 
perspective.  This  is  why  historians  so  seldom  discuss  events  of  less  than  several  decades  ago. 
Economists  and  policy  makers,  however,  cannot  afford  to  keep  that  much  distance.  And  by 
consequence, much of what they write and say shows the effects of perspective distortion: the current 
recession  invariably  looks  greater  than  the  previous  one.  Architects  in  15th  century  Florence 
discovered how to draw a correct perspective. Much later, the architects designing the building of the 
Nederlandsche  Bank  used  this  knowledge:  By  making  the  tiles  that  line  the  outside  of  the  building 
larger for higher stories, they cancelled out the distortion in the eye of the observer below. Today, I 
have  set  myself  the  ambitious  goal  of  putting  the  business  cycle  in  perspective.  I  intend  to  regard 
recent  cyclical  developments  in  the  light  of  preceding  business  cycles.  This  gathering  presents  an 
eminent  opportunity  to  discuss  the  international  and  Dutch  business  cycles,  for  AkzoNobel  is  an 
international concern - active in 80 countries. But you are also a Dutch company, with its head office 
established here and almost 20 per cent of production concentrated in this country. At the same time, I 
suspect that AkzoNobel has a greater than average interest in the analysis of cyclical developments: 
An important part of the firm’s activities - basic chemicals - may be characterised as early cyclical. For 
us,  incidentally,  this  makes  companies  in  this  sector  interesting,  because  they  provide  a  leading 
indicator for the business cycle. 
The economic slowdown since the  year 2000  has so far been roughly simultaneous  in  Europe and 
North  America.  It  has  often  been  claimed  that  this  is  the  result  of  the  increasing  economic 
intertwinement of both large blocks. That increase can, of course, hardly be denied. World trade today 
represents  17%  of  global  production,  against  only  8%  in  1914.  And  this  excludes  the  increased 
internationalisation  of  businesses,  through  the  establishment  of  branches  and  plants  abroad  and 
through  cross-border  mergers.  Also  highly  visible  is  the  fact  that  the  connection  between  financial 
markets has become stronger over time. The terrorist attacks in the United States and the dubious 
accounting  practices  revealed  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Enron  collapse  have  hurt  stock  market 
sentiments world-wide. Recent research conducted at the Bank confirms this image: the correlation of 
German, British and US share prices has more than doubled over the past twenty years, from around 
0.30 to 0.65. 
The  simultaneous  cyclical  movements  of  the  large  economies  are  not  determined  primarily  by 
increased  intertwinement  but  through  the  occurrence  of  global  shocks.  Cyclical  coherence  between 
Germany and the US was especially strong in the aftermath of the oil crises of the 1970s. The current 
cyclical harmony is explained by two recent global shocks: the oil price rises and the bursting of the 
ICT bubble. Almost continuously for the ten years up to 1998, oil prices moved within a bandwidth of 
10-20 euro per barrel. In the course of 1999 and 2000, however, the oil price rose by almost 300% 
from the lower limit of this bandwidth to over 37 euros. Since late 2000, oil prices have come down 
under the impact of global economic slowdown. But a possible war against Iraq might push them up 
again. The second shock was caused by the bursting of the ICT stock market bubble. Share prices of 
ICT companies took a plunge from the peak reached in March 2000, losing two-thirds of their value. 
ICT investments - which in the US had risen by 10% to 20% every year since the early 1990s - have 
been falling since mid-2000. The present synchronicity of international cyclical movements has largely 
been  caused  by  these  two  shocks.  There  is  a  good  possibility,  however,  that  the  international 
convergence  will  dissolve  again  when  the  effects  of  both  shocks  have  ebbed  away.  When  the  tide 
turns, the speed of recovery may be different on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Another, related phenomenon is the decline in amplitude which cyclical waves have shown in recent 
years. In most industrialised countries, cyclical movements have been strongly damped since the first 
half  of  the  1980s.  Several  explanations  have  been  offered,  one  of  which  is  the  gradual  shift  in  the 
economy  from  industry  to  services.  This  may  cause  damping  because  fluctuations  in  industrial 
production tend to be relatively large. The share of services in overall employment has increased from 
BIS Review 2/2003 
 1
 47% in 1960 to 70% today. However, research based on US figures shows that this shift has played 
only  a  minor  part:  it  appears  that  the  industrial  and  the  services  sectors  both  follow  more  stable 
patterns than they did a few decades ago. A second explanation offered for cyclical damping is that 
ICT  developments  have  led  to  improved  inventory  management  efficiency.  ICT  applications  have 
enabled  businesses  to  organise  their  inventory  management  in  more  efficient  ways.  But  ICT 
applications  have  not  helped  predict  the  future  development  of  consumers’  inclination  to  spend.  If 
consumers spend 100 million euro less than expected on their Christmas shopping, stocks increase by 
100 million euro’s worth. In other words: greater or smaller-than-expected sales affect inventories just 
as much as they did ten years ago. Therefore, the observed damping of the business cycle must be 
attributable to other causes. 
A third explanation given for the flattening of cyclical patterns is that monetary and budgetary policies 
nowadays tend to be aimed more towards the medium term. Over the past two decades, monetary 
policy has succeeded reasonably well in curbing inflation, thereby enhancing the predictability of the 
macroeconomic environment. The risk that a cyclical boom will trigger  a  wage-price spiral has also 
diminished. As for budgetary policy, the 1960s and ’70s were characterised by activism, which served 
to magnify rather than damp cyclical movements. The 1980s were the years of austerity measures, 
taking away the potential stabilising effects of public finance. Since then, the budgetary position of the 
Netherlands - and of some other countries - has greatly improved, allowing a trend-based budgetary 
policy to be pursued. Such a policy implies that in principle, public finance has a damping effect on the 
business cycle. In the meantime, however, developments in the US show that active budgetary policy 
is not yet entirely a thing of the past. The US budgetary position (as a percentage of gross domestic 
product) has deteriorated by 4½ percentage points in just two years’ time. A fourth factor connected 
with cyclical damping is the fact that fewer global shocks have occurred during the last twenty years. 
So damping is also a matter of chance. The 1990-91 recession in the US, for instance, was mitigated 
somewhat by the boost which the European economy received from German reunification and which 
kept  up  the  level  of  US  exports  to  Europe.  A  few  years  later,  the  reverse  happened.  Despite  the 
multitude of possible causes, only 40% to 60% of the damping effect can be explained. The latter two 
factors - less activist budgetary policies and fewer global shocks - each account for 20% to 30% of 
cyclical damping since the early 1980s. 
Against  this  background  of  more  moderate  cyclical  movements,  I  should  like  to  "zoom  in"  on  the 
current cyclical downturn in the Netherlands. Contrary to some allegations, this downturn is not very 
different  from  previous  periods  of  cyclical  decline  -  in  fact,  it  is  a  textbook  case.  The  depth  of  the 
cyclical trough clearly varies across cycles, but its average level has been 1½ to 2 per cent below the 
trend. Thus over the past decades, cyclical lows in the Netherlands have tended not to bring an actual 
shrinkage of the economy. The current five-quarter period of nearly zero growth also appears set to 
steer just clear of recession. What was unusual about the last cycle was the length of its upturn. After 
the  economy  had  reached  its  potential  production  level,  there  followed  three  more  years  of  relative 
strong growth before the cycle turned down. The prolonged rise is attributable to consumer spending. 
A  strong  autonomous  increase  of  employment  led  to  a  favourable  development  of  households’ 
incomes. This, combined with low real interest rates and a generous disposition by mortgage lenders, 
led  to  a  sharp  rise  in  housing  prices.  The  withdrawal  of  the  resulting  equity  on  the  value  of  home 
property gave a strong additional push to household expenditures. 
The decline also shows a few distinct features, most prominently the development of foreign trade. In 
the past, a decline in the Dutch business cycle usually began with a fall in exports - which should not 
come  as  a  surprise  in  such  an  open  economy.  This  time,  however,  the  downturn  in  exports  was 
somewhat  delayed, indicating that the current cyclical movement has been driven to a much larger 
extent than usual by domestic factors. The decline of investment demand set in relatively early on and 
has  been  stronger  than  average.  On  the  face  of  it,  the  situation  here  seems  to  parallel  that  in  the 
United States. There, the recent slowdown seems to have been initiated by the fall in ICT investments. 
The development of other investments (i.e. excluding ICT) has been relatively stable. But things are 
different in the Netherlands. It is true that the share of ICT in total investments increased strongly from 
1995 to 2000, from 11% to over 16%. But the cyclical curve of non-ICT investments hardly deviates 
from the overall pattern. The fall in investments in the Netherlands is mainly attributable to an erosion 
of private sector profitability from 1998 onwards. The early slump in investment growth seems also to 
have been caused by supply restrictions, for instance in the construction industry: during the second 
half of 1999, almost 80% of vacancies in construction were difficult to fill. Reinforcing the downturn in 
investment  demand  was  the  incipient  deflation  of  the  stock market  bubble  from  the  third  quarter  of 
2000  onwards  -  a  few  quarters  after  the  cyclical  turning  point.  Added  to  this,  the  sharp  increase  in 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2003
 housing prices levelled off in 2001, and with it the boost it had given to consumer spending. This has 
had a negative impact on private consumption. 
Another remarkable feature of the current downturn is the fact that Dutch inflation has risen relatively 
strongly, not only compared to earlier business cycles, but also compared to other euro area countries. 
In  all  EMU  countries,  inflation  was  pushed  up  by  rising  oil  and  food  prices  and  the  decline  in  the 
exchange rate of the euro. In the Netherlands, however, this development was compounded by the 
unusually low rate of unemployment reached well before the cyclical peak in output. Labour market 
tightness resulted in strong wage increases, and hence in an acceleration of the Dutch inflation rate. 
Dutch prices have risen more sharply than elsewhere in Europe, and I do not have to tell this audience 
what  that  means  for  Dutch  competitiveness.  And  although  the  difference  in  inflation  between  the 
Netherlands and the euro area has declined from 2.2 percentage points in January to 1.2 percentage 
point in November. This indicates that the rate of deterioration has come down. It does not mean that 
any lost ground has been regained. 
Analysing recent cyclical developments is not an art for art’s sake. Understanding the nature of the 
downturn  may  contribute  to  more  accurate  economic  projections.  The  ongoing  adjustments  in  the 
Dutch business sector, like those elsewhere in the euro area, have not been completed. Thus far, the 
US  economy  has  appeared  the  more  resilient.  Recovery  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  is  therefore 
unlikely to be simultaneous. According to the latest figures, the US economy has already returned to 
2½ per cent growth over the past year, whereas the recovery in Europe which was expected for the 
second half of 2002, failed to materialise. Current expectations are that the European economy will 
only start to pick up in the course of 2003 - the latest economic projections by CPB, the Netherlands 
Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, predict 1¾ per cent growth for the euro area during 2003. The 
inflation picture is rather flat, with a projected 2% on average for 2003. The projections are surrounded 
by fairly large uncertainties. I want to mention the developments of the dollar exchange rate and the 
price of oil in particular. Since 2000, the growth of the Dutch economy has lagged behind that of the 
euro area, whereas our economy used to outgrow that of the euro area during nine out of ten years in 
the 1990s. During the past year, the Dutch economy has hardly grown at all, for a number of reasons. 
Declining  stock  market  prices,  rising  unemployment  and  political  tensions  in  the  Middle  East  have 
sharply depressed both consumer and business sentiments. Added to this, the wealth effect of rising 
house  prices  on consumer spending has disappeared. The economy  will recover only slowly  in  the 
next few years. According to the CPB, economic growth will be only ¾ per cent in 2003, which is well 
below the projections for the euro area as a whole.  Both business investment and employment are 
expected  to  show  negative  growth  in  the  year  to  come,  while  Dutch  exports  will  fall  behind  the 
expected growth of world trade. At the same time, the inflation rate for the Netherlands is estimated to 
come  out  at  2½  per  cent.  This  means  that  the  decline  -  from  an  excessively  high  level  in  2001  - 
continues. 
I have reached my conclusions. Or rather, returning to the terminology of spatial perspective, I have 
reached the point at the horizon where all lines merge: the central vanishing point. In this address, I 
have been dicussing recent cyclical developments in the light of previous business cycles. Basing my 
argument  on  a  quantitative  analysis,  I  have  attempted  to  avoid  being  deluded  by  perspective 
distortion. Regrettably, it will be some years before we may determine how successful my attempt has 
been.  
BIS Review 2/2003 
 3
