 A G Romero: Integrity and good governance - reputation risk in the public 
sector and financial institutions  
Speech delivered by Drs A G Romero, Executive, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles, on 
the occasion of the opening of the Sixth Biennial Regional Central Banks Legal Seminar, Willemstad, 
Cura(cid:231)ao, 12-14 May 2003. 
 OECD definition of corruption: (cid:147)The providing of grants or gifts to, the bribing of, or the offering of 
money to a receiving party (public servant) with the intention of influencing the receiving party to do a 
task that is not in accordance with his duty(cid:148). 
Introduction 
We have seen drastic changes in the world in the areas of economics, finance, supervision, and legal 
matters.  These  changes  have  resulted  from  a  number  of  factors.  These  factors  include:  the 
internationalization of economic activities fueled mainly by the increasing cooperation between nations 
through  the  formation  of  trade  blocks  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  the  Americas;  the  easy  access  to 
information,  making  know-how  cheaper  and  readily  available;  the  intensification  of  financial 
cooperation  in  the  region  and  global  environment;  and  finally,  the  exchange  of  views  and  the 
alignment of policy actions between various international organizations, such as OECD, World Bank, 
IMF,  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  and  the  International  Association  of  Insurance 
Supervisors. 
Historically, since the mid-80s, we have noticed growing attention from the world community as well as 
governments to identifying and tracking the flow of financial funds proceeding from criminal activities. 
Concerns about the negative effects of these illegal activities on the welfare of the community have 
triggered  international  actions  to  combat  criminality  and  corruption.  Initially,  the  focus  on  combating 
criminal activities was concentrated mainly on business enterprises and financial institutions, which led 
to initiatives to develop various internal rules, best-practice guidelines, and national and international 
legislation.  In  the  90s,  and  specifically  after  the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  2001,  organized 
crime  gained  more  international  dimensions.  At  this  point,  the  focus  of  governments,  as  well  as 
financial  sector  supervisors,  shifted  to  issues  such  as  integrity,  corruption,  and  the  fight  against 
organized international crime. 
During the decade of the 90s we also witnessed a trend of increasing mergers and acquisitions in the 
European banking sector as a result of the closer economic and financial cooperation between the EU 
members. To  a  great  extent,  these  mergers  and  acquisitions  influenced  not  only  supervision  in  the 
banking sector in Europe, but also supervision in general in our region because of the importance of 
the international (offshore) banking here. Moreover, we saw on the European continent a new bank 
assurance  concept.  Banks  and  insurance  companies  joined  forces  to  form  new  global  banking  and 
insurance groups. The formation of these groups has added to the difficulties in risk management in 
the entire economy. They also present new challenges for national and international supervisors. 
Around 1994, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) launched a new 
international comparative research study on integrity in the public sector in the OECD countries. As a 
consequence of the findings of this study, in 1998 the Council of the OECD issued their first set of 
recommendations  titled,  (cid:147)  Improving  Ethical  Conduct  in  the  Public  Services(cid:148).  In  1996,  the  United 
Nations  also  issued  a  (cid:147)  Code  of  Conduct  for  Public  Officials(cid:148)  that  provided  guidelines  on  the 
acceptance of gifts, the handling of confidentiality, and the financing of political activities. 
In 1997, the governments of the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba set up a joint committee to study the 
effects  of  corruption  in  the  public  sector.  The  committee  was  told  to  propose  recommendations  to 
improve  (cid:145)good  governance(cid:146)  and  (cid:145)integrity(cid:146)  in  the  entire  public  sector.  In  1997,  the  working  group 
representing Aruba issued a first report titled, (cid:145)Calidat(cid:146) (Quality) on good governance. This report was 
followed  by  the  report,  (cid:145)Konfiansa(cid:146)  (Confidence)  in  1999  by  the  Netherlands  Antilles  working  group. 
The main objectives of the working groups were to focus on the implications of the decision-making 
process in the public sector, where the activities of the governments and civil servants have important 
and sometimes long-lasting influence on the way the community behaves and on the democratic rights 
that must be respected.  
BIS Review 23/2003 
 1
 Today I want to review with you some aspects of good governance, integrity, and market conduct from 
both a supervisory and a public-sector perspective. In the first part of my presentation, I will discuss 
the public sector / government responsibility for good governance and integrity. Here the main focus is 
to  stress  that  only  governments  can  initiate  the  process  of  creating  a  legal  framework  in  which  the 
society can function according to specific rules, and at the same time, set guidelines and acceptable 
norms  and  values  for  the  community  that  respect  the  democratic  principles  of  freedom.  Next,  I  will 
highlight  the  new  challenges  for  the  supervisory  authorities  in  the  region.  I  will  reveal  some  of  the 
important issues related to the mitigation of reputation risk within financial institutions and their conduct 
of  business  in  a  changing  environment.  How  can  managing  and  supervisory  directors  promote  a 
sound  and  safe  business  environment  in  which  corruption  and  integrity  risks  are  reduced  to  a 
minimum? 
(cid:145)Good governance(cid:146) and (cid:145)integrity(cid:146) in the public sector of the Netherlands Antilles 
Concern  for  good  governance  and  integrity  in  the  public  sector  is  a  relatively  new  phenomenon. 
Considering that, as I indicated in my introduction, governments and international organizations began 
discussing  issues  related  to  corruption,  good  governance,  and  integrity  in  a  global  setting  around 
1994,  one  might  be  tempted  to  conclude  that  these  are  new  issues!  However,  even  though 
international  attention  on  these  issues  is  new,  the  concepts  are  not.  Since  the  beginning  of  our 
parliamentary democracy, the focus of governments here and around the world has been to design 
policies and create instruments for good governance and integrity. One  also could ask whether the 
situation related to these issues has worsened in recent decades, warranting the increased attention 
of the international community since the mid-90s. In my view, the worsening of the way the authorities 
and  the  community  experience,  perceive  corruption  and  integrity  have  been  the  main  driving  force 
behind the increased focus on combating illegal activities.  
In  general,  private-sector  companies  are  operated  with  a  predominant  aim  of  promoting  and 
safeguarding the profitability and earning capacity of the business. An objective derived from this main 
aim is to guarantee the continuity of the businesses, and by extension, job security for the employees. 
In the public sector, production and consumption are driven by other factors, such as power. Those in 
power must maximize the support of the electorate, which by nature has a shorter time horizon than 
private sector businesses. 
Governments can be seen as monopolists when it comes to things like public tasks and services, such 
as defense of the country, police work within the community, the safeguarding and provision of good 
public health, education, the initiation/formulation of laws, and the transfer of income to those in need. 
Another group of stakeholders, i.e., the civil servants in their capacity as advisors to government and 
implementers  of  the  plans  and  decisions  of  the  governments,  also  are  important  elements  in 
assessing, implementing, and guiding the process of good governance and integrity in a country. The 
community, on the other end, experiences the effects of actions undertaken by governments and the 
civil servants on their daily life. Good governance, therefore, has to do with efforts by all stakeholders 
aimed  at  striking  a  balance  between  the  interest  of  government  in  initiating  policies,  the 
implementation  of  these  decisions  by  civil  servants,  and  the  effects  of  these  actions  on  the  entire 
community.  
In this crucial triangle  of power between  governments, civil servants, and the community, important 
instruments have been (or will have to be) developed to guide this process efficiently. One important 
tool that governments can use to improve good governance is communication between governments 
and civil servants, on the one hand, and the community, on the other hand, with respect to plans to be 
implemented.  The  community  should  be  informed  constantly  concerning  the  government’s  actions, 
intentions, and directions with respect to their policies. Today in our community we experience daily at 
least one press conference of a minister and/or a commissioner to discuss plans and interact with the 
press and the community on public issues such as tax reforms, education, combat of illegal actions, 
and so forth. This is a very good way for governments to introduce and discuss their plans publicly. 
Besides press conferences and public discussion with the community, other instruments have been 
developed  and  implemented  here  on  the  islands  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  good  governance  and 
integrity.  These  instruments  are,  broadly,  the  acceptance  of  three  important  Ordinances:  (1)  the 
National  Ordinance  on  Transparency  in  Government  (  Openbaarheid  van  Bestuur)  in  1996,  (2)  the 
National  Ordinance  on  Administrative  Justice  (LAR)  in  2001,  and  (3)  the  Island  Ordinance  on  the 
Institution  of  an  (cid:145)Ombudsman(cid:146)  in  Curacao. With  these  ordinances,  the  governments  have  improved 
further the transparency in the management of the public domain and property. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2003
 The  National  Ordinance  on  Transparency  in  Government  of  1996  allows  each  member  of  this 
community  to  request  and  obtain  information  from  the  government  and  civil  servants  on  all  public 
issues,  excepting  only  those  issues  regarded  as  national  security  or  information  on  persons  and 
individual  industry-specific data. Through this Ordinance, the  decisions taken by  the  authorities and 
the implementation of these decisions become more transparent for the community. If one member of 
our  community  wants  assurance  that  a  decision  taken  by  the  authorities  to  grant,  for  instance,  a 
license to build a new hotel in a specific location was made in accordance with good governance rules, 
that  individual  has  the  right  to  request  and  receive  all  information  on  this  project.  He  can  then 
evaluate, based on the information received, whether the decision was made in accordance with the 
rules  of  good  governance.  I  believe  that  this  Ordinance  on  Transparency  has  far-reaching 
consequences, not only for the way the authorities function, but also for how the entire community will 
get  accustomed  to  dealing  with  the  objectives  of  this  Ordinance.  The  National  Ordinance  on 
Transparency  in  Government  has  added  to  the  transparency  in  the  entire  decision  process. We  as 
members  of  this  community  can  at  all  times  evaluate  and  critically  follow  actions  of  the  authorities, 
particularly  in  the  provision  of  public  services  and  the  granting  of  permissions  and  licenses.  These 
areas are very vulnerable to corruption. A wrong decision can impact seriously the reputation risk in 
terms of how others perceive the functioning of our governments. 
The second important instrument for good governance that our parliament has approved recently is 
the  National  Ordinance  on  Administrative  Justice  (LAR),  which  is  linked  closely  to  the  previous 
Ordinance  on  Transparency  in  Government.  This  Ordinance  on  Administrative  Justice  allows  the 
community  (stakeholders)  to  raise  objections  or  even  appeal  before  a  court  of  Justice,  a  decision 
taken by the authorities. The Bank, as supervisory authority of the financial sector, also is confronted 
with the effects of this Ordinance. In our daily work we have to be very careful with each decision that 
we make since the community can use this Ordinance to question or challenge our decisions. If we 
again use the example of the granting of a license to build a hotel, the community can not only raise 
objections against the granting of the license, but it also can even appeal this decision before a court 
of  law  (Judge)  to  have  an  impartial  body  evaluate  whether  the  decision  taken  by  the  government 
respected the rules of good governance and integrity.  
The third Island Ordinance on the Institution of an Ombudsman in Curacao is intended to allow the 
community to post a complaint about how the government or the civil servants handle requests and 
remarks from the community on issues like the granting of licenses, the reaction to requested public 
services,  and  the  tariffs  on  certain  public  goods  and  services.  This  independent  Ombudsman  will 
channel the complaints of the community to the respective institution being criticized. 
As  you  can  appreciate,  the  government,  the  civil  servants,  and  other  public  institutions  are  being 
transformed  in  the  way  they  function  because  the  community  at  all  times  publicly  can  challenge 
decisions  of  the  authorities  through  objective  and  individual  institutions  aimed  at  assessing  and 
evaluating these decisions. 
There are at this moment two other areas of concern that will have to be addressed in the immediate 
future  to  complete  the  legal  possibilities  for  the  community  to  challenge  the  decisions  taken  by 
authorities.  One  of  these  risk  areas  is  that  of  criminal  liability  of  the  ministers,  commissioners,  and 
public  servants.  A  draft  National  Ordinance  on  the  Criminal  Responsibility  for  the  Public  Officers  is 
awaiting  parliamentary  approval.  The  second  risk  area  that  the  authorities  will  have  to  handle  is 
improving the entire organization of the civil servants on the islands. The government apparatus will 
have  to  work  further  on  the  separation  of  duties  to  efficiently  handle  and  react  to  requests  for 
information  and  services  from  the  community.  Without  good  tools,  no  government  apparatus  can 
perform  the  task  given  to  it  by  the  legislative  bodies.  In  recent  years,  many  initiatives  have  been 
undertaken on the islands to scale down the government apparatus, reduce the red tape, and provide 
better training facilities for civil servants, but this process is taking longer than originally planned. 
I understand that  during this seminar, the issues I  have discussed briefly  will be dealt  with  in more 
detail. I(cid:146)m convinced that since you all have a legal background, these discussions will lead to some 
useful  recommendations  that  we  can  implement  here  and  that  you  also  can  take  back  home  as  a 
positive experience. 
Let me now turn to issues related to integrity and market conduct in the financial sector, but from a 
financial supervisory perspective. How are we as financial sector supervisors dealing with the issues 
of transparency, market conduct, and combating illegal activities? 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 3
 Reputation risk and financial supervision 
Integrity audit and testing, combating money laundering, and probity testing of (supervisory) directors 
have  become  integral  parts  of  the  supervision  in  our  jurisdiction  and  around  the  world.  Areas  of 
attention and constant concern for the Bank van de Nederlandse Antillen, as supervisory authority for 
financial  institutions,  have  been  the  assessing  and  testing  of  integrity  and  probity  of  directors  of 
financial institutions. Since the mid-90s, we have been in the forefront of the discussion, the designing 
and  setting  of  integrity  rules,  and  the  development  of  good  conduct  of  business  and  best-practice 
guidelines  for  individuals  who  manage  financial  institutions  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles.  Due  to  the 
increasing  workload  in  the  supervision  departments  of  banking,  insurance,  and  pension  funds  with 
regard  to  integrity  audits  and  probity  tests  for  directors,  the  management  of  the  Bank  agreed  to 
concentrate  the  responsibility  and  coordination  of  integrity  and  good  governance  supervision  in  a 
separate department within the Bank. At the end of the year 2000, we officially agreed to incorporate 
in  the  Bank  a  department  called  the  (cid:147)Financial  Sector  Integrity  Unit(cid:148)  as  a  tool  to  improve  and 
concentrate the knowledge and efficiency in supervisory audits of financial institutions. Prior to 2000, 
the  integrity  audits  and  the  compliance  with  corporate  governance  principles  in  financial  institutions 
was  done  mainly  as  part  of  the  normal  supervisory  audits  that  the  Bank  performed.  These  audits 
focused largely on prudential supervisory issues. The decision to concentrate integrity issues in one 
department was made not only because integrity audits had become a heavy burden in supervision in 
general, but also and mainly because we saw many sound and reputable financial institutions in the 
world  go  bankrupt  in  the  80s  and  90s  due  to  mismanagement  and  corruption.  The  major  cases  of 
fraud  during  these  decades  in  the  international  financial  sector  (Banco  Ambrosiano,  Bank  of  Credit 
and  Commerce  International  (BCCI),  and  Barings  Bank)  all  were  centered  around  unreliable  and 
corrupt management. These scandals also triggered attention on integrity issues here and elsewhere 
in the world. 
As we have seen, the concern about integrity in companies and financial institutions in particular has 
received a lot of attention here and in the world for various reasons: (1) developments within the public 
sector  and  the  implications  thereof  for  the  public  tendering  of  large  projects,  (2)  the  international 
legislation  implemented  during  the  90s,  which  increased  public  awareness,  (3)  pressure  from 
international and national stakeholders demanding more transparency in the decision-making process 
of  the  public  sector,  and,  finally,  (4)  developments  in  the  administration  of  justice  in  the  areas  of 
criminal, fiscal, and civil law1. 
Because  of  integrity  audits  and  major  scandals  in  accounting  firms  that  certified  inaccurate  annual 
reports, we have expanded the focus of supervision to include the broader concept of market conduct 
and market discipline within the financial sector. 
(cid:147)Market discipline is about information and incentives. Market participants must have access to reliable 
and timely information on the financial conditions and prospects of banking firms and both the market 
participants  and  the  firms  must  have  incentives  to  respond  to  this  information.  With  respect  to 
information,  we  need  to  consider  what  additional  disclosure  would  contribute  to  enhanced  market 
discipline.2(cid:148) 
Traditionally,  supervision  of  financial  institutions  has  centered  more  on  prudential  issues,  such  as 
liquidity, solvency, concentration of loans and funding to a limited group of customers, and the earning 
capacity  in  institutions,  than  on  market  conduct  and  reputation.  As  I  indicated  earlier  in  this 
presentation, supervision worldwide has shifted today to combine both prudential and integrity/market-
conduct issues. The integrity and market-conduct issues have to do with the extent to which financial 
institutions  allow  market  participants  to  have  reliable  information  when  doing  business  with  these 
institutions. Integrity and market conduct also focus on the issues of transparency in institutions and 
the  organization  of  financial  markets.  The  major  risk  involved  in  supervising  market  conduct  is 
determining to what extent the institutions assess and deal with operational, legal, concentration, and 
reputation risk.  
Before discussing with you the tools that supervisors have developed to deal with market conduct and 
integrity  in  audits,  let  me  first  briefly  define  some  concepts  of  risk  that  we  deal  with  in  financial 
                                                      
1  
Interview  with Prof. C. Schaap of Ernst & Young Forensic Studies. (cid:147)Eye on Finance: Information bulletin from Ernst & Young of 
February 2001 
(cid:147)The roles of market discipline, regulation and supervision.(cid:148) Speech by Mr. L H. Meyers, member of the Board of Governors of the 
US Federal Reserve System on the occasion of the 16th Annual Monetary Conference, Cato Institute, Washington DC, 1998. 
BIS Review 23/2003
2  
4 
  institutions  today.  Supervisors  will  have  to  develop  audit  tools  to  assess  these  concepts  within  the 
financial sector. 
Operational risk can be explained best as measuring the direct and indirect effects of an incomplete or 
deficient internal process resulting from human errors and technical failures in the IT system. This risk 
is related mostly to external circumstances, which the institutions may not control completely. 
Legal risk can be  defined  as the risk of loss for an institution because a contract cannot be legally 
enforced. Legal risk includes risks arising from insufficient documentation and insufficient authority of 
the  counter  party.  Bilateral  agreements  must  be  evaluated  adequately  for  enforceability  before  any 
transactions take place. 
Reputation  risk  has  to  do  with  negative  publicity  about  the  contractual  and  legal  customers  of  an 
institution and is related mostly to cases of money laundering and insider trading using the institution(cid:146)s 
services.  Reputation  risk  also  has  to  do  with  the  current  and  prospective  impact  on  earnings  and 
capital arising from negative public opinion. Such a risk affects the institution(cid:146)s ability to establish new 
relationships  or  services  or  continue  servicing  existing  relationships.  This  risk  may  expose  the 
institution  to  litigation,  financial  loss,  or  a  decline  in  its  customer  base.  Reputation  risk  exposure  is 
present  throughout  the  organization  and  includes  the  responsibility  to  exercise  an  abundance  of 
caution in dealing with customers and the community. 
Concentration risk has to do with the overdependence of an institution on one limited group of clients 
either on the asset side or the liability side of the balance sheet. This overdependence on a limited 
group  of  clients  may  make  an  institution  very  vulnerable  if  these  customers  abruptly  stop  doing 
business with the institution. 
How  has  the  Bank  dealt  with  the  increased  attention  on  market  conduct  and  integrity  in  financial 
institutions when undertaking our supervisory role? 
Once again, we have developed a set of tools to assess and determine these specific risk areas within 
supervised  institutions.  Naturally,  the  first  and  by  far  the  most  important  tools  are  the  legislation 
enacted by the parliament and governments giving the Bank authority to supervise financial institutions 
and  deal  with  other  law  enforcement  bodies  on  specific  issues  regarding  supervision  and  illegal 
activities. Here the authorities have enacted the following supervisory legal framework to facilitate the 
role of the supervisory authority to guarantee safe and sound operations of financial institutions. These 
laws are: 
          The National Ordinance on the Supervision of Pension funds of 1985;  
The National Ordinance on the Supervision of Insurance Companies of 1990/91;  
The National Ordinance on Penalization of Money Laundering of 1993;  
The National Ordinance on Banking and Credit Institutions of 1994;  
The National Ordinance on Reporting of Unusual Transactions (MOT) of 1997;  
The National Ordinance on Identification of Financial Transactions (LIF) of 1997;  
The National Ordinance on the Supervision of Stock Exchange Markets of 1999;  
The National Ordinance on the confiscation and freezing of assets from illegal activities of 
2001;  
The National Ordinance on the Registration of Transboundary movements of large sums of 
Cash (2002); and  
The  National  Ordinance  on  the  Supervision  of  Investment  Institutions  (Mutual  Funds)  and 
Administrators of 2003.  
Based upon this legislation, the Bank now is in a better position to use effective control tools to assess 
the  integrity,  money-laundering,  and  market-conduct  issues  within  financial  institutions.  In  recent 
months, our staff has been working on separate new guidelines on Money Laundering for banks and 
credit  institutions,  insurance  companies,  pension  funds,  money  remitters,  institutional  investment 
companies, and administrators. According to our planning, these guidelines will become effective by 
June 1, 2003. These guidelines will replace the current guidelines on Money Laundering of 1996. 
In October 2001, the Bank reissued a revised Guidance Notes for Boards of Directors of Supervised 
Financial  Institutions  on  Corporate  Governance  and  Summary  of  Best  Practice  Guidelines  on 
BIS Review 23/2003 
 5
 Corporate  Governance.  The  guidance  notes  describe  the  general  responsibilities  of  the  Board,  the 
legal  obligations  of  directors,  and  the  role  of  auditors.  The  best-practice  guidelines  contain  a 
discussion and presentation of various systems, policies, and measures potentially effective in dealing 
with corporate governance issues in financial institutions. To encourage the practical implementation 
of  the  guidelines,  the  Bank requires  the  Board  of  Directors  of  all  supervised  financial  institutions  to 
report to the Bank on an annual basis a Statement of Compliance with the best-practice guidelines on 
corporate governance reviewed by an accounting firm. 
Another important tool for supervision in financial institutions is the audit on the Know Your Customer 
(KYC) policies. Our supervisors have created an integrated audit tool to verify how financial institutions 
handle compliance with KYC policies. The main objective of this audit tool is to review and assess the 
customer(cid:146)s identification files and the source of funds in financial transactions. 
Finally, the Integrity testing tool is used for (supervisory) directors and those who determine the daily 
state of affairs in financial institutions. My colleagues, Mr. S. Saab and Mr. S. Salesia, will discuss with 
you later during this seminar the details of this specific tool of supervision and management control 
over integrity issues, probity of the management, and ability to assess and mitigate all types of risks 
involved in the financial institutions under management or supervision.  
Concluding remarks 
Today I have reviewed important issues on good governance, integrity, and market conduct from both 
the public-sector and supervisory perspective. In the public sector, our parliament has passed various 
laws  to  enhance  transparency  in  government  and  to  enable  the  community  to  appeal  important 
decisions of the authorities.  
During  the  last  ten  years,  the  integrity  and  conduct  of  public  officials  have  been  at  the  center  of 
discussion around the world. We specifically have dealt with these issues through the enactment of 
various laws and guidelines on good governance and market transparency. Since concern for these 
issues  is  recent,  both  authorities  and  the  community  will  have  to  adapt  to  this  new  situation.  This 
legislation was created to make the public- sector decision process more transparent, but use of the 
options  created  by  lawmakers  must  be  used  with  tact  and  care  by  the  community,  lest  the 
government’s flexibility to act rapidly becomes illusory. Experiences so far indicate that the community 
has handled responsibly their broadened acquired freedom to request information on and evaluate the 
process of good governance. 
In the supervisory arena, we have used all the legal options created to develop new guidelines and 
revise  existing  ones  to  improve  our  efficiency  in  supervising  financial  institutions.  One  of  the  major 
achievements in recent years was the creation of a separate specialized unit within the Bank to deal 
with issues on integrity, corporate governance, and market conduct. This process now is being fine-
tuned  by  our  staff  to  better  control  risk  areas  on  non-prudential  matters.  The  cooperation  between 
national  and  international  authorities  on  these  non-prudential  matters  in  the  form  of  exchange  of 
information,  provision  of  training  facilities,  and  mutual  assistance  in  supervision  and  combating  of 
international crime and money laundering has helped us greatly understand and reduce operational, 
reputation, legal, and concentration risk. 
Furthermore, the options being created to improve market discipline and transparency are intended to 
enhance the stability of the world financial markets and reduce inter(national) systemic risks. There is 
consensus  among  supervisors  that  this  is  the  way  to  move  ahead,  and  I  have  seen  numerous 
initiatives in the region to improve cooperation among supervisors. 
The  future  of  adequate  supervision  can  be  strengthened  only  through  more  cooperation  and 
appropriate training of supervisors. I(cid:146)m convinced that the international supervisory  institutions have 
acknowledged this problem and they are working increasingly toward more cooperation and assisting 
jurisdictions in our region to capitalize on their experiences.  
Let me now end my presentation as I started it with a quote from former US President Harry Truman 
on Good Governance and Integrity: (cid:147)The only way free government works is if the men in charge of 
it  have  got  the  welfare  of  the  people  in  mind  at  all  times.  If  the  man  loses  sight  of  that  even  for  a 
minute, you don(cid:146)t have free governments anymore.(cid:148) 
I thank you very much for your attention and wish you a fruitful conference and a happy stay on our 
island. 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2003
