 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Frankfurt, 9 January 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will report on the outcome of today's meeting of the 
Governing Council of the ECB, which was also attended by the President of the ECOFIN Council, Mr. 
Christodoulakis, and Commissioner Solbes. 
We have reviewed monetary, financial and economic developments and updated our assessment 
in light of the new information available. Overall, we consider that the outlook for price stability in the 
medium term has not changed since our decision of 5 December to reduce the key ECB interest rates. 
We judge the current monetary  policy stance appropriate to maintain a favourable outlook for price 
stability in the medium term. Hence, we have decided to keep our key rates unchanged. 
As regards the analysis under the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, the three-month average 
of  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3  was  7.1%  for  the  period  from  September  to  November  2002, 
unchanged from the period from August to October 2002. A strong preference of investors for liquid 
and  secure  assets,  in  an  environment  of  continued  financial  market,  economic  and  geopolitical 
uncertainty, remains a major driving force behind the strong monetary dynamics. Furthermore, the low 
level  of  interest  rates  prevailing  in  the  euro  area  makes  the  holding  of  monetary  assets  relatively 
attractive.  
As a result of the pace of monetary growth, liquidity in the euro area is ample. However, at the current 
juncture, given that the portfolio shifts due to economic and financial uncertainty may be a temporary 
phenomenon, and in light of the sluggish economic growth, the excess liquidity is deemed unlikely to 
translate into inflationary pressures. The continued decline in the growth of loans to the private sector 
up to November 2002 supports this assessment. 
Turning to the second pillar, the outlook for economic activity in the euro area has remained broadly 
unchanged. As recently published survey data indicate, economic growth is likely to have remained 
subdued at the end of last year. For 2003, a gradual increase in real GDP growth rates to levels close 
to potential later in the year remains the main scenario, provided that the factors currently contributing 
to the general climate of uncertainty gradually unwind. Although some stabilisation in financial markets 
has  been  observed  over  the  past  couple  of  months,  investors  continue  to  perceive  a  high  level  of 
uncertainty.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  still  risks  relating  to  a  disorderly  adjustment  of  the  past 
accumulation of macroeconomic imbalances, especially outside the euro area. In addition, geopolitical 
tensions continue to weigh adversely on confidence. Indeed, the increase in oil prices over the past 
few  weeks  –  besides  being  influenced  by  temporary  supply  constraints  –  reflects  the  risk  of  more 
acute  tensions  in  oil  markets  in  the  future,  which,  in  turn,  would  have  a  negative  impact  on  the 
prospects for economic activity worldwide. There are still, therefore, downside risks to the outlook for 
economic  activity  in  the  euro  area,  although  the  current  low  level  of  interest  rates  should  help  to 
counterbalance these. 
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat's flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 2.2% 
in December 2002, unchanged from November 2002. Due to the increase in oil prices, some renewed 
upward pressure on consumer prices is likely to have emerged around the turn of the year, and this 
pressure may have been reinforced by effects stemming from various increases in indirect taxes and 
administered prices which became effective at the beginning of 2003. At the same time, base effects – 
relating mainly to unprocessed food prices but, in part, also originating from past increases in services 
prices – will help to reduce annual HICP inflation figures in early 2003. Furthermore, the direct effects 
of  the  recent  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  on  import  prices  and  their  gradual 
passthrough to the euro area economy should contribute to dampening consumer price inflation. The 
current  subdued  pace  of  economic  growth  should  also  contain  inflationary  pressures.  While  the 
significant  risks  surrounding  oil  price  developments  make  any  short-term  prediction  difficult  at  this 
stage,  the  most  likely  outcome  remains  that  inflation  will  stabilise  in  the  course  of  2003  at  a  level 
below 2%.  
BIS Review 1/2003 
 1
 A  major  condition  for  this  outlook  for  inflation  to  materialise  will  be  moderate  wage  developments. 
Reflecting the rigidities prevailing in euro area labour markets, wage growth remained on an upward 
trend until early 2002, despite the weakening of economic activity. It is not yet clear whether this trend 
has come to a halt. Wage moderation is crucial for maintaining price stability. Furthermore, it would 
help to improve the prospects for economic and employment growth.  
An important contribution to strengthening growth prospects in the euro area should also come from 
fiscal and structural policies. Determined reform efforts are needed in these policy areas to increase 
incentives for investment and employment creation in the euro area.  
Regarding  fiscal  policy,  countries  with  remaining  fiscal  imbalances  have  committed  themselves  to 
implement consolidation plans in order to reach budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus in 
the  medium  term.  As  part  of  this  process,  governments  should  put  emphasis  on  growth-oriented 
consolidation policies that strengthen the productive forces of the economy. Such policies are likely to 
be  most  effective  when  integrated  into  a  comprehensive  reform  strategy  based  on  structural 
retrenchment in spending. 
The fiscal policy framework, as laid down in the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact, provides a 
sound  basis  for  limiting  the  risk  of  fiscal  imbalances  occurring.  At  the  same  time,  it  preserves  an 
appropriate  medium-term  orientation  for  fiscal  policy,  based  on  realistic  assumptions  regarding 
economic  developments.  The  Governing  Council  supports  the  steps  taken  by  the  Commission  to 
preserve  the  functioning  of  the  framework,  including  the  implementation  of  excessive  deficit 
procedures and the issuing of early warnings, where required. 
Turning  to  structural  reforms,  it  is  essential  that  governments  intensify  their  efforts  to  expand  the 
euro  area's  potential  for  non-inflationary  growth  and  to  reduce  its  high  level  of  unemployment.  The 
need for further progress in this field is particularly evident in a phase when the euro area economy 
has  to  adapt  to  a  sequence  of  adverse  shocks.  Indeed,  such  reforms,  which  should  aim  to  reduce 
rigidities  in  labour  and  goods  markets,  could  significantly  enhance  the  degree  of  resilience  of 
economic  activity  to  such  shocks,  both  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and  in  its  regions.  Renewed 
momentum in the process of structural reform will be important to foster confidence among consumers 
and investors in long-term growth and employment opportunities in the euro area. This, in turn, should 
also have a positive effect on spending and investment decisions in the short and medium term.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2003
