 Yves Mersch: Reflections on the eurosystem(cid:146)s monetary policy strategy after 
four years 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  the  33rd  ISC-
Symposium, St. Gallen, Switzerland, 23 May 2003. 
Introduction 
The primary objective of the single monetary policy is the maintenance of price stability. However, the 
Eurosystem,  like  all  central  banks,  cannot  control  the  price  level  directly  but  faces  a  complex 
transmission process. Because the latter is complex, the preparation, discussion and presentation of 
monetary policy decisions must be placed in a coherent clarifying framework. This is the role of the 
monetary  policy  strategy.  The  strategy  fulfils  two  crucial  tasks.  First,  the  strategy  imposes  a  clear 
structure  on  the  policy-making  process  itself.  It  must  ensure  that  the  Governing  Council  has  the 
information  and  analysis  required  by  an  effective  monetary  policy  that  will  maintain  price  stability. 
Second, the monetary policy strategy is a vehicle for communicating with the public. Monetary policy is 
most  effective  when  it  is  credible.  The  strategy  must  therefore  facilitate  the  communication  of 
decisions taken and convince the public that the objective will be achieved.  
In October 1998 the ECB Governing Council announced that the Eurosystem would adopt a monetary 
policy strategy consisting of three key elements. The first element was a quantitative definition of price 
stability.  The  second  and  third  elements  were  the  "two  pillars"  of  the  strategy  used  to  achieve  this 
objective, namely the assignment of a (cid:147)prominent role to money(cid:148) and a "broadly based assessment of 
the outlook for price developments and risks to price stability". The Eurosystem took the position that 
policymaking  should  not  become  dominated  by  inflation-forecast-targeting  type  preoccupations. 
Eurosystem monetary  policy,  thus,  does  not  react mechanically  to  a  forecast  at  a  fixed  horizon  but 
rather tailors the policy response depending on the nature of the shock hitting the economy. This is 
documented by its medium-term orientation and reflects why the medium-term has not been defined 
quantitatively. As the single monetary policy faces uncertainty about the functioning of the economy, 
the  robustness  of  information  stemming  from  various  sources  is  checked.  Furthermore,  policy 
decisions  are  based  on  a  judgment  on  the  likelihood  of  certain  scenarios  occurring.  The  distinct 
character  of  the  two-pillar  strategy  is  also  stressed  by  the  announcement  of  a  reference  value  for 
monetary growthsignalling the prominent role assigned to money. On the contrary, strong focus on a 
single inflation forecast would not do justice to the complexity of the decision-making process and at 
the  same  time  not  be  a  transparent  means  to  communicate  this  complexity.  Overall,  projection 
exercises provide a main element within the second pillar, but they do not offer an all-encompassing 
summary device. 
Four  and  a  half  years  have  elapsed  since  the  announcement  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy 
strategy. These years provide a wealth of information, in terms of direct experience and of views by 
external  observers.  In  December  2002  the  President  of  the  ECB  announced  that  the  Eurosystem 
would  conduct  an  extensive  analysis  of  its  strategy.  The  evaluation  encompassed  a  thorough 
assessment of comments from academics, analysts and journalists. In plain analogy with the majority 
of the comments received, the evaluation process focused on three aspects, namely a) the definition 
of price stability, b) the role of money and c) the two-pillar architecture. 
The definition of price stability 
1. 
The Treaty (Art. 105.1) assigns to the Eurosystem the primary objective of maintaining price stability. 
On 13 October 1998 the ECB Governing Council defined price stability as "a year-on-year increase in 
the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  for  the  euro  area  of  below  2%".  Price  stability 
according to this definition "is to be maintained over the medium term". Critics mainly addressed three 
aspects of this definition, namely the choice of the price index, the choice of the quantitative value for 
the objective and the format of the definition. 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 1
 1.1 
The choice of the price index 
The HICP 
For the purpose of setting a quantitative objective for monetary policy, a price index should embody a 
number of essential properties, such as credibility, reliability, timeliness and frequency. The HICP was 
initially  created  for  the  assessment  of  price  convergence  in  Stage  Two  of  EMU  and  is  largely 
harmonised across euro area countries. It scores particularly high in the above criteria. There is no 
controversy in that Eurostat provides a high quality price index at international standards. 
Headline inflation versus core inflation 
The choice of the headline measure has the advantage of transparency: It provides the measure that 
most closely approximates the  price  of a representative basket of consumption goods and services 
purchased by euro area households. In theory, core inflation represents an appealing concept in that it 
filters  out  the  more  volatile  components  and/or  temporary  factors,  which  should  be  disregarded  for 
monetary policy purposes. In practice though, measures of underlying inflation may lack credibility with 
the public. Furthermore, there is no unique method to derive such measures and different measures 
often  provide  very  different  figures.  In  any  case,  the  medium-term  orientation  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
monetary  policy  strategy  ensures  that  the  Governing  Council  will  duly  discount  short-term  price 
volatility in its deliberations. 
The choice of the quantitative value for the objective 
1.2 
The  announcement  of  a  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  is  an  essential  element  of  the 
Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy. It provides a clear and measurable benchmark against which 
the public can hold the Eurosystem accountable. It enhances the transparency of the monetary policy 
framework, and gives guidance to expectations of price developments, thereby helping to stabilize the 
economy. Ultimately, any assessment of the appropriateness of the specific quantitative value requires 
weighing off the costs of inflation and the rationales for tolerating small positive inflation rates. 
The costs of inflation 
Recent evidence confirms a negative and significant effect of inflation on long-term growth, even at 
moderate  rates  of  inflation.  Furthermore,  inflation  has  been  found  to  negatively  affect  aggregate 
welfare through a number of channels, such as non-indexed tax systems, nominal rigidities, distortions 
in  relative  prices,  income  redistribution,  "shoe-leather  costs",  excessive  financial  sector  growth, 
inflation uncertainty, risk premia etc. Evidence that has become available since the inception of the 
Eurosystem strategy suggests that the costs of inflation may be higher than previously thought and 
that even moderate rates of inflation could entail significant costs. 
The rationales for tolerating small positive inflation rates 
Nevertheless,  a  number  of  considerations  suggest  that  maintaining  a  moderate  positive  rate  of 
inflation would be desirable. These relate to the presence of measurement bias in the price index, the 
existence of downward rigidities in labour and goods markets, sustained inflation differentials across 
euro area countries and the existence of a lower bound for nominal interest rates. 
Measurement bias 
Inflation  may  be  subject  to  a  positive  measurement  error,  due  to  a  number  of  sources  (e.g., 
substitution bias, quality bias, outlet bias and new good bias). Assuming a positive measurement bias, 
an environment of very low inflation may hide a situation of ’de facto’ deflation. However, the level of 
uncertainty surrounding the possible bias remains very high. With respect to the HICP, however, the 
continuous improvements implemented by Eurostat suggest that the measurement bias is likely to be 
very small and to further decline in the future. 
Downward nominal rigidities 
In the presence of limited downward flexibility in prices and nominal wages, the economic adjustment 
to shocks may become too sluggish. A small positive inflation rate may "grease" the real adjustment if 
workers  show  resistance  to  nominal  wage  cuts.  According  to  more  recent  evidence,  however,  the 
importance  of  downward  nominal  rigidities  in  the  euro  area  is  limited  (trend  towards  flexible  wage 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2003
 components;  likely  to  decline  in  sustained  low  inflation  environment  and/or  with  structural  reforms; 
positive trend productivity growth). If downward nominal rigidities were pervasive, it is unclear whether 
monetary policy should accommodate them in the setting of the policy objective since this could make 
them even more ’entrenched’. 
Sustained inflation differentials across euro area countries 
It is acknowledged that inflation in countries at the lower end of the inflation distribution under price 
stability in the area as a whole seems to be quite low. Sustained inflation differentials may result for 
different  reasons  ("Balassa-Samuelson  effect";  flexibility  of  markets;  price  level  convergence;  etc.). 
The  current  assessment  for  the  euro  area,  however,  suggests  that  the  magnitude  of  the 
Balassa-Samuelson  effect  is  rather  small,  even  after  enlargement.  In  addition,  the  price  stability 
definition refers to the euro area as a whole and inflation dispersion most probably will be observed in 
virtually  any  monetary  area.  Regional  deflationary  spirals  seem  to  be  extremely  unlikely  as  long  as 
there is no deflationary spiral in the area as a whole. 
The zero lower bound in nominal interest rates 
Maintaining  a  small  positive  inflation  rate  rather  than  strict  price  stability  reduces  the  probability  of 
approaching very low levels of nominal interest rates. Such a safety margin is desirable, as the event 
of hitting the zero lower bound is linked to a diminished effectiveness of monetary policy and a higher 
risk of a deflationary spiral. The Japanese experience of protracted financial and monetary instability, 
however,  can  not  be  directly  transposed  to  the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  evidence  from  simulation 
exercises indicate that the likelihood of hitting the zero lower bound of nominal interest rates and/or 
experiencing a deflationary spiral is rather small when the inflation objective is above 1%. 
The format of the price stability objective 
1.3 
Here, the discussion refers to two separate aspects, namely the issue of symmetry in the objective 
and whether it is preferable to specify the objective in the form of a range for allowable inflation rates 
or in terms of a specific rate of inflation. 
Symmetry 
There seems to be a perception of a lack of symmetry in the Eurosystem’s definition of price stability, 
as  it  clearly  defines  an  upper  bound  at  below  2%,  while  not  explicitly  mentioning  a  lower  bound. 
Asymmetry could entail two types of difficulties. Firstly, it may have led to an excessive focus by the 
public on the 2% upper-mark as a benchmark for future developments in financial contracts and wage 
negotiations. In fact, inflation expectations indeed have settled close to the upper bound. The lack of a 
more  precise  aim  within  the  existing  definition  may  make  it  more  difficult  for  the  Eurosystem  to 
maintain  price  stability.  Secondly,  a  lack  of  symmetry  may  not  be  conducive  to  the  clarity  of 
communication,  especially  when  the  arguments  for  lowering  policy  rates  need  to  be  explained. 
However, the Eurosystem clarified a) that the use of the word "increase" excludes deflation and b) that 
the  lack  of  an  explicit  lower  bound  acknowledges  the  existence  of  an  unknown  and  possibly 
time-varying measurement bias in the HICP. 
Range versus focal point 
The choice between setting the objective of price stability by means of a range or a specific rate of 
inflation is subject to certain trade-offs. Critics of the current format suggest that a single point rate of 
inflation  has  stronger  signaling  properties.  However,  international  evidence  suggests  that,  once  the 
objective  embodies  a  quantitative  announcement,  its  use  in  the  form  of  a  point  or  a  range  for 
admissible  inflation  rates  makes  no  appreciable  difference  for  firmly  anchoring  long-term  inflation 
expectations. One advantage of a range is that it signals the uncertainty regarding the optimal inflation 
rate and conveys to the public the message that the control of inflation is inherently imperfect. This 
may be conducive to the credibility of the central bank: It contributes to limiting its accountability for 
moderate  variations  in  inflation  over  the  short  term.Furthermore,  a  range  is  fully  compatible  with  a 
gradual  shift  in  the  optimal  inflation  rate  due  to  permanent  shifts  in  productivity  growth  or  other 
structural shocks.On the other hand, a range could be interpreted as a zone of indifference, with policy 
responding only when inflation approaches the edges. If a range is announced around the point target, 
it  is  important  that  the  edges  are  interpreted  as  "soft-edged"  and  not  as  triggers  for  policy,  thus 
allowing for a gradual and medium-term approach to monetary policy. 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 3
 The definition of price stability: main conclusions  
The review of the definition of price stability has confirmed its overall successful performance within 
the Eurosystem’s strategic framework.Inflation expectations are perfectly compatible with the definition 
of  price  stability.  Small  and  declining  volatility  of  long-term  inflation  expectations  document  the 
successful anchoring of inflation expectations in the euro area. The analysis has shown that there is 
no viable alternative to headline HICP inflation for defining the primary objective. At the same time, the 
Eurosystem  will  continue  to  monitor  measures  of  (cid:147)underlying  inflation(cid:148)  as  indicator  variables  in  the 
context of regular analysis and in external communication.  
However, the Governing Council wished to further clarify the existing definition of price stability. To this 
end, the Governing Council agreed that in the pursuit of price stability it will aim to maintain inflation 
rates close to 2% ("from below") over the medium term. This clarification underlines the Eurosystem’s 
commitment to provide a sufficient safety margin to guard against any major risks of deflation. It also 
takes due account of the possible presence of a measurement bias in the HICP andother factorsthe 
implications  of  inflation  differentials  within  the  euro  area.  In  addition,  it  perfectly  reflects  the 
medium-term orientation of the single monetary policy.  
The role of money 
2. 
Inflation  is  ultimately  a  monetary  phenomenon.  The  Governing  Council  therefore  recognized  that 
giving money a prominent role was important. Two properties were identified in October 1998 justifying 
a prominent indicator role for a monetary aggregates, namely its leading indicator properties for price 
developments and  its stable relationship  with  its  long-run determinants (notably the  price  level, real 
income, interest rates). Both properties triggered criticism and it was important to review whether the 
underlying conditions are still satisfied. 
The leading indicator property of money 
A large number of studies confirm that empirical evidence continues to support that broad monetary 
aggregates have important indicator properties for euro area inflation. The leading indicator properties 
of money are optimal at medium to longer-term horizons. There is also evidence that narrow monetary 
aggregates have leading indicator properties for cyclical developments. And finally, careful analysis of 
money and credit growth may provide early information on the development of financial instability in 
addition to other indicators. Such information is of relevance for monetary policy as the emergence of 
financial imbalances or bubbles could have a de-stabilising impact on activity and, ultimately, prices in 
the medium term. 
The stability of money demand 
The  relevance  of  monetary  aggregates  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  hinges  on  the  long-run 
stability of money demand. There is substantial evidence suggesting that long-run euro area money 
demand  is  stable.  This  finding  is  robust  with  respect  to  a  number  of  methodological  issues 
(aggregation method, sample period, etc.). However, the empirical work has shown that over the most 
recent period, there were signs of instability in the short-term mechanism by which deviations of the 
demand  for  M3  from  its  long-term  equilibrium  are  corrected.  At  present,  information  from  various 
sources (Balance of Payments, Financial Accounts) suggest that current developments in the demand 
for M3 in the euro area seem to be associated with a heightened preference for liquidity induced by an 
exceptionally prolonged period of asset price volatility. 
However, it may not be taken for granted that stable money demand will last endlessly. One concern 
relates  to  possible  future  structural  changes  in  the  composition  of  wealth  due  to  the  increased 
sophistication of private investors. Historically, instability was primarily due to financial innovation or 
tax  changes  affecting  the  relative  net  return  of  holding  money.  However,  there  have  not  been 
significant changes in any of these factors recently which would justify to expect a continued instability 
in money demand. 
The role of money: main conclusions  
Broad money reveals strong leading  indicator properties for developments in prices. Narrow money 
aggregates  have  leading  indicator  properties  for  cyclical  developments.  Excess  money  and  credit 
growth may provide early information for identifying financial imbalances and/or asset price bubbles, 
which ultimately may impact on price developments. At present, there is no evidence suggesting that 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2003
 the  long-run  link  between  money  and  prices  has  become  obsolete.  Both  conditions  motivating  the 
assignment of a prominent role to money, thus, are still satisfied. However, monetary growth has been 
subject to substantial volatility in the short-run. Against this background, the Eurosystem will continue 
with its monetary analysis to interpret short-term trends in monetary aggregates with caution and to 
conduct studies on money demand.  
The two-pillar architecture 
3. 
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy was designed to take account of the uncertainty monetary 
policy faces about the functioning of the economy. To this end, a twin pillar architecture is employed in 
organizing,  assessing  and  cross-checking  all  information  relevant  for  an  assessment  of  the  risks  to 
price stability. Within the first pillar, the Eurosystem has announced a quantitative reference value for 
the growth rate of M3, as a benchmark against which monetary developments can be assessed and 
described to the public. Analysis under the second pillar focuses on the short-to-medium-term risks to 
price  stability.  It  is  based  on  a  broad  range  of  information  about  wages,  commodity  prices  and 
exchange  rates,  asset  prices,  wealth,  external  demand,  fiscal  policy,  and  domestic  financing 
conditions  and  costs.  The  Eurosystem’s  approach  to  structuring  its  analysis  under  two  pillars  was 
innovative. Not surprisingly, it triggered many discussions as well as criticism. The latter focused on 
the reference value and the co-existence of two distinct pillars. 
The first pillar and the use of the reference value 
Much  of  the  criticism  owes  to  an  overly  simplistic  understanding  of  the  first  pillar  as  a  simple 
comparison between observed monetary growth and the reference value. Contrary to much journalistic 
discussion,  however,  M3  growth  away  from  the  reference  value  over  shorter  periods  may  not  be 
interpreted as a policy failure. In fact, the relationship between interest rates and monetary growth is 
complex, it may vary over time and it is shock specific. Most importantly, monetary policy actions are 
not geared to returning M3 growth to the reference value as quickly as possible, but to achieving the 
objective of price stability over the medium term. 
It seems that M3 has been more sensitive to short-term developments in financial markets than one 
may  have  expected.  As  a  consequence,  monthly  changes  in  M3  growth  became  quite  volatile  and 
measures  of  short-term  trends  in  monetary  aggregates  have  to  be  interpreted  with  caution.  Most 
importantly, in order to overcome the limited signalling properties of money in the short-run, the scope 
of  monetary  analysis  has  been  enriched  over  time  and  goes  well  beyond  the  narrow  study  of 
deviations between the growth rate of M3 and its reference value. The monetary analysis undertaken 
by  the  Eurosystem  consists  of  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  liquidity  situation  based  on 
information from a large number of sources, ranging from Monetary and Banking Statistics to Balance 
of  Payments  and  Financial  Accounts.  It  involves  a  thorough  analysis  of  components  of  monetary 
aggregates (in  particular  M3 and  M1)  as  well as their counterpartsfrom both  MFI liabilities and  MFI 
assets(in  particular  loans  to  the  private  sector).  Various  money  gap  measures,  concepts  of  excess 
liquidity and monetary models are used to identify the factors underlying the developments in money 
and credit and to best extract the information contained in money for longer term price developments. 
Monetary analysis and the reference value: main conclusions  
The  Governing  Council  acknowledged  the  need  to  communicate  more  convincingly  the  enriched 
scope of monetary analysis and stressed the rich choice of data and methods used. To underscore the 
longer-term nature of the reference value as a benchmark for assessing monetary developments, the 
Governing Council decided to no longer conduct a review of the reference value on an annual basis. 
Importantly, the reference value for M3 is based on medium-term assumptions for real GDP growth 
and velocity. The mere announcement of the annual review, however, unintentionally seems to have 
affected expectations. Its legend annual review appears to have added to the misperception that the 
reference value is announced "for a specific year" and to confusions with an annual targeting of M3 
growth. The Governing Council agreed to continue to assess the stability properties of money demand 
and the  validity of the assumptions underlying the reference value  with respect to trends  in income 
velocity  and  output  growth.  The  Governing  Council  will  change  the  reference  value  if  necessary. 
However, the experience has shown that the underlying assumptions change over longer periods only. 
The Governing Council therefore refrains from announcing a specific frequency at which the reference 
value will be reviewed.  
BIS Review 24/2003 
 5
 The co-existence of two pillars 
The  twin  pillar  architecture  triggered  a  good  deal  of  criticism,  much  of  which  seems  to  neglect  the 
specific merit of the twin architecture. First, the two-pillar strategy perfectly reflects the difference in the 
time  perspectives  relevant  for  analysis  under  the  economic  and  the  monetary  analysis.  It  is  widely 
acknowledged  that  long-term  price  movements  are  driven  by  trend  money  growth,  while  higher 
frequency  inflation  developments  appear  to  reflect  the  interplay  between  demand  and  supply 
conditions  at  short-  to  medium-term  horizons.  From  the  perspective  of  central  bankers,  the  kind  of 
information provided by both the economic and the monetary analysis is equally relevant, but differs 
qualitatively. 
Second, the two-pillar architecture serves as an instrument to organise and convey information to the 
Governing  Council  and  the  public.  At  present,  monetary  phenomena  are  not  fully  captured  by 
conventional economic models. The two-pillar structure represents an analytical commitment on the 
part of the Eurosystem to ensure the robustness of monetary policy by taking due account of different 
paradigms in policy considerations. 
Third,  the  two-pillar  architecture  serves  as  a  communication  device.  It  allows  conveying  monetary 
policy decisions and the underlying rationales to the public in a most transparent manner. Empirical 
evidence  suggests  that  nowadays  interest  rate  decisions  by  the  Governing  Council  are  very  well 
anticipated by market participants. 
The co-existence of economic and monetary analysis: main conclusions  
Economic  and  monetary  analysis  operate  under  different  time  horizons.  The  Governing  Council 
wishes  to  clarify  communication  on  the  cross-checking  of  information  in  deriving  its  unified  overall 
judgement on the risks to price stability. To this end, the introductory statement of the President will 
henceforth follow a new structure. 
It will start with the economic analysis to identify short- to medium-term risks to price stability. As in the 
past, economic analysis is based on further developments in structural models, tools and models in 
forecasting, etc. It will include analysis of shocks hitting the euro area economy and projections of key 
macroeconomic  variables.  The  Governing  Council  recalled  that  since  the  inception  of  the  single 
monetary  policy  the  economic  analysis  has  been  deepened.  The  Governing  Council  confirmed  the 
importance of projections, but also recalled that they will not exhaust the economic analysis.  
The monetary analysis will then follow to assess medium to long-term trends in inflation in view of the 
close  relationship  between  money  and  prices  over  extended  periods.  It  will  take  into  account 
developments  in  the  extended  range  of  monetary  indicators  including  not  only  M3,  but  also  its 
components and counterparts, notably credit, and various measures of excess liquidity (money gaps, 
monetary  overhang,  etc.).  In  essence,  monetary  analysis  mainly  will  serve  as  a  means  of 
cross-checking,  from  a  medium-  to  long-term  perspective,  the  short  to  medium-term  indications 
coming  from  economic  analysis.  This  cross-checking  ensures  that  monetary  policy  has  a  nominal 
anchor beyond the conventional projection horizon. 
The Governing Council confirmed that both, the short-term assessment from economic analysis and 
the  medium-  to  long-term  assessment  based  on  monetary  analysis  lead  to  a  compound  single 
assessment.  This  single  assessment  is  the  fundament  of  Governing  Council  decisions.  This  new 
structure of the introductory statement better illustrates that the two perspectives offer complementary 
analytical frameworks to support the overall assessment of risks to price stability. 
Overall conclusion 
To sum up, the strategy evaluation by and large confirmed the key elements of the existing strategy. In 
different fields, the decisions taken by the Governing Council ensure a high degree of continuity: First, 
the  Governing  Council  continues  to  reject  a  strategy  of  inflation  targeting.  Second,  the  strategy  will 
continue to entail three main elements, namely a quantitative definition of the primary objective of price 
stability  and  the  "two  pillars"  of  the  strategy  used  to  achieve  this  objective.  Third,  the  quantitative 
definition of price stability continues to refrain from rejects a corridor for inflation outcomes. Fourth, the 
type of analysis undertaken under both economic and monetary pillars is unchanged. 
Within  the  existing  framework,  though,  the  Governing  Council  undertook  distinct  clarifications.  First, 
the quantitative definition  of price stability has been  clarified  by  defining the aim of the Eurosystem 
6 
 BIS Review 24/2003
 within the existing definition (i.e. close to 2% "from below"). Second, by restructuring the introductory 
statement of the President the Governing Council has (cid:150) and will continue to do so (cid:150) clarified the scope 
of  the  enriched  monetary  analysis  and  its  use  in  monetary  policy  making  as  a  means  of 
cross-checking.  In  order  to  avoid  confusion  with  monetary  targeting  and  to  stress  the  long-term 
character of the reference value, the Governing Council decided to no longer conduct its review on an 
annual basis. 
BIS Review 24/2003 
 7
