 Bimal Jalan: Exchange rate management - an emerging consensus? 
Address by Dr Bimal Jalan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 14th National Assembly of 
the Forex Association of India, Mumbai, 14 August 2003. 
 I  am  very  happy  to  be  here  with  you  on  the  occasion  of  the  14th  National  Assembly.  This  annual 
gathering of our Forex specialists is a very special occasion for everyone interested in the evolution of 
forex market in India - not only the dealers and market participants, but also the RBI, Government and 
outside  experts  interested  in  appropriate  macro-economic  management  for  higher  growth  and  the 
greater good of our people. It provides all of us with an opportunity to review recent developments in 
forex  markets  against  the  background  of  global  developments  in  a  fast  changing  world  economic 
scenario  and  modify  our  own  policy  and  approach.  I  am,  therefore,  delighted  to  be  with  you  once 
again. 
As you know, RBI is in regular touch, formally and informally, with your association to review market 
developments.  My  senior  colleagues  and  I  have  also  benefited  from  your  advice  and,  as  you  are 
aware, a large number of measures have now been put in place to liberalise our regulations in respect 
of foreign exchange transactions. With your permission, today, on this special occasion, I would like to 
deal  briefly  with  some  of  the  longer  term  policy  issues  in  respect  of  exchange  rate  and  reserves 
management.  Several  of  these  issues  have  also  been  debated  in  various  international  fora.  In  the 
context of upsurge in our reserves in recent years and the appreciating trend in the external value of 
the rupee, there has also been considerable domestic discussion of these issues. 
You  will  recall  that  the  last  time  I  had  addressed  your  Association  was  in  December  2000  -  nearly 
2‰ years  ago  -  on  the  occasion  of  the  21st  Asia  Pacific  Forex  Congress.  That meeting  was  taking 
place against the background of the Asian crisis in 1997-98. The Asian region had just come out of the 
forex  crisis  of  a  very  destabilising  kind.  I  had  used  that  occasion  to  review  the  on-going  debate  on 
management  of  the  external  sector,  particularly  the  appropriate  exchange  rate  systems,  the 
appropriate intervention policy, and the foreign exchange reserve policy. Soon after the Asian crisis, 
these subjects had figured very prominently in the discussions on International Financial Architecture 
in  various  fora,  such  as  IMF,  the  World  bank,  G20,  Financial  Stability  Forum  and  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements. 
At that time, while reviewing the state of the debate, I had mentioned that a worldwide consensus on 
several issues was still evolving. Today, while (cid:147)consensus(cid:148) may be too strong a word, I believe that 
there is a fair degree of convergence in the dominant international opinion among experts and various 
specialised  institutions  on  many  of  these  issues.  Let  me  summarise  some  of  the  main  conclusions 
which have emerged in the last 2 or 3 years on the management of the external sector. Once again, I 
should emphasise that, given widely different economies of the world that we are talking about, there 
is no global consensus as such or unity of views. However, at present, as I see it, there is certainly a 
(cid:147)dominant(cid:148)  view  of  what  is  right  and  appropriate,  which  is  increasingly  commanding  international 
acceptance. 
Thus, on the question of the appropriate exchange rate regime, a fixed exchange rate regime (even 
with a Currency Board) is clearly out of favour. The Brazilian and Argentinian crisis, after the Asian 
crisis, came as a rude shock. Even strong Currency Board type arrangements of a fixed peg vis-(cid:224)-vis 
dollar were found to be unviable. You will recall that, soon after the Asian crisis, the widely accepted 
theoretical position was that a country had the choice of either giving up monetary independence and 
setting up a Currency Board or giving up the stable currency objective and letting the exchange rate 
float freely so that monetary policy could then be directed to the objectives of inflation control. There is 
a shift in this paradigm. The possibility of having a viable fixed rate mechanism has been generally 
discarded, and the dominant view now is that, for most countries floating or flexible rates are the only 
sustainable way of having a less crisis-prone exchange rate regime. 
In regard to the desirable degree of flexibility in exchange rates, opinions and practices vary. But a 
completely (cid:147)free(cid:148) float, without intervention, is clearly out of favour except perhaps in respect of a few 
global or reserve currencies. And, in respect of these currencies also (say, Euro and Dollar), concerns 
are expressed at the highest levels if the movement is sharp in either direction - recently, for example, 
when Euro was strengthening at a fast pace. Studies by the IMF and several experts also show that by 
far, the most common exchange rate regime adopted by countries, including industrial countries, is not 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 1
 a  free  float.  Most  of  the  countries  have  adopted  intermediate  regimes  of  various  types,  such  as, 
managed  floats  with  no  pre-announced  path,  and  independent  floats  with  foreign  exchange 
intervention moderating the rate of change and preventing undue fluctuations. By and large, barring a 
few,  countries  have  (cid:147)managed(cid:148)  floats  and  Central  Banks  intervene  periodically.  This  has  also  been 
true of industrial countries. In the past, the U.S., the EU and the U.K. have also intervened at one time 
or another. Thus, irrespective of the pure theoretical position in favour of a free float, the external value 
of the currency continues to be a matter of concern to most countries, and most central banks. 
The reason why intervention by most central banks in forex markets has become necessary from time 
to  time  is  primarily  because  of  two  reasons.  A  fundamental  change  that  has  taken  place  in  recent 
years  is  the  importance  of  capital  flows  in  determining  exchange  rate  movements  as  against  trade 
deficits and economic growth, which were important in the earlier days. The latter do matter, but only 
over  a  period  of  time.  Capital  flows,  on  the  other  hand,  have  become  the  primary  determinants  of 
exchange rate movements on a day-to-day basis. Secondly, unlike trade flows, capital flows in (cid:147)gross(cid:148) 
terms which affect exchange rate can be several times higher than (cid:147)net(cid:148) flows on any day. These are 
also much more sensitive to what everybody else is saying or doing than is the case with foreign trade 
or  economic  growth.  Therefore,  herding  becomes  unavoidable.  I  am  sure  you  will  agree  that  all 
dealers prefer to be wrong with everyone else rather than being wrong alone! 
A  related  issue,  which  is  a  corollary  of  the  prevalent  intermediate  regimes  in  respect  of  exchange 
rates, concerns the need, if any, for foreign exchange reserves. In a regime of free float, it could be 
argued  that  there  was  really  no  need  for  reserves.  If  demand  for  foreign  exchange  is  higher  than 
supply,  exchange  rates  will  depreciate  and  equilibrate  demand  and  supply  over  time.  If  supply 
exceeded demand, exchange rates will appreciate and sooner or later, the two will equalise at some 
price. However, today in the light of volatility induced by capital flows and the self-fulfilling expectations 
that this can generate, there is now a growing consensus that emerging market countries should, as a 
matter  of  policy,  maintain  (cid:147)adequate(cid:148)  reserves.  How  adequacy  is  to  be  defined  is  also  becoming 
clearer. Earlier, the rule used to be defined in terms of number of months of imports. Now, increasingly 
it  is  felt  that  reserves  should  at  least  be  sufficient  to  cover  likely  variations  in  capital  flows  or  the 
(cid:147)liquidity-at-risk(cid:148). (However, there is as yet no consensus on the upper limit for reserves. Even after an 
(cid:147)adequate(cid:148) level is reached, reserves may continue to increase if capital inflows are strong and central 
banks decide to intervene in order to moderate the degree of appreciation.) 
To  sum  up,  it  seems  that  the  debate  on  appropriate  policies  relating  to  forex  markets  has  now 
converged around some generally accepted views. Among these, as I mentioned are: (a) exchange 
rates should be flexible and not fixed or pegged; (b) countries should be able to intervene or manage 
exchange rates - to at least some degree - if movements are believed to be destablising in the short 
run;  and  (c)  reserves  should  at  least  be  sufficient  to  take  care  of  fluctuations  in  capital  flows  and 
(cid:147)liquidity at risk(cid:148). 
Let me now briefly deal with some issues of practical importance in the management of forex markets 
in India, which have figured prominently in the media and expert commentary. I will first take up 2 or 
3 matters  which  are  rather  straight-forward  and  on  which  our  policy  stance  is  also  equally 
(cid:147)unambiguous(cid:148) and clear-cut. Then I will move to, and conclude with, a discussion of the appropriate 
exchange rate policy for India in the current situation. 
A frequently discussed question is about Capital Account Convertibility (CAS), i.e. when is India going 
to move to full CAC? As you are aware, we have already liberalized and deregulated a whole host of 
capital account transactions. It is probably fair to say that for most transactions which are required for 
business or personal convenience, the rupee is, for all practical purposes, convertible. In cases, where 
specific permission is required for transactions above a high monetary ceiling, this permission is also 
generally forthcoming. It is also the declared policy of the Government and the RBI to continue with 
this process of liberalization. In this sense, Capital Account Convertibility continues to be a desirable 
objective for all investment and business related transactions and India should be able to achieve this 
objective in not too distant a future. 
There  are,  however,  two  areas  where  we  would  need  to  be  extremely  cautious  -  one  is  unlimited 
access to short-term external commercial borrowing for meeting working capital and other domestic 
requirements.  The  other  area  concerns  the  question  of  providing  unrestricted  freedom  to  domestic 
residents to convert their domestic bank deposits and idle assets (such as, real estate), in response to 
market developments or exchange rate expectations. 
In  respect  of  short-term  external  commercial  borrowings,  there  is  already  a  strong  international 
consensus that emerging markets should keep such borrowings relatively small in relation to their total 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2003
 external debt or reserves. Many of the financial crises in the 1990s occurred because the short-term 
debt was excessive. When times were good, such debt was easily accessible. The position, however, 
changed dramatically in times of external  pressure.  All creditors  who could redeem the debt did so 
within a very short period, causing extreme domestic financial vulnerability. The occurrence of such a 
possibility has to be avoided, and we would do well to continue with our policy of keeping access to 
short-term debt limited as a conscious policy at all times - good and bad. 
So far as the free convertibility of domestic assets by residents is concerned, the issues are somewhat 
more fundamental. It has to do with the differential impact of (cid:147)stock(cid:148) and (cid:147)flows(cid:148) in determining external 
vulnerability. The day-to-day movement in exchange rates is determined by (cid:147)flows(cid:148) of funds,  i.e. by 
demand and supply of spot or forward transactions in the market. Now, suppose the exchange rate is 
depreciating unduly sharply (for whatever reasons) and is expected to continue to do so for the near 
future.  Now,  further  suppose  that  domestic  residents,  therefore,  decide  -  perfectly  rationally  and 
reasonably - that they should convert a part or whole of their stock of domestic assets from domestic 
currency to foreign currency. This will be financially desirable as the domestic value of their converted 
assets is expected to increase because of anticipated depreciation. And, if a large number of residents 
so decide simultaneously within a short period of time, as they may, this expectation would become 
self-fulfilling. A severe external crisis is then unavoidable. 
Consider India(cid:146)s case, for example. Today, our reserves are high and exchange rate movements are, 
by  and  large,  orderly.  Now,  suppose  there  is  an  event  which  creates  external  uncertainty,  as  for 
example, what actually happened at the time of the Kargil or the imposition of sanctions after Pokhran, 
or  the  oil  crises  earlier.  Domestic  stock  of  bank  deposits  in  rupees  in  India  is  presently  close  to 
US$ 290 billion, nearly three and a half times our total reserves. At the time of Kargil or Pokhran or the 
oil crises, the multiple of domestic deposits over reserves was in fact several times higher than now. 
One  can  imagine  what  would  have  had  happened  to  our  external  situation,  if  within  a  very  short 
period, domestic residents decided to rush to their neighbourhood banks and convert a significant part 
of these deposits into sterling, euro or dollar. 
No emerging market exchange rate system can cope with this kind of contingency. This may be an 
unlikely  possibility  today,  but  it  must  be  factored  in  while  deciding  on  a  long  term  policy  of  free 
convertibility of (cid:147)stock(cid:148) of domestic assets. Incidentally, this kind of eventuality is less likely to occur in 
respect of industrial countries with international currencies such as Euro or Dollar, which are held by 
banks, corporates, and other entities as part of their long-term global asset portfolio (as distinguished 
from emerging market currencies in which banks and other intermediaries normally take a daily long or 
short position for purposes of currency trade). 
Another  issue,  which  has  figured  prominently  in  the  current  debate,  relates  to  foreign  exchange 
reserves. As is well known, India(cid:146)s foreign exchange reserves have increased substantially in the past 
few years and are now among one of the largest in the world. The fact that most of the constituents of 
India(cid:146)s balance of payments are showing positive trends - on the current as well as capital accounts - 
is a reflection of the increasing competitiveness of the Indian economy and strong confidence of the 
international community in India(cid:146)s growth potential. For the first time after our Independence 56 years 
ago, the fragility of the balance of payments is no longer a concern of policy makers. This is a highly 
positive development and regarded as such by the country at large. 
Nevertheless,  there  are  two  concerns  that  have  been  expressed  by  expert  commentators  -  one  is 
about  the  (cid:147)cost(cid:148)  of  additional  reserves,  and  second  concerns  the  impact  of  (cid:147)arbitrage(cid:148)  in  inducing 
higher inflows. So far as the cost of additional reserves is concerned, it needs to be borne in mind that 
the bulk of additions to reserves in the recent period is on account of non-debt creating inflows. India(cid:146)s 
total external debt, including NRI (Non-Resident Indian) deposits, has increased relatively slowly as 
compared with the increase in reserves, particularly in the last couple of years. In fact, India pre-paid 
more than $ 3 billion of external debt earlier this year. It may also be mentioned that rates of interest 
paid on NRI deposits and multilateral loans in foreign currency are in line with or lower than prevailing 
international interest rates. 
On NRI rupee deposits, interest rates in the last couple of years have been in line with interest rates 
on deposits by residents, and are currently even lower than domestic interest rates. So far as other 
non-debt  creating  inflows  (i.e.,  foreign  direct  investment,  portfolio  investment  or  remittances)  are 
concerned, such inflows by their very nature are commercial in nature and enjoy the same returns and 
risks,  including  exchange  rate  risk,  as  any  other  form  of  domestic  investment  or  remittance  by 
residents. The cost to the country of such flows is the same whether they are added to reserves or are 
matched by equivalent foreign currency outflow on account of higher imports or investments abroad by 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 3
 residents. On the  whole, under present conditions, it  seems that the (cid:147)cost(cid:148) of additional reserves is 
really a non-issue from a broader macro-economic point of view. 
Indian interest rates have come down substantially in the last three or four years. They are, however, 
still  higher  than  those  prevailing  in  the  U.S.,  Europe,  U.K.  or  Japan.  This  provides  an  (cid:147)arbitrage(cid:148) 
opportunity  to  holder  of  liquid  assets  abroad,  who  may  take  advantage  of  higher  domestic  interest 
rates  in  India  leading  to  a  possible  short-term  upsurge  in  capital  flows.  However,  there  are  several 
considerations,  which  indicate  that  (cid:147)arbitrage(cid:148)  per  se  is  unlikely  to  have  been  a  primary  factor  in 
influencing remittances or investment decisions by NRIs or foreign entities in the recent period. Among 
these are: 
   The minimum period of deposits by NRIs in Indian rupees is now one year, and the interest 
rate on such deposits is subject to a ceiling rate of 2.5 per cent over Libor. This is broadly in 
line with one-year forward premium on the dollar in the Indian market (interest rates on dollar 
deposits by NRIs are actually below Libor). 
Outside of NRI deposits, investments by Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) in debt funds is 
subject to an overall cap of only $ 1 billion in the aggregate. In other words, the possibility of 
arbitrage  by  FIIs  in  respect  of  pure  debt  funds  is  limited  to  this  low  figure  of  $  1  billion 
(excluding investments in a mix of equity and debt funds). 
Interest rates and  yields on liquid securities are highly variable abroad as well as in India, 
and  the  differential  between  the  two  rates  can  change  very  sharply  within  a  short  time 
depending on market expectations. It is interesting to note that the yield on 10 year Treasury 
bills  in  the  U.S.  had  risen  to  about  4.4  per  cent  as  compared  with  5.6  per  cent  on 
Government bonds of similar maturity in India at the end of July 2003. Taking into account 
the forward premia on dollars and yield fluctuations, except for brief period, there is likely to 
be little incentive to send large amounts of capital to India merely to take advantage of the 
interest differential. 
On the whole, it is likely that external flows into India have been motivated by factors other than pure 
arbitrage.  Figures  on  sources  of  reserve  accretion  available  upto  the  end  of  last  year  (2002-03) 
confirm this view. It  is also pertinent to note that domestic interest rates  among industrial countries 
also  vary  considerably.  For  example,  in  Japan,  they  are  close  to  zero.  In  the  U.K.,  they  are  above 
4 per cent, and in the U.S. about 1.5 per cent. There is no evidence that capital has been moving out 
of U.S. to U.K. or Europe merely on account of interest differential. Within a certain low range, capital 
flows  are  likely  to  be  more  influenced  by  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation  than  pure  arbitrage  even 
among industrial countries with full CAC. 
Another  point  which  has  been  forcefully  put  forward  by  several  experts  in  the  context  of  rising 
reserves, is that India should use its reserves for increasing investment for further development of the 
country  rather  than  keep  them  as  liquid  assets.  It  is  argued  that  it  is  paradoxical  for  a  developing 
country to have a current and capital account surplus, and thereby add to its reserves, rather than use 
foreign savings to enhance the rate of investment in the economy. 
In principle, this point is valid. There is no doubt that in our present situation, maximum support has to 
be  given  to  increasing  the  level  of  investment,  particularly  in  the  infrastructure  sector.  It  is  for  this 
reason that RBI in the recent period has been following a soft interest rate policy in an environment of 
low inflation. However, at the same time, it must be emphasized that there is very little that RBI, (or, for 
that  matter,  Government)  can  directly  do  to  use  additional  reserves  for  investment.  The  equivalent 
rupee  resources  have  already  been  released  by  the  RBI  to  recipients  of  foreign  exchange,  and 
equivalent rupee liquidity has already been created. The decision on whether to invest, consume or 
deposit these additional rupee resources lies with recipients, and not with the RBI. By all means, let us 
urge them to invest, but there is not much of a case for pointing a finger at additional reserves as a 
(cid:147)cause(cid:148) of lower than desirable level of investment activity in the economy. 
Let me now come to my last point, which is of considerable present-day interest in India in the context 
of high and rising reserves, easy liquidity, low interest rates and the weakening dollar, i.e., what should 
be  the  correct  or  right  policy  stance  for  the  management  of  exchange  rate  in  India  in  the  present 
environment? In RBI(cid:146)s periodic credit policy statements, as well as other public statements, RBI has 
highlighted the main pillars of its strategy for the management of the exchange rate. These are: RBI 
does not have a fixed (cid:147)target(cid:148) for the exchange rate which it tries to defend or pursue over time; RBI is 
prepared  to  intervene  in  the  market  to  dampen  excessive  volatility  as  and  when  necessary;  RBI(cid:146)s 
purchases or sales of foreign currency are undertaken through a number of banks and are generally 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2003
 discreete and smooth; and market operations and exchange rate movement should, in principle, be 
transaction-oriented rather than purely speculative in nature. 
It is perhaps fair to say that the actual results of the exchange rate policy followed by the RBI, since 
the Asian crisis in particular, have been highly positive so far. In addition to sharp increase in reserves 
and  generally  (cid:147)orderly(cid:148)  movements  in  exchange  rates  with  lower  volatility,  the  confidence  level  of 
domestic  and  foreign  investors  in  the  Indian  external  sector  policies  is  strong.  India(cid:146)s  policies  have 
also been described by the IMF as being (cid:147)comparable to the global best practices(cid:148) in a recent study of 
20  select  industrial  and  developing  countries.  Interestingly,  a  leading  global  news  agency,  in  an 
international journal, has recently described India(cid:146)s currency model as being (cid:147)ideal(cid:148) for Asia. India is 
now one of the very few developing countries which has set up its own clearing house for dollar-rupee 
transaction with the concurrence of the Federal Reserve System, New York. 
In the last few months, however, when the dollar has been depreciating against major currencies, and 
rupee  has  been  appreciating  against  the  dollar  (albeit  slowly),  a  number  of  suggestions  have  been 
made by experts and others calling for a shift in RBI(cid:146)s exchange rate policies. There are, in the main, 
three alternative approaches that have been suggested for consideration: 
   One view advanced by several distinguished economists, including Prof. Kenneth Rogoff of 
IMF during his recent visit to India, is that rupee should be allowed to appreciate freely in line 
with  market  trends.  According  to  this  view,  there  is  no  strong  case  for  RBI(cid:146)s  further 
intervention as reserves are already very high. RBI(cid:146)s purchases create substantial additional 
domestic liquidity, which may be destabilising in the long run. There is also no evidence, in 
their  opinion, that unconstrained  appreciation or  volatility  would affect growth  prospects or 
lead to any other macro-economic problem. 
An  exactly  opposite  view,  which,  among  others,  has  been  recently  articulated  by  an 
important all-India industry association, is that RBI should intervene more aggressively in the 
market  to  further  reduce  the  degree  of  appreciation.  The  main  argument  in  favour  of  this 
view is that India must maintain its global (cid:147)competitiveness(cid:148), particularly in relation to China 
which has a fixed exchange rate with the dollar and whose currency has been depreciating 
along with it. 
A  third  view,  which  has  been  recently  put  forward  by  a  leading  economic  journal,  among 
others, is that RBI should pursue what it has referred to as a policy of (cid:147)calculated volatility(cid:148). It 
has been argued that the present policy of controlled volatility has provided virtually risk-less 
gain  to  market  participants  since  the  rupee  has  been  expected  to  appreciate  substantially 
and  continuously  over  the  past  few  months.  According  to  this  view,  in  order  to  prevent 
excessive capital inflows during this period, RBI should have allowed the exchange rate to 
(cid:147)overshoot(cid:148) quickly the targeted exchange rate of, say, Rs. 46.20 (or any other number) to, 
say,  Rs.  45.50.  Thereafter,  it  should  have  allowed  the  rupee  to  depreciate  slowly,  but  not 
necessarily  smoothly,  to  the  above  targeted  number over  a  period  of  next  few  months.  In 
essence, this proposal  is  akin to a policy  of (announced or unannounced) fixed exchange 
rate within a wider band. 
The RBI  welcomes the current debate. Reserves,  at  present,  are certainly  at  a  level  which is more 
than enough to meet any foreseeable contingency. It is also clear that, in the present period, capital 
inflows  and  remittances  have  been  strong,  requiring  continuous  domestic  liquidity  management.  In 
principle, therefore, it would be nice if an alternative viable exchange rate management system could 
be put in place which would avoid excessive build-up of reserves and domestic liquidity and, at the 
same time, maintain India(cid:146)s external competitiveness with low inflation and low interest rates. 
In theory, each of the above alternative approaches has some merit. However, it is not entirely clear 
that  they  can  be  put  into  practice  without  causing  substantial  instability  or  uncertainty  and  possible 
emergence  of  macro-economic  problems  which  are  worse  than  what  they  are  trying  to  solve.  An 
implicit assumption in two of the above alternatives is that there is a level at which, after initial fast 
appreciation, the exchange rate will either stabilise or turn around. A further implicit assumption is that 
the  level  (whatever  it  is)  is  either  already  known  or  will  become  known  to  the  market  as  it  is 
approached. 
RBI(cid:146)s  past  experience  does not suggest that these assumptions are valid. It  would be recalled that 
there  have  been  periods  when  rupee  exchange  rates  have  been  relatively  more  volatile  and 
movements have been sharper. However, during periods of sharper appreciation, instead of inflows 
declining and demand for foreign currency rising, it was noticed that actual market behaviour was the 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 5
 opposite. The opposite was true during periods of sharp depreciation. Exchange rate expectations had 
their  own  momentum  and  were  often  self-fulfilling.  There  must,  of  course,  be  a  level  where  these 
expectations will reverse. However, if that level, because of (cid:147)momentum(cid:148) trading in imperfect and thin 
markets  happens  to  be  significantly  out  of  line  with  (cid:147)fundamentals(cid:148),  considerable  instability  and 
substantial overvaluation (or under valuation) may result. Such an outcome may do more harm than 
good to continued confidence in a country(cid:146)s exchange rate system. 
The third suggestion to hold the rates at current levels, and not to allow it to appreciate any further, 
even if inflows are strong, is also likely to be unsustainable over any length of time. It virtually amounts 
to adopting a (cid:147)fixed(cid:148) or a near-fixed exchange rate system with a floor. Past experience suggests that 
this system can work well, as it did in East Asia prior to the crisis, when the economy is doing well and 
inflows  are  strong,  but  it  comes  under  extreme  pressure  when  there  are  unfavourable  domestic  or 
external developments. Abandonment of a system of (cid:147)fixed(cid:148) exchange rates (or a system with a known 
floor)  then  becomes  unavoidable.  Such  a  change,  when  it  occurs  under  pressure,  can  result  in 
considerable instability which is likely to be spread over a fairly long period. At the end of this process, 
the country then has no option but to revert to a more flexible exchange rate system. 
It is by no means a mere coincidence that all countries affected by external crises in the 1990s had a 
fixed or near-fixed exchange rate systems. China at present is an exception to the rule in view of its 
persistent  trade  surpluses  over  a  long  period  combined  with  very  high  levels  of  foreign  direct 
investment.  It  is  not  certain  how  long  into  the  future  this  situation  will  prevail.  In  any  case,  China(cid:146)s 
special characteristics are difficult to replicate in other emerging markets with lower volume of trade 
and foreign investment. 
The desirability of maintaining the-overall competitiveness of an economy can hardly be questioned. 
However, the long-run competitiveness of an economy needs to be measured in relation to a multiple 
currency  basket,  and  in  relation  to  major  trading  partners  over  a  reasonably  long  period  of  time. 
Exchange rate fluctuations among major currencies are now an everyday fact of life, and it is important 
for  all  entities  with  foreign  exchange  exposures  to  resort  to  (cid:147)hedging(cid:148)  with  appropriate  risk 
management of assets and liabilities. 
On balance, the benefits of the suggested alternatives to the present system are not very clear. The 
present system is by no means an ideal one. However, like the old cliche about virtues of democracy, 
it is probably better in the long run than all the available alternatives. In view of behavioural and market 
complexities  in  this  area,  as  well  as  multiple  economic  policy  objectives,  solutions  which  seem  (cid:147)ex 
ante(cid:148)  optimal  may  turn  out  to  be  disastrous  (cid:147)ex  post(cid:148)  -  after  the  event  -  as  happened  in  Argentina 
recently and East Asia and Mexico some years ago. 
Nevertheless,  as  I  said  a  while  ago,  RBI  welcomes  the  present  debate.  As  a  contribution  to  this 
debate, I have tried to deal with some relevant issues, and indicate our present views on them. These 
views  are,  of  course,  subject  to  change  in  the  light  of  domestic  and  international  experience  and 
further academic insights. 
We look forward to your deliberations and hope to benefit from them. 
6 
 BIS Review 36/2003
