 Bank of Japan’s March report of recent economic and financial developments1 
Bank of Japan, 6 March 2003. 
 The Bank’s View2 
Economic activity remains flat amid substantial uncertainty about the outlook for the economy. 
With  regard  to  final  demand,  while  business  fixed  investment  has  been  virtually  level,  private 
consumption  continues  to  be  weak.  Moreover,  housing  investment  remains  sluggish  and  public 
investment is declining. While domestic demand has yet to show signs of recovery, both exports and 
imports are increasing at a very modest pace with net exports remaining virtually level.  
Industrial  production  continues  to  be  basically  level  in  response  to  these  developments  in  final 
demand. As for the employment situation, new job offers are on a gradual rising trend. In addition, the 
number  of  employees,  which  covers  various  types  of  employees  including  non-regular  employees 
such  as  temporary  workers,  appears  to  be  declining  at  a  slower  pace.  However,  firms  are  still 
maintaining  their  stance  on  reducing  personnel  expenses,  and  household  income  continues  to 
decrease significantly due mainly to an ongoing decline in wages. Thus, the employment and income 
situation of households overall remains severe. 
Turning to the economic outlook, a widely shared view of the prospect for overseas economies in 2003 
is that, partly due to the continued firmness in Asian economies, they will follow a gradual recovery 
path.  However,  their  recovery  is  likely  to  be  anemic,  at  least  for  the  time  being,  given  the  sluggish 
improvement in the U.S. economy and further weakness in European economies. In this situation, the 
increase in exports is expected to remain very modest, and industrial production is likely to be more or 
less unchanged for the immediate future.  
With  respect  to  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  declining  trend,  and 
private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time due to the severe employment and income 
situation.  Business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  be  supported  by  the  improvement  in  corporate 
profits to date, but is unlikely to recover clearly for the time being due mainly to substantial uncertainty 
regarding overseas economies.  
Overall, assuming that overseas economies will recover in 2003, albeit only at a moderate pace, the 
increase in exports will accelerate and the uptrend in production will resume sooner or later, which in 
turn will initiate the momentum for a recovery. However, the economy is unlikely to show clear signs of 
recovery for some time, since production is expected to be virtually unchanged for the time being while 
downward pressures such as excessive labor input and debt persist. Furthermore, the downside risk 
to the economic outlook for overseas economies continues to require attention, given that there are 
some uncertain factors including geopolitical developments and their economic implications. On the 
domestic  side,  stock  prices  are  weak.  Hence,  careful  monitoring  is  required  of  progress  in  the 
resolution of the nonperforming-loan problem and its effects on stock prices, corporate finance, and 
the economy.  
On the price front, import prices are on a rising trend with some fluctuations, reflecting developments 
in  prices  of  overseas  commodities  such  as  crude  oil.  Domestic  corporate  goods  prices  have  been 
declining gradually on the whole with the continued fall in machinery prices, despite the rise in import 
prices  and  the  improved  supply-demand  balance  in  materials  industries.  Consumer  prices  and 
corporate services prices have also been declining gradually.  
Looking at the conditions influencing price developments, import prices are projected to be firm for the 
time  being  due  mainly  to  developments  in  crude  oil  prices.  On  the  other  hand,  factors  such  as  the 
ongoing  technological  innovations  in  machinery  and  the  streamlining  of  distribution  channels  will 
continue to push prices downward. Meanwhile, the overall state of supply and demand is expected to 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
March 4 and 5, 2003. 
2   The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on March 4 and 5, 2003 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 12/2003 
 1
 continue exerting downward pressure on prices, with domestic demand continuing to be weak for a 
while. However, the low levels of inventories and the improvement in the supply-demand balance in 
materials industries will support prices in corporate transactions. Against this background, the decline 
in domestic corporate goods prices is likely to be mitigated in the near term. The pace of year-on-year 
decline in consumer prices is expected to become somewhat slower, as medical costs are projected to 
rise from April due to public insurance reforms.  
As for the financial environment, the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank of Japan is 
recently  moving  at  around  20  trillion  yen,  as  the  Bank  provides  ample  liquidity.  Under  these 
circumstances, in the money markets the overnight call rate continues to hover at very close to zero 
percent.  Moreover,  longer-term  interest  rates  continue  to  be  at  low  levels  on  the  whole,  and  the 
markets remain steady to date as the fiscal year-end approaches. 
Yields on long-term government bonds declined again to the range of 0.7-0.8 percent after moving in 
the  range  of  0.8-0.9  percent  until  mid-February.  Yield  spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank  bonds 
and corporate bonds) and government bonds are contracting slightly. 
Stock  prices  are  weakening  slightly  reflecting  the  heightened  uncertainty  about  geopolitical 
developments  and  uncertainty  regarding  the  domestic  economic  outlook.  The  Nikkei  225  Stock 
Average is recently moving at the 8,000-8,500 yen level. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen is currently traded in the range of 117-119 yen to the U.S. 
dollar, as the dollar continues to be weak due mainly to greater tension in the Middle East.  
With regard to corporate finance, private banks remain cautious in extending loans to firms with high 
credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip  companies.  The 
lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms, particularly small ones, are severe. In 
the  corporate  bond  and  CP  markets,  the  issuing  environment  for  firms  with  high  credit  ratings  is 
accommodative, but the environment for firms with low credit ratings is severe. 
Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because business fixed 
investment remains sluggish and firms are continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-
on-year basis. The amount outstanding of corporate  bonds and CP issued is moving  at around the 
previous year’s level.  
Meanwhile, according to business surveys, financial positions of firms, particularly those of small firms, 
remain severe. 
The year-on-year growth rate of the monetary base is around 10-15 percent. The year-on-year growth 
rate of the money stock is around 2.0 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market 
conditions continue to be extremely easy. Long-term interest rates are declining slightly. The money 
stock  and  the  monetary  base  maintain  high  growth  rates  relative  to  that  of  economic  activity  as  a 
whole. However, stock prices remain weak. In corporate finance, the fund-raising environment of firms 
with low credit risks is accommodative on the whole, but with regard to firms with high credit risks, the 
stance  of  investors  is  severe  and  the  lending  attitudes  of  private  banks  continue  to  be  cautious. 
Developments  in  the  financial  and  capital  markets,  the  behavior  of  financial  institutions,  and  the 
situation of corporate finance continue to require close monitoring. 
 