 Caleb M Fundanga: The role of the banking sector in combating money 
laundering 
A paper presented by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at a seminar organised 
by the C and N Centre for Advanced International Studies, Lusaka, Zambia, 23 January 2003. 
 Mr Chairman 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Allow me first of all to thank you for inviting me to address you on this topic of great importance to the 
development  of  our  financial  system  in  Zambia  –  “the  role  of  the  banking  sector  in  combating 
money laundering”. I have every reason to believe that your training in the last couple of days has 
provided an opportunity for you to share with the resource persons valuable insights on the subjects 
you have covered. 
Mr  Chairman,  the  scourge  of  money  laundering  is  not  new  to  mankind.  Despite  money  laundering 
being topical in policy discussions nowadays and on the minds of supervisors and regulators like the 
Bank of Zambia, the scourge itself has a long history and could be as old as the history of organised 
trade. Nonetheless, in spite of the fundamentals of the crime remaining, largely, the same as in the 
olden days, recent advances in technology  and globalisation have offered and  will continue to offer 
more sophisticated means to convert ill-gotten proceeds into legally acceptable financial assets. 
In  recent  times,  money  laundering  has  grown  into  real  big  business.  For  instance,  the  Economist 
magazine estimated that about USD 500 billion to USD 1.5 trillion is laundered through banks each 
year. Further, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) - an intergovernmental organization under the 
auspices  of  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD)  also  estimates 
money laundering to be in the ranges of USD 590 billion to US1.5 trillion. As a percentage of world 
economic output, money laundering accounts for about 2% to 5%. Obviously, given the secrecy and 
the  illegal  nature  of  this  business,  it  is  difficult  to  tell  exactly  the  extent  of  money  laundering. 
Nevertheless, these figures give us an indication of the magnitude of the problem. 
In  this  regard,  financial  institutions,  in  particular,  banks  provide  a  conduit  through  which  money 
(including  laundered  money)  flows.  Because  of  this,  the  financial  system  is  the  focal  point  of  anti-
money  laundering  initiatives  because  dirty  money  is  most  visible  when  it  is  first  introduced  into  the 
financial system. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  before  I  proceed  in  discussing  the  various  aspects  of  money  laundering 
including  stages  in  money  laundering,  its  effects  on the  economy,  the  global  and  local  initiatives  to 
fight money laundering and the role that banks can play in combating money laundering, allow me to 
define what money laundering is.  
For the purposes of my presentation today, I shall define money laundering as the method of hiding, 
mixing and disguising the proceeds of criminal activities through legally operating institutions for the 
purpose of destroying the origins of the proceeds. 
Mr  Chairman,  it  is  clear  from  the  definition  that  money  laundering  is  a  tool  that  is  used  by  people 
involved in illegal activities, such as drug trafficking, organised crime, tax-evading, political bribery and 
above all, corruption. In addition, the events of September 11th have added another dimension to the 
problem  of  money  laundering  and  brought  to  light  the  synonymity  between  money  laundering  and 
terrorism.  
What  then  are  the  stages  in  money  laundering?  Though  the  money  laundering  process  seems  so 
complicated, it usually follows a traceable pattern and three distinct stages can be identified. These 
are:  
• 
Placement Stage. This it involves the disposal of cash proceeds of the illegal activity. It is at 
this stage that the proceeds are introduced into the financial system in a manner that avoids 
detection  by  the  banks  and  the  authorities.  At  this  stage  criminals  use  techniques  like 
depositing large amounts of money in several smaller batches so as to avoid suspicion and 
detection. 
BIS Review 6/2003 
 1
   Layering Stage. This is when the true character of the cash proceeds of the illegal activities 
is hidden through a series of transactions in order to erase the audit trail. This is done by 
transferring  this  money  to  off-shore  banking  centres  with  strict  secrecy  laws,  or  to  bearer 
bonds, and/or shell holding companies and accounts held in the name of nominees. 
The last stage is the Integration Stage where the successfully laundered money is integrated 
into the financial system.  
Money laundering has a wide range of adverse effects on any country’s economic, political and social 
structures. Since laundered money passes through the financial system, money laundering also has 
several  effects  on  the  financial  systems  as  a  whole  and  banks  in  particular.  Some  of  the  effects 
include: 
• 
First, undermining legitimate private sector efforts. Money launderers use front companies, 
to disguise the proceeds of illicit activities and in the process hide the ill-gotten gains. These 
companies have access to substantial illicit funds, therefore allowing them to subsidize the 
front company and offer it’s products and services at levels below market rates. At times they 
quote  prices,  which  are  below  production  cost.  This  explains  why  front  companies  have 
competitive advantage over companies that source their funding from the financial markets. 
This  makes  it  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  legitimate  business  to  compete  against  such 
companies.  This  situation  may  lead  to  the  crowding  out  of  legitimate  private  sector 
businesses by criminal entities. Clearly, such criminal enterprises would not adhere to good 
corporate governance practices as legitimate businesses would. 
Second, loss of control of economic policy. As already alluded to, the magnitude of money 
laundering is between 2% to 5% of world output. In most developing economies, like ours, 
these proceeds may dwarf government budgets, resulting in loss of control over economic 
policy by such governments. 
Third, money laundering can also affect currencies and interest rates as launderers reinvest 
their  funds  where  their  schemes  are  less  likely  to  be  detected  rather  than  where  rates  of 
return are higher. Money laundering can also increase the threat of monetary instability due 
to the misallocation of resources. In this regard, money laundering may result in inexplicable 
changes in money demand and increased volatility of international capital flows, interest and 
exchange rates. The unpredictable nature of money laundering, coupled with the attendant 
loss of policy control, may make sound economic policy difficult to achieve. 
Fourth,  money  laundering  could  lead  to  economic  distortion  and  instability.  Since  money 
launderers  are  not  interested  in  profit  generation  from  their  investment  but  rather  in 
protecting  their  proceeds,  they  will  invest  their  funds  in  activities  that  are  not  necessarily 
economically beneficial to the country where the funds are located. Further, to the extent that 
money laundering and financial crime redirect funds from sound investments to low-quality 
investments  that  hide  their  proceeds,  economic  growth  can  suffer.  In  some  countries  for 
example, entire industries, such as construction and hotels, have been financed not because 
of actual demand, but because of the short-term interests of money launderers. When these 
industries  no  longer  suit  the  money  launderers’  scheme  of  things,  they  abandon  them, 
causing a collapse of these sectors and immense damage to economies. 
Fifth,  money  laundering  could  lead  to  loss  of  revenue.  Money  laundering  makes  tax 
collection efforts difficult, thus leading to decline in tax revenues. The loss of revenue means 
government setting higher tax rates than would normally be the case. 
Sixth, money laundering could lead to risks to privatisation programmes. Money laundering 
poses  a  threat  to  governments’  economic  reform  efforts,  especially  privatization  of  state 
owned  enterprises.  Money  launderers  have  the  financial  power  to  out-bid  legitimate 
investors.  In  addition,  while  privatisation  initiatives  are  often  economically  beneficial,  they 
can  also  serve  as  a  vehicle  to  launder  funds.  Criminals  have  been  known  to  purchase 
privatised banks, resorts, etc to hide their illicit proceeds and farther their criminal activities. 
Unfortunately, developing countries like Zambia risk being exposed to the threat of money 
laundering because in the process of attracting investments, they become more vulnerable 
to accepting laundered money. 
Seven, money laundering  could  expose  any recipient country  to reputation risk. In today’s 
global  economy,  nations  cannot  afford  to  have  their  reputations  eroded  by  associating 
        themselves  with  money  laundering  activities.  Money  laundering  and  other  crimes  erode 
confidence  in  financial  markets,  and  the  negative  reputation  resulting  from  these  activities 
diminishes  legitimate  global  opportunities  available  to  any  country  and  this  could  slow 
sustainable economic growth.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen, what I have just elaborated are the adverse effects of money laundering on 
any economy in the world. Allow me now to look at the effects of money laundering on the banking 
sector. As you may be aware, due to banks’ confidentiality principle and their capability to handle huge 
cashless transactions, and transmit funds efficiently, they are normally the targets of money laundering 
activities. In doing so, banks also suffer serious consequences from money laundering, which include: 
• 
First,  reputation  risk  -  banks  become  vulnerable  to  reputation  risk  because  they  easily 
become  a  vehicle  for  or  a  victim  of  illegal  activities  perpetuated  by  their  customers.  Once 
banks are associated with such activities, their reputation in the market becomes tainted and 
they risk losing customers. For instance, in Zambia, the closure of one bank was as a result 
of allegations that the bank maintained accounts keeping proceeds of drug money.  Banks 
therefore,  need  to  protect  themselves  by  continuously  and  vigilantly  evaluating  their 
customer  base.  The  quest  to  mobilise  deposits  and  improve  liquidity  must  not  be  an 
overriding factor to accepting money from questionable sources. 
Second, legal risk - banks may become subject of lawsuits resulting from failure to observe 
‘know  your  customer’  standards  or  from  failure  to  practice  due  diligence  in  customer 
evaluation  and  acceptance.  As  a  result  of  this,  banks  can  suffer  from  criminal  liabilities, 
supervisory fines and other penalties.  
Third, concentration risk - banks are expected to have information systems to identify credit 
concentrations and to set prudential limits to restrict exposures to single borrowers or groups 
of related borrowers. The challenge for banks therefore is to adopt vigorous programs for the 
detection of suspicious transactions, since failure to report such transactions under the new 
money laundering legislation may subject the bank to criminal sanctions.  
Fourth, lack of anti-money laundering practices in a bank may also affect it’s relationships 
with  correspondent  banks  because  reputable  international  banks  would  not  want  to  be 
associated  with  banks  that  do  not  practice  basic  anti-money  laundering  techniques,  and 
therefore be a threaten to their own operations.  
Fifth, money laundering compromises the corporate governance structure of banks. This is 
an area of concern especially among the small banks when it comes to deposit mobilisation 
and customer selection. 
   Mr Chairman, the increasing integration of financial systems means that money launderers can now 
make use of the financial system to hide the proceeds of the illegal activities easily. Launderers are 
now able to quickly move illicit money between national jurisdictions, therefore complicating the task of 
tracing and confiscating these assets.  
Further,  differences  in  money  laundering  legislation  and  in  the  implementation  of  international 
standards such as, know your customer regulations, customer identification and secrecy laws have led 
to  regulatory  arbitrage.  This  has  worked  to  the  advantage  of  money  launderers  because  they  can 
move the proceeds of their activities to less regulated territories where there are lax laws. Therefore, 
to avoid launderers from taking advantage of the weaknesses in the application of international law, 
many governments have decided to co-operate in order to combat money laundering. In this regard, 
the most notable international initiatives/responses to money laundering include: 
• 
First, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). The FATF is a 26 member intergovernmental, 
policymaking body that was established in 1989 to guide the implementation of anti money 
laundering  measures  in  the  aftermath  of  the  1988  UN  Drugs  Convention.  Its  membership 
includes the major financial centres of Europe, North America and Asia. The FATF has come 
up  with  40  recommendations  which  member  countries  are  expected  to  adopt.  These  are 
designed  for  universal  application  and  cover  the  criminal  justice  system  and  law 
enforcement, the financial system; it’s regulation and international cooperation.   
Second,  the  Basel  Committee  of  Banking  Supervision.  The  main  thrust  of  regulatory 
response  to  money  laundering  has  been  to  stop  dirty  money  from  entering  the  banking 
system  and  to  make  sure  that  it  is  traceable  when  it  occurs.  The  Basel  Committee,  a 
grouping of the worlds leading bank supervisors has so far come up with three guidelines for 
    banks  in  combating  money  laundering,  namely:  ‘The  Prevention  of  Criminal  Use  of  the 
Banking  System  for  the  purpose  of  Money  Laundering’  (1988),  the  ‘Core  Principles  of 
Effective Banking Supervision’ (1997), and the ‘Customer due diligence for banks’ (2001). 
Third, the Wolfsberg Principles. The Wolfberg Principles came into force in 2000 and are an 
industry response to the threat of money laundering. They are an agreement among eleven 
major  international  private  banks  (which  account  for  at  least  a  third  of  the  world  private 
banking  funds)  to  guide  the  conduct  of  international  private  banking.  Essentially,  the 
Principles seek to control money laundering by cutting across the multiplicity of jurisdictional 
issues  and  addressing  the  serious  reputation  damage  they  were  suffering  in  the  media 
because of money laundering. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me now to discuss our local initiatives/responses to money laundering. 
Admittedly, there has been little activity in the areas of prevention of money laundering in Zambia, until 
quite recently. This exposed the country to the activities of money  launderers  because they always 
seek to operate in countries where there are lax controls. However, the major initiatives in the fight 
against money laundering, locally, have included:  
• 
Enactment of the Prohibition and Prevention of Money Laundering Act. The Government of 
Zambia responded to the increase in drug trafficking and money laundering by passing the 
Prohibition  and  Prevention  of  Money  Laundering  Act  in  2001.  The  Act  provides  for  the 
disclosure of information by supervisory authorities and of regulated institutions if suspected 
of money laundering activities. The Act also provides for the forfeiture of property belonging 
to  persons  connected  to  money  laundering  offences  as  well  as  for  the  prosecution  of 
persons connected to or charged with money laundering offences. The Money Laundering 
Act places certain obligations on the Bank of Zambia as the supervisory  authority. One of 
these is the issuance of regulations to commercial banks as and when necessary in order to 
prevent money laundering. 
Regulatory responses. The Governor of the Bank of Zambia is a member of the Anti-Money 
Laundering  Authority,  whose  main  functions  are  to  provide  policy  directives  to  the 
Commissioner  of  the  Drug  Enforcement  Commission  and  to  advise  the  Minister  of  Home 
Affairs on measures that are required to prevent and detect money-laundering activities in 
Zambia. 
In order to minimise the likelihood of criminals or their organisations from taking control of or 
setting  up  their  own  banks,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  as  the  licensing  authority  of  banks  and 
financial institutions, has put in place a rigorous licensing process, which ensures that only 
‘fit and proper’ persons are allowed to own and manage financial institutions.  
Know  Your  Customer  Directive.  Even  before  the  coming  into  effect  of  the  Prohibition  and 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, the Bank of Zambia, inline with the Basle Committee’s 
guidelines  issued  the  ‘Know  Your  Customer’  Directive  in  December  1998.  The  directive 
outlines  the  basic  procedures  that  bank  managements  should  put  in  place  within  their 
institutions to prevent criminal  use of the banking system. It also places  limitations on the 
amounts of foreign exchange that individuals can transact. 
   Mr Chairman, the banking sector in Zambia has also not lagged behind in terms of coming up with an 
industry  response  to  this  scourge.  The  Bankers’  Association  of  Zambia  (BAZ)  issued  the  ‘Code  of 
Banking  Practice  in  Zambia’  in  2002,  outlining  the  Association’s  commitment  to  fighting  money 
laundering and complying with the letter and spirit of money laundering in all parts of the world.  
Because banks have been identified as the primary focus of money launderers and provide an entry 
point for laundered money into the financial system, most efforts to combat this scourge are targeted 
towards  banks.  Under  the  money-laundering  Act,  banks  have  certain  obligations,  which  are  placed 
upon them by the law. These include: 
• 
To  keep  identification  record  of  its  customers  for  a  period  of  ten  years.  This  is  aimed  at 
safeguarding the documentary evidence to prove that the financial institution has sufficient 
knowledge of its clients. 
To  report  to  the  Money  Laundering  Investigations  Unit  whenever  there  are  reasonable 
grounds to believe that a money laundering offence has been or is about to be committed. 
To comply with any directives issued by the Bank of Zambia. 
    To designate an officer in each branch or office as the money laundering officer. 
To provide training to staff on anti-money laundering techniques. 
• 
• 
In conclusion, Mr Chairman, I would like to state that the effects of money laundering are incomputable 
and  unknown  to  many  of  us.  The  Prohibition  and  Prevention  of  Money  Laundering  Bill  has  laid  a 
foundation and will serve to deter the use of the Zambian financial system as a site to launder dirty 
money. It has given each one of us a challenge. For the banking sector, the challenge is to ensure that 
their corporate governance structures and risk management systems are redesigned to take care of 
this growing threat. 
As for the Bank of Zambia, our challenge is to recognise that technology and globalisation has given 
money launderers an opportunity to explore new techniques to commit and cover their crimes. This 
therefore,  requires  us  to  be  more  vigilant,  dynamic  and  resourceful  to  thwart  and  overcome  the 
scourge. In addition, full co-operation and coordination within the banking industry in implementing the 
Bank  of  Zambia  guidelines  will  go  a  long  way  in  enhancing  co-operation  within  the  region  and 
internationally  because  money  laundering  thrives  in  jurisdictions  where  there  is  piece-meal 
implementation of standards and laws. 
Once again, I thank you for inviting me. 
 