Ishrat Husain: The role of the private sector and government in Pakistan’s 
economic development 
Convocation address by Dr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Institute of 
Business Management, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, 4 February 2003. 
 Mr. Vice Chancellor, Dean of Faculty, Director IBM, Distinguished guests, Faculty members and dear 
students, 
I would like to thank the Vice Chancellor, Faculty of the Dean and Director of the Institute of Business 
Management  for  inviting  me  this  evening  at  their  graduation  ceremony.  I  would  extend  my  sincere 
felicitations to all those who will receive their M.B.A. degrees today and also to their parents. As an 
employer  who  recruits  about  50  candidates  from  among  several  thousand  applicants  through  a 
competitive process every year I am quite sure to see some of you in the State Bank of Pakistan in 
near future. We already have more than 50 graduates from this University and the Institute and they 
have  demonstrated  high  standards  of  integrity  and  professional  competence.  As  your  Director  has 
pointed out some of the able graduates of this Institute are unable to cross the threshold of 70 percent 
marks  at  the  M.B.A.  examination  used  by  the  S.B.P.  to  screen  the  candidates  because  of  your 
rigorous  grading.  But  you  must  realize  that  we  receive  11,000  applications  every  year  and  it  is  not 
possible for us to test all of them. Hence we have to adopt a certain cut-off point. We would examine 
other  possibilities  such  as  ranking  of  the  Universities  and  Business  Institutes  to  adopt  alternative 
system of screening. 
Today, as it is a tradition on such occasions I am going to address on an important topic i.e. the role of 
private sector in the economic development of Pakistan. Most of you will end up in this sector and I 
would therefore like to give you some advice – as to what role you should play. 
Pakistan has made considerable progress during the last 55 years since its independence. A country 
with  about  30  million  people  in  1947  was  heavily  dependent  on  imported  food,  imported  cloth  and 
imported energy  to sustain itself. There were serious doubts raised at that time about the country’s 
economic survival. Today, in 2003 Pakistan one of the largest countries in the world with a population 
145 million is not only self sufficient in food grains, meat, milk and poultry but also exports wheat and 
rice. Pakistan does not only clothe its population but is one of the leading exporters of textiles in the 
world. More than 50 percent of the energy needs of the country are met from local reserves of natural 
gas and hydel power. Pakistan was one of the few developing countries that achieved an impressive 
economic  growth  of  6  percent  annually  for  over  four  decades  and  tripled  its  per  capita  income. 
Incidence of poverty had declined from almost 50 percent of the population to less than 20 percent by 
the  late  eighties  although  it  has  resurged  to  34  percent  by  the  late  nineties.  An  average  Pakistani 
today has higher life expectancy, enjoys higher food per capita and consumes more calories than his 
father’s  generation.  We  have  built  large  dams  such  as  Tarbela  and  Mangla,  motorways,  super 
highways and modern ports. We are better connected to the rest of the world through fast means of 
telecommunications, internet, cable and satellite channels. 
Despite these spectacular achievements for which we should thank Almighty Allah for His blessings 
we are still a poor and underdeveloped country and the benefits of this progress have not been shared 
universally.  Too  many  people  have  been  left  out:  One-third  of  the  population  still  lives  on  about 
Rs.60 per  day,  one-half  of  the  population  is  illiterate  with  extremely  low  female  literacy  rates  in  the 
rural  areas,  a  large  segment  of  population  does  not  have  access  to  safe  water  for  drinking  and 
personal  hygiene;  disease,  malnutrition,  infant  and  maternal  mortality  rates  are  still  quite  high, 
population  is  growing  more  rapidly  than  other  countries  in  the  region  and  income  and  regional 
inequalities  are  rising.  In  essence,  we  have  lagged  behind  in  our  social  and  human  development 
indicators and our performance has been much below our potential. This lack of social progress has 
also created problem of social cohesion. This therefore, brings me to a series of questions: How can 
we  catch  up  with  the  rest  of  the  world  and  start  improving  on  our  social  and  human  development 
indicators? What can we learn from our own historical experience and the mistakes we have made in 
the last? What can we extract from the success stories of other developing countries and apply them 
to Pakistan? Although there is always a lack of unanimity among economists about the prescriptive 
aspects of development let me venture to share my own thoughts with you today. 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 1
The last five decades of development experience have taught us clearly that the respectively roles of 
the Government and private sector should be clearly delineated, defined and put into practice. Those 
who  think  in  terms  of  dichotomy  between  market  and  government  are  sadly  mistaken.  Government 
has the primary responsibility to (a) provide security – internal and external to its citizens (b) maintain 
law and order (c) dispense quick and fair justice and enforce contracts (d) build physical infrastructure 
(e)  provide  basic  social  services  such  as  education,  health  and  water  supply  (f)  implement  good 
governance  (g)  maintain  macro  economic  stability,  (h)  regulate  the  markets  where  there  are 
monopolies, externalities, economies of scale (i) build social safety nets for the poorest and vulnerable 
segments of the population. Markets need government and government needs markets. The state is 
not a substitute for the market but a critical complement and that Government action is essential to 
ensure that development process is inclusive and the benefits of growth are not pre-empted by a small 
class of elite in the country. 
Private sector, on the other hand, has the capacity and ability to produce, distribute and trade goods 
and  services  in  the  economy  efficiently  and  at  least  cost.  There  is  hardly  any  justification  for  the 
Government or the bureaucrats to be running businesses. The record of public sector enterprises and 
nationalized commercial banks in Pakistan for the last 30 years speaks volume of the damage that has 
been  inflicted  on  our  economy.  To  just  give  you  one  example,  if  50  percent  of  the  allocation  of 
Rs.100 billion  which  was  made  last  year  to  bear  the  losses  of  the  public  sector  corporations  and 
enterprises was diverted to education, health and other social services, imagine how much it would 
have helped the common man in this country. Profit making is not dirty provided it is made through 
competition, hard work, entrepreneurship, in an environment where there is a level playing field for all 
economic  sectors,  where  the  rules  of  game  are  applicable  to  every  one,  where  implementation  of 
policies and regulations take place across board, where taxes and other government dues are paid on 
time  and  loans  are  repaid  without  any  write  off.  Under  such  circumstances  private  enterprises 
generate  production,  employment,  opportunities  and  create  income  in  the  economy.  This  will  only 
happen when they make profits and invest those profits in expansion of their existing businesses or 
creating new businesses. Economic growth takes place through this investment, incomes rise and the 
countries  get  prosperous.  Those  of  you  who  still  believe  in  old  socialistic  ways  of  thinking  in  which 
profits  were  condemned  as  socially  exploitative  should  shed  this  thinking  as  this  is  flawed  and 
empirically  incorrect.  Privatization,  Deregulation  and  liberalization  are  the  key  instruments  through 
which private sector can flourish and thrive. Those of you who believe that Governments should create 
jobs  for  all  educated  youth  are  sadly  mistaken  as  it  only  burdens  the  Government  budget  with 
artificially inflated and unsustainable, wasteful expenditures and results in larger fiscal deficits. These 
deficits can only be financed through borrowing or printing currency. If the former route is taken then 
we are caught in a debt trap and if the latter route is adopted we are in any inflationary bind. Both of 
these routes lead us to a path of disaster and instability for the economy. 
You must realize that the private sector employs 90 percent of the labor force in Pakistan and Public 
sector hardly 10 percent. Private sector is thus not only the main engine of growth but also the main 
provider of economic opportunity and activity. 60 percent of the country’s labor force is employed in 
agriculture  through  tenancy,  self-employment,  owner-cultivated  land  or  farm  and  non-farm  labor. 
80 percent  of  the  non-agricultural  labor  force  depends  on  small  and  medium  enterprises  including 
small shops, hawkers, thela wallas, hotels and restaurants, social and personal services, construction, 
transport services. Only 20 percent of non-agricultural labor force is employed in organized sectors in 
Government, manufacturing, electricity, gas and water, financial institutions and other services. Thus 
private sector growth, particularly of smaller firms and farms, is vital to both employment generation as 
well as reduction of poverty in Pakistan. 
How can the private sector, particularly small and medium enterprises and agriculture be encouraged 
to  expand,  invest  and  generate  employment?  First  and  foremost,  good  economic  governance  must 
prevail  and  be  practiced.  Unless  there  is  transparency,  predictability,  consistency,  rule  of  law  and 
uniform application of law, private sector would not be forthcoming as the uncertainties in economic 
governance do not allow them to make accurate calculations of their costs and benefits. Bureaucratic 
harassment,  corruption  and  extortion  are  all  damaging  to  the  investment  climate  as  they  impose 
barriers to entry, add to operating costs and create uncertainty once the firm is established. 
Second,  there  should  be  sound  economic  policies  in  place  –  fiscal  discipline,  market  determined 
exchange and interest rates, lower trade barriers and tariffs, reasonable taxation levels, openness to 
trade,  and  well  functioning  financial  system.  In  absence  of  sound,  clear  and  consistent  economic 
policies the private entrepreneur will always be reluctant to part with his capital. Unsustainable fiscal 
policies  crowd  out  private  sector  and  make  it  more  difficult  for  them  to  access  credit  from  financial 
system at reasonable price. 
Third, changes in political regime should not create abrupt and radical shifts in the underlying rules of 
game.  Contracts  and  projects  approved  by  the  preceding  governments  should  be  scrupulously 
honored by the subsequent governments without any interruption or hiatus. Commercial disputes or 
allegations  of  corruption  should  be  tackled  according  to  the  due  process  of  law  and  arbitration 
procedures. Whims and caprices of individuals should not be allowed to play havoc as they not only 
undermine the confidence of existing firms but also deter new investors from engaging in production. 
Fourth,  the  Government  has  to  ensure  that  physical  infrastructure  and  adequately  trained  and 
educated labor force are available in sufficient quantities so that the private firms derive benefits from 
reduced  cost  of  production.  If  electricity  or  water  charges  are  exorbitant,  transportation  costs  are 
overbearing  or  the  educational  level  of  labor  is  quite  low  the  returns  to  prospective  investment  are 
considerably reduced and the investor is unwilling to commit his funds. 
Fifth, adequate credit availability from financial institutions to agriculture and SME sectors has been 
one of the major constraints for growth. The  SBP has taken measures recently to accelerate credit 
delivery to these sectors by involving commercial banks on a large scale and giving them incentives. 
Prudential  regulations  are  also  being  revised  to  remove  the  hurdles  in  the  way  of  credit  delivery  to 
small  and  medium  enterprises.  The  multiplier  effect  on  the  economy  through  higher  credit  and 
enlarged access to the economic actors in these two fields is likely to be quite large and sustainable. 
As both these sectors are labor intensive they would generate a greater demand for labor absorption. 
China was able to reduce rural poverty from 250 million people in 1978 to about 34 million in 1999 by 
focusing on agriculture and Town and Village enterprises (TVEs). There is no reason as to why we 
cannot succeed in achieving the same results over the coming decade. 
But, in facilitating the private sector to play the role we have outlined above I come back to the need 
for investing in education and training at all levels – higher, secondary, vocational and primary. It is not 
only  the  quantity  that  matters  but  also  the  quality  of  education.  At  this  point  I  must  commend  the 
faculty and students of Bahauddin Zakaria University for maintaining high standards of education. I am 
confident  that  the  students  graduating  from  this  University  will  be  highly  competitive  and  earn  the 
respect of employers. These days, the reputation of institutions matters a lot and this reputation can 
not  be  acquired  overnight.  It  is  also  not  the  buildings  and  infrastructure  which  contribute  to  this 
reputation but the curriculum, instruction, assimilation of knowledge, and its application to day to day 
life, problem solving approach which distinguishes one institution from the other. It is also easy to lose 
reputation although more difficult to acquire it. Therefore I will appeal to the faculty as well as students 
of this august university not to become complacent but remain on their toes. They should continually 
try to excel in their respective fields, maintain high standards and traditions of knowledge seeking and 
discourage the bad habits of memorizing the material, cheating at the exams, skipping the classes, 
selecting only the material which is likely to appear at the exam. Those of you who devote themselves 
to  continuous  and  inquisitive  learning  will  come  ahead  in  life.  No  amount  of  sifarish  or  nepotism  or 
connections with the right people will help  you in the long run. It is only the innate qualities of hard 
work and systematic learning which will keep you in good stead. I wish all those who are graduating 
today the best of luck in their careers. 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 3
