 Antonio Fazio: Two great economists and the challenges we face today 
Address by Mr Antonio Fazio, Governor of the Bank of Italy, on the occasion of the granting of the 
Keynes  Sraffa  Award,  at  The  Italian  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  for  the  UK,  London, 
25 February 2003. 
 John Maynard Keynes was the most influential economist of the twentieth century, a century in which 
the world economy made greater advances than in any other historical period. 
The world’s population grew much faster than in the preceding centuries; per capita output also rose at 
an unprecedented pace. 
The growth in population and per capita income accelerated in the second half of the century, not least 
owing to the absence of wars comparable to those fought in the first half. 
The overall improvement in living conditions was accompanied by a widening of the gaps between the 
economic welfare of countries and geographical areas, and above all by an increase in the perception 
of the disparities. 
I shall return to this point later. 
As a subject in its own right, political economy acquired form and substance between the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries. In this respect it is worth recalling: the fundamental contributions of Cantillon 
and  Hume;  the  Physiocrats  and  Quesnay  with  his  Tableau  économique,  the  precursor  of  Leontief’s 
input-output analysis; Antonio Genovesi, who held the first chair of political economy in Europe at the 
University of Naples, with his Lezioni di economia civile, and Ferdinando Galiani, whose treatise Della 
moneta  remains  exemplary  for  its  profundity  and  enduring  relevance.  Adam  Smith’s  The  Wealth  of 
Nations marked a decisive turning point. 
But economic analysis had already been developed, as a part of philosophy, by the Schoolmen. In the 
late Middle Ages, from the thirteenth century onwards, the great Italian, Spanish, French and Flemish 
moralists, in addressing the emergence of the urban economy and the growth in commerce and fairs 
after the manorial economy of the great Benedictine monasteries and the feudal estates, discussed 
the new developments with regard to trade, currencies, prices and the interest rate. 
Not far from here, in Oxford, the light of the Franciscan order, John Duns Scotus, developed a theory 
of prices that is based strictly on the cost and hence on the quantities of labour employed in producing 
goods. 
The  underlying  idea  was  constantly  to  search  for  and  define  the  just  price,  in  order  to  pursue 
commutative  justice  in  exchanges,  a  concept  that,  together  with  distributive  justice,  was  forcefully 
stressed by Thomas Aquinas as the basis of orderly life in the community. 
Later, the doctors of the Sorbonne and the great Italian universities also addressed the question of 
insurance.  Taking  a  premium  to  insure  goods  against  the  risks  of  shipwreck  and  piracy  was 
acceptable, but the insurers had to possess adequate capital, what we would call actuarial reserves 
today, with which to indemnify the insured in the event of claims. 
Fresh  impetus  was  given  to  the  study  of  economic  phenomena  by  the  monetary  upheavals  that 
followed the discovery of America. 
In  the  1500s  and  the  early  1600s,  Molina,  Lessius  and  Lugo  put  forward  elegant  analyses  of  the 
distinction between interest, considered a merely monetary phenomenon in line with Thomas Aquinas, 
and profits. 
In general it was censurable, usury, to charge interest on sums that were lent, because money was 
deemed  unproductive;  however,  it  was  morally  acceptable  to  receive  compensation,  a  return  or  a 
share of the profits where the money lent gave rise, through commerce, to the creation of new wealth. 
The distinction between monetary interest and profits, the fruit of the use of money in commercial and 
productive enterprises, was lost for several centuries. After Wicksell it was rediscovered by Keynes, 
who made it a cornerstone of his General Theory. 
BIS Review 13/2003 
 1
 In the nineteenth century Ricardo and Malthus in England observed and theorized the expansion of 
industry  and  international  trade,  the  growth  of  the  population  and  its  relationship  with  resources. 
Malthus also perceived the problem of effective demand. 
Marx, reinterpreting Hegel and Ricardo, drew on the development of mass production and capitalism 
and the tensions between workers and capitalists to form his palingenetic vision of the end of private 
property, the triumph of the proletariat, and communism. 
In  continental  Europe  and  Italy,  Christian  sociologists  and  economists  -  Ozanam,  von  Ketteler  and 
Toniolo - analyzed the social and political consequences of the industrial revolution and the spread of 
mass production. They prepared the way for the social doctrine of the Catholic Church and Pope Leo 
XIII’s encyclical Rerum Novarum. 
In Germany the principles of the welfare state were outlined. 
In every epoch, the great economists understand the economic and social changes and upheavals of 
their  times.  They  put  forward  new  views  of  the  forces  that  dominate  the  evolution  of  the  economy. 
They study stylized facts, theorize them and reduce them to logical relationships and to models of how 
economic  systems  work,  from  which  they  draw  indications  for  the  conduct  of  business  and  for  the 
action of the public authorities. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  role  of  credit  and  banking  and,  more  generally,  of 
finance emerged in all its importance. 
The separation, the real and logical distinction, between economic agents who save and those who 
use  savings  or  make  investments  by  borrowing  capital  has  enormous  implications  not  only  for  the 
expansion of economic activity but also for the stability of the growth process, both within individual 
economies and across economic systems. 
Keynes fully understood these changes  and derived  revolutionary  economic theories from them, as 
well as setting out their far-reaching implications for policy. 
His genius is to be seen in the Economic Consequences of the Peace, which, it gives me pleasure to 
recall, was immediately translated into Italian by the Milanese publisher Treves. 
Keynes foresaw the devastating effects of the Treaty of Versailles on the European economy. 
He envisaged the losses suffered by Germany and Russia being a source of major political instability 
in Europe. 
He made a fierce attack on the work of President Wilson, the French president and the British prime 
minister. 
He  examined  the  advisability  of  partially  or  completely  cancelling  war  debts  that  had  become 
unbearable  for  the  smaller  countries,  and  analyzed  the  dire  consequences  that  application  of  the 
peace treaty would have for international trade and the prosperity of some regions. 
In the background, there seems to emerge a positive vision of economic relations among European 
countries along the general lines of what would take shape in the design of the European Community. 
In  A  Tract  on  Monetary  Reform,  which  was  also  promptly  translated  into  Italian  by  Piero  Sraffa, 
Keynes delineated a new and different role for monetary policy. 
The objective of the banks of issue, which had developed predominantly in the nineteenth century and 
the early decades of the twentieth, was basically reduced to maintaining the gold parity. 
Stressing the powerful repercussions of inflation and deflation on the orderly working of the economy, 
prosperity,  growth and employment, Keynes  indicated the stabilization of the price level in terms of 
fiduciary money as the objective of monetary policy. 
He advocated the abandonment of the gold standard, which he called a “barbarous relic”. 
Several years later, in his criticism of Britain’s return to the gold standard, he reiterated his objections 
to  restoring  the  pre-war  parity,  or  at  any  rate  to  setting  an  exchange  rate  well  above  the  one  then 
obtaining. 
In The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill, a pamphlet he wrote in 1925, Keynes argued that 
restoring the pre-war parity would generate deflation, with adverse effects on income, a contraction in 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2003
 the volume of business and economic crisis. The only way to avoid these effects was to reduce wages 
and prices. 
His warning went unheeded. In the opinion of many scholars, the return of all the major countries to 
the gold standard with a marked revaluation of their currencies was the underlying cause of the Great 
Depression of the 1930s. 
In Italy, Mussolini’s “quota 90” policy for the lira, implemented in an authoritarian fashion in 1926 by 
the  Finance  Minister,  Giuseppe  Volpi,  despite  the  misgivings  of  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy, 
Bonaldo Stringher, appears to have been influenced by Keynes’s suggestions. In order to mitigate the 
deflationary  effects,  the  revaluation  of  the  lira  to  90  against  sterling,  from  a  market  rate  that  had 
reached nearly 150, was accompanied by an overall reduction in wages of 20 per cent. In the 1930s 
the  Fascist  regime  also  began  a  large  programme  of  major  public  works  that  supported  domestic 
demand. 
The Great Depression and the economic crisis that gripped Germany were the main cause, together 
with the country’s severe institutional difficulties, of the advent of Nazism. 
The hyperinflation of the early 1920s had been the consequence of the impossibility for the German 
economy to expand again under the heavy burden imposed by the peace treaty. 
The Second World War was not unrelated to the First, partly owing to the serious errors committed in 
the 1920s in international relations and monetary policies. 
The problem of unemployment emerged in all its drama. 
In  the  United  States  economic  policy  reacted  with  the  New  Deal  and  with  a  monetary  policy 
appropriate  to  the  new  conditions.  Economists  laboriously  rediscovered  the  problem  of  effective 
demand. The Polish economist Michael Kalecki is among those to be recalled in this regard. 
But it was Keynes who fully developed a new paradigm with which to grasp reality and make economic 
policy prescriptions. 
In  his  General  Theory  of  Employment,  Interest  and  Money,  the  classical  vision  in  which  supply 
generates demand in accordance with Say’s Law is criticized and the causal relationship is reversed: 
the level of economic activity depends on the demand for consumption and investment. 
The separation between the units where savings are formed and those where investment is decided, 
through  banking  and  financial  intermediation,  renders  investment  independent  of  the  availability  of 
savings. In the absence of full employment, the expansion of public and private investment generates 
an increase in employment, consumption, production and, ultimately, savings that is sufficient to cover 
the new investment. 
The  rediscovery  of  the  distinction  between  the  interest  rate  and  the  marginal  rate  of  return  on 
investment gave Keynes the theoretical model for determining the demand for capital goods on the 
part  of  firms.  The  equilibrium  between  saving  and  investment  is  re-established  through  changes  in 
income, while the interest rate is determined in the money market. 
The model’s originality, the theoretical revolution, was grasped by economists. John Hicks offered an 
elegant interpretation of it in Mr. Keynes and the Classics. 
In  1944  Franco  Modigliani  extended  the  analysis  of  Keynesian  theory  and  formalized  it  in  Liquidity 
Preference and the Theory of Interest and Money. 
In the United States the  new theory’s implications for the public finances  were  worked out by  Alvin 
Hansen. 
The great effort to rebuild an international monetary order towards the end of the Second World War, 
culminating in the Bretton Woods agreements of 1944, again saw Keynes among its protagonists. 
Instead of his proposal based on the creation of an international currency, the bancor, the agreements 
mainly adopted the plan formulated by Harry Dexter White of the United States, based on the dollar, 
which was in turn linked to gold. 
America  and  the  Federal  Reserve  came  to  play  a  role  akin  to  that  of  a  world  central  bank.  The 
ascendancy  of  the  dollar  as  the  most  important  currency  in  international  trade  had  major 
consequences for the US economy. 
BIS Review 13/2003 
 3
 Like all great thinkers, Keynes interpreted his times. His theories have had an immense influence on 
the  economic  policies  of  all  the  major  countries  up  to  today;  they  have  also  been  subjected  to 
stretched interpretations and used for shortsighted policies in the field of public finances. 
That public works could be used to alleviate unemployment was something rulers had always known. 
It will suffice to recall the examples of public spending in the Papal States and the Kingdom of Naples 
in Italy before national unification.  
One  example  of  a  programme  designed  to  increase  the  level  of  effective  demand  was  Roosevelt’s 
New  Deal  in  the  United  States.  In  England,  the  Beveridge  plan  was  influenced  by  the  same 
philosophy.  Post-war  Italy’s  on-the-job  public  works  training  scheme,  the  Vanoni  plan  and  the 
programme of special measures for Southern Italy are other examples.  
Keynes’s original idea was to concentrate on public works and infrastructure, on expenditure intended 
to  orient  production  and  not  on  unproductive  expenditure,  although  he  later  used  the  paradox  of 
digging holes in the ground and then filling them in to explain the principle of effective demand. 
On the theoretical level, the Keynesian model is definitively established as an explanation of how an 
economy works. 
I was brought up on Keynesian theory by Modigliani and Samuelson at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology  in  the  1960s.  Solow’s  classes  introduced  me  to  the  theory  of  growth.  Those  were  the 
years  of  Kennedy’s  New  Frontier  and  the  new  economic  policy.  Keynesian  theory  was  taught  and 
applied, but Modigliani also encouraged me to look into the  work of Friedman, who  was refocusing 
attention on classical monetary theory. 
Friedman  had  restated  the  quantity  theory  of  money  in  1956.  In  his  Presidential  address  to  the 
American Economic Association in December 1967 he prefigured the explanation of the stagflation of 
the 1970s. He reasserted the need to control the quantity of money and not only interest rates. His 
ideas formed the basis for the monetary policies of the leading industrial countries in the 1980s and 
1990s after the period of inflation that followed the cutting of the link with gold and the oil crises. 
An  elegant  and  insightful  synthesis  of  these  two  theories,  the  classical  and  the  Keynesian,  was 
developed by Patinkin in Money, Interest and Prices. 
In the Bank of Italy’s econometric model, which we began to build in 1963 and which is continuously 
updated and used to analyze the evolution of the Italian economy, the starting point is a Keynesian 
approach to the operation of the real sector of the economy; this is then integrated with an analysis of 
financial flows, à la Tobin. 
The stabilization of Italy’s economy in 1974 after the first oil shock, which involved limiting the volume 
of  bank  lending  in  order  to  control  domestic  demand,  capital  outflows  and  the  exchange  rate,  was 
planned and estimated using the model. The outcome was more than satisfactory. 
The  same  model  was  the  basis  for  deciding  the  massive  fiscal  adjustment  undertaken  in  1977  to 
improve  the  balance  of  payments  and  curb  inflation.  In  both  cases  the  measures  were  set  out  in 
agreements with the International Monetary Fund. 
For the stabilization programme of 1994-96 we relied on a stringent monetary policy. 
The objective was to subdue inflation, and the rate was rapidly reduced from almost double digits to 
around 2 per cent. Following the drastic monetary restriction, in roughly two years the lira appreciated 
by more than 25 per cent against the German mark. 
The growth in the money supply was virtually nil in the two years 1995-96. Initially, short-term interest 
rates  had  to  be  raised  to  an  exceptionally  high  level  by  rationing  central  bank  credit  to  banks. 
Inflationary expectations were stamped out; the lira appreciated and long-term interest rates fell from 
almost 14 per cent in early 1995 to 6 per cent within the space of two years. 
Although a Keynesian model was employed in order to analyze demand, output and employment, the 
monetary tightening proved effective in disinflating the economy. 
In some respects even the supply-side economics of the Reagan Administration in the 1980s, which 
was also a major factor in the strong performance of the US economy in the 1990s, can be interpreted 
as a stimulus to domestic  demand based on a reduction of taxation and an  increase in the budget 
deficit. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2003
 The economic policy pursued by the United States in 2001 and 2002, consisting in large interest-rate 
reductions, tax cuts and increased public spending, also displays pronounced Keynesian traits. It was 
made possible by the existence of a budget surplus, the relatively low level of public debt, the strength 
of the dollar and the growth in productivity, itself ascribable to the flexibility of the labour market, which 
prevented inflationary repercussions. 
In several cyclical phases in recent decades, and to some extent at present as well, the interpretation 
of  international  economic  developments  has  indicated  an  insufficient  level  of  effective  demand, 
especially of investment expenditure in the leading economies. 
Piero  Sraffa  developed  his  ideas  largely  in  the  intellectual  milieu  of  Cambridge,  to  which  Keynes 
brought him in 1927. The year before, the Economic Journal had published an essay of Sraffa’s that 
shook the foundations of Marshall’s model of perfect competition. 
Sraffa was a student of Einaudi’s. For many years he kept up an intellectual correspondence with such 
philosophers  and  political  thinkers  as  Wittgenstein  and  Gramsci.  But  he  was  a  scholar  open  to 
practical problems. We see this in his writings on money and banks in Italy in the stormy aftermath of 
the  First  World  War,  from  which  he  drew  some  principles  concerning  the  advisability  of  public 
involvement  in  banking  supervision  in  periods  of  instability,  in  economies  where  finance  was  still 
developing. 
Until 1950 he worked on the critical edition of the works of Ricardo. 
Exhuming  an  approach  that  had  been  “submerged  and  forgotten  since  the  advent  of  the  ‘marginal’ 
theory”, Sraffa formulated a theory of prices and distribution on rigorous analytical foundations. 
The result was a critique of the neoclassical theory of value, which was the consensus doctrine of the 
day. His analysis contradicts the Marxian labour theory of value. Like Keynes, Sraffa distinguishes the 
share of output that remunerates capital from the interest rate. He mentions the possible influence of 
the rate set by the central bank on the rate of profit. 
Sraffa’s  Production  of  Commodities  by  Means  of  Commodities  was  not  published  until  1960,  after 
more than three decades of intense work to make sure of the logical and mathematical consistency of 
his theory. It was published in English and an Italian version was brought out almost simultaneously. 
The  new  theory  triggered  lively  debate.  One  of  Sraffa’s  students,  Luigi  Pasinetti,  crossed  swords, 
successfully, with two eminent representatives of neoclassical economics, Solow and Samuelson, my 
own professors. Another of his students, Pierangelo Garegnani, continued to elaborate Sraffian capital 
theory. He  is now  working on the complete edition  of Sraffa’s papers, still largely unpublished,  with 
support from the Bank of Italy. 
In 1965-66, in his course on “Advanced Economic Theory”, Samuelson described Sraffa’s work with 
the  greatest  respect  and  linked  it  to  the  great  school  of  thought  beginning  with  Quesnay’s 
Tableau économique  and  continuing,  three  centuries  later,  with  Leontief’s  input-output  tables  and 
linear programming. 
Professor  Samuelson  reaffirmed  this  judgment  in  an  article  in  the  Corriere  della  Sera  of 
6 September 1983  on  the  occasion  of  Sraffa’s  death,  with  the  statement  that  if  his  work  had  been 
published  a  decade  or  two  earlier  it  would  have  exerted  a  powerful  influence  on  the  subsequent 
development of economic theory by Leontief, von Neumann, Knight and Koopmans. 
Professor Pasinetti has extended Sraffa’s theoretical vision to the analysis of economic development. 
So far, to my knowledge, this has had limited application to current economic events. 
I  should  like,  instead,  to  put  forward  the  hypothesis  that  it  can  be  of  considerable  help  in 
understanding several important phenomena of our age. 
Sraffa’s model  is  an  analytical  interpretation  of  subsistence,  of  the  conditions  for  the  existence  and 
survival  of an economic system. The relationships between  the  quantities of commodities produced 
and  used  for  production  and  prices  must  correspond  to  certain  conditions  connected  with  technical 
relationships. 
The model offers a new view, which also differs from classical economics, of the relative importance of 
different goods in the functioning of the economy. Some goods are essential for the production of the 
others; their disappearance would derail the economy. On the contrary, luxury goods only satisfy the 
needs of certain groups of consumers; their disappearance would have no significant repercussions 
on the economy, nor would it affect the distribution of income between wages and profits. 
BIS Review 13/2003 
 5
 The model shows very clearly that the value of non-reproducible goods of which a given amount is 
found in nature, such as land, depends on all the other relationships existing between the goods that 
are produced, which in turn are means of production. 
In the same way as for luxury goods,  taxes on rents have  no effect on prices  or the distribution of 
income. 
The meaning of Sraffa’s laconic remark on the possible dependence of the rate of profit on the rate of 
interest may be less elusive today. With the globalization of financial markets, the rate of profit must be 
correlated with and is certainly powerfully influenced by the level of interest rates established in the 
international money market. 
Classical models can be extended along the lines developed by von Neumann to the link between the 
interest  rate  and  the  rate  of  growth.  In  a  global  economy  with  unrestricted  international  financial 
transactions,  this  has  implications  for  the  sustainability  of  growth  in  economies  with  a  large  foreign 
debt,  the  interest  rate  on  which  is  determined  exogenously  by  the  level  prevailing  in  international 
markets. It also has implications for the distribution of income between wages and profits within such 
economies. 
Finally, I would like to read Sraffa’s work in the light of an ideal connection with the profound thought of 
the medieval Schoolmen in their search for the just price. 
Given  the  rate  of  profit,  commutative  justice  is  established  in  the  exchange  of  goods  within  the 
economy, based on the quantity of labour directly or indirectly embodied in them. 
Every worker’s purchasing power is determined exactly as a function of the structure of production, as 
defined by technical ratios. In other words, every worker’s purchasing power reflects the values of the 
goods that remunerate the effort required to produce them. 
In addition to commutative justice this also results in a sort of distributive justice as the foundation of 
society. 
Considerable progress has been made over the past two decades in the economic and institutional 
situation of the advanced and the developing countries, in global economic interdependence and in 
international economic cooperation.  
Observers  and  politicians  are  fully  aware  of  the  need  to  take  up  the  challenge  of  a  globalization 
process that, while greatly improving living conditions throughout the world, has also aggravated and 
above all highlighted the disparities between the supply of essential goods and the level of economic 
development in different countries and geographical areas.  
Financial globalization has progressed at a very fast pace in the past twenty years, thanks in part to 
the  use  of  information  technology.  Today  it  can  be  said  there  is  a  single,  worldwide  money  and 
financial market.  
The growth in world trade has mainly concerned industrial products.  
These developments in the exchange of goods, services and capital are a source of wealth for all who 
take  part  in  them.  Yet  the  liberalization  and  globalization  of  financial  flows  can  be  accompanied  by 
outbreaks of instability that harm the weakest economies.  
In  a  system  that  rests  basically  on  fiduciary  money,  the  principles  of  free  trade  and  comparative 
advantage  typical  of  trade  in  manufactures  have  sometimes  been  extended  unquestioningly  to 
movements of financial capital. Past errors in fixing exchange rates and instituting specific monetary 
regimes have been repeated in new ways. 
Reflection on the mistakes made and the need to limit and rectify the adverse effects on the stability of 
intermediaries, to protect savings and to restore conditions for a recovery in output have prompted the 
monetary  authorities  of  the  industrial  countries  to  establish  more  extensive  and  closer  cooperation 
among themselves and with the developing countries.  
The Governor of the Bank of England, Sir Edward George, plays a leading role in this new phase of 
international monetary cooperation that we could say began with the meeting of the Group of Seven 
leading industrial countries in Toronto in February 1995, shortly after the Mexican crisis erupted.  
The  international  financial  system’s  ability  to  cope  with  the  repercussions  of  the  uncertainty  that 
followed  11  September  2001,  the  difficulties  created  by  the  cyclical  slowdown  in  the  leading 
economies  and  the  consequences  of  the  discovery  of  serious  irregularities  in  the  management  of 
6 
 BIS Review 13/2003
 major international economic and financial groups, without suffering serious damage, testifies to the 
positive results.  
To date, agricultural commodities and textiles have been excluded from the liberalization of trade.  
The  leading  industrial  countries  must  make  an  effort  to  reduce  the  enormous  subsidies  to  their 
agricultural sectors and remove the regulatory and tariff barriers to imports of agricultural products and 
textiles from the developing countries.  
By  concentrating  on  the  production  of  high-quality  goods  and  opening  up  to  imports  of  widely-
consumed  goods  from  the  developing  countries,  the  wealthiest  economies  can  make  an  important 
contribution to increasing world output and, above all, to ensuring it is more equitably distributed.  
The great economists are men of their times, but they also have the ability to shed light on the future.  
The  twentieth  century  gave  us  examples  of  instability  and  of  economic  and  political  upheaval  of 
extraordinary magnitude.  
At some crucial moments people feared for the very survival of our civilization, owing to the wide-scale 
use of weapons of mass destruction.  
The experience  of the two world  wars,  with their legacy of death and destruction, must impel us to 
relegate war to the past as a means of solving international disputes. Great philosophers have taught 
us  that  peace  lies  at  the  core  of  the  future  of  humanity.  Closer  cooperation  between  the  advanced 
countries and the emerging economies can contribute to the progress of the world economy.  
It is necessary to rely on the decision-making power of the United Nations. It is necessary to oppose 
all  the  forms  of  violence  that  offend  the  dignity  of  the  person,  such  as  terrorism.  It  is  necessary  to 
strengthen, also in the light of ethical principles, the foundations of international law and institutions. 
For its part economic theory has made major advances. 
There is room to refine the analytical instruments that the great thinkers of the distant and recent past 
have handed down to us and adapt them to today’s situations. 
This  is  a  task  for  universities,  but  also  for  the  institutions  that  are  continuously  faced  with  new 
phenomena  and  problems.  Further  intellectual  revolutions  may  not  be  indispensable;  if  they  are, 
enlightened minds will put them forward. 
Fruitful  results  can  still  come  from  the  analogical  application  of  existing  theories,  formulated  for 
essentially closed economies, to increasingly open and integrated economies. 
The  institutional  orders  and  policies  adopted  for  national  financial  systems  can  provide  guidance, 
taking account of the differences, for world finance. 
Theoretical models developed in the age of free banking can be applied to the analysis of international 
finance,  in  which  the  national  monetary  systems  of  individual  countries  play  a  role  similar  to  that 
played by banks in national economies in the early decades of the 1900s. 
There exists a problem of controlling global liquidity, in addition to the stability of intermediaries. 
As rightly pointed out by Fausto Vicarelli, an economist who died prematurely some ten years ago, the 
basic characteristic of capitalism in the age of finance is instability. He considered the analysis of this 
phenomenon,  and  the  consequent  proposals  for  economic  policy,  to  be  one  of  Keynes’s  most 
important contributions. 
Sraffa’s  theory  and  the  exhumation  of  classical  doctrine,  from  Smith  to  Ricardo,  not  to  mention  the 
neoclassical models of growth, provide us with interpretations of the underlying relationships that link 
the variables of the economy. 
We know the mechanisms, but our grasp of what sets them in motion is often tenuous. 
Investment  remains  a  fundamental  variable  for  comprehending  the  evolution  of  an  economy.  Our 
knowledge remains incomplete, however, our forecasting power fragile. The current difficulties of the 
European economy and the uncertain outlook in Japan suffice to demonstrate this. 
The links between economics and the other social sciences must be rediscovered, beginning with the 
adjacent and most closely interrelated disciplines, such as demography. 
There remains the wider realm of the moral sciences. Economics is part of philosophy and politics. 
BIS Review 13/2003 
 7
 In  his  writings  Professor  Dahrendorf  compels  us  to  re-examine  critically  the  relationship  that  has 
developed  between  freedom  and  society,  between  the  market  and  regulation,  between  democracy 
and  self-determination.  Raising  the  issue  of  a  new  international  order,  he  has  affirmed  that 
“democratizing  international  decision-making  is  the  greatest  challenge  posed  to  our  political 
imagination”.  
There  is  a  need  for  a  “strong  philosophy”  of  which  economic  theory  must  be  an  organic  part. 
Adam Smith was a professor of moral philosophy; The Wealth of Nations springs from a social and 
political vision. 
The development of marginal analysis and the theory of markets and the study of general equilibrium 
have made fundamental contributions to our understanding of the economic behaviour and facts that 
surround us and in which we are immersed. 
They are not sufficient. We must investigate the underlying determinants of economic phenomena. 
The advances by Keynes and Sraffa beyond microeconomic analysis, with one considering aggregate 
quantities  and  the  other  the  value  relationships  between  wages  and  goods,  directly  seek  to 
understand the variables of greatest importance for the welfare of society. 
The ancient themes of commutative justice and distributive justice maintain all their relevance. 
Economic analysis must go back to investigating first principles, rediscovering the links with the other 
dimensions of society of which the economy is part. This can come about in empirical fashion, as often 
happens.  But  that  is  not  sufficient.  It  is  up  to  social  scientists,  to  philosophers,  to  return  to  a  more 
systematic  study  that  will  set  our  understanding  and  action  in  the  field  of  economics  on  a  firmer 
foundation. 
The  century  that  has  just  begun,  with  society  marked  by  uncertainty  and  based  on  knowledge, 
demands  an  even  greater  capacity  for  government  and  participation,  nurtured  by  a  higher  cultural 
level. It is the way to invest in the future, preparing a better tomorrow for the younger generations. 
8 
 BIS Review 13/2003
