 Willem F Duisenberg: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 
10 September 2003. 
 It is my pleasure to appear before your Committee here today. As usual, I shall start my testimony with 
the ECB’s assessment of recent economic and monetary developments. I should then like to turn to 
issues relating to euro banknotes and conclude my opening remarks with a few personal observations. 
Economic and monetary developments 
1. 
Starting with our assessment of the economic environment, the data that has become available over 
recent months has confirmed that real economic activity in the euro area was very weak in the first half 
of  2003,  with  a  slight  quarterly  decline  in  real  GDP  growth  in  the  second  quarter  according  to 
Eurostat’s first estimate. At the same time, indications of an upturn in economic activity starting in the 
second  half  of  the  year  have  strengthened.  In  fact,  survey  data  and  financial  market  developments 
reflect an  improvement in  confidence. The  expectation of a gradual economic recovery starting this 
year  and  strengthening  in  2004  is  in  line  with  all  the  forecasts  and  projections  which  have  recently 
become available. 
Both external and domestic factors continue to support the expected pick-up in economic activity. As 
regards the external factors, the economic recovery which is already under way in several parts of the 
world should lead to an increase in euro area export demand. This development should counteract the 
effects  of  the  loss  of  price  competitiveness  brought  about  by  the  past  appreciation  of  the  euro. 
Furthermore, real disposable income should be positively affected by terms of trade effects stemming 
from  the  past  appreciation  of  the  euro.  Moreover,  ongoing  adjustment  efforts  by  companies  to 
enhance competitiveness and profitability should improve the conditions for an economic upswing. In 
this respect, the low level of interest rates strengthens incentives to invest. 
As  a  consequence  of  recent  developments,  downside  risks  to  the  main  scenario  of  a  gradual 
economic recovery have declined, although they have not disappeared. Macroeconomic imbalances in 
some  regions  of  the  world  still  persist.  Although  these  may  not  affect  the  short-term  economic 
dynamics,  they  constitute  a  risk  over  the  longer  term.  In  addition,  oil  price  developments  may  also 
pose a risk to economic activity. 
As  regards  prices,  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate  for  annual  HICP  inflation  in  August  was  2.1%.  Annual 
HICP inflation is likely to hover around, or be slightly above, 2% for the remainder of 2003, not least as 
oil  price  developments  imply  some  upward  pressure  in  the  short  term.  Beyond  the  short  term,  we 
continue to expect annual inflation rates to fall below 2% in 2004, stabilising at levels consistent with 
price stability. This expectation is based  on the assumption of moderate wage  developments in the 
context of a gradual economic recovery. Moreover, the significant past strengthening of the external 
value of the euro should continue to have lagged effects which will limit upward pressure on prices, 
despite  some  recent  declines  in  the  level  of  the  euro  exchange  rate.  Over  longer  time  horizons, 
inflation expectations in the euro area seem to be well anchored at levels below but close to 2%. 
As  regards  our  monetary  analysis,  monetary  growth  has  remained  strong  in  recent  months.  As  a 
consequence, there is significantly more liquidity available in the euro area than is needed to finance 
non-inflationary growth. This high excess liquidity  is partly due to  portfolio shifts and an  increase  in 
precautionary savings. However, the low levels of interest rates have contributed to the high demand 
for  liquid  assets.  The  current  level  of  interest  rates  is  also  counterbalancing  the  negative  impact  of 
subdued  economic  growth  on  credit  demand.  In  fact,  the  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  has 
stabilised at relatively robust levels since the beginning of the year. 
At  the  current  juncture,  the  ample  liquidity  is  not  expected  to  translate  into  inflationary  pressure. 
However, monetary growth needs to be closely monitored, as the significant amount of excess liquidity 
could  become  a  source  of  concern  if  it  were  to  persist  when  economic  activity  strengthens 
significantly. 
BIS Review 39/2003 
 1
 To sum up, and cross-checking the information from the two pillars, our economic analysis confirms 
the  expectation  that  price  pressures  will  remain  subdued  in  the  context  of  a  gradual  economic 
recovery and moderate import price and wage developments. The strong monetary expansion should 
not, in view of the economic situation, be seen as adversely affecting this outlook for the time being. 
Overall,  therefore,  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price  stability  remains  favourable.  Against  this 
background, the key ECB interest rates are considered appropriate at present. Clearly, the Governing 
Council will continue to carefully monitor all factors that might affect this assessment. 
Taking a longer-term view, the current level of short-term nominal interest rates in the euro area is the 
lowest recorded over the past 50 years. More importantly, the low level of interest rates is at present 
associated with inflation expectations that are compatible with price stability. This has not often been 
the case in the past.  
In  this  respect,  history  tells  us  that  loose  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  lead  to  entrenched  inflation 
processes, which in the end had adverse consequences for economic growth and employment. If we 
were to learn a lesson from the 1970s and the 1980s, it would be that there are high economic costs 
to be paid in fighting inflation once it has become entrenched. I should recall that it was this realisation 
which led to the worldwide conviction that monetary and economic policies should be stability-oriented. 
If I look back at the early years of Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), I can say that 
I am satisfied with what has been achieved by the monetary policy of the ECB. Inflation expectations 
over this very challenging period indicate that there is public confidence in the fact that price stability in 
the euro area will be maintained. This confidence constitutes a major achievement which - through a 
variety of channels - contributes to raising the growth potential of the euro area.  
However, I must also confess that other macroeconomic policies have not lived up to expectations.  
In the area of fiscal policy, we have seen a process where commitments made have repeatedly been 
broken.  From  the  start  of  Stage  Three,  some  countries  have  not  shown  sufficient  determination  to 
meet one of the key objectives of the Stability and Growth Pact, namely to achieve budgets in balance 
or  surplus  over  the  medium  term.  As  the  times  of  strong  economic  growth  have  not  been  properly 
used to bring the fiscal position of these countries onto a sustainable  basis, it  is not surprising that 
these  countries  have  had  problems  during  the  last  few  years  in  keeping  fiscal  deficits  below  the 
threshold of 3% of GDP laid down in the Treaty. 
In  this  light,  I  view  recent  fiscal  developments  and  the  discussions  surrounding  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  with  great  concern.  There  is  growing  evidence  that  most  countries  will  miss  their 
budgetary  targets  for  2003  by  a  significant  margin.  While  the  deterioration  of  budgetary  balances 
mainly  reflects  thelower  than  anticipated  economic  growth,  it  is  worrying  that  not  all  countries  with 
severe imbalances have so far introduced sufficient consolidation measures.  
The  lack  of  fiscal  discipline  -  and  notably  the  lack  of  any  clear  medium-term-oriented  consolidation 
strategies - is a factor weighing adversely on the euro area’s long-term growth prospects. In order to 
strengthen confidence in the euro area, it is fundamental to maintain the credibility of the institutional 
and economic underpinnings of EMU and to abide in all respects by the agreed rules of the game. It is 
essential  that,  in  the  budgetary  plans  currently  being  prepared  for  2004,  there  be  a  correction  of 
excessive deficits within the agreed time-frame in the countries concerned. In the other countries with 
fiscal  imbalances,  a  structural  consolidation  effort  of  at  least  0.5%  of  GDP  per  year  is  required.  All 
fiscal plans need to be part of a comprehensive and credible medium-term strategy, with an emphasis 
on expenditure restraint and a growth-oriented restructuring of expenditure.  
Another  area  in  which  we  have  seen  insufficient  progress  over  recent  years  is  that  of  structural 
reforms. While some initiatives are under way, more needs to be done to address structural rigidities in 
the labour and product markets. I should like to emphasise that the benefits of these reforms for the 
economic  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  would  be  substantial.  Such  reforms  are  essential  to 
address  what  is  perceived  as  the  euro  area’s  main  economic  problem,  namely  the  high  level  of 
structural unemployment. While these benefits will be fully reaped over the medium term, I am also 
convinced  that  reforms  would  also  support  economic  growth  in  the  short  term,  as  they  would 
strengthen confidence and make the euro area more attractive to investors. 
Issues relating to euro banknotes 
2. 
Let me now turn to issues relating to euro banknotes. Continuing a practice that was established last 
year, the ECB published, in July, its biannual information on the counterfeiting of the euro. The data 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2003
 confirmed what was expected from the outset, namely that the counterfeiting figures would increase in 
the early years of the new currency. In addition, because of its status as an international currency, the 
euro may be considered a more attractive target than any of the legacy currencies were. However, 
despite  these  factors,  and  although  it  may  be  too  early  to  identify  any  reliable  trends,  euro 
counterfeiting has currently settled at a level far lower than the aggregate level of counterfeiting of the 
legacy  currencies  in  2001.  This  factor  should  be  clearly  emphasised,  since  much  of  the  public 
reporting in this regard has been exaggerated or distorted. 
The  euro  banknotes  are  designed  to  be  among  the  best  in  the  world  when  it  comes  to  counterfeit 
resistance. Moreover, in line with the normal practice of central banks, preparatory work has begun on 
developing even better protected banknotes. These may be issued towards the end of this decade. 
However, even the most sophisticated security devices will be useless if the banknote user makes no 
effort to check them. Therefore, our message to the public in our press releases on counterfeiting has 
consistently  been  that  there  is  no  undue  cause  for  alarm  about  counterfeiting,  but  that  the  public 
should  remain  vigilant  in  checking  banknotes  using  the  FEEL-LOOK-TILT  test,  thereby  denying 
criminals any chance of succeeding in their attempts at counterfeiting. This remains my message.  
In  addition,  we  are  also  trying  to  identify  any  need  for  the  provision  of  additional  information  and 
training to the general public and, in particular, to professional cash handlers, i.e. cashiers of shops 
and banks, which are normally frontline targets for counterfeiters. At the same time, the ECB has been 
stepping up the institutional framework for combating counterfeits. In this context, I should like to refer 
to the close co-operation  on anti-counterfeiting issues that has been established between the ECB, 
Europol  and  the  European  Commission.  Moreover,  co-operation  agreements  are  about  to  be 
concluded  between  the  ECB  and  Interpol,  and  between  the  ECB  and  national  central  banks  of 
acceding countries. 
Before  concluding,  let  me  make  a  final  remark.  As  you  know,  this  is my  last  testimony  before  your 
Committee. I have had the privilege to preside over the ECB for the past five years, guiding it from its 
very inception through a number of crucial - and successful - stages, such as the introduction of the 
euro in 1999 and, three years later, the euro cash changeover. Both events were, in my view, major 
steps towards a Europe (cid:147)united ever more closely(cid:148), and I am honoured to have served the European 
public and the cause of European integration during these times.  
Madam Chairman, Honourable Committee Members, let me convey to all of you my sincere thanks for 
our very fruitful co-operation over the past few  years. While we may not always have agreed on all 
issues, I believe that our relationship was marked by mutual confidence and a truly co-operative spirit. 
I  have  enjoyed  working  with  you  and  wish  you,  as  well  as  my  successor,  much  success  with  the 
challenges that lie ahead. 
BIS Review 39/2003 
 3
