 Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Review of economic development in Iceland during 
2002 
Address by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of 
Iceland, at the Bank’s annual meeting, Reykjavík, 21 March 2003. 
 On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland I welcome you all to the Bank’s 
42nd annual meeting. The Bank’s financial statements for the year 2002 have been ratified today by 
the  Prime  Minister.  The  Bank’s  annual  report  has  also  been  published.  It  includes  a  survey  of  the 
Bank’s  activities  and  performance,  along  with  a  detailed  report  on  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  and 
actions,  the  financial  system,  financial  stability  and  the  financial  markets,  and  the  main  features  of 
economic developments in the course of last year.  
The year 2002 was the first full year after new legislation on the Bank was passed and it moved onto 
an  inflation  target  with  a  joint  declaration  by  the  Government  and  the  Central  Bank  in  2001.  The 
number of countries that have adopted an inflation target for their monetary policy implementation has 
increased sharply after New Zealand introduced such a policy in February 1990. In all, 21 countries 
have  now  moved  onto  a  formal  inflation  target,  including  Canada,  the  UK,  Norway,  Sweden, 
Switzerland and Australia.  
The  chief  characteristic  of  this  arrangement  is  that  price  stability  is  the  main  objective  of  monetary 
policy. A declaration is also made stating that inflation will be kept within certain limits over a specific 
period.  The  central  bank  is  granted  independence  to  attain  this  target  with  the  instruments  at  its 
disposal. Other aspects of the new framework include increased transparency in monetary policy and 
communication of information from the central bank to the public and government. In most countries 
this has greatly stimulated discussion of monetary policy and central bank measures, on which opinion 
is divided as ever. Inflation forecasts play a vital role in monetary policy implementation under such a 
system.  The  expected  inflation  trend  according  to  the  forecast  forms  the  basis  for  monetary  policy 
decisions. 
One  consequence  of  this  policy  is  that  exchange  rate  stability  is  no  longer  the  anchor  of  monetary 
policy.  This  is  not  because  the  exchange  rate  of  any  currency  is  a  lightweight  factor  in  economic 
developments; rather, experience has shown that under free international capital flows, central bank 
instruments  are  inadequate  for  maintaining  a  stable  exchange  rate.  Under  conditions  of  free 
international capital flows, a central bank’s primary instrument is interest rates, which in the long run 
can only attain a single macroeconomic goal, i.e. ensuring price stability. It has turned out that other 
countries have benefited from adopting such a framework. 
It  was  in  light  of  this  international  experience  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  monetary  policy 
framework was changed two years ago and formal inflation targeting was adopted. Accordingly, the 
Central  Bank  is  obliged  to  aim  towards  an  annual  rate  of  inflation  which,  measured  in  terms  of  the 
increase in the Consumer Price Index over a twelve-month period, should generally be as close as 
possible  to  2½%.  Inflation  targeting  was  introduced  in  a  climate  where  the  economy  was  severely 
overheating. For this reason an adjustment period was set for the Central Bank, whereby it should aim 
to attain the inflation target by no later than the end of 2003. We have reason to celebrate the fact that 
inflation had already reached the set target by November 2002.  
In 1996 a period of robust economic growth began in Iceland which did not come to an end until 2002. 
GDP  growth  in  2001  is  estimated  at  2.9%,  which  is  more  than  in  most  industrialised  countries  that 
year. This growth phase ended with severe overheating of the economy. Among the forms this took 
was  a  current  account  deficit  in  excess  of  10%  of  GDP  in  2000  and  twelve-month  inflation  which 
peaked  in  the  beginning  of  2002  at  9.4%.  In  2002,  a  sharp  turnaround  took  place  in  the  Icelandic 
economy, under the strong influence of the Central Bank’s tight monetary stance. A small surplus was 
shown on the trade account and better external balance put the exchange rate of the króna on a surer 
footing. The króna appreciated substantially during the year after sharp depreciation in 2001, when it 
most  likely  dropped  considerably  below  the  equilibrium  exchange  rate.  Last  year’s  rapid  disinflation 
was not least the result of the substantial appreciation of the króna, which in turn can be attributed to 
better  external  balance,  lower  inflation  expectations  as  the  year  wore  on,  greater  confidence  in 
stability, and expectations that large-scale investment projects would go ahead. Disinflation last year 
can  also  be  attributed  to  a  considerable  weakness  in  domestic  demand.  National  expenditure 
BIS Review 18/2003 
 1
 contracted  by  2½%.  The  decline  in  fixed  capital  formation  was  particularly  pronounced,  but  private 
consumption  also  contracted.  In  spite  of  the  contraction  in  national  expenditure,  however,  GDP 
declined by only  ½%. This was due to favourable foreign trade developments, with a contraction in 
imports and expanding exports.  
The sudden turnaround in Iceland’s current account from 2000 to 2002 is almost unparalleled among 
the  developed  countries.  In  2002  there  was  a  1.8  b.kr.  surplus  on  the  current  account,  or  0.2%  of 
estimated GDP. In 2000 the deficit amounted to more than 10% of GDP, as I mentioned earlier. This 
shows the great adaptability of the Icelandic economy, which to a large extent can be attributed to the 
wide  range  of  reforms  that  have  been  made  to  the  structure  of  economy  in  recent  years,  including 
changes in the monetary framework. 
Now I shall turn to last year’s inflation developments in more detail. In 2001 inflation climbed rapidly, 
from 5.6% at the beginning of the year to a peak of 9.4% in January 2002. Last year, inflation slowed 
down  steadily  and  dropped  to  1.4%  in  January  2003.  According  to  the  last  two  measurements, 
inflation has edged up again, to 2.2% at the beginning of March. This did not come as a surprise. 
According to the joint declaration by the Government and the Central Bank of Iceland from March 27, 
2001 on an inflation target and a change in the exchange rate policy, the Central Bank, in consultation 
with Statistics Iceland, was supposed to devise one or more indices for assessing the underlying rate 
of inflation, which the Bank could take note of in the implementation of monetary policy. Two such core 
indices have been published since November. Both are compiled on the same basis as the CPI, but 
Core Index I excludes prices of vegetables, fruit, agricultural products and petrol, and Core Index II 
excludes prices of public services as well. The components excluded from the two core indices are 
either fairly volatile or more or less beyond the impact of monetary policy, or they reflect relative price 
changes that monetary policy should normally not respond to. Over the past 12 months, Core Index I 
has risen by 2.6%, i.e. marginally more than the inflation target, and Core Index II by 2.3%. I would like 
to underline that, notwithstanding the publication of core indices, the CPI is still the official reference 
on which the inflation target is based.  
For decades, a far too high rate of inflation was one of Iceland’s main economic problems. This had an 
adverse  effect  on  businesses,  making  effective  planning  difficult.  It  also  had  an  adverse  effect  on 
households, partly because a large proportion of household debt is indexed to inflation. It is certainly a 
welcome achievement for the Icelandic economy to have triumphed over inflation. However, I cannot 
avoid mentioning here that I think many people take inflation rather too lightly and feel that too much 
emphasis  is  given  to  constraining  it.  I  would  caution  against  this  view.  I  am  certain  that  the  same 
principles apply to Iceland as other industrialised countries, to which we tend to compare ourselves, 
namely that a low rate of inflation is one of the cornerstones of economic growth and public welfare 
and the Central Bank should therefore continue to have price stability as its main goal, as stipulated in 
current  legislation.  In  addition,  the  other  factors,  such  as  fiscal  policy  and  wage  decisions,  have  a 
considerable impact on how tight the monetary stance needs to be.  
The new monetary framework implied that a policy of stable exchange rate was abandoned, allowing 
the external value of the króna to be determined by market forces. No one doubts for a moment that 
the exchange rate of the króna is crucial for the economy. The exchange rate has a major effect on 
prices and profitability in the traded goods sector. Recently there has been a great deal of discussion 
about  the  exchange  rate  and  the  Central  Bank  has  frequently  come  under  fire.  A  widespread 
misunderstanding seems to prevail that the Central Bank can control the exchange rate. People must 
realise that the Central Bank exerts a limited long term impact on the exchange rate. The exchange 
rate depends on various economic factors, including foreign trade, foreign investment in Iceland and 
investment  by  Icelanders  abroad,  and  last  but  not  least  expectations  about  future  economic 
developments. For example, there is little doubt that expectations in connection with power-intensive 
industry have already influenced the exchange rate of the króna, which at present is stronger than if 
decisions on large-scale investment in aluminium production had not been announced.  
Interest rates certainly affect the exchange rate, but experience in Iceland and elsewhere shows that 
in the long run this impact tends to fade out if monetary policy aims for rate of inflation close to the 
prevailing rate among trading partner countries. Likewise, the Central Bank's foreign exchange market 
intervention  tends  to  have  only  a  short-lived  effect.  If  the  exchange  rate  is  moving  with  a  strong 
momentum in a certain direction, no central bank can resist this for long. This is a common experience 
of all countries that have liberalized international capital movements, which  was also shared by the 
Central Bank of Iceland when it tried to stem the depreciation of the króna from mid 2000 until autumn 
2001. Recent calls for the Central Bank to set an exchange rate target are unrealistic. The only way to 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2003
 fix the exchange rate while still retaining an independent currency is to return to the old regime and 
introduce currency controls, but  who  would  want to return  to such an arrangement? Exchange rate 
volatility is best prevented with economic policies which promote economic stability, but this does not 
only depend on the Central Bank. It is essential to take a long-term perspective. However, it should be 
noted that since September last year the Central Bank has been regularly purchasing currency in the 
foreign exchange market in order to boost its external reserve. The Bank’s purchases of currency have 
amounted to more than 13 b.kr. since that time, and have undoubtedly weighed somewhat against the 
appreciation of the króna in the short run, although the long-term effect is negligible, if any at all. 
The Central Bank’s main monetary instrument is the interest rate on its repo agreements with credit 
institutions. In response to anticipated overheating of the economy the Central Bank began to raise its 
interest rates as early as 1997 and raised them rapidly in 1999 and 2000. In the beginning of 2001 the 
policy rate was up to 11.4%. Since then the Central Bank has lowered its policy rate 13 times and it 
now stands at 5.3%. Admittedly this is a higher level than among neighbouring countries such as the 
euro  region,  which  have  to  tackle  the  problems  of  persistent  economic  weakness  and  high 
unemployment. The outlook is also bleak, for example in Germany, judging from reports in the last few 
days. The European Central Bank has reviewed its growth forecast for the euro region as a whole and 
now expects 1% GDP growth. According to this, growth will be zero in Germany, because it will be 
higher in various peripheral regions of Europe. Thus the economic policy tasks that need to be tackled 
in Iceland and the euro region have been different, and still are at the moment. On the other hand, 
central bank interest rates in Norway are 5.5% to cite a close industrialised neighbour. The Central 
Bank’s policy rate is now 2¾% in real terms, which is somewhat below the current assessment of the 
equilibrium interest rate. The Central Bank’s interest rates therefore act as a stimulus on the economy, 
being at their lowest level in real terms since spring 1996. It should also be borne in mind that interest 
rate changes affect demand and inflation  with a considerable lag. Thus the impact of the extensive 
interest rate cuts in recent months is still being felt. 
The  credit  institutions’  required  reserve  with  the  Central  Bank  has  been  another  of  its  monetary 
instruments, although the importance of this has diminished over the years. In recent years the Bank 
has been aiming to create operating conditions for credit institutions comparable to those in most other 
European countries, insofar as conditions permit. To this end, the Central Bank has been amending its 
rules in the past few years. The Board of Governors recently decided to change the rules on required 
reserves, the first phase of which will enter into force today. The required reserve ratio will be lowered, 
thereby  releasing  liquidity  for  the  banking  system  amounting  to  8  b.kr.,  which  ought  to  enable  a 
reduction in interest rates in the banking system. Further changes are planned later in the year. 
By  law,  the  Central  Bank  shall  promote  an  efficient  and  safe  financial  system,  including  payment 
systems domestically and with foreign countries. Payment systems and securities settlement systems 
are important components of the financial system, which makes it vital to ensure that they are active 
and  reliable.  This  may  sound  like  a  fairly  modest  task,  but  it  can  be  compared  to  a  building  that 
obviously serves its purpose well – we rarely ponder the piping and wiring that are hidden from our 
sight  yet are vital to ensure that the  building functions properly. The same can be said  of payment 
systems  and  settlement  systems.  The  financial  system  would  definitely  not  be  tenable  if  secure 
systems for payment intermediation and settlements were not in place.  
The Central Bank has formulated a policy on these issues with the aim of adjusting Iceland’s systems 
to international standards. In doing so it has taken particular account of an assessment made by the 
International Monetary Fund in 2000, on the extent to which Iceland’s payment systems observe the 
so-called  Core  Principles.  In  the  IMF’s  view,  Iceland  fulfilled  only  three  of  the  ten  Principles  at  that 
time. In particular it pinpointed the need to inform participants about systemic risk and establish risk 
management and settlement guarantees in the systems, set clear rules on their activities, draw up a 
contingency plan and increase system transparency. A great deal of work needed to be done and the 
Central Bank, in collaboration with financial institutions, has firmly underlined that Iceland’s systems 
should be brought up to international standards.  
Initially it was decided that the main emphasis would be on developing a netting system for payments 
below the limits set for the real-time gross settlement system. It was also decided that once work on 
that system was well under way, further development of the real-time gross settlement system would 
be addressed. Another necessary issue  to consider  was the securities settlement system, following 
the payment system reforms. 
Operation of the netting system is in the hands of Fjölgreiðslumiðlun hf., which is jointly owned by the 
commercial  banks,  payment  card  companies  and  the  Central  Bank.  The  system  handles  netting  of 
BIS Review 18/2003 
 3
 accumulated payment orders lower than 25 m.kr. Work has been in progress on a thorough upgrading 
of the system and has now largely been completed. Towards the end of 2002 a plan was drawn up for 
the collateral security amounts in the system and participants made this available to the Central Bank 
on January 1 this year. 
Operation of the Central Bank’s RTGS system started in 2000. It handles final settlement of individual 
payment orders of 25 m.kr. or above as soon as the deposit in the payer’s account allows this to be 
done. The system thereby transfers payment orders, which are above the minimum needed to qualify 
for the RTGS system, directly to or from participants’ current accounts with the Central Bank.  
The  RTGS  system  has  a  triple  function.  Firstly,  the  Central  Bank  uses  the  system  for  the 
implementation of its monetary policy; secondly, it is used in transactions by credit institutions with the 
Central Bank; and thirdly, it is used for gross settlements between credit institutions. The security and 
functionality  of  this  system  are  thereby  preconditions  for  enabling  the  Central  Bank  to  achieve  its 
objectives for both price and financial stability. Consequently, operation of the RTGS system has been 
assigned to the Central Bank, a familiar arrangement from many other countries. The Bank’s duty is to 
strengthen the security, efficiency and independence of the system. At the end of 2002 agreements 
were made with all system participants specifying payment authorisations and  collateral security for 
settlements. This represented a major step towards bringing arrangements for the credit institutions’ 
transactions with the Central Bank into harmony with best international practices. Automatic Central 
Bank  guarantees  for  settlements  in  the  RTGS  system  are  thus  a  thing  of  the  past.  Work  is  still  in 
progress on developing the system. This year it is expected that the rules governing it will be revised, 
its  independence  be  enhanced,  collateral  security  amounts  for  settlements  be  reviewed,  handling 
times be shortened and settlement limits be lowered. 
In  2002,  the  Central  Bank  put  forward  proposals  for  the  development  of  the  securities  settlement 
system which is operated on the basis of an agreement between the Central Bank, Central Securities 
Depository  and  Iceland  Stock  Exchange.  Proposals  included  clarification  of  rules  for  the  system’s 
operations, introduction of risk management, and expediting of payment orders from the Depository to 
the  Central  Bank  and  netting  of  them,  so  that  credit  institutions  can  be  notified  of  their  securities 
trading positions in order to prepare settlements which are made the following morning. 
Following amendments made to the Public Limited Companies Act in 2002, requests were made for 
securities  settlements  to  be  allowed  in  foreign  currencies.  The  Central  Bank  has  participated  in 
examining  the  possibilities  of  developing  a  settlement  system for  securities  in  foreign  currencies,  in 
collaboration  with  the  Central  Securities  Depository,  Iceland  Stock  Exchange  and  the  commercial 
banks. Such a system would clearly pose new settlement risks. It would presumably be an option in 
this respect to establish a system which would be entirely operated by Icelandic commercial banks.  
In  all  the  work  described  here,  the  Central  Bank  has  had  a  very  good  collaboration  with  financial 
institutions and other parties involved, and I would like to express my thanks for the close cooperation 
and good understanding that has been achieved among all the parties to this work.  
A  number  of  important  changes  have  occurred  since  the  Central  Bank  published  its  last  macro-
economic  forecast  in  February.  It  has  been  decided  to  bring  forward  a  number  public  sector 
construction  projects  and  launch  the  expansion  of  the  Nordurál  aluminium  smelter  at  Grundartangi. 
Furthermore,  activity  on  the  Kárahnjúkar  hydropower  project  will  be  more  intensive  than  was 
previously  assumed.  Combined  with  the  cut  in  the  Central  Bank’s  policy  interest  rate  in  February, 
these  three  factors  will  lead  to  more  demand  in  2003  and  2004  than  was  assumed  in  the  national 
economic forecast, and all things being equal this will spur GDP growth.  
Central  and  local  government  authorities  have  decided  to  bring  forward  construction  projects 
amounting to a total of 10 b.kr., of which roughly 5½ b.kr. will be made in 2003 and 4½ b.kr. in 2004.  
Plans  have  been  made  for  expanding  the  Nordurál  aluminium  smelter  in  two  phases.  Production 
capacity  will  be stepped up by  90  thousand tonnes  per  year  in 2005 and  by  a further 60 thousand 
tonnes  in  2008  and  2009.  In  connection  with  the  expansion,  projects  will  be  undertaken  at 
Nordlingaalda, Nesjavellir and Reykjanes to supply power for the smelter. Investment on account of 
the Nordurál expansion will total 2½ b.kr. in 2003 and 14 b.kr. in 2004. 
According  to  the  latest  projections  by  Landsvirkjun  [the  National  Power  Company]  for  hydropower 
development  at  Kárahnjúkar  its  expenditure  on  the  project  will  be  5  b.kr.  higher  in  2003  than 
previously estimated, and just over half a billion kr. greater in 2004.  
4 
 BIS Review 18/2003
 In all, this represents a total extra investment of 13 b.kr. during the current year and 19 b.kr. next year, 
over and above the amounts assumed when the Central Bank’s latest macro economic forecast was 
published last month.  
On  the  basis  of  these  new  assumptions,  preliminary  studies  suggest  that  economic  growth  could 
easily end up in the range 2-2½% this year and well over 3% next year. The annual growth rate is as 
much  as  1%  above  what  was  previously  forecast.  The  employment  outlook  has  also  improved 
considerably. Given that the negative output gap was never very wide, and that seasonally adjusted 
unemployment  measured  3.2%  in  February  and  has  changed  little  since  September,  it  is  clear  that 
inflationary  pressures  are  likely  to  develop  much  sooner  than  was  previously  thought.  Inflation  this 
year is likely to be close to the Central Bank’s 2½% target, but other things being equal it could rise 
next year.  
While it is foreseeable that these major construction projects could coincide to some extent in 2004 
and 2005, most of the weight will be felt in 2005 and 2006. Thus economic policy implementation will 
face a greater challenge than was thought when only the Reydarfjördur aluminium smelter and related 
hydropower development were foreseen. The new outlook calls for economic policy responses on both 
the monetary  and fiscal side. While the scale  of the response  will be determined by exchange rate 
developments,  it  is  clear  that  preventing  overheating  and  inflation  will  be  a  major  challenge  in  the 
period  ahead.  Effective  fiscal  measures  are  necessary  in  order  to  prevent  monetary  policy  from 
bearing the brunt of these pressures, since this would have an excessive impact on the traded goods 
sector. The firmer the fiscal stance is at the peak of construction activity, the smaller is the increase in 
the real exchange rate that will inevitably will accompany it, with a correspondingly beneficial effect on 
current export and most competing industries.  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The  global  economy  is  shrouded  in  uncertainty.  A  low  rate  of  growth  has  been  attained  in  most 
industrialised countries since 2001 and the recovery is slower than had been hoped. The war in Iraq 
heightens this uncertainty. Favourable economic conditions among main trading partner countries is 
important  for  Iceland’s  terms  of  trade.  A  special  cause  for  concern  is  therefore  the  deteriorating 
outlook in the euro region, which is important for Iceland’s foreign trade.  
The situation in Iceland is quite different. A prolonged growth phase was followed by one year, 2002, 
of  a  minor  contraction,  but  at  present  we  foresee  a  new  period  of  growth  when  our  task  will  be  to 
maintain economic balance. Expectations of greater prosperity are already clearly visible. 
I would like to conclude by thanking the Office of the Prime Minister and other government authorities 
for their pleasant cooperation. I also thank the financial institutions for their good collaboration. Last 
but not least, I would like to thank the employees of the Central Bank for their fine work, without which 
the Bank could not have achieved such impressive results.  
BIS Review 18/2003 
 5
