 David Klein: Israel’s economy after the elections 
Speech by Mr David Klein, Governor of the Bank of Israel, for the Israel-Japan Friendship Society and 
Chamber of Commerce, 9 January 2003. 
 Following  the  elections  we  will  have  a  new  government.  This  may  be  an  opportunity  to  assess  the 
economic and social policy for the term of the next government. 
A  reasonable  starting  point  would  be  to  ask  where  the  economy  will  be  heading  if  the  present 
background factors – namely the world slowdown and the conflict with the Palestinians – will endure, 
and we continue with present policies. A not improbable answer would be that: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
the economy will keep contracting, 
the rate of unemployment will increase, 
more families will find themselves below the poverty line, 
the government debt will increase, 
tnterest rates, short and long, will remain high. 
None of these is unavoidable 
If policies will be adjusted there is a good chance to steer the economy away from continued recession 
with all its repercussions. What, then, are the required changes? 
I will sum them up for you, but not before stating that we are fortunate not to have on our plate two 
major constraints that limited our ability to grow in the past, namely: 
- 
- 
shortage of foreign currency, 
inflation. 
Foreign currency 
We don’t have a problem of foreign currency because we abolished exchange controls on one hand, 
and let the market determine the daily exchange rate on the other. 
When  a  foreign  analyst  wants  to  convey  the  salient  features  of  the  Israeli  economy  from  this 
perspective, this is what he says to-day: 
- 
foreign currency reserves are high and stable. In the last six years they reached a level of 
5-6 months of imports, some USD 24 billion, 
net  foreign  debt  of  the  economy  as  a  whole  is  low  and  declining.  In  the  last  two  years  it 
amounted to a negligible 2% of GDP, 
short-term assets of the economy exceed by a wide margin its short-term liabilities, meaning 
that we should not expect any liquidity problem, 
the  foreign  currency  market,  created  by  the  Bank  of  Israel  in  mid-94’,  keeps  widening  in 
terms  of  daily  turnovers  and  number  of  participants,  operating  at  reasonable  spreads  and 
characterized by relatively low volatility. 
   Inflation 
When one is reviewing the progress we have made in taming inflation, the noteworthy landmarks are: 
- 
We have succeeded in going down from three-digit inflation in the first half of the 1980s to a 
low two-digit inflation in the first half of the 1990s, and then to a low one-digit inflation at the 
turn of the century. In this respect we have joined a worldwide trend and to-day there is no 
meaningful inflation differential between Israel and the developed world. 
BIS Review 6/2003 
 1
  In the first half of last  year, 2002,  inflation rose temporarily to 6% for the period, but then 
declined practically to zero in the second half of the year. In this sense we returned to the 
record set in the years 1999-2001, when the annual pace of inflation was set in the range of 
zero to 1.5%. 
Hence we can, and should, devote all our energy to follow one major target: stop the contraction of the 
economy and start growing again. 
Employment and growth 
What, then, are the policies required to change course in terms of employment and growth: 
1. 
- 
  Fiscal consolidation, by which we mean: 
Reduce  the  deficit  to  redirect  downward  the  government  debt  ratio,  to  reduce  long-term 
interest rate, to promote investment. Special care should be taken that the 2003 budget will 
indeed result in a deficit no higher than 3%, as the government decided. 
Restructure government spending to increase infrastructure investment, cut the government 
wage  bill,  arrest  the  increase  in  defense  spending,  and  implement  series  of  programs  to 
divert potential employees from welfare to work. The most promising way to reduce poverty 
is  to  upgrade  programs  to  increase  the  overall  employment  rate,  were  we  lag  very  much 
behind the world. 
Follow  scrupulously,  if  not  expedite,  the  program  to  cut  the  individual  income  tax  rate,  to 
reduce the marginal rate, including social security, to 49%. We ought to remember that our 
ability to compete with the world depends also on our tax regime. 
Foreign workers 
2. 
Change track in dealing with the urgent need to reduce significantly the number of foreign workers in 
Israel. Foreign employment in Israel has reached a level of 11% of the labor force, almost the highest 
in the world. The number of foreign workers in Israel exceed the number of the unemployed. The new 
track should aim at equalizing, at least, the cost of employing a foreign worker to that of employing an 
Israeli one. The difference now may amount to 40% in favor of the foreign worker. Immigration police 
is indeed necessary, but far from being enough. 
Social pact 
3. 
The government should reach an understanding with the labor union and the employers association 
regarding  a  new  set  of  rules  governing  wage  determination.  This  is  particularly  important  regarding 
wages in the public sector, the minimum wage in the economy,  wages and other benefits of senior 
management in the private sector, and economy-wide pension arrangements. 
Structural changes 
4. 
Move ahead with required structural changes in the economy to improve competition in key industries 
like financial services, energy, water, transportation and communication. 
Short-term interest rate 
5. 
If  all  these  changes  will  be  implemented  the  Bank  of  Israel  will  be  able  to  gradually  reduce  the 
short-term interest rate while maintaining price and financial stability. 
The challenge ahead 
This  is  an  extremely  difficult  package  to  implement.  But  we  all  remember  the  story  from  Alice  in 
Wonderland, where Alice met a cat at a cross-road: 
“Which way should I take” asked Alice. 
  “It depends where you want to go”, answered the cat. 
“I don’t care” said Alice. 
“Then” retorted the cat, “it does not matter which way you take”. 
We know where we want to go. 
We know what is at stake. 
We  should,  then,  get  organized  to  implement  the  required  changes  to  start  growing  again.  We 
certainly have the potential to do it and I trust that we will. 
 