 Bank of Japan’s January report of recent economic and financial 
Developments1 
Bank of Japan, 23 January 2003. 
 The Bank’s view2 
Japan’s  economy  has  stabilized  as  a  whole,  but  there  is  still  substantial  uncertainty  about  the 
prospects for a recovery. 
With regard to final demand, while the decline in business fixed investment has almost come to a halt, 
private consumption continues to be weak. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish and public 
investment is declining. There are still no signs of recovery in domestic demand, and exports continue 
to be virtually level.  
Industrial production is basically level in response to these developments in final demand. As for the 
employment  situation,  overtime  hours  worked  and  new  job  offers  are  on  a  gradual  rising  trend.  In 
addition,  the  number  of  employees,  which  covers  various  types  of  employees  including  non-regular 
employees such as temporary workers, appears to have gradually stopped declining. However, firms 
are still maintaining their stance on reducing personnel expenses, and household income continues to 
decrease  significantly  due  to,  among  other  factors,  an  ongoing  decline  in  wages.  Thus,  the 
employment and income situation of households overall remains severe. 
Turning to the economic outlook, a widely shared view of the prospect for overseas economies in 2003 
is that they will follow a gradual recovery path. However, their recovery is likely to be anemic, at least 
for the time being, given that economic indicators for the United States and for some other regions are 
soft on the whole. In this situation, exports and industrial production are expected to be more or less 
unchanged for the immediate future.  
With  respect  to  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  declining  trend,  and 
private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time due to the severe employment and income 
situation.  Business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  be  supported  by  the  improvement  in  corporate 
profits to date,  but a noticeable recovery  is unlikely for the time being due to,  among other factors, 
substantial uncertainty regarding overseas economies.  
Overall,  assuming  that  overseas  economies  will  recover  in  2003,  albeit  at  a  moderate  pace,  the 
increase in exports and production will resume sooner or later, which in turn will gradually make the 
foundations  of  Japan’s  economic  recovery  firmer.  However,  the  economy  is  unlikely  to  show  clear 
signs of recovery for some time, since exports and production are expected to be virtually unchanged 
for  the  time  being  while  downward  pressures  such  as  excessive  labor  input  and  debt  persist. 
Furthermore,  the  downside  risk  to  the  economic  outlook  for  the  United  States  and  other  overseas 
economies  continues  to  require  attention,  given  that  there  are  some  uncertain  factors  including 
geopolitical  developments  and  their  economic  implications.  On  the  domestic  side,  stock  prices  are 
weak.  Hence,  careful monitoring  is  required  of  progress  in  the  resolution  of  the  nonperforming-loan 
problem and its effects on stock prices, corporate finance, and the economy.  
On the price front, import prices continue to rise reflecting the firmness in oil prices and depreciation of 
the yen from summer to autumn 2002. The decline in domestic corporate goods prices has become 
slower  due  to  the  rise  in  import  prices  and  the  improved  supply-demand  balance  in  materials 
industries,  despite  the  continued  fall  of  machinery  prices.  Consumer  prices  remain  on  a  gradual 
downtrend and corporate services prices continue to decline.  
Looking at the conditions influencing price developments, import prices are likely to be level because 
the effect of the rise in oil prices will be offset by that of the recent appreciation of the yen. Although 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
January 21 and 22, 2003. 
2   The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on January 21 and 22, 2003, as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 3/2003 
 1
 the low  levels of inventories will support prices to some degree, the overall condition of supply and 
demand is expected to continue exerting downward pressure on prices for a while amid persistently 
weak  domestic  demand.  Moreover,  factors  such  as  the  ongoing  technological  innovations  in 
machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining of distribution channels will continue to exert downward 
pressure on prices. Under these circumstances, domestic corporate goods prices are expected to be 
weak for a while. Consumer prices are expected to stay on a declining trend for the time being at the 
current  gradual  pace.  The  increase  in  imports  of  consumer  goods  has  come  to  a  halt  and  this  is 
expected to alleviate the downward pressure on prices to some extent, but the faster pace of decline 
in wages may reinforce the ongoing decline in prices, especially that in services prices.  
As for the financial environment, the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan 
is  recently  moving  at  around  20  trillion  yen,  as  the  Bank  provides  ample  liquidity.  Under  these 
circumstances,  in  the  short-term  money  markets,  the  overnight  call  rate  continues  to  hover  at  very 
close to zero percent. Moreover, longer-term interest rates continue to be at low levels as a whole. 
Yields on long-term government bonds declined further and are recently moving in the range of 0.8-0.9 
percent,  as  the  demand  of  banks  and  other  institutional  investors  for  the  bonds  has  become  even 
stronger.  Yield  spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank  bonds  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government 
bonds remain virtually unchanged. 
Stock prices continue to be weak, reflecting the uncertainty about the domestic economic outlook. The 
Nikkei 225 Stock Average is recently moving at around 8,500 yen. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen has been strengthening somewhat, reflecting the weakening 
of the U.S. dollar on the whole mainly caused by the strained situation in the Middle East. The yen is 
currently traded in the range of 117-119 yen to the U.S. dollar. 
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  private  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious  in  extending  loans  to 
firms  with  high  credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip 
companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms, particularly small ones, 
continue to be severe. In the corporate bond and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with 
high credit ratings is accommodative, but the environment for firms with low credit ratings is severe. 
Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because business fixed 
investment remains sluggish while firms are continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-
on-year basis. The amount outstanding of corporate  bonds and CP issued is moving  at around the 
previous year’s level.  
Meanwhile,  according  to  business  surveys,  the  financial  position  of  firms,  particularly  that  of  small 
firms, remains severe. 
The monetary base exhibits a high year-on-year growth rate of around 20 percent. The year-on-year 
growth rate of the money stock dropped to around 2.0-2.5 percent in December.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market 
conditions  as  a  whole  continue  to  be  extremely  easy.  Long-term  interest  rates  are  declining.  The 
money stock and the monetary base maintain high growth rates relative to that of economic activity as 
a whole. However, stock prices remain unstable. In corporate finance, the fund-raising environment of 
firms  with  low  credit  risks  is  accommodative  on  the  whole,  but  with  regard  to  firms  with  high  credit 
risks, the stance of investors is severe and the lending attitudes of private banks are becoming more 
cautious. Hence, including the effects arising from government measures to accelerate the disposal of 
non-performing loans and to revitalize industries and firms, developments in the financial and capital 
markets, the behavior of financial institutions, and the situation of corporate finance continue to require 
close monitoring. 
 