 Klaus Liebscher: A stable euro for a strong Europe 
Panel  statement  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the  European 
Banking & Financial Forum, Prague, 25 March 2003. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to participate once again in the European Banking & Financial Forum here 
in Prague and I congratulate the organizers for the interesting topics they have chosen this year. 
I would like to focus my deliberations on the state of the economy, on the stability-oriented framework 
of  EMU,  including  the  need  for  further  reforms  required  to  enhance  the  euro  area’s  noninflationary 
growth potential, and - last but not least - on the EU enlargement process. 
The Governing Council of the ECB decided on March 6 to reduce the key interest rate by 25 basis 
points to 2½%. This decision was taken in the light of an improved outlook for price stability, owing in 
part to the appreciation of the euro and the subdued pace of economic growth in the euro area. The 
latter must be seen in the context of increased geopolitical risks over a protracted period of time, which 
once  again  led  to  higher  oil  prices.  Additionally,  a  fundamental  downward  correction  of  companies’ 
profit  expectations  as  well  as  increasing  pessimism  on  the  part  of  consumers  and  investors  have 
substantially  dampened demand and depressed stock prices in the industrial world. However, apart 
from these unfavourable shocks, some structural inefficiencies have also been holding back the euro 
area economy. 
Forecasting the future is notoriously difficult - even more so under the current geopolitical conditions. 
Heightened volatility in oil markets, for instance, makes it more problematic than usual to assess short-
term inflation developments. However, on the assumption that geopolitical tensions will decrease over 
time, more fundamental factors should dominate price developments in the euro area. The significant 
appreciation of the euro over the past year, which will feed through to the economy via lower import 
and producer prices, subdued economic activity and somewhat more modest wage settlements should 
dampen inflation in the medium term. If oil prices moderate, as indicated by futures, inflation rates in 
the euro area will most likely fall below 2% in the course of 2003 and should remain at levels in line 
with price stability thereafter. 
Against this background, interest rates in the euro area have fallen to very low levels, both in nominal 
and real terms. On the basis of currently available information, this policy stance, while contributing to 
the  preservation  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  somewhat  counterbalances  the  multiple 
factors which currently have an adverse effect on economic activity. 
In  the  current  environment  of  heightened  uncertainty,  stability  has  become  an  even  more  precious 
asset.  As  is  well  known,  the  Eurosystem’s  primary  objective  is  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the 
medium term, since price stability unambiguously represents a precondition for sustainable economic 
growth and rising employment in the long run. Moreover, in times of severe tension, it is of the utmost 
importance  that  policymakers  do  not  lose  sight  of  their  primary  responsibility,  so  as  to  reduce 
uncertainty and strengthen confidence. Consequently, the Governing Council of the ECB stands ready 
to act if necessary. And financial markets can rely on the provision of sufficient liquidity even under 
exceptional circumstances, as was demonstrated in the past. 
As  to  military  action  in  Iraq,  the  impact  of  this  confrontation  on  the  global  economy  can  vary 
significantly in scope and size, depending on the extent and duration of the conflict. It is therefore not 
possible at this juncture to conclusively assess the short and medium-term implications for the euro 
area. 
The  euro  area  has  established  itself  as  a  stable  monetary  anchor  in  the  global  economy.  That 
notwithstanding, one has to acknowledge that much remains to be done. 
The Stability and Growth Pact obliges euro area member states to achieve budgetary positions close 
to balance or in surplus in a sustainable manner, in order to minimize the risk of breaching the budget 
deficit criterion of 3% of GDP in the course of a business cycle. Sound budgetary positions not only 
create  enough  leeway  for  automatic  stabilizers  to  take  full  effect  over  the  cycle,  they  contribute  to 
reducing  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  and  consequently  the  interest  burden  for  governments,  increase 
investors’  confidence  in  the  euro  area  and  therefore  keep  interest  rates  lower  than  they  would 
otherwise be. Moreover, demographic developments make it imperative to bring public finances into 
  structural  balance  or  surplus.  Even  though  in  most  countries  the  current  fiscal  policy  stance,  as 
envisaged in the updated stability programs, strikes a reasonable balance between letting automatic 
stabilizers  operate  and  seeking  further  consolidation  where  needed,  some  countries’  current 
consolidation plans lack ambition, particularly over the medium run, once the current slump has in all 
likelihood been overcome. It is necessary that all euro area countries live up to their obligations in full. 
Fiscal policy must be part of a comprehensive and growth-oriented strategy, focusing - as a rule - on 
restraining the volume and on improving the structure of public expenditures. 
The euro area economy is held back not only by current geopolitical tensions, but also by frictions in 
labor and product markets. Structural reforms in these areas are of utmost importance to increase the 
flexibility of the economy, thereby improving its resilience against detrimental shocks and raising the 
euro area’s noninflationary growth potential. Policymakers are well aware of this assessment. 
However,  the  lack  of  clear  and  decisive  progress  in  implementing  structural  reforms  weighs  on 
confidence.  It  is  high  time  to  reassure  business,  investors  and  consumers  by  delivering  overdue 
structural  reforms.  Such measures  must  be  geared  towards  more flexible  labor markets  and  higher 
labor participation rates, the full implementation of the EU single market, free and sound competition 
along  with further cutbacks in state aid, and consumer-friendly retail market regulations. This would 
enhance  productivity,  thereby  making  the  euro  area  more  attractive  for  domestic  and  international 
investment,  it  would  promote  economic  activity  and  raise  the  noninflationary  growth  potential  of  the 
euro  area,  and  it  would  enhance  employment,  thus  boosting  consumer  confidence  and  private 
consumption. Indeed, it is up to us to set in motion such a virtuous circle! 
The policy program of the newly elected Austrian government includes several important measures to 
foster Austria´s attractiveness for business and investors. Starting out from a small budget deficit of 
0.6% in 2002, the government´s fiscal policy stance foresees some cyclically motivated widening of 
the deficit to 1.3% this year. Looking ahead, the government intends to make significant tax cuts. The 
cutback  of  the  share  of  government  in  the  Austrian  economy  is  appropriate  and  in  line  with 
international endeavors to improve the quality of public finances. The tax cuts should be accompanied 
one for one by expenditure cuts so as to ensure that a balanced budget is achieved over the cycle. 
Where  do  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  enter  this  picture?  It  is  my  conviction  that  this 
historic  reunification  of  Europe  will  mutually  strengthen  today’s  accession  countries  and  the  EU. 
Having said this, challenging tasks lie ahead. First and foremost, we will have to provide stability in a 
broad  sense:  political  stability,  macroeconomic  stability,  financial  market  stability  and  price  stability. 
The  framework  which  is  in  place  provides  for  such  broadly  based  stability.  Thus,  enlargement  will 
encourage growth and employment in a wider Europe. 
Economic and monetary integration of the accession countries will proceed in three stages: first, the 
acceding countries will join the EU in May 2004, second, the new Member States will participate in 
ERM II, the exchange rate mechanism of the EU, for at least two years, and third, after the sustainable 
fulfilment of all the convergence criteria laid down in the Treaty, the new Member States will adopt the 
euro. 
Throughout  the  process  leading  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  new  Member  States’  economic 
situations and their policy  strategies will have to be  assessed on a case-by-case basis. The role of 
ERM II in this process, first, is to help participating Member States orient their policies to stability and 
to foster economic convergence. Second, participation in ERM II without severe tensions for at least 
two years is one of the convergence criteria. 
Finally,  entry  into  the  euro  area  will  be  based  on  the  sustainable  fulfilment  of  the  Maastricht 
convergence criteria. These criteria will be applied to future euro area entrants in the same way they 
applied  to  euro  area  countries.  It  may  take  quite  a  while  before  new  Member  States  will  be  in  a 
position to fully participate in EMU. A fair share of realism is called for to avoid disappointment. In the 
long run, such an equitable and strict procedure will be to the advantage of all Member States of the 
European Union. 
In concluding, I would like to reiterate that in many respects, the euro has proved to be a driving force 
for  Europe’s  continued  political  integration  and  economic  reforms.  The  euro  is  regarded  as  an 
important token of identity for a modern, dynamic and open Europe. 
The euro provides a stable anchor in unfortunately not so stable times. But the euro can only shield us 
from external shocks within limits. Even though the euro has already triggered considerable fiscal and 
structural  reforms,  we  must  not  relinquish  our  endeavors  to  make  the  euro  area  economy  more 
efficient and productive. 
 