I J Macfarlane: Do Australian households borrow too much? 
Talk  by  Mr  I  J  Macfarlane,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  The  Sydney  Institute, 
Sydney, 3 April 2003. 
 Tonight’s subject is one that has attracted increasing attention over recent years - namely, the growth 
of household debt. There is no doubt that this debt has grown quickly over the past decade, and this 
has prompted a number of people to suggest that  it is too high and that  it  presents a  threat to the 
future  health  of  the  economy.  What  I  would  like  to  do  tonight  is  to  examine  household  debt  from 
several  perspectives  in  order  to  form  a  judgment  on  whether  its  current  level  poses  risks  for  the 
economy, and what those risks might be. My broad conclusion is that a proportion of households have 
clearly taken on more risk, which has increased the risk profile for the sector as a whole. This is likely 
to  make  household  consumption  more  sensitive  to  changes  in  economic  circumstances  than  it 
formerly  was,  but  the  overall  risk  for  the  economy  has  not  gone  up  to  the  extent  that  would  be 
indicated by the rise in the level of debt or in the debt to income ratio. 
The  subject  of  household  debt  is  one  that  we  at  the  Reserve  Bank  have  been  thinking  about,  and 
writing about, for some time. Over the past year, we have produced a number of studies on debt and 
housing,  which have laid out the main facts. I will summarise them briefly, before moving on to the 
more  difficult  task  of  making  judgments  about  their  economic  significance.  Those  who  want  more 
detail can consult the studies listed below.1 
What has happened? 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Most  studies  concentrate  on  movements  in  the  ratio  of  household  debt  to  household 
incomes. Over the past decade, this ratio in Australia has risen from a level that was low by 
international standards (56 per cent) to one that  is in the  upper end of the range of other 
comparable countries (125 per cent). 
The rise in household debt was mainly due to increased borrowing for housing. Housing debt 
accounts for 83 per cent of total household debt, and that percentage has risen slightly over 
the decade. The story of household debt is largely a story about housing and, of course, is 
intimately tied up with the subject of rising house prices. In the remainder of my talk I will 
deal only with housing debt and ignore other forms of household debt. 
While  borrowing  for  owner-occupation  is  still  the  largest  part  of  housing  debt,  the  fastest 
growing component has been borrowing for investor housing, which now represents 30 per 
cent of the stock of housing loans (compared with 18 per cent a decade ago). 
The main reason that debt has risen is that households can afford to borrow more in a low 
interest rate environment like the past decade than in a high interest rate environment like 
the previous two decades. Allied to this is the fact that in a low inflation environment, the real 
value of the debt is not eroded as fast as it was in a higher inflation one. So each household 
that takes out a loan can  borrow more at the start of the loan, and  will run down the real 
value of the loan more slowly than formerly was the case. Analysis published by the Reserve 
Bank of Australia (RBA) last month shows that these two related explanations could account 
for an approximate doubling in the debt to income ratio when their effects had fully worked 
through the system.2 
                                                      
1  See ‘Recent Developments in Housing: Prices, Finance and Investor Attitudes’, RBA Bulletin, July 2002, ‘Innovations in the 
Provision  of  Finance  for  Investor  Housing’,  RBA  Bulletin,  December  2002,  ‘Housing  Equity  Withdrawal’,  RBA  Bulletin, 
February 2003, and ‘Household Debt: What the Data Show’, RBA Bulletin, March 2003. 
2   See RBA Bulletin, March 2003, op cit. In principle, this would not be completed until the last loan taken out before the fall in 
interest rates was paid off, i.e. 25 years. But in practice it would be a lot shorter because on average mortgages are paid out 
or refinanced well before maturity. 
BIS Review 17/2003 
 1
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Financial deregulation and the associated increase in competition among lenders has also 
played  a  role  by  making  loans  cheaper,  easier  to  obtain,  particularly  to  investors,  and 
providing innovations such as home equity loans and redraw facilities. 
Over 70 per cent of households either own their homes outright or are renting and therefore 
have no housing debt. Owner-occupied housing debt is concentrated in about 30 per cent of 
households, as it has been for decades, but that 30 per cent have considerably higher debt 
levels now.3 
For those households with mortgages, there is a pronounced pattern in the debt to income 
ratio and the debt-servicing ratio over the life cycle. Both these ratios peak in the 35-40 year 
age group and decline thereafter, usually to zero. 
Other measures of household balance sheet health such as the debt-servicing ratio and the 
gearing ratio show considerably less of an upward trend than the debt to income ratio. 
What can we learn from the debt to income ratio? 
Does the sharp rise in the household debt to income ratio over the past decade mean that it is now too 
high, or, as some commentators put it, that it has reached an unsustainable level? Unfortunately, it is 
impossible  to  answer  this  question  by  looking  at  the  aggregate  ratio,  even  if  we  supplement  our 
analysis by international comparisons (Graph 1). There does not appear to be a level at which bad 
things start to happen - Japan’s ratio  levelled off at about  130  after the equity  and property  bubble 
burst, but  it  was corporate debt rather than household debt  which fuelled the  bubble. In  the United 
Kingdom the ratio fell in the early 1990s after it reached 115, but has now resumed its upward path to 
be in the mid 120s, while in the Netherlands the ratio exceeds 180 and is still going up. 
                                                      
3   Unfortunately, we have no detailed information on the distribution of household debt for investment housing. In what follows, 
we assume that investment properties are owned by households that already own or are paying off their owner-occupied 
property, i.e. renters do not own investment properties. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2003
Graph 1 
   The debt to income ratio is only one measure of the health of household balance sheets, and, as will 
be argued below, not the best measure. We have to ask why the debt to income ratio rose, before we 
can draw any conclusions. As we demonstrated earlier, the main reason it has risen is that interest 
rates  have  fallen:  mortgage  rates  halved  between  the  second  half  of  the  1980s  and  the  past  five 
years. As a result, a household which borrowed up to the point where debt servicing equalled 30 per 
cent of gross income (a common yardstick used by banks and other mortgage lenders) would be able 
to nearly double the size of the mortgage and still make the same monthly repayments as before. 
In order to judge whether the resulting increase in debt represents an increase in risk, we have to go 
through the following mental exercise. Compare two households - one in 1993 and the other in 2003 - 
that have the same percentage of their income used in debt service, and have the same gearing ratio 
(level of debt as a percentage of value of house), but with the 2003 household having a debt level 
nearly twice as high as the 1993 household. Is the 2003 household taking more risk than the 1993 
household? 
My judgment is that the 2003 household is riskier in only one respect. For a given rise in interest rates, 
it will be more affected because the rise will apply to a larger loan. But it is probably not right to make 
the assumption about ‘a given rise in interest rates’. That is because in the low inflation/low interest 
rate  environment  we  have  today,  interest  rates  do  not  move  about  as  much  as  before.  In  the  late 
1980s, on one occasion the mortgage rate rose by 3½ percentage points in a year, in the 1990s we 
have had nothing like that (the largest rise in a year was 1¾ percentage points). So the answer to the 
question I posed above is that, provided the variability of interest rates has also fallen in proportion to 
the fall in the average interest rate level - which it has - the hypothetical household in 2003 is in no 
riskier a position than the hypothetical household in 1993. 
Does this mean that the large rise in housing debt that we have seen in practice has not made the 
household  sector  more  vulnerable?  No,  it  merely  means  that  we  cannot  draw  this  conclusion  from 
looking at the rise in the debt to income ratio without enquiring into its cause. If, as in the hypothetical 
example above, it is entirely due to a fall in the level of interest rates and a commensurate fall in the 
variability of interest rates, then risk has not increased. This is important because most of the rise in 
the debt to income ratio in Australia is of this type. But this does not mean that we can dismiss all 
concerns about the rise in household debt. This is because some of the rise in the debt to income ratio 
was due to factors other than the fall  in  interest rates, and these factors may  well have resulted  in 
households taking on more risk, and in many cases a lot more than they recognise. The rest of my talk 
will attempt to spell out these factors. 
BIS Review 17/2003 
 3
Other factors behind the rise in the debt to income ratio 
Lower inflation 
The other variable that has a quantifiable and mechanical effect on the debt to income ratio is the rate 
of inflation or, more precisely, the rate of increase of household incomes. Not surprisingly, this is highly 
correlated  with  the  rate  of  interest,  but  it  has  an  identifiably  separate  influence.  When  the  rate  of 
growth of incomes slows, the debt to income ratio of each borrowing household is eroded more slowly 
than in a higher inflation environment. 
When a household first takes out a mortgage, it places itself in a somewhat vulnerable position in that 
its debt is a multiple of its income, and its debt-servicing ratio is at its maximum. It accepts the risks 
involved  because  it  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  path  to  home  ownership.  In  the  past,  the  typical 
household only remained  in this relatively ‘risky phase’ for a few  years, mainly  because its nominal 
income rose quickly (partly due to inflation), and secondly because its debt was reduced by principal 
repayment.  In  a  low  inflation  environment,  nominal  incomes  rise  more  slowly  and  so  households 
remain  in  the  ‘risky  phase’  for  longer.  If  they  have  fully  factored  this  into  their  financial  decision-
making, it should not present a major problem, but if they are still operating on the assumption that 
inflation will quickly reduce debt burdens, they would be taking more risk than they perceive.4 
Financial deregulation and increased competition 
A range of other factors has allowed households to maintain higher levels of debt for longer periods 
than previously, and most of these are, at least in part, attributable to innovations brought about by 
financial deregulation and increased competition among providers of credit. It is now much easier to 
refinance and so take out a larger loan either on an existing property or to purchase a more expensive 
one. Banks and mortgage brokers now actively encourage these activities, and so loan turnover has 
risen  sharply.  A  similar  process  is  seen  with  new  lending  products  such  as  home  equity  loans  and 
mortgages with a redraw facility. 
These developments have allowed borrowers to go back and top up their debt over their lifetime rather 
than  simply  allow  it  to  decline  through  principal  repayment.  The  contrast  between  the  two  types  of 
behaviour is shown in Graph 2: the older pattern is shown in the top panel, and the newer one in the 
lower panel. Like the effect of lower inflation described earlier, this allows households to remain in the 
‘risky phase’ for longer than was the case in earlier decades. 
The special case of lending for investor housing 
So far the analysis has implicitly assumed that we are talking about households that borrow for owner-
occupation or, at the margin, for consumption. But the biggest single change over the past decade is 
the rapid increase in borrowing in order to purchase a dwelling for investment purposes. The annual 
growth rate in this type of borrowing has averaged 21.6 per cent over the past decade, compared with 
13.4 per cent for borrowing for owner-occupation. To put this in another perspective - if borrowing for 
investment  purposes  had  only  risen  at  the  same  rate  as  borrowing  for  owner-occupation,  the 
aggregate  debt  to  income  ratio  would  only  have  reached  109  per  cent,  not  the  125  per  cent  that 
actually occurred. At the former figure, Australia would still be in the lower half of the countries shown 
in Graph 1. 
So borrowing for investor housing is a large part of the story of rising household debt in Australia. It is 
also  different  to  borrowing  for  owner-occupation  in  several  respects.  First,  it  is  a  pure  investment 
decision, not a lifestyle decision. Many people would choose to become owner-occupiers even if they 
understood  that  it  might  not  be  particularly  profitable;  it  is  hard  to  see  why  anyone  would  be  an 
investor  in  housing  other  than  because  they  expected  it  would  be  a  profitable  commercial  decision 
(hence, the widespread use of ‘investment seminars’ to encourage this type of activity). Second, for a 
high proportion of these investors, tax considerations drive the profitability calculations and so provide 
an incentive to maximise debt. Thirdly, borrowing for investment purposes is inherently riskier than for 
owner-occupation, in that the investor cannot be sure of who is going to occupy the dwelling and on 
what terms, but the owner-occupier knows the answer to that question. 
                                                      
4  See G.R. Stevens, ‘Some Observations on Low Inflation and Household Finances’, RBA Bulletin, October 1997. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2003
Graph 2 
   There are additional risks that now accompany investor housing as a result of how the industry has 
changed. A high proportion of investment is now in multi-unit apartment buildings, where developers 
pre-sell to investors, usually on 10 per cent deposit. They have, therefore, effectively transferred the 
first  10  per  cent  of  price  risk  onto  investors.  Because  the  building  may  take  about  18  months  to 
complete, that means the  investor  will not know  whether the risk has eventuated for 18 months. In 
economics,  a  lag  between  when  a  decision  to  increase  supply  is  made  and  when  the  price  effect 
occurs  can  lead  to  what  is  colloquially  known  as  a  ‘hog  cycle’,  and  can  be  associated  with  large 
overshootings in prices. It is conceivable that at some point in time there could be a large reduction in 
investor  demand  for  apartments,  perhaps  because  of  fears  of  over-supply.  But  because  of  the 
production  lag,  there  would  still  be  an  18-month  supply  of  partly-built  apartments  to  come  onto  the 
market and to be digested by it. With the trend towards large-scale developments which take longer to 
complete, it is possible that this lag has been lengthening in recent years. 
For these reasons, we at the Reserve Bank have been concerned about investor housing for some 
time. We are concerned not only because it has been a very large factor in explaining the growth of 
household debt, but because the risks involved are greater than in borrowing for owner-occupation, 
and are unlikely to be fully understood by the many newcomers to this activity. 
What do other financial ratios show? 
The most important financial ratio from the household perspective is the debt-servicing ratio - the ratio 
of interest payments to disposable income. Understanding the movements in this ratio is difficult, as 
shown in the appendix to this speech. Two measures of debt servicing are shown in Graph 3 - the 
bottom  line  shows  only  interest  on  mortgage  debt  and  the  top  line  adds  in  the  interest  on  all  other 
household  borrowing.  Both  lines  show  a  gradual  upward  trend,  although  their  cyclical  movements 
differ. 
By 2002, the debt-servicing ratio on mortgages had reached 6 per cent of household income, while 
total debt servicing reached 7½ per cent. If we were to add the required repayment of principal on to 
this  line,  there  would  be  a  larger  tendency  for  the  line  to  slope  upwards.  Our  estimate  is  that 
households currently pay about 2½ per cent of income in required principal repayment, which brings 
their total debt servicing to 10 per cent of disposable income. 
BIS Review 17/2003 
 5
These aggregate ratios sound quite low, but we should recognise that they are held down because 
they include all those households which have no debt. When we adjust for this, our estimate is that for 
households with housing debt, the total servicing payment (interest plus required payment of principal) 
averages 20  per cent of disposable income, compared with  about 14  per cent 10  years ago. Thus, 
although  interest  rates  have  trended  downwards  through  the  period  covered  by  Graph  3,  debt 
servicing  has  trended  upwards.  Households  have  increased  their  borrowing  by  more  than  interest 
rates have fallen, an outcome consistent with the developments discussed in the previous section. 
Graph 3 
   Another financial ratio that is important in order to evaluate risk is the gearing ratio, which is the ratio of 
the value of housing debt to the value of the stock of housing assets (Graph 4). In Australia this has 
risen over the past decade from 13 per cent to 20 per cent,5 and therefore means that households as 
a whole have increased their risk. But most households hold no housing debt, so the average gearing 
ratio for those that do is about 43 per cent. 
One other fact that we can deduce is that the average gearing ratio for investors has risen a lot faster 
than for owner-occupiers over the past decade, although the level is not as high. It appears that there 
are two main classes of owners of investment properties: those that wish to live off the rental income 
and therefore hold little or no debt; and those that are mainly concerned with capital appreciation and 
tax minimisation and therefore aim for a high level of debt. Over the past decade, the sharp rise in the 
gearing ratio suggests that the second group have expanded a lot faster than the first. 
Response to shocks 
I would now like to return to the question of whether the rise in household debt will result in a reaction 
which will be disruptive to the economy. Some commentators have suggested that the debt to income 
ratio is now so high that it is unsustainable. If they mean by this that it will start to fall under its own 
weight, I think that this outcome is very unlikely. It is far more likely that the ratio will continue to rise 
for some time, even if more slowly. For a start, the effects of the lower interest rates and lower inflation 
have not yet fully worked their way through the system and, additionally, it is likely that over time more 
households will take advantage of the newer and more flexible debt products now on offer. 
                                                      
5  An  alternative  measure  of  gearing,  the  value  of  total  household  debt  to  total  household  assets  (which  includes  equity 
holdings, superannuation, etc.), has risen from 10 per cent to 15 per cent over the same period. 
6 
 BIS Review 17/2003
Graph 4 
   A more fruitful approach to analysing the effects on the economy of the higher household debt level is 
to ask how it will affect the response to economic shocks. In other words, how differently will a ‘high 
household  debt’  economy  behave  in  the  face  of  some  temporary  adversity  compared  with  a  ‘low 
household debt’ economy? Is it more likely now, for example, that an adverse shock to the economy 
will mean more households are forced into selling their homes, or having their banks foreclose on their 
mortgages?  This  is  the  sort  of scenario  which  we  would  all  dread  because  it  would  impart  a  sharp 
contractionary force to the economy. 
In principle, this could happen if the shock in question was a deep enough recession accompanied by 
a large enough rise in unemployment. If someone loses their job altogether or is forced to accept one 
at a much lower income, they may not be able to meet their debt-servicing obligations. However, the 
crucial variable here is the debt-servicing ratio - it is this which determines whether a household can 
keep its property when there is an interruption to its cash flow, not the absolute level of debt (or the 
debt to income ratio).  And  we know  that the  debt-servicing ratio has risen moderately - from about 
14 per  cent  to  20  per  cent.  So  our  judgement  would  be  that  although  the  incidence  of  this  type  of 
extreme reaction would increase, it would not increase by a lot. 
Even if we judge that the incidence of this extreme reaction will still be relatively low, are there other 
forms of behaviour which are likely to have changed as a result of the higher debt-servicing ratio and 
higher gearing among indebted households? In other words, are households that can afford to meet 
their debt-servicing requirement likely to change their behaviour in other ways now that they have a 
higher debt level than formerly? It seems to me that the answer to this is yes. Households are bound 
to become more cautious if the prospect of an economic downturn increases, and this would show up 
as weaker consumption and a rise in precautionary savings. Thus, as a general conclusion, we should 
assume that consumption will become more sensitive to economic conditions. 
A related aspect is that it is often said that consumption is now more sensitive to a change in monetary 
policy. This is clearly true if we define a change in monetary policy as a given absolute rise in interest 
rates, say 50 basis points. Obviously, if households have more debt, a rise in interest rates will affect 
them more  than  if  they  had  less,  and  so  income  after mortgage  payments  would  fall  more,  and  so 
would  consumption.  This  has  not  gone  unnoticed,  and  at  the  Reserve  Bank  we  are  aware  that  the 
heightening  sensitivity  of  consumption  means  that  to  achieve  a  given  change  in  the  economy,  a 
smaller change in interest rates will be required. 
What about the response to falling house prices? For those households that could afford to meet their 
debt-servicing obligations, one would have to assume that they would continue to do so, regardless of 
the fact that the price of their house was falling. Even in the extreme circumstance where the price fell 
below the debt level - referred to as negative equity - it is likely that owner-occupiers would endure the 
BIS Review 17/2003 
 7
situation  stoically  because  there  would  be  little  alternative.  Again,  the  higher  the  gearing,  the  more 
their  wealth  would  be  affected  and  the  more  cautious  they  would  become  in  their  consumption 
spending.  The  behaviour  of  investors  in  this  situation,  however,  could  be  quite  different  to  owner-
occupiers  in  that  there  would  be  a  strong  temptation  to  get  rid  of  the  troublesome  investment, 
especially if the fall in price was caused by a difficulty in finding tenants. So for investors, there could 
be  a  flow-on  from falling  housing  prices  to  increased  selling  pressure  and  hence  further  downward 
pressure on housing prices. 
Another  channel  through  which  the  increased  sensitivity  of  consumption  could  work  is  the 
phenomenon of housing equity injection/withdrawal. As we have seen, in the good times households 
can augment their consumption by effectively tapping into the increased equity in their homes (housing 
equity withdrawal). But if they become apprehensive about their economic prospects, they could easily 
cease  this  activity  or  go  back  to  the  old  pattern  of  equity  injection,  which  would  involve  reducing 
consumption.  There  is  evidence  from  the  United  Kingdom  that  such  a  switch  occurs  when  house 
prices fall. 
Apart from the heightened sensitivity of consumption, are there other risks that we have overlooked? 
In particular, are there risks to the lenders as well as to borrowers, and hence a possibility of some 
sort of financial crisis due to failure of financial institutions? Obviously, if the shock was large enough, 
we could not rule this out, but my guess is that it is highly unlikely. Throughout our work on household 
debt, we have assumed that lending standards of financial institutions, as typified by maximum debt-
service ratios, have not been relaxed. This might be an over-simplification but, if it is, it is not a large 
one.6  I  know  APRA  have  been  looking  at  this  situation  closely  and  have  been  subjecting  banks  to 
stress tests based on quite onerous scenarios - for example, a 25 per cent fall in house prices. Even 
under these extreme assumptions, even though bad debts rise markedly and there would be a lot of 
personal distress, it is very hard to conclude that there would be large-scale financial failure. 
Conclusions 
Although  I  started  with  the  intention  of  keeping  my  talk  simple,  I  am  afraid  that  the  subject  matter 
ended up being far more technical than I thought. I will therefore attempt to compensate for this by 
keeping the conclusions as simple as possible. 
There  is  one  important  factor  that  should  give  us  some  reassurance  about  the  large  increase  in 
household debt. That is,  most of the increase  was  due to the  halving  in the  mortgage rate and the 
inflation rate as we moved from the 1980s to the 1990s. If this was all that was at work, I would be 
comfortable,  given  the  greater  stability  in  interest  rates,  in  concluding  that  there  had  not  been  a 
significant increase in the risk profile of the household sector. 
But other factors have also been at work, and I cannot help but think they are the result of the over-
confidence that follows the experience of a strong and sustained economic expansion. Much as I think 
the expansion has a good deal further to run, I suspect that a significant number of households have 
chosen a debt level which makes sense in good times, but does not take into account the fact that bad 
times inevitably will occur at some time or other. 
The other factors that have been at work show up as a modest rise in the aggregate debt-servicing 
ratio  and  a  similar  rise  in  the  aggregate  gearing  ratio.  These  are  not  because  the  maximum risk  a 
typical  household  faces  during  its  life  cycle  is  larger  than  it  formerly  was,  but  because  many  more 
households  are  now  staying  at  or  near  their  maximum  risk  position  for  a  longer  period.  The  other 
development  that  has  clearly  increased  risk  is  the  exceptionally  fast  increase  in  borrowing  for 
residential  property  for  investment  purposes,  and  the  accompanying  rapid  expansion  in  apartment 
building, which show all the signs of a seriously over-extended market. 
As far as we can judge at this stage, the rise in household debt does not pose a significant danger of a 
financial crisis, i.e. the failure of significant financial institutions such as occurred in the early 1990s 
after the build-up in corporate debt. But it does suggest that household consumption will be a lot more 
sensitive to economic conditions than hitherto. Thus, we should expect a more pronounced cutback in 
                                                      
6  There is some anecdotal evidence of a small relaxation in lending standards in that the proportion of ‘high loan to valuation’ 
loans has risen somewhat, and the emergence of the non-conforming lenders has meant that some borrowers who could 
not meet the standards of the traditional lenders can now obtain housing loans. 
8 
 BIS Review 17/2003
consumption if adverse economic conditions occur. This increased sensitivity also has implications for 
monetary policy, a development we have been aware of for some time. 
At  present,  there  are  some  tentative  signs  that  both  household  borrowing  and  residential  property 
development may be levelling out. There is no doubt that those developments, followed by a further 
scaling back, would be in the longer-term interest of the Australian economy. 
Appendix 
Some measurement issues 
Debt servicing 
One of the important aspects of any assessment of the sustainability of debt burdens is the extent of 
an  economic  entity’s  income  which  must  be  devoted  to  debt  servicing.  The  measure  used  in  this 
speech  is  the  ratio  of  interest  payments  by  households  to  household  disposable  income.  This  is 
derived from information in the national accounts, with some adjustments.1 
Graph A1 
   The upper line in Graph A1 (the same as Graph 3 in the text) shows the resulting series. The notable 
feature of this series is that the peak value for debt servicing was in the period of high interest rates in 
the late 1980s. Subsequently, debt servicing costs declined sharply as interest rates fell. The effects of 
interest rate changes  in the 1990s are  visible as cyclical rises  and falls  in  debt servicing, around a 
slowly rising trend, caused by the increase in debt levels. 
                                                      
1  Two adjustments have been made to the data published in the national accounts to arrive at the interest paid data used 
here. First, unlike the published national accounts data, the figures here are not measured net of Financial Intermediation 
Services  Indirectly  Measured  (‘FISIM’),  which  treats  some  interest  as  payment  for  the  financial  intermediation  services 
supplied  to  households  which  are  not  explicitly  paid  for  by  fees.  In  assessing  the  actual  interest  payments  made  by 
borrowers for the purposes at hand, gross interest payments are of more interest. Second, the published data show a level 
of interest expenses in the recent past which seems too low relative to what is implied by the level of debt and prevailing 
interest rates, both of which are fairly readily observable. From the December quarter 2000, the figures here use RBA staff 
estimates which vary the implied interest rate in line with the cash rate. 
BIS Review 17/2003 
 9
The  upward  trend  in  debt  servicing  is  clearer  in  the  lower  line  in  the  graph,  which  shows  the  debt 
servicing  requirement  specifically  for  housing  debt.  Currently,  about  6  per  cent  of  household 
disposable  income  is  devoted  to  servicing  the  interest  cost  of  mortgages.  This  is  higher  by  about 
1 percentage  point  than  the  peak  value  in  1990,  despite  the  much  lower  level  of mortgage  interest 
rates, because the size of mortgage debt outstanding is now so much higher. Allowing for principal 
repayments as well as interest would increase this by about 2½ percentage points, an amount which is 
likely to be larger now than in the past because of the higher levels of debt. 
The fact that total interest servicing costs - i.e. those for mortgages and other loans - were so high in 
1990, so that the divergence between these two lines is greatest at that time, reflects two factors. First, 
personal  loans  were  a  much  larger  share  of  total  household  debt  at  that  time  than  they  are  now. 
Second, the average rate of interest on personal loans is usually higher than for mortgages, and they 
rose much more in the late 1980s than did mortgage rates. 
Both these series represent averages across the household sector. But experience differs markedly 
between  households.  Slightly  less  than  30  per  cent  of  households  have  an  outstanding  mortgage 
against their own house; about 40 per cent of households have no mortgage debt on the dwelling they 
own.  These  proportions  are  little  changed  from  a  decade  ago.  Based  on  data  from  the  Australian 
Bureau  of  Statistics  (ABS)  and  the  Australian  Taxation  Office,  the  proportion  of  households  owning 
investment properties is around 8 to 10 per cent. Some, though not all, of these properties are partly 
debt  financed.  Taking  these  facts  into  account,  and  allowing  for  the  fact  that  households  with  debt 
have, on average, incomes about 30 per cent higher than the average for all households, interest and 
principal  repayments  probably  account  for  something  like  20  per  cent  of  disposable  income  among 
those households who have debt. This has most likely increased by about 6 percentage points over 
the past decade. 
In summary, a closer analysis of debt servicing requirements suggests that the commonly quoted fact 
that  the  total  interest  servicing  cost  is  less  than  in  the  late-1980s  peak  obscures  the  fact  that  debt 
servicing costs are on an upward trend - which only stands to reason given that overall debt levels are 
rising. Further, servicing costs of those households with debt are considerably higher than indicated by 
the average experience across the household sector, and have risen a good deal over the past ten 
years. 
Gearing ratios 
Turning to consideration of housing leverage - that is, the ratio of housing debt to the value of housing 
assets - Graph 4 in the speech showed that leverage had risen from about 13 per cent to about 20 per 
cent over the past decade. However, again this is the average across all households, including the 
majority of households who carry no debt at all. Arguably a more relevant measure is the leverage of 
those households  which do carry debt - namely, owner occupiers  with a mortgage still outstanding, 
and investors. 
Some  estimation  is  involved  here  because  the  relevant  data  are  not  directly  observable.  On  the 
assumption that the 30 per cent of households with debt against their homes also own 30 per cent of 
housing assets, we estimate that the ratio of debt to assets for indebted owner occupiers is about 46 
per cent, up from 36 per cent ten years earlier. Among investors, the rise in leverage appears to have 
been  steeper,  though  from  a  lower  starting  point.  In  2002,  it  is  estimated  that  investors  had  debt 
equivalent to 36 per cent of assets, compared with 16 per cent ten years earlier. 
Table 1 
Estimated housing gearing ratios 
 Owner-occupiers 
Investors 
1992 
35.9 
15.6 
2002 
46.1 
36.1 
 increase 
28.3 
132.0 
  2 
 BIS Review 17/2003
