 David Klein: Coping with the challenge to reduce poverty 
Speech by Mr David Klein, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the IMF/World Bank Annual Meeting, 
Dubai, 23 September 2003. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
Mr. K(cid:246)hler, Managing Director of the IMF, 
Mr. Wolfensohn, President of the World Bank Group 
Distinguished Governors, 
Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The world recognized the need to give priority to the global poverty problem, and expressed a wide 
consensus on this matter in the Millennium Development Goals. Let me devote my statement today to 
this subject, and say a few words on the challenges facing Israel in its efforts to reduce poverty. 
We believe that poverty cannot be tackled effectively if policy is not focusing on growth. Growth is not 
a sufficient condition for reduction of poverty, but it is, at one and the same time, the highway to raise 
the living standards of those who are able to work, and the provider of resources to support those who 
are unable to help themselves. 
We also believe that in order to realize its potential growth, the Israeli economy - perhaps like some 
other small and medium-sized economies - has to be open to free movement of goods, services and 
capital,  and  to  adhere  to  international  standards  of  macro-economic  management,  including  the 
standards  for  fiscal  deficit  and  price  stability.  Such  a  framework  maximizes  Israel(cid:146)s  potential 
contribution  to  science  and  technology  as  a  major  vehicle  of  growth  through  international  trade. 
However, this approach also requires to make our tax regime competitive with that of other countries, 
which  necessarily  means  to  commensurately  reduce  government  expenditures  to  keep  a  lid  on  its 
debt. 
Therefore, the macro economic framework constrains the room to handle the challenge of reducing 
poverty by just increasing welfare payments. When we come to formulate an alternative strategy, we 
rely on the experience and advice of the World Bank and the IMF and the policies of other countries, 
like those adopted by the European Union. 
One fundamental element in our strategy consists of various reforms in the labor market leading to an 
increase  in  the  ratio  of  employed  persons  in  the  working  age  population.  This  is  one  dimension  in 
which  we  lag  behind  the  developed  world.  I  need  not  elaborate  here  on  the  significant  relation 
between the rate of employment and the incidence of poverty. 
A  second  key  element  in  our  strategy  is  targeting  of  the  policy  to  reduce  poverty.  Like  some  other 
countries,  we  have  a  history  of  increasing  welfare  payments  without  making  a  distinction  between 
those who are able, or unable, to work, and without applying an income test for welfare entitlement. 
The new policy of reducing poverty will have to target the poorest and least empowered population, 
and let them have a dominant role in shaping their future. 
To  evaluate  the  progress  we  are  making  in  poverty  reduction  we  add  to  the  traditional  relative 
definition of the poverty line a need-based (absolute) definition of poverty. Once we have a meaningful 
and  measurable  target,  we  will  be  able  to  make  our  policy  more  effective:  to  introduce  quantitative 
indicators 
instruments,  determine 
accountability for policy implementation and to make sure that full transparency of the policy making 
and implementation is in place. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The DC CommuniquØ published yesterday stated: 
Today we renewed our commitment to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and to continue our 
work  on  implementing  the  strategies,  partnerships  and  actions  agreed  in  Doha,  Monterrey  and 
Johannesburg. 
Israel has been, and will continue to be, a firm supporter of this worldwide effort to reduce poverty. 
legislative  measures  and  budgetary 
follow-up,  define 
for 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 Finally, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to extend special thanks to the government and people of 
the United Arab Emirates for their warm hospitality to all the participants of our Annual Meeting and for 
their generous assistance to the efficient organization of the Meeting. 
Thank you Mr. Chairman. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
