 Jaime Caruana: Presentation of the Annual Report of the Bank of Spain 
Address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of The Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  Governing  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Spain  on  the  presentation  of  the 
Annual Report, Madrid, 13 June 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Twelve months ago, on presenting last year(cid:146)s Annual Report, I highlighted the significance of the year 
2002  as  the  final  step  in  the  replacement  of  the  peseta  by  the  euro.  Some  of  the  features 
characterising economic developments last year were also discernible at that point: uncertainty and a 
crisis of confidence prompted by a wide-ranging set of shocks to which I shall refer during this speech. 
This conjunction of factors is perhaps not so much the outcome of chance as it is of the fact that, in a 
globalised economy, shocks that might previously have had local effects now feed through rapidly and 
sharply  to  the  world  economy  as  a  whole.  Given  this  adverse  external  environment,  it  is  worth 
reflecting on the conditions our economy should maintain to continue with the process of convergence 
towards  the  income  levels  of  the  most  advanced  countries.  As  on  previous  occasions,  I  shall 
commence with a brief review of the international economic environment. 
The  world  economy  experienced  a  modest,  hesitant  and,  in  terms  of  its  geographical  distribution, 
uneven  recovery  in  2002.  Against  a  backdrop  of  notable  uncertainty,  the  growth  of  the  main 
economies was lower than expected. This was especially the case  in the euro area but also in the 
United  States,  while  stagnation  continued  in  Japan.  Certain  emerging  regions,  such  as  Asia  and 
Central and Eastern Europe, were more buoyant. But the economic results in Latin America were very 
poor.  Inflation  rates  generally  held  at  low  levels  and  the  trade  imbalances  between  the  main  areas 
increased. 
Some of the uncertainty bearing on the world economy was associated with a complicated geopolitical 
situation. Unfortunately, it cannot be said that all the factors holding back an international recovery are 
behind us. The swift conclusion of the Iraq war has eliminated some of the main factors of uncertainty 
and this, along with cheaper oil and improved stock market prices, should contribute to entrenching a 
scenario that allows a more robust though still moderate pace of growth, even though doubts remain 
about the vigour of growth in a climate of lacklustre private investment. 
But  the  confidence  crisis  besetting  the  world  economy  was  not  only  the  result  of  the  geopolitical 
situation.  The  disclosure  of  a  series  of  irregularities  in  the  financial  statements  of  certain  major 
companies, especially in the United States, fuelled a notable lack of confidence about the information 
provided to the markets and called into question not only companies(cid:146) reported earnings, but also the 
suitability of accounting regulations and the independence of auditors and investment banks. Given a 
stock  market  climate  already  depressed  by  the  ongoing  correction  of  the  bubble  that  affected  the 
technology and communications sector, this lack of confidence further propelled the downward trend 
on  the  equity  markets,  which  favoured  the  fixed-income  markets.  Moreover,  the  crises  in  certain 
emerging economies continued, especially in Latin America, and this also contributed to the general 
risk-aversion of investors on international financial markets. 
A key feature of recent developments in the world economy is that the aforementioned shocks, whose 
common denominator is their impact on agents(cid:146) confidence, affected all the developed economies and 
some of the emerging ones almost simultaneously. This highlights how, in an increasingly globalised 
world, the transmission channels on which expectations turn (and which exert a key influence on the 
financial markets) are extremely rapid. All economies, especially the most developed ones, are prone 
to the impact of this type of disturbance, whose origin may be very remote and whose relationship to a 
specific national economy(cid:146)s fundamentals may seem far-removed. 
The loss of confidence stemming from the aforementioned shocks was, in turn, amplified by various 
deep-seated  imbalances  in  the  world  economy  which  have  not  been  corrected  or  have  even 
worsened,  including  most  notably  the  US  current-account  deficit  and  persistent  deflation  in  Japan. 
These underlying weaknesses stoked up uncertainty and a climate of mistrust in various segments of 
the world economy, all of which contributed too to checking and postponing the onset of recovery. 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 1
 Against  this  background  of  closely  interacting  national  economies,  mention  should  be  made  of  the 
high dependence of the rest of the world on the US economy, which proved greater than expected, 
despite the fact that the results in the United States were not particularly buoyant. Such dependence is 
a cause for concern since the United States is, at the same time, the main source of growth for the 
rest of the world and the main raiser of savings on the international capital market, a situation that is 
hardly sustainable over the medium and long term. Moreover, the saving/investment mismatch in the 
United States has been heightened recently by the clearly expansionary bias of monetary and, above 
all, fiscal policy. 
In these circumstances, a swift correction of the US external deficit, while undoubtedly desirable in the 
medium  and  long  run,  might  affect  numerous  other  economies  most  adversely  in  the  short  term 
through  causing  a  contraction  in  the  external  demand  of  these  economies  at  a  time  at  which  their 
growth  is  rather  low.  A  lesson  to  be  drawn  from  this  complex  situation  is  that  when  international 
economic disequilibria increase and swell out of all proportion, there is a risk that their correction will 
be at the least timely moment and with significant costs in terms of growth and well-being. 
Last  year the main economies adapted very  differently  to the  above-mentioned shocks. The United 
States drew benefit from the flexibility of its economy, which allowed a better and swifter adaptation to 
a  more  demanding  environment,  while  policies  took  on  an  unmistaken  expansionary  stance. 
Conversely, the Japanese economy had neither the flexibility to adapt, owing to its numerous rigidities, 
nor scope for stimulus from its demand-side policies, whose room for manoeuvre essentially petered 
out some time back. Finally, the euro area economy, also beset by structural rigidities, was relatively 
inflexible  in  that  fiscal  policy  leeway  was  directly  proportionate  in  each  country  to  the  consolidation 
drive pursued in the previous upturn, with room for manoeuvre proving greater in the case of the single 
monetary policy. 
Consequently, the experience of recent years shows how vital it is to harness economic upturns so as 
first,  to  increase  the  flexibility  of  economies  in  order  to  absorb  more  readily  the  impact  of  adverse 
disturbances; and further, to give economic policies sufficient headroom in contractionary phases. In 
this  context,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  that  macroprudential  policies  should  remain  particularly 
vigilant and react promptly and decisively in the face of potential signs of weakness in the segments of 
the financial system under their supervision. 
In the wake of the crises of recent years, an increasing number of emerging economies undertook - 
with varying degrees of ambition and success - structural reforms aimed at greater flexibility. Yet these 
improvements did not prevent crises from continuing in some of these countries, virulently so in Latin 
America  in  2002.  In  late  2002  and  early  2003,  the  economic  outlook  and  the  trend  of  financial 
variables  in  Latin  America  improved  perceptibly,  especially  following  the  positive  developments  in 
Brazil and Argentina. 
The recent crises have highlighted deep-seated shortcomings in the legal and institutional workings of 
these countries. Emphasis has thus been placed not only on the need to pursue policies supportive of 
monetary, financial and fiscal stability, but also on how important an institutional framework respectful 
of property rights and private enterprise is for fostering growth in these countries. 
Factors of a more global nature have also been pivotal in the recent crises. These have been related 
to greater risk-aversion on international financial markets, which has caused capital flows to some of 
these  emerging  economies  to  shrink.  International  markets  have,  however,  tended  to  be  more 
selective,  and  there  have  been  fewer  episodes  of  crises  spreading  from  one  country  to  another, 
although contagion cannot be said to have disappeared completely. 
The recurrence of these crises has led to reflection on the so-called (cid:147)architecture(cid:148) of the international 
financial  system.  Numerous  reforms  have  been  proposed  in  this  connection.  And  some  have  been 
adopted,  and  are generally  in the initial stages of implementation.  Much remains to be done  in this 
area,  although  the  acceptance  of  sovereign  bonds  incorporating  the  so-called  collective  action 
clauses, issued by Mexico, Brazil and Uruguay, offer grounds for hope. 
The euro area 
In an international setting, as described, of a moderately expanding world economy and heightened 
geopolitical tension, the pace of growth in the euro area in 2002 was markedly weak. At 0.8%, it was 
far lower than had been expected at the end of the previous year. This performance has highlighted 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2003
 the considerable exposure of the euro area to global shocks and the burden the structural deficiencies 
still beleaguering the area entail for it. 
However,  although  economic  buoyancy  has  diminished  across  the  board,  there  have  been 
considerable differences in the growth of the different Member States. In particular, among the four 
major countries in the area, only Spain has remained moderately dynamic in this unfavourable setting, 
while  the  biggest  economy,  Germany,  has  deteriorated  markedly.  Thus,  while  high  and  growing 
synchrony has been observed over the past decade, this still remains below what should be the case 
for a fully integrated economic area. Persisting divergences underscore the need to refine the single 
market and reaffirm the role to be played by national policies when it comes to ensuring the proper 
functioning of each of the member economies. 
It  is  also  significant  that  the  scant  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  2002  was  mostly  based  on  the 
contribution  of  the  external  sector.  As  a  result,  the  shocks  buffeting  the  European  economy  had  a 
particular influence on internal demand, which was considerably slack throughout the year. That is a 
feature that may hold future growth back, once the euro has left its past weakness behind and has 
appreciated considerably against the dollar. 
In  any  event,  the  bleaker  outlook  for  employment  and  the  deterioration  in  financial  wealth  were 
conducive  to  an  increase  in  the  household  saving  ratio,  consequently  reducing  their  propensity  to 
consume.  The  sluggishness  of  expenditure  naturally  affected  investment  plans  which,  in  turn,  were 
discouraged by the decline in stock market prices, balance-sheet restructuring by the most debt-ridden 
companies and the tightening of lending conditions by banking institutions in certain countries. 
The  limited  adjustment  capacity  of  the  European  economy  was  manifest  in  the  relative  lack  of 
responsiveness of nominal wages to the economic slowdown. Job creation was affected as a result, 
especially  in  the  second  half  of  the  year.  This  lack  of  flexibility,  along  with  the  rigidities  of  price 
formation  in  the  industries  least  exposed  to  competition,  also  hindered  the  moderation  of  inflation 
rates, thereby conditioning the European Central Bank(cid:146)s monetary policy decisions. 
The loss of momentum behind the process of reforms in 2002 is telling if it is borne in mind that the 
European economy is still far from achieving its goals in terms of greater flexibility and integration of 
the  markets  for  goods  and  factors,  the  promotion  of  innovation  and  the  incorporation  of  new 
technologies into productive processes. 
Generally,  demand-side  policies  contributed  to  tempering  the  scale  of  the  slowdown,  although  the 
potential constraints on these policies were manifest throughout last year. In particular, the insufficient 
consolidation of public finances in certain countries in the previous upturn has considerably eroded the 
stabilising capacity of fiscal policy in the current cyclical phase. Therefore, a number of countries had 
to curtail the operation of the automatic stabilisers and some had to run budget deficits above 3% of 
GDP, which triggered the related excessive deficit procedures. Evidently, the unfavourable economic 
situation  is  testing  the  multilateral  surveillance  mechanisms  of  budgetary  policies.  But  the  report 
drafted by ECOFIN, based on a proposal by the Commission and recently taken up by the European 
Council, has contributed to reinforcing the validity of the Stability and Growth Pact and to clarifying its 
application. 
The  single  monetary  policy  has  also  reacted  to  the  cyclical  slowdown,  maintaining  conditions 
propitious to the growth of economic activity while bolstering the credibility of its commitment to price 
stability. However, continuing inflationary pressures, linked in part to the aforementioned rigidities in 
price-  and  wage-formation  mechanisms,  have  naturally  limited  the  scope  of  the  more  relaxed 
monetary policy stance. In any event, the key ECB interest rate stands today at 2%, 125 basis points 
down on a year ago. That constitutes a tailored response to the weakness of economic activity and to 
the improved inflation outlook over the period to date, brought about by the substantial appreciation of 
the euro. 
The economic environment has been appreciably alleviated in recent months by the rapid outcome of 
the  Iraq  war  and,  in  particular,  by  the  favourable  impact  of  this  on  oil  and  stock  market  prices. 
Nevertheless,  uncertainty  over  the  European  economy(cid:146)s  capacity  promptly  to  embark  on  a  path  of 
sustained recovery has not been sufficiently dispelled. In particular, the hesitancy of the US economy, 
the deterioration in its current-account and budget deficits, continuing imponderables in respect of the 
international political situation and the current volatility of financial and foreign currency markets may 
affect the European economy(cid:146)s growth prospects, given its dependence on the external environment. 
Along  with  these,  there  are  other  factors  more  specific  to  the  area  (such  as  the  sluggishness  of 
business  investment,  doubts  about  the  scale  of  the  consequences  of  the  stock  market  crisis  for 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 3
 demand,  and  the  persistent  weakness  of  some  of  the  major  Member  State  economies)  that  might 
delay the expected acceleration in activity in the euro area which, in all likelihood, will grow in 2003 
below potential for the third year running. 
On the institutional front, highly significant events for the process of European construction have taken 
place in 2003. The signing of the Treaty of Accession to the EU by ten new countries, which took place 
in April and will be effective in May 2004, marks the start of a phase of far-reaching changes which will 
pose sizable challenges for the competitiveness and cohesion of the area and for the strengthening of 
the effectiveness of the European institutions. In this connection, the European Convention plans in 
the coming weeks to announce its proposed draft of the future European Constitutional Treaty, which 
shall be agreed at the Inter-Governmental Conference to be convened in 2004. As regards monetary 
policy,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has,  with  a  view  to  adapting  the  operating  arrangements  of  the 
euro  area  to  the  possible  entry  of  new  members,  recently  recommended  changes  in  its  voting 
procedures, in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty of Nice. The proposed Recommendation 
was  approved  by  the  European  Council  of  21  March  2003  and  introduces  a  rotation  system 
whereunder the number of governors entitled to vote at any one time is restricted to 15, divided into 
three groups on the basis of their voting frequency. Without delving into the details of the approved 
formula, I should like to stress that the criteria of representativeness used in determining the voting 
rights of each member of the Council will place the Governor of the Banco de Espaæa within the first 
group of Governors, who are authorised to vote in the ECB governing council most frequently, on an 
equal footing with Germany, France and Italy. 
The Spanish economy 
In an adverse external setting, the key characteristic of the period analysed in the Annual Report was 
the capacity shown by the Spanish economy to sustain a comparatively high growth rate of 2%, and to 
continue generating employment, which increased by 1.3%. For yet another year, therefore, there was 
further headway in real convergence towards the average GDP per capita levels of the euro area. 
This performance has confirmed a new pattern of response by the Spanish economy during cyclical 
downturns, which would in the past have given rise to sharp adjustments in activity and employment, 
following the prior build-up of forceful disequilibria. This change in the behaviour of the economy  is 
partly related to the persistence of the expansionary effects derived from Spain(cid:146)s membership of EMU, 
in terms of substantial interest rate cuts and a significant reduction in inflation expectations. Above all, 
however, the Spanish economy(cid:146)s greater resilience to the external deceleration has been due to its 
present regime of macroeconomic stability and to the structural reforms undertaken. 
In particular, I wish to stress the benefits arising from fiscal policy, which has enabled the balanced 
budget  not  to  be  jeopardised  in  the  cyclical  downturn.  Also  notable  are  the  improvements  in  the 
workings  of  the  labour  market  which,  combined  with  the  moderate  increase  in  real  wages,  have 
continued to ensure high employment generation. This has been one of the most positive features of 
recent economic developments, and has helped underpin agents(cid:146) spending decisions and the process 
of real convergence, mainly via the increase in the rate of employment. 
In  terms  of  its components,  growth  in  2002  saw  a  prolongation  of  the  trends  already  perceptible  in 
2001,  and  was  based  on  the  strength  of  household  spending  and  the  momentum  of  infrastructure 
construction.  As  explained  in  detail  in  the  Annual  Report,  set  against  the  significant  slowdown  in 
exports and the fall-off in capital investment, household consumption grew at a rate of close to 2% in 
2002. This growth  was underpinned by the increase in disposable income, contributing to  which, in 
turn, were the interplay of net general government transfers to households and higher employment. 
Moreover,  the  rise  in  households(cid:146)  property  assets,  to  which  I  shall  refer  later,  also  helped  sustain 
consumption,  offsetting  the  losses  in  financial  wealth  brought  about  by  the  heavy  stock  market 
declines. 
House purchases, the other component of household spending, have grown over the past two years at 
a lower rate than that observed  in the period to 2000. More recently, this spending component has 
been subject to opposite-moving influences: on one hand, house-price rises may have dampened the 
demand for habitual dwellings; but on the other, the fact that the return on residential investment has 
held  far  above  that  provided  by  other  forms  of  investment  (financial  assets  in  particular)  has 
encouraged  house  purchases.  In  any  event,  investment  in  housing  has  continued  to  sustain  the 
increase  in  construction.  And  further  contributing  factors  here  have  been  the  forceful  investment  in 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2003
 infrastructure, carried out both by general government and by non-financial corporations related to this 
sector. 
Although  this  consumption-  and  construction-led  growth  pattern  has  provided  suitable  support  for 
progress in real convergence, some of the elements on which it is based are likely not to continue in 
the future. In particular, the intensity of the expansionary effects of the sizable decline in interest rates 
and the rise in property values will foreseeably diminish, both these factors, along with employment, 
having been underpinned by the buoyancy of household expenditure. Moreover, the fact that in the 
past households expanded their spending and reduced their saving (simultaneously increasing their 
debt, as I shall discuss later) means more moderate behaviour is to be expected -and desirable- in the 
future, geared to a restructuring of their saving ratio. Indeed, this began to be seen already in 2002. 
As regards  gross capital formation, investment in  infrastructure has  had a key  part in enlarging the 
economy(cid:146)s productive capital stock. But it cannot play this leading role indefinitely. Consequently, it is 
particularly important that the flatness of business investment and, especially, of spending on capital 
goods in recent years, which has hampered productivity gains and the incorporation of technological 
innovations,  should  be  put  behind.  In  principle,  the  current  high  ordinary  returns  accruing  to 
companies  coupled  with  low  financial  costs  are  propitious  to  investment  regaining  buoyancy,  as 
expectations progressively clear. 
On the prices front, certain temporary factors, such as the physical introduction of the euro and dearer 
oil,  fuelled  increases  in  domestic  prices,  against  the  background  of  relatively  sustained  growth  in 
consumer  demand.  This  prompted  a  rise  in  the  inflation  rate,  which  stood  at  end-2002  at  4%.  This 
increase in inflation has been partly reversed, thanks to the improvement in recent months which has 
seen this rate cut by around one percentage point. However, the bout of rising inflation last year fed 
through  in  part  to  wages,  highlighting  the  importance  of  reinforcing  wage  moderation.  In  fact,  the 
inflation differential with the euro area, despite narrowing recently, has remained persistent. And that 
may pose a risk for future competitiveness. 
In  the  area  of  price  formation,  a  cause  for  concern  is  the  differences  that  continue  to  be  seen  in 
business margins, depending on whether industries exposed or not to competition are involved. In the 
former, mainly export-geared companies, the rate of change of prices has been virtually zero for over 
a year, reflecting the efforts exporting companies have to make to compete in markets experiencing a 
particularly  delicate  situation.  In  parallel,  other  industries  less  exposed  to  competition  continue  to 
increase their operating margins considerably. 
The  Spanish  economy(cid:146)s  resilience  in  the  face  of  the  adverse  external  environment  in  2002  offers 
bright  prospects  for  short-  and  medium-term  developments,  having  placed  it  in  a  sound  starting 
position for more dynamic growth as the international climate improves. However, the expansionary 
impulses  stemming  from  EMU  membership  will  tend  increasingly  to  have  a  lesser  effect,  while  the 
economy will have to address new challenges arising from the stiffer competition that EU enlargement 
will entail. 
Consequently, the growth pattern may not reside so much on consumption and construction but will 
have to be underpinned to a greater extent by investment and exports, meaning that dynamism will 
depend particularly on their profitability and competitiveness. National economic policies will thus have 
to  be  geared  to  strengthening  these  elements  by  promoting  macroeconomic  stability,  business 
profitability and the competitiveness of the productive system. 
As  earlier  indicated,  budgetary  policy  has  contributed  to  domestic  stability  by  means  of  fiscal 
consolidation  and  the  control  of  the  budget  deficit.  If  in  the  future,  against  a  background  in  which 
European  monetary  conditions  will  remain  relatively  generous  for  the  requirements  of  the  Spanish 
economy,  demand  pressures  were  to  persist  and  contribute  to  sustaining  an  inflation  differential 
unwarranted by the process of real convergence, it might be advisable to move towards a budgetary 
surplus position. That would additionally help tackle the problems of the long-term sustainability of the 
pensions system. 
Maintaining  competitiveness,  which  is  one  of  the  main  long-term  challenges,  will  require  continuing 
wage  moderation  and  higher  productivity  gains.  To  do  this,  certain  changes  must  be  made  to  the 
collective bargaining system so that settlements are more closely related to the specific situation of 
firms. It is also necessary to increase the incentives for the stable hiring of employees, reducing the 
segmentation  and  duality  brought  about  by  the  still-high  numbers  of  temporary  employees  as  a 
proportion of the total labour force, despite the fact this proportion has fallen in recent years. In this 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 5
 flexibility, 
respect, the reform of hiring arrangements in the past has been in the right direction, as it has reduced 
the differences in terms of costs between temporary and permanent employment contracts. 
Stepping up investment in capital goods and establishing conditions conducive to the incorporation of 
technological progress, especially in the ICT field, are vital factors for boosting productivity gains in the 
economy.  Nevertheless,  as  the  experience  of  other  countries  (particularly  the  United  States)  has 
shown, to reap the potential benefits of the incorporation of new technologies through investment also 
requires setting a more flexibly working economy in place, pushing through structural and liberalising 
reforms, and designing an appropriate regulatory framework. 
Structural  reforms  aimed  at  promoting 
formation  and 
competitiveness should not be considered as having only medium- and long-term effects. The recent 
history  of  the  Spanish  economy  illustrates  the  relative  speed  with  which  their  effects  have  become 
visible, when they have been applied with perseverance and consistency. This is because they alter 
the  expectations  of  agents,  who  incorporate  the  new  framework  into  their  behaviour  almost 
immediately. 
The foregoing takes on special importance in the face of the challenges EU enlargement entails. The 
similarities between the productive specialisation of our economy and that of the accession countries, 
combined  with  their  low-cost  and  highly  trained  labour,  pose  a  challenge  to  the  Spanish  economy, 
which  has  to  face  stiff competition  in  those  industries  in  which  Spain  is  more  specialised.  It  will  be 
necessary  to  bolster  the  competitive  capacity  of  the  Spanish  productive  structure  through  product-
differentiation  and  quality-enhancing  strategies,  by  improving  its  endowment  of  technological  and 
human  capital  and  by  developing  the  technologically  most  advanced  industries.  But  Spanish 
companies must also set in train strategies enabling them to harness the opportunities of enlargement 
and to increase their presence in the new areas of the single market, channelling their foreign direct 
investment efforts in that direction. 
innovation,  human  capital 
Financial aspects of the Spanish economy 
Some  of  the  financial  features  of  recent  developments  in  the  Spanish  economy  are  of  particular 
importance.  As  I  have  said,  monetary  and  financial  conditions  remained  generous  in  the  Spanish 
economy and, in step with this, financing received by households and firms grew by around 14% last 
year. This increase, which far outpaced the average for the euro area countries, led to a fresh increase 
in the private sector(cid:146)s debt ratios which, in a few short years, have attained the average levels for the 
euro area. 
Significantly, the ongoing resort by companies and, above all, by Spanish households to debt in order 
to finance higher investment and consumption levels is principally a reflection of the favourable impact 
on  agents(cid:146)  expectations  of  the  new  setting  of  macroeconomic  stability,  which  provides  for  higher 
sustainable growth in income and employment. 
One of the clearest consequences of the recent trend of financial flows in the Spanish economy has 
been the contribution made to curbing the scope of the recent cyclical downturn in Spain. That has 
helped the private sector maintain buoyant expenditure on the basis not only of its current revenue but 
also of its expectations of future income. 
Moreover, the downward course of interest rates in recent years, which continued in 2002, has meant 
that  the  gradual  growth  of  Spanish  household  and  corporate  liabilities  has  been  accompanied  by  a 
less  marked  increase  in  the  financial  burden  associated  with  these  debts.  Relative  to  the  sector(cid:146)s 
income, this burden tended to stabilise last year around levels which may be qualified as normal on 
international comparisons. 
Yet it cannot be ruled out that the volumes of debt built up may ultimately affect the pace of economic 
recovery, since they restrict the headroom available for firms and households to continue increasing 
their  resort  to  borrowed  funds.  Ideally,  then,  the  growth  rate  of  debt  should  moderate,  so  that  the 
sector(cid:146)s  spending  decisions  may  move  more  in  line  with  current  income,  thereby  maintaining  the 
soundness of the financial position of Spanish households and firms. It should further be borne in mind 
that the greater levels of debt attained have also tended to heighten the sensitivity of agents(cid:146) spending 
decisions to changes in the variables determining the effective cost of financing. 
In the case of households, most of the financing received has been earmarked for house purchases, 
the main component of household wealth. That has strengthened residential investment and prompted 
rapid growth in property asset prices. 
6 
 BIS Review 31/2003
 A brief review of the past behaviour of the variables habitually considered as the basic determinants of 
property prices provides for a better understanding of their recent trajectory. Changes in the population 
pyramid, increased immigration, the growth of the demand for second homes by residents and non-
residents and, above all, the continuous growth of income and the pronounced fall in interest rates are 
factors  that  help  explain  the  trend  growth  of  the  relative  price  of  housing  in  Spain.  In  addition,  the 
unfavourable course of stock market prices in the last three years has enhanced the attractiveness of 
alternative investment opportunities, such as those offered by real estate. 
Yet in a market such as that for property which, by its very nature, sees supply adjust relatively slowly, 
demand pressures such as those arising from the aforementioned factors may cause excessive price 
reactions  that  tend  to  be  corrected  subsequently.  This  appears  to  be  the  situation  currently  in  our 
country where, even with a significant rise in the rate at which houses are built, property values may 
have exceeded the levels consistent with the trajectory of their determinants. In such a situation, it is 
likely  -and  desirable-  that  house-price  growth  rates  will  be  brought  back  progressively  and  in  an 
orderly fashion to levels more in line with their fundamentals. 
This process, which should run parallel to gradual moderation in the resort to credit financing by the 
households and companies most directly involved in the real estate  business, would prevent house 
prices from moving too far away from their equilibrium value. It would therefore reduce the likelihood of 
sharper  adjustments  ultimately  taking  place  in  the  housing  market,  the  influence  of  which  on  the 
overall  working  of  the  economy  cannot  be  understated.  For  a  sounder  functioning  of  the  complex 
markets for land and housing, at least two groups of measures would be required. On one hand, those 
aimed at influencing the determinants of house prices and, in particular, the regulations and practices 
restricting the supply of land. And on the other, those intended to correct the distortions behind the 
marked bias in the Spanish market towards owner-occupied as opposed to rented housing. 
With regard to the financial system, the year 2002 was, once again, a particularly complicated one. 
Adding to the usual effects any economic slowdown and correction of excesses built up in upturns will 
involve  were  other  factors,  including  most  notably  corporate  and  accounting  shortcomings  of  a 
structural nature, which have undermined the very institutional foundations of markets. This crisis of 
confidence  was  exceptional  due  above  all  to  the  doubts  cast  on  elements  as  fundamental  as  the 
recording  of  transactions  at  listed  companies,  the  veracity  of  information  provided  to  investors, 
conflicts of interest within companies and between these and their main financial agents or auditors, 
and the most elementary mechanisms of corporate governance. 
Within this complex picture, two positive features should be underscored. First, one highly favourable 
aspect of recent developments in the  world  economy, which I mentioned  in the presentation of last 
year(cid:146)s Annual Report,  is the resilience generally shown by the financial system in the  industrialised 
countries,  which  has  limited  the  adverse  effects  of  turbulence  on  the  real  sector.  This  resilience 
continued  in  2002,  although  there  are  perceptible  signs  that  the  succession  of  shocks  and  the 
obstinacy  of  certain  disequilibria  might  have  eroded  the  solidity  of  certain  segments  of  the  global 
financial  system  in  some  countries.  There  would  have  been  no  such  resilience  were  it  not  for  the 
improvements in risk management introduced in recent years and for the margin for manoeuvre built 
up  during  the  boom  years.  Second,  the  response  by  general  government,  with  its  three-pronged 
executive  (including  here  the  various  supervisors),  legislative  and  legal  powers,  has  proven  prompt 
and effective and has allowed many of the shortcomings in market fundamentals highlighted by the 
crisis  to  be  corrected.  Initiatives  such  as  the  Sarbanes-Oaxley  Act  in  the  United  States;  the 
amendments made in Spain by the Financial System Reform Measures Act; the boost to international 
accounting convergence between Europe and the United States, based on putting principles ahead of 
detailed  rules;  the  reinforced  supervision  of  auditors;  the  fresh  momentum  to  improving  corporate 
governance, etc., have all made for some progress in improving confidence. 
Against  this  uncertain  backdrop,  Spanish  deposits  institutions  likewise  offered  proof  of  resilience, 
along with greater strength in areas such as accounting, own funds and provisions. Combined with the 
growth differential the Spanish economy still enjoys, this has allowed Spanish institutions to negotiate 
the  difficulties  thrown  up  last  year  with  a  limited  impact  on  their  earnings,  and  this  despite  the 
difficulties  in  Latin  American  markets.  In  turn,  historically  low  default  levels  in  the  domestic market, 
despite the strong expansion of credit in recent years, and the strength of own funds mean that, on the 
financial side, there are no constraints on the process of economic recovery. 
In  this  setting,  rising  to  the  challenge  of  a  complex  international  financial  situation  underscores  the 
importance for institutions of continuing to strive to improve the efficiency and solvency of our system. 
They must apply  greater rigour to the  analysis, extension  and monitoring  of credit  transactions  and 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 7
 make recovery procedures more flexible. The heightened competition in the Spanish banking industry, 
with the subsequent benefits in terms of efficiency for borrowers and depositors, will - combined with 
historically low interest rates - require of banks a major drive to cut costs so as to increase efficiency. 
The challenges posed by the current cyclical juncture should not see us forget other more structural 
and medium-term challenges affecting financial institutions and, specifically, banks, savings banks and 
co-operatives.  Given  the  far-reaching  consequences  for  banking,  such  challenges  include  most 
notably the New Capital Accord and the implementation of International Accounting Standards (IAS). 
It should be clear that these new regulatory aspects go beyond a mere alteration of laws, decrees or 
Banco de Espaæa circulars. They are an innovation in the true sense of the term which will affect not 
only capital headings or financial statements but also business strategies, risk management, etc. 
Take, for example, the issue of transparency, both in Basel II and in IAS. This does not involve merely 
disclosing specific information to the market. The requirements in this area represent a far-reaching 
revision of the means of compiling financial information. That will not only affect financial statements; it 
will also influence banks(cid:146) decision-making arrangements. Undoubtedly, this revision will entail changes 
to information-gathering systems, both quantitatively and qualitatively. 
Banks  must  therefore  be  prepared  for  the  consequences  of  greater  public  scrutiny  of  how  they  do 
business.  This  involves  not  only  giving  more  information,  but  explaining  decision-making,  and 
addressing  the  consequences  that  greater  transparency  may  have  for  relations  between  managers 
and  current  and  potential  investors,  analysts,  depositors,  credit  rating  agencies,  auditors  and,  also, 
supervisors. 
Turning to IAS, the Banco de Espaæa, as a supervisor with a legitimate interest in bank accounting, 
will continue to play an active role in shaping the accounting rules applicable to credit institutions. That 
said,  it  is  vital  that  banking  institutions  should  accept  the  qualitative  changes  imposed  by  the  new 
accounting environment. Specifically, IAS impose greater responsibility - the corollary of their flexibility 
-  on  bank  managers,  which  is  in  contrast  to  the  current  state  of  affairs,  where  the  precision  of 
accounting rules largely limits discretionality. 
As to the more advanced features under Basel II (such as the internal ratings-based systems), there is 
occasionally  an  excessively  mechanistic  view  of  what  is  entailed.  This  is  not  a  more  complicated 
formula  for  calculating  capital  requirements.  What  the  more  advanced  approaches  under  Basel 
demand, and recognise, are more sophisticated internal risk-management systems. Hence, and as the 
word (cid:147)management(cid:148) indicates, the systems should be effectively used and integrated into the bank(cid:146)s 
everyday analysis and decision-making at all levels. 
Capital  requirements  calculated  in  a  more  sophisticated  manner,  and  which  encourage  better  risk-
management techniques, should be underpinned by a suitable policy for capital. It does not suffice to 
have  a  sufficient  and  even  comfortable  overall  volume  of  capital:  what  is  needed  is  a  strategy  for 
capital  that  takes  into  account  factors  such  as  the  permanence  and  quality  of  capital,  market 
accessibility  and  the  balance  between  shareholder  remuneration  and  the  institution(cid:146)s  capitalisation. 
Too often, formulas for increasing capital through the use of subordinated debt or hybrid instruments 
to finance business expansion are resorted to, while at the same time the build-up in reserves from 
retained  earnings  slows.  It  is  crucial  for  banking  institutions  to  evaluate  decisions  on  the  level  and 
composition of capital from a strategic and medium-term perspective. 
These thoughts on the challenges to be faced would be incomplete without addressing the corporate 
governance  of  credit  institutions.  The  Banco  de  Espaæa  has  a  particular  interest  in  this  area  as  it 
considers it a basis for sound risk-management. It is duly assigning additional resources and focusing 
on  the  matter  more  closely.  Far  from  being  a  passing  fad,  improving  corporate  governance  should 
receive priority attention from banks. Not only because of the factors habitually cited, but also because 
the  new  environment  of  transparency  associated  with  IAS  and  Basel  II  will  simultaneously  involve 
greater  market  scrutiny,  a  greater  capacity  for  action  by  bank  managers  and,  in  sum,  heightened 
responsibility for them. 
My final comments relate to the internal changes at the Banco de Espaæa. The year 2002 has also 
been important in this respect in view of the reforms initiated, which will continue in the coming years. 
Last  year  the  Banco  de  Espaæa  successfully  met  the  logistical  challenge  of  substituting  euro  for 
pesetas. While the intensity of this process has diminished, it has nevertheless continued this year. I 
should like to reiterate my gratitude to the staff at the Banco de Espaæa for their efforts and dedication, 
which have been on a par with the historic significance of this event. 
8 
 BIS Review 31/2003
 Likewise, last year saw the start of an ambitious plan to rationalise our network of branches, located in 
each and every  Spanish  provincial capital. The restructuring  involves acknowledging  what is a fact: 
namely, that many of the services provided by the branches do not -owing mainly to new technologies- 
require a physical presence. And those requiring physical presence can be more efficiently organised 
through  a  smaller  group  of  better-equipped  logistical  centres.  Following  negotiations  with  employee 
representatives, the restructuring entails the progressive closure of 30 branches over three years. The 
first ten have already been closed, and those that are to remain are being upgraded. 
The restructuring marks a further step towards the necessary reorganisation of the Bank so we may 
better  adapt  to  our  future  responsibilities  and  challenges.  It  has  been  sought  to  strike  a  balance 
between  the  need  for  efficiency  in  the  management  of  public  interests  and  the  desirable  regional 
presence of our institution. The agreement reached with the employee representatives evidences our 
objective of squaring the need for reform with due respect and recognition of the work performed by 
the Bank(cid:146)s personnel in all the branches that are being closed. I should therefore like to convey my 
appreciation and gratitude to all our employees for their excellent work, with a special mention to those 
that  have  left  us  or  are  to  do  so  in  the  near  future  after  devoting  so  many  years  to  the  Banco  de 
Espaæa. 
Finally, my gratitude to those of you present on this Council today for your contributions, co-operation 
and support. 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 9
