 Andrew Large: Convergence in insurance and banking - some financial 
stability issues 
Speech  by  Sir  Andrew  Large,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  a  conference  in  the 
Mandarin Oriental Hotel, London, 12 June 2003. 
 Introduction 
In getting together my remarks, I found myself wondering why you asked me, a central banker and 
former investment banker, to address this illustrious gathering of the insurance industry. What is it that 
makes central banks so interested in insurance? 
Central  banks  typically  have  two  major  preoccupations.  Monetary  stability  and  financial  stability. 
Clearly those of us with an eye on the macro economic drivers which impact monetary stability cannot 
fail to have taken an interest in the volatility of equity markets. And that volatility has real implications 
for  the  life  assurance  world.  Secondly,  the  way  catastrophe  and  other  cover  can  be  extended  in  a 
world where terrorism is a fact of life has its own significance for the workings of the real economy. 
But it(cid:146)s from the point of view of financial stability that I(cid:146)d particularly like to develop some thoughts this 
morning. After all financial stability is about identifying and countering risks and threats which could 
ultimately impact confidence in the banking or wider financial system. And that gets to both the nature 
of interactions between insurance and banking on the one hand and to the environment in which we 
all  operate  -  the  areas  of  accounting,  regulation,  payment  and  settlement  and  law,  the  broad 
infrastructure if you will - on the other. 
In simpler days, it hadn(cid:146)t occurred to most people that the world of insurance could be relevant to the 
issue  of  overall  financial  stability.  The  worlds  of  insurance  and  banking  were  relatively  distant  from 
each  other  as  were  the  worlds  of  securities  and  banking.  Separate  silos,  if  you  will.  But  today 
insurance  companies  are  an  important  factor  in  mitigating  risks  which  earlier  would  have  been 
contained  within  the  banking  world.  I(cid:146)m  talking  about  risks  like  debtor  default.  And  now,  there  is 
increasing overlap and interaction with banks and capital markets. 
A personal anecdote might help to make that point; and also highlight my view that the breaking down 
of the silos is a pretty recent phenomenon. I well remember a time in the 1970s. As an investment 
banker, I used to handle capital market deals in the early  days of the eurobond market. I began to 
observe that, even though I couldn(cid:146)t articulate what was going on with precision, there were areas of 
the insurance industry which seemed to be taking similar types of risk as banks, but charging a wholly 
different price. I remember talking to my friends in the insurance broking industry about it. One or two 
of  them  are  here  in  the  audience!  First  of  all,  was  it  true?  Secondly,  if  it  was,  why?  And  thirdly,  if 
indeed there was an arbitrage opportunity then how could we unlock its value? I remember feelings of 
frustration.  Somehow  we  couldn(cid:146)t  quite  see  how  to  reconcile  some  of  the  essential  differences, 
including regulatory and accounting distinctions. To say nothing of the language or jargon used in the 
two sectors. Well, the rapid growth of the derivatives industry during the late 1980s changed all that! 
All sorts of new instruments for exploiting arbitrage opportunities like the one I described came into 
being. The different aspects of risk were unpicked and recombined. Those developments depended 
partly  on  new  information  technology.  And,  together  with  securitisation  the  functional  divide  was 
crossed. That evolution provided colossal commercial opportunities and enhanced general economic 
value. 
I recall this because it(cid:146)s a good example of how technical advances, some rocket science and market 
forces have changed the fortunes and capabilities of two great industries. And today, even though we 
don(cid:146)t have full integration we certainly have greatly increased interdependence and linkages. Just take 
the involvement of the insurance industry in credit risk transfer as an example. And just as with a lot of 
interdependencies  you  get  network  effects  with  undoubted  economic  benefits  on  the  one  hand,  but 
potential vulnerabilities on the other. 
Maybe I can start by making a few observations on the vulnerabilities - increased risk to firms or the 
overall financial system - that were less significant until the interconnections appeared. The starting 
point  here  will  be  to  try  to  understand  the  nature  of  these  vulnerabilities  better,  and  their  potential 
impact on the financial system. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 1
 Vulnerabilities: comparing banking and insurance 
My first observation relates to the different (cid:147)customs and practice(cid:148) of the two industries. 
In the banking world, obligations have historically tended to be for amounts which are clearly specified 
-  either  in  money  terms  or  according  to  some  agreed  formula  -  in  advance.  The  event  triggering 
delivery  of  the  obligation  is  unambiguous.  Often  it(cid:146)s  simply  expiry  of  a  set  time  period;  and  the 
timetable for payment once the obligation becomes due is fixed (and typically short). In the non-life 
part of the insurance world, on the other hand the amount to be paid is often a matter of interpretation 
of  the  contract.  There  might  be  greater  scope  for  debate  about  whether  the  triggering  event  has 
actually  occurred  or  whether  any  associated  conditions  have  been  met  -  even  whether  payment  is 
due. And any payment due may not be made, at least in full until negotiations on these points have 
been completed. The fact that well-established channels may exist to resolve any disputes - including 
if necessary the courts - doesn(cid:146)t get around the fact that uncertainty regarding the timing and quantum 
of payment is injected into the process. 
Bankers find it hard to reconcile these realities of the insurance world with the way they manage risk 
and  undertake  their  business.  Clearly,  this  fundamental  difference  in  approach  can  raise  issues  for 
those of us with an eye on financial stability. Specifically, these different characteristics can give rise to 
cash  flow  and  liquidity  implications  which,  for  bankers  and  others  in  the  financial  markets,  are 
potentially  highly  disruptive.  It(cid:146)s  fair  to  say  that  confidence  in  the  banking  world,  which  enables  the 
system to function relies on obligations being met as they fall due. As the volume and complexity of 
inter-linked  contracts  in  the  system  increases  the  need  for  certainty  on  this  point  also  increases. 
Higher  volumes  and  greater  complexity  also  increase  the  interest  of  financial  authorities  who  have 
responsibility for stability of the financial system. 
To be more specific, a potential problem can arise if, at any point in the chain expected payments do 
not materialise. Despite the progress which has been made there is still some caution on the part of 
banking regulators towards recognising the risk mitigation provided by insurance contracts. A recent 
example is the debate over recognition of insurance cover for operational risk under the new Basel II 
capital adequacy regime. 
That  general  point  is  illustrated  by  the  post-Enron  case  involving  JP  Morgan  Chase  and  various 
insurance  companies.  Whatever  the  rights  and  wrongs  of  the  case  the  very  fact  that  it  became 
necessary  illustrates  the  potential  for  uncertainty  in  relation  to  contracts  at  the  boundary  between 
banking and insurance. Furthermore the JP Morgan Chase case was ultimately settled out of court. So 
it might not have taken us much further forward in terms of clear guidance or greater legal certainty. 
I(cid:146)m  sure  you  will  be  revisiting  these  issues  tomorrow  afternoon,  in  your  session  covering  legal 
systems. So, I won(cid:146)t labour my point much further. But there is a vulnerability here which I think we 
would do well to try to understand better. We(cid:146)ve got to enhance confidence that contracts straddling 
the two sectors can be relied upon to produce expected outcomes in a timely way and even in adverse 
conditions. 
Risk transfer 
My second observation relates to risk transfer more specifically. 
Alan Greenspan made the observation that the successes of the banking system in diversifying risk 
have  increased  its  ability  to  withstand  significant  shocks  in  recent  years,  including  the  Asia  crisis, 
Russia, LTCM, 9/11 to say nothing of Enron, the IT boom and bust, and the telecom write offs. A lot of 
people agree with him. So the development of markets for the transfer of credit risk is of real value. It 
allows institutions that are best placed to originate a loan to do so, without necessarily requiring them 
to  continue  to  bear  the  risk.  Having  a  market  to  transfer  risk  allows  institutions  to  diversify  their 
exposures  across  different  sectors  and  regions.  And  of  course  it  generates  price  information  that 
would not otherwise be available. That means credit exposures can be marked to market in a way that 
had not previously been possible. 
But it raises other questions. The transferors may have proper insight into the nature of the risks. But 
to whom have the risks been transferred? Are the transferees actually aware of the risks they have 
taken on? And are they in the best position to monitor these risks as they evolve? How do they acquire 
day to day knowledge about the quality of those risks? Going further, what might they do when they 
find out? 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 Some of the concerns being expressed by private and public sector commentators in these areas are, 
in my view, important and worthy of further examination. Those concerns I(cid:146)m talking about include: a 
lack of aggregate data on derivative positions; lack of transparency in accounting for them; and the 
potential for unexpected concentrations of risk to build up. Although in principle this redistribution of 
risk should be benign we simply do not have the information at present to judge what the actual impact 
has been. 
But why is all this relevant to insurance? It(cid:146)s certainly true that in a lot of cases originating banks have 
laid risks off to other banks. There are many possible reasons for this: for diversification or to avoid 
concentration;  opportunities  to  earn  fees;  regulatory  arbitrage;  and  different  views  on  pricing  and 
spreads. But it is also well known too that risks have been transferred from banks to various areas of 
the insurance world. That includes reinsurance, where the degree to which such risk has now been 
concentrated is difficult to assess. Moreover, these transfers have taken place, not only through OTC 
contracts,  but  also  through  securitised  debt  instruments,  of  various  credit  quality.  In  my  view,  this 
opacity  is  not  conducive  to  long-term  confidence  in  the  strength  of  the  industry.  And,  it  certainly 
doesn(cid:146)t contribute to overall systemic robustness. 
So this is the second area where gaining better understanding of the potential vulnerabilities before we 
face adverse outcomes could be of real value. 
Supervision and regulation 
Obviously, it(cid:146)s pretty easy to make lists of risks and potential vulnerabilities. Central bankers are meant 
to be especially good at  it! But I(cid:146)ve  already referred to the significant  benefits of risk transfer. They 
include wider distribution of risk, and potentially at lower cost to buyers of protection from those risks. 
That(cid:146)s got to be of real value. The question is: can these gains be achieved efficiently whilst at the 
same time mitigating the risks? 
My  suggestion  here  relates  to  the  environment  in  which  the  industries  operate:  the  general 
infrastructure  I  talked  about  earlier.  If  we  want  to  get  the  full  benefits  of  risk  transfer,  but  with  the 
vulnerabilities  contained  at  acceptable  levels  then  it(cid:146)s  worth  reflecting  on  the  value  of  co-ordinating 
some major elements of that environment: supervision, regulation and accounting, as they relate to the 
worlds of banking and insurance. I can(cid:146)t help feeling that a genuine effort and real engagement in this 
area  will  help develop a better understanding of where risk really resides. In turn, that  would mean 
greater predictability, enhanced confidence and better business opportunities. 
I(cid:146)d like to give  you a few examples. For a long time, the functional areas of banking and insurance 
were  silos.  So  were  the  regulations  and  indeed  the  regulators!  After  all,  they  mirrored  the  different 
business realities I have just described. Here in the UK, the creation of the FSA to oversee both of the 
areas - and other parts of the financial system as well - is a huge step forward. It helps in developing a 
regulatory framework which meets business realities on the one hand and public policy requirements 
on the other. Whatever the complexities it may generate, I believe we are already seeing great benefit. 
And similar developments are taking place in other countries as well. 
Now although the integrated structure of regulatory authorities is making significant progress in some 
countries, the nature of the regulations themselves are converging only slowly. There is as yet no real 
equivalent to the Basel Accord in the insurance area: no common prudential template for insurance 
supervisors  exists  yet  internationally.  That  said,  I  fully  recognise  and  applaud  the  work  of  the 
International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  in  setting  out  best  practice  and  promoting 
co-operation between supervisors. That(cid:146)s a very  helpful base for further work in future. We have to 
wish them well. But, the current position is that approaches to insurance regulation can vary widely 
from country to country. On top of that, there is sometimes fragmentation of markets and regulatory 
responsibilities,  notably  in  the  US.  Unfortunately  that  complicates  progress  towards  international 
agreement. Maybe  even more so than  what the brave souls in banking supervision  who negotiated 
Basel II experienced! 
Of course, progress is being made. In the UK,  work is concentrating on the  development of a risk-
based solvency regime as a counterpart to capital adequacy in the banking arena. This is part of the 
FSA(cid:146)s Tiner project to overhaul the regulatory environment for insurers. At the EU level the first stage 
of  a  review  of  solvency  requirements  for  insurers  has  now  been  completed.  Designers  of  the  next 
stage are now looking to the approach taken for banks under the Basel Accord, focusing on the three 
pillars to develop further EU solvency standards. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 3
 It(cid:146)s worth looking a bit at the three pillar approach itself. For those of you unfamiliar with the banking 
jargon  this  approach  involves  combining  requirements  for  minimum  capital  (the  first  pillar)  with  a 
supervisory  review  of  each  institution(cid:146)s  profile  and  internal  processes  (the  second  pillar).  The  third 
pillar involves market discipline where effective disclosure should allow a better understanding of the 
risks  being  taken  on  by  different  institutions.  That  allows  the  market  itself  rather  than  armies  of 
regulators to do some of the work. The same set of principles should be equally relevant for insurance. 
But, we(cid:146)ve got to recognise that the scale of change required is truly formidable! 
That(cid:146)s  especially  true  since  disclosure  leads  us  inexorably  to  accounting.  After  all  meaningful 
disclosure requires a common approach to recording the value of insurance contracts. Otherwise you 
couldn(cid:146)t achieve standardised capital requirements; and greater transparency is of limited value unless 
comparisons can be made. So the work being undertaken by the International Accounting Standards 
Board on a disclosure standard for insurance will be absolutely crucial in this respect. 
Conclusion 
My observations about the value of convergence in what I have called the (cid:145)infrastructure environment(cid:146), 
come down to these areas of focus: 
First,  convergence  will  enable  better  understanding  of  the  reality,  or  absence,  of  systemic  risk.  In 
particular I(cid:146)m talking about the potential for transmission of shocks between the insurance industry and 
the banking system. 
Second,  it  will  discourage  arbitrage  that  is  based  on  technical  accounting  and  regulatory  factors. 
Instead,  convergence  will  enable  the  market  to  focus  on  arbitrage  which  reflects  the  substantive 
evaluation of risks where real economic value may reside. 
And third, the added transparency of interfaces between the two industries will enhance confidence in 
the risk transfer arena. That will help dissipate the sort of unease which I sense around the place at 
the moment. 
The data deficiencies we confront today where the actual location of risk is so opaque is to my mind a 
major challenge. Better transparency will surely help to avoid adverse consequences of shocks which 
are inevitable from time to time. The infrastructure environment has to be robust enough to withstand 
these shocks. 
Of  course  there  are  challenges.  For  example:  in  avoiding  over-engineering  and  over-prescription  in 
regulation  and  accounting  standards,  and  sticking  more  to  a  principles-based  approach.  Those 
principles have got to be based on best practice in the markets on the one hand, and the public policy 
needs on the other. Here, I(cid:146)m including adequate systemic security. My thesis would be that the very 
effort  necessary  to  define  those  principles  and  the  necessary  engagement  between  leaders  of  the 
industry on the one hand and public authorities on the other will reward us with a system where all 
parties can operate and contribute with confidence. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2003
