 Willem F Duisenberg: The first lustrum of the ECB 
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  International 
Frankfurt Banking Evening, Frankfurt, 16 June 2003. 
 Introduction 
It gives me great pleasure to address such a distinguished audience today; even more so as it is not 
the first time I am speaking at the International Frankfurt Banking Evening. 
On  1  June  of  this  year,  the  ECB  celebrated  its  fifth  anniversary.  Hence,  In  my  speech  today,  I  will 
focus on two topics. First, I will discuss some lessons from our experience of monetary policy in the 
euro area during the first five years of the ECB. Second, I will look ahead and elaborate on ongoing 
developments  in  the  context  to  the  Convention  on  the  Future  of  Europe,  which  aims  to  lay  the 
foundations for a Constitutional Treaty for the European Union. 
ECB monetary policy-making in perspective 
Starting with our experience of monetary policy, and, of course, speaking as an impartial observer, I 
can say that I am very satisfied with how the Governing Council of the ECB has functioned over the 
last five years in fairly difficult circumstances. Indeed, a lot has happened and it must be said that the 
first lustrum of the ECB was a fair (cid:147)baptism of fire(cid:148). I am not going to bore you with a recap of the 
monetary  policy  decisions  we  have  taken,  or  the  reasons  behind  each  of  them,  but  will  instead 
concentrate on seven or so features which, to my mind, can be considered as the main issues when 
reviewing our monetary policy experience. 
Let me begin by making a few remarks on our focus on price stability. This focus is enshrined in the 
Treaty on European Union and is our mandate. It is so with very good reason. Long gone are the days 
when  monetary  policy  was  thought  to  face  a  long-term  trade-off  between  inflation  and  economic 
growth. It is now globally acknowledged that maintaining a low and stable rate of inflation is the best 
contribution that monetary policy can make to economic welfare. 
The ECB has pursued  its  mandate of maintaining  price stability  with  vigour and determination. The 
public has understood this. Inflation expectations, as measured by survey data or by financial market 
indicators, have always remained consistent with our definition of price stability. This is all the more 
remarkable as the ECB had no track record at the beginning  while  it  was faced  with the  euro area 
economy being hit by repeated upward price shocks. As a result of all these shocks, HICP inflation 
has been above - and sometimes significantly above - 2% for quite some time. But inflation always 
bounced back following these shocks and today the outlook for price stability is once again favourable. 
A second related  point I  would like to mention  is the medium-term orientation of our policy. As  a 
central  bank,  we  only  affect  prices  with  long  lags  and  we  cannot  steer  trends  in  prices  with  high 
precision. Our focus on the medium term helps to avoid overly ambitious attempts to fine-tune inflation 
developments.  You  might  ask  what  (cid:147)medium  term(cid:148)  means  exactly.  It  is  certainly  not  a  fixed  time 
horizon, as some have argued. Experience in recent years has taught us that flexibility in this respect 
is very important. From this point of view, the ECB(cid:146)s monetary policy strategy is different from pure 
forms of inflation targeting. 
This leads me to my third issue, which is that one cannot simply rely on a single inflation forecast to 
conduct  monetary  policy  successfully.  Experience  suggests  that  it  can  be  very  misleading  to 
summarise the assessment of medium-term inflationary pressures in one single figure, even when a 
measure of statistical error is attached to it. Unfortunately, monetary policy is not so simple and the 
repeated significant forecast errors by all major institutions over the last few years provide evidence of 
this. Indeed, I agree with Alan Greenspan who once said that central bankers should be less reluctant 
to admit that they sometimes do not know. 
Instead  of  relying  on  a  single  forecast,  our  monetary  policy  strategy  emphasises  this  fundamental 
uncertainty. Our strategy builds on several forecasts and indicators and includes a cross-check of the 
information from the economic analysis, which is relevant from the short to medium-term perspective 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 1
 for  inflation,  with  that  from  the  monetary  analysis,  which  is  important  for  the  medium  to  long-term 
outlook. 
In this respect, the fourth point that I would like to discuss today is that over the last few years we have 
seen that monetary analysis is not only an important, but also a complex business. I have no doubt 
that  inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon  over  the  long  term  and  that  we  are  right  in  attributing  a 
prominent role to monitoring monetary developments in our monetary policy strategy. 
A  fifth  point  I  would  like  to  make  is  that  it  was  difficult  to  gauge  the  effects  of  global 
interdependencies when we began to conduct the single monetary policy. What we have learnt, in 
particular,  is  that  global  linkages  go  well  beyond  the  international  trade  channel,  which  was 
traditionally considered to be the main, if not the only channel through which economic shocks were 
transmitted.  Moreover,  more  shocks  -  such  as  those  associated  with  the  introduction  of  new 
technologies and those of a political nature - have increasingly become global in nature. 
Related to this - and this is my sixth point - we have learnt that sharp asset price fluctuations may 
be  very  important  for  shaping  economic  trends.  In  recent  years  we  have  witnessed  extraordinary 
developments in capital markets. Initially, exceptional optimism about potential output growth and talks 
of a (cid:147)new economy(cid:148) drove stock prices to sky-high levels. 
The  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148)  euphoria  was  sowing  the  seeds  of  less  positive  developments  even  before  it 
actually burst. It seems to have been accompanied by a rising short-termism of corporate managers, 
which  in  turn  was  accompanied  by  corporate  malpractice  and  also  pushed  firms  to  over-invest, 
especially in the IT and telecommunications sector. The subsequent large fall in equity prices and the 
revelation of corporate malpractice had a series of negative consequences, including an increase in 
leverage  ratios  of  non-financial  corporations,  a  decline  in  the  value  of  collateral,  increases  in  risk 
premia, and certain firms experiencing difficulties in obtaining external finance. All of this may still be 
part  of  the  reason  for  the  weak  consumption  and  investment  activity,  and  thus  the  slow  pace  of 
economic growth in the euro area that we are now observing. 
To cut a long story short: monetary policy obviously has to take into account the public and financial 
market sentiment in assessing the risks to price stability over the medium term. Central banks must 
monitor financial market developments very closely in order to figure out what the consequences are 
for the outlook for price stability over the medium term, but they must not target asset prices. 
Finally,  and  this  is  my  last  point  on  monetary  policy,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  effective 
communication is an all-important requirement for successful monetary policy. However, as we have 
learnt over the last five years, it is no easy business. I am sure you will appreciate that communication 
is particularly difficult in the context of the euro area, with so many different traditions and languages. 
Over time, we have seen a significant improvement in public understanding of our communication of 
our monetary policy strategy and our monetary policy decisions. Evidence of this is that our monetary 
policy decisions have been very predictable, as reflected in money market indicators, which I rate as a 
highly positive development. Indeed, we want to be, and we have to be, well understood in order to be 
effective in our policy. And, as you were able to see from our recent clarification of the ECB(cid:146)s strategy, 
we continue to strive for even more effective communication. 
The future of the ECB 
Let me now turn to the Convention on the Future of Europe and the future institutional status of the 
ECB. Celebrating the fifth anniversary is, of course, a good opportunity for us to look ahead. Where 
will the ECB be in five years time? What kind of challenges will it face? What kind of environment will it 
be confronted with? 
Today  we  are  very  much  aware  that  the  constitutional  construction  of  the  European  Union  is  in  a 
process of evolution. The Convention has more or less wrapped up its deliberations and its President, 
ValØry Giscard d(cid:146)Estaing, will present the draft of a new (cid:147)Treaty establishing the Constitution(cid:148) to the 
leaders of the Member States in a few days time. 
As the central bank of the European Union, the ECB has followed the  work of the Convention  with 
great  interest  over  the  past  one  and  a  half  years.  The  ECB  welcomes  all  efforts  to  further  the 
construction  of  a  united  Europe.  A  European  Union  with  effective,  functioning  and  transparent 
structures and processes, capable of meeting the expectations of its citizens, and equipped to assume 
international responsibility commensurate with its size and importance, would complement and further 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 bolster  the  success  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  Throughout  the  five  years  of  its 
existence, the ECB has stated that a strong euro is good for a strong Europe. I would now like to add 
that a strong Europe is good for a strong euro. 
If the European Union is re-writing its rulebook by giving itself a Constitution, does this mean profound 
changes  to  the  provisions  relating  to  the  ECB  and  to  monetary  union  in  general?  Throughout  the 
process  of  drafting  the  Constitution,  the  ECB  has  consistently  advocated  that  the  economic 
constitution of the EU - the basic set of rules and provisions for EMU as laid down in the Maastricht 
Treaty  -  is  sound  both  in  terms  of  the  objectives  set  and  the  allocation  of  responsibilities  between 
different  actors  and  levels  of  government.  The  Convention  appears  to  have  followed  a  similar 
reasoning, as it appears that the future Constitution will take over the provisions relating to EMU in an 
essentially unchanged form. The single monetary policy is, by its very nature, indivisible and is thus 
centralised; hence it remains an exclusive competence of the Union. The task of conducting monetary 
policy, as well as all other central banking tasks, has been assigned to an independent central bank 
with a clear primary objective of maintaining price stability. In addition to the ECB, the ESCB is also 
mentioned in the first part of the Constitution, thus acknowledging the federal nature of the monetary 
authority  of  the  European  Union  and  its  sui  generis  character.  Finally,  the  more  specific  provisions 
concerning monetary policy in the current Treaty as well as the Statute of the ECB and the ESCB will 
remain unchanged and form part of the constitutional texts of the Union. 
By  contrast,  budgetary  and  other  economic  policies  will  remain  under  national  competence  in  the 
future Constitution, in recognition of the fact that the vast majority of (cid:147)public goods(cid:148), such as defence, 
for  which  revenues  are  raised  and  subsequently  dispensed,  are  still  provided  at  the  national  level. 
That said, the draft Constitution also prescribes a close co-ordination of economic policies within the 
Union. I very much welcome the fact that the fundamental features of the current set-up of EMU have 
been  preserved.  After  all,  the  stability  of  the  institutional  architecture  is  a  crucial  element  of  the 
credibility of the single monetary policy and the public(cid:146)s confidence in our currency. 
Concluding remarks 
Clearly  it  is  now  up  to  the  governments  of  the  Member  States  to  move  forward  in  the  forthcoming 
Intergovernmental Conference and give the final form to the text prepared by the Convention. If I, as a 
central banker, am allowed to present my assessment, I would argue that the Convention has done a 
very good job of incorporating the substance of the EMU chapter into the new Constitution, while also 
introducing clarifications, additions and updates in the current texts where necessary and appropriate. 
What I do miss is that the Convention has not taken over our suggestion to incorporate somewhere in 
the text the notion of Eurosystem, which stands for the core concept of our central banking system, 
i.e. the  ECB and the national central  banks of the member states that have  adopted the  euro. The 
Eurosystem is not mentioned in the Treaty as it stands, nor in the draft-Constitution. Conclusion: we 
still have some work to do....!!! 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 3
