 Y V Reddy: A central banker(cid:146)s perspective of the world economy 
Statement by Mr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India and Alternate Governor of the 
Fund for India, at the Joint Annual Discussion of the Boards of Governors, on the occasion of the 2003 
IMF/World Bank Annual Meeting, Dubai, 23-24 September 2003. 
 World Bank Group 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
International Finance Corporation 
International Development Association 
International Centre For Settlement Of Investment Disputes 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
International Monetary Fund 
Mr. Chairman: 
Since  we  met  last  in  April  2003,  there  have  been  some  signs  of  improvement  in  the  global 
environment.  Recent  economic  data  of  some  countries  as  well  as  some  forward  looking  market 
indicators, particularly those relating to financial markets indicate that we may be seeing some signs of 
global economic recovery. While we share the view that this could indicate the beginning of a stronger 
recovery, we recognize that considerable risks still persist, though the upside risks appear to outweigh 
the downside risks. 
The outlook for the United States, Euro area and Japan presents a mixed picture. If current trends are 
any  indication,  global  recovery  in  the  near-term  would  be  led  by  the  United  States.  However,  the 
widened and historically high twin deficits, in fiscal and current accounts, of the United States pose the 
threat of possible disruptive adjustment of the US dollar against other major currencies. We recognize 
this as a necessary short term trade-off for realizing medium-term gains. We, therefore, urge all the 
major currency areas to coordinate their policies and to carefully monitor currency market behavior to 
minimize  potential  adverse  repercussions  on  financial  markets  and  on  sustainability  of  global 
economic recovery. The recent depreciation of dollar has, to some extent, minimized the possibility of 
such disruptive adjustment. Further, continuing robust productivity trends support the strong prospect 
for  recovery  in  the  United  States.  In  this  regard,  there  is  considerable  merit  in  the  U.S.  evolving  a 
medium-term fiscal framework to bring its fiscal position on to a sustainable path. 
The  outlook  for  the  Euro  area  seems  rather  flat.  As  in  the  US,  there  is  a  comparable  element  of 
trade-off. While the monetary stimulus provided by the European Central Bank is encouraging, scope 
exists for using fiscal stimulus in a more countercyclical manner. In our view, the Stability and Growth 
Pact should be applied in a flexible manner to allow the automatic stabilizers to run their courses in the 
short-term,  even  if  that  results  in  marginal  breaching  of  ceilings  on  fiscal  deficits,  especially  in 
countries where this could trigger recovery. 
We welcome the reforms undertaken to improve the accounting and auditing standards and corporate 
governance  practices  both  in  the  US  and  the  EU.  These  improvements  are  partly  reflected  in  the 
strengthening of corporate bond and equity markets. The primary bond market issues have become 
more  buoyant.  Sovereign  yields,  in  general,  have  declined,  combined  with  a  compression  of  yield 
spreads.  We  consider  these  developments  as  supportive  of  increased  capital  flows  into  emerging 
markets and for the general strengthening of intermediation in international capital markets. Though 
there was a temporary upward shift in the long-term yields of bonds in the US, potential for significant 
risks of further increase in bond yields appear remote. First, the policy interest rates have declined to 
historically low levels and upward hikes in quick succession are therefore unlikely. The housing and 
mortgage  markets  as  also  bond  markets  cannot  withstand  such  sudden  shocks.  Second,  the 
probability  of  inflation  undershooting  and  the  consequent  adverse  implications  for  deflationary 
expectations are feared by many. 
The question also remains as to how long and to what extent the US would lead the global recovery. It 
is  important  for  the  EU  and  also  Japan  to  intensify  structural  and  financial  sector  reforms  with 
redoubled  vigor.  In  some  countries,  labor  and  product  market  reforms  should  receive  priority  as 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 important  components  of  such  reforms.  We  encourage  the  Euro  area  countries  to  take  steps  to 
promote  productivity  and  efficiency  gains,  given  the  minimal  scope,  in  the  short-run,  for  achieving 
higher  labor  participation  rates.  The  necessity  of  achieving  these  gains,  and  a  general  increase  in 
demand arises from the impending medium-term fiscal risks associated with demographic trends and 
the  attendant  pension  reforms.  Similarly,  we  recognize  that  more  vigorous  steps  may  help  Japan 
counteract deflationary expectations an address the fragility  of the financial system. In the medium-
term Japan also requires further restoration of fiscal stabilization. 
Growth  is  expected  to  remain  robust  in  most  emerging  market  economies  and,  to  some  extent,  in 
Africa.  These  are  propelled  in  no  small  measure  by  stronger  macroeconomic  policies,  structural 
reforms and improvements in the institutional structure. Prospects have also improved due to general 
improvements in major industrial countries, favorable terms of trade due to non-oil commodity price 
increases, and improved financial market conditions, especially in the bond markets. It is imperative 
that greater resources flow into these countries to help sustain growth. The current favorable financial 
market conditions, no doubt, provide an opportunity for these countries to steer ahead with remaining 
structural reforms and achieve greater fiscal and external sector sustainability. 
Among the developing countries, emerging countries in Asia continue to remain a bright spot. They 
have shown extraordinary resilience in the face of the recent global slowdown and continue to exhibit 
healthy recovery. While timely and complementary policy actions taken by a number of countries to 
facilitate the revival of external demand and expand intra-regional trade are promising, medium-term 
prospects would depend on the recovery in major industrial countries. 
The scope for exchange rate flexibility, particularly in view of the recent build up of reserves in many 
countries, has generated a lot of debate over the last few months. This calls for a more dynamic and 
pragmatic  approach  in  the  analysis  of  recent  trends  in  exchange  rates  and  reserve  management 
practices keeping in view country specific circumstances. The recent strengthening of external position 
of  many  developing  countries  through  building  up  substantial  foreign  exchange  reserves  can  be 
viewed  from  several  perspectives.  First,  it  is  in  part,  a  reflection  of  the  lack  of  confidence  in  the 
international financial architecture. International liquidity support through official channels is beset with 
problems relating to adequacy of volumes, timely availability, reasonableness of costs and above all, 
limited  extent  of  assurances.  Second,  it  is  also  a  reflection  of  efforts  to  contain  risks  from  external 
shocks.  Private  capital  flows  which  dominate  capital  movements  tend  to  be  pro-cyclical  even  when 
fundamentals  are  strong.  It  is  therefore  necessary  for  developing  countries  to  build  cushions  when 
times  are  favorable.  High  reserves  provide  some  self-insurance  which  is  effective  in  building 
confidence including among the rating agencies and possibly in dealing with threat of crises. Third, the 
reserve  accumulation  could  also  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the  availability  of  abundant  international 
liquidity  following  the  easing  of  the  monetary  policy  in  industrial  countries.  The  resultant  excess 
liquidity flowed into the emerging markets. In the event of hardening of interest rates in industrialized 
countries, this liquidity may as quickly dry up; in that situation, emerging market should have sufficient 
cushion to withstand such reverse flows of capital. Fourth, and most important, the reserve build up 
could be the result of countries aiming at containing volatility in foreign exchange markets. It should be 
recognised  that  the  self  corrective  mechanism  in  foreign  exchange  markets  seen  in  developed 
countries is conspicuously absent presently among many emerging markets. 
It  is  also  necessary  to  recognize  that  developing  countries  face  major  challenges  in  their  effort  for 
sustained  economic  growth  which  could  enable  them  to  make  a  significant  impact  on  poverty 
reduction. Recent studies by the World Bank indicate that there  would  be considerable shortfalls in 
achieving  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs).  These  failures  would  not  only  be  limited  to 
some  under-performing  low  income  countries;  even  countries  which  have  made  rapid  strides  in 
sustained economic growth over the past decade, would not be able to meet critical goals. The level of 
development assistance currently available and even the additional commitments made at Monterrey, 
and subsequently, would not be sufficient to meet the minimum financing needs. Developing countries 
have huge unmet financing needs relative to MDG targets and even with their best efforts, they would 
not be able to make up the deficiency. There is a very strong case for substantially stepping up the 
quantum and improving the quality of development assistance. 
There are two aspects to this which we would like to stress. One, is the need to make allocation of 
development  assistance  to  countries  equitable.  The  guiding  principles  should  be  the  incidence  of 
poverty and the effectiveness of poverty reduction efforts. This is best done in multilateral settings so 
that allocation based on national or strategic considerations are kept to the minimum. The breadth of 
their work, especially the analytic services and the richness of their development experience improve 
the  quality  of  policy  dialogue.  There  is  also  the  need  to  reduce  transaction  cost  of  development 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
 assistance through better harmonization of procedures and processes. The Rome initiative needs to 
be followed up and bilateral donors should look at ways of working with multilateral institutions so that 
common mechanisms for project preparation, appraisal, procurement, monitoring, reporting, auditing, 
etc.  could  be  evolved.  Another  way  would  be  to  cofinance  projects  and  programmes  that  recipient 
countries draw up and avoid running parallel stand-alone projects that  yield sub-optimal results and 
strain country capacities. 
Developing  countries  have  been  taking  courageous  steps  in  reforming  their  policy  environment, 
improving  their  institutions  of  governance  and  in  general,  widening,  deepening  and  making  more 
equitable the delivery of services to the poor. Timely and productive development assistance as well 
as increased access to markets are required to complement and strengthen these efforts. Developed 
countries  must  be  prepared  to  play  the  role  of  partners  in  this  process  as  they  agreed  to  do  at 
Monterrey. All players in the development process - developing countries, developed countries and the 
multilateral institutions - have to work to bring about greater accountability. The monitoring of policies, 
actions  and  outcomes  needed  to  achieve  MDGs  can  be  a  useful  tool  to  bring  about  increased 
effectiveness of the development process. While this would require considerable efforts at improving 
the capacities in developing countries, particularly in gathering reliable and accurate statistical data, 
such efforts should be a part of the overall development process and should not be seen as an end in 
itself. Side by side, we need to develop strong partnerships so that country ownership is assured. 
Further  work  is  also  required  in  order  to  enhance  the  voice  and  participation  of  developing  and 
transition countries in the multilateral institutions. While we appreciate that there are no quick fixes, we 
would stress that on-going dialogue and efforts to evolve solutions that better reflect changed realities 
is the way forward. 
Together, we would work towards improving the environment where we see the benefits of economic 
growth percolating to those who have been hitherto  denied  and to those  who  have suffered painful 
adjustments. There is no single mantra that would work everywhere and our policies should recognize 
this.  But,  if  we  are  able  to  develop  a  real  partnership,  with  each  nation  allowed  to  exploit  its 
comparative advantage, and not be held back by artificial barriers and constraints, there is no reason 
why we will not succeed. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 3
