 Joseph O Sanusi: Embracing good corporate governance practices in Nigeria 
Keynote address by Dr Joseph O Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the 19th Annual 
Directors(cid:146) Seminar organised by the Financial Institutions Training Centre (FITC), Abuja, 17-19 June 
2003. 
 The Director General, Financial Institutions Training Centre (FITC), Chairmen and Members of Board 
of  Financial  Institutions,  Chief  Executives  of  Banks,  Captains  of  Industry,  Distinguished  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen. 
I feel deeply honoured to be invited to this important seminar, as the Special Guest of Honour and for 
the  privilege  to  deliver  this  keynote  address.  I  should  also  start  by  congratulating  the  Financial 
Institutions Training Centre (FITC), which has put this seminar together, for its impressive contribution 
to capacity building in the financial services sector.  
The  theme  for  the  2003  Annual  Directors(cid:146)  Seminar:  (cid:147)Balancing  Stakeholders  Interests:  Issues  and 
Challenges(cid:148) is quite relevant and timely, given the havoc which poor governance has wreaked on the 
corporate existence of many institutions and the failure on the part of many banks to uphold the tenets 
of  good  corporate  governance.  Moreover,  when  placed  in  its  proper  perspective,  the  theme  of  the 
seminar  to  my  mind,  calls  for  the  enhancement  of  standards  and  adoption  of  sound  corporate 
governance practices by banks and their corporate customers. In this context, I will like to congratulate 
the  Management  of  the  FITC  for  coming  up  with  this  discourse,  which  I  believe  would  enhance 
participants(cid:146) awareness of the various challenges facing the board/management of institutions in the 
discharge of their statutory responsibilities to their various stakeholders.  
Perhaps,  I  should  observe  at  this  juncture  that  the  role  of  the  FITC  in  providing  quality  human 
development and  advisory services to  its clientele has not gone  unnoticed,  which explains the  high 
calibre of participation at this seminar. I will like to urge the Management of the institution to sustain 
and, improve on that legacy that has been the hallmark of the Centre so that it will continue to attract 
top management in its future programmes. Judging from its antecedents, I have no doubt in my mind 
that the FITC have assembled a formidable team of experts to present the seminar papers that would 
explore the different dimensions of the seminar theme. 
Distinguished  participants,  let  me  caution  that  there  is  no  one  single  factor  that  contributes  to 
institutional  problems  than  the  lack  of  effective  governance.  The  issue  of  good  governance  is, 
therefore,  an  imperative  for  ensuring  successful  corporate  performance.  Building  good  corporate 
governance is a shared responsibility among all stakeholders, each of whom may exert pressure to 
move  an  institution  in  a  slightly  different  direction.  In  this  regard,  although  the  motivations  of  the 
various players are different, they can and should be mutually supportive.  
In any establishment, good governance starts with the owners, then it extends down through the board 
and management to the employees. No matter what the ownership is, there is need for transparency 
and accountability in its relationship with other stakeholders. In this context, all rules that define the 
governance responsibilities, incentives and sanctions facing the board, management and staff must be 
well articulated. Board members should be held accountable and liable for their actions, that impact on 
the interests of other stakeholders. The first major step in creating good governance is for all players 
to mutually agree on the common corporate goals, which must be specific, explicit and consistent. In 
the  process  there  will  be  trade-offs  and  delicate  balancing  of  various  interest  groups.  But  once  the 
goals  are  determined  and  the  respective  roles  of  the  various  players  are  explicitly  defined,  there 
should be an incentive structure and sanctions, which must be effectively monitored and enforced.  
The  recent  widespread  corporate  scandals  and  failures  had  their  root  in  dishonest  management 
decisions and,  in some cases, outright cover-ups  of illicit activities and,  has brought  to the fore the 
role,  which  the  pursuit  of  narrow  group  interests  played  in  wrecking  these  corporations  and, 
consequently, the lives of millions of innocent citizens who had a stake in them. In particular, these 
developments  have  further  raised  the  question  of  the  responsibilities  of  the  Board  of  Directors  in 
ensuring that an appropriate balance is maintained between stakeholders(cid:146) interests. It is also against 
this  backdrop  that  there  is  now  a  global  commitment  to  pursue  and  promote  good  governance 
practices  in  corporations  all  over  the  world  and  with  it  came  the  establishment  of  standards,  which 
corporations and countries are encouraged to adopt. 
BIS Review 27/2003 
 1
 Along with corporate responsibility, corporate governance provides the foundations of market integrity 
and,  thus,  imposes  a  lot  of  responsibility  on  the  Board  of  Directors  that  involves  striking  a  delicate 
balance  between  the  various  stakeholders.  It  needs  to  be  emphasized  here  that  balancing 
stakeholders(cid:146)  interests  goes  beyond  protecting  the  interests  of  shareholders  in  an  individual 
organization. Indeed, it revolves around embracing good corporate governance that sets the rules and 
practices that govern the relationship between managers and shareholders of corporations, as well as 
stakeholders  like  the  public,  employees,  pensioners  and  local  communities  while  at  the  same  time 
ensuring transparency, fairness and accountability. Striking an appropriate balance between various 
stakeholders(cid:146)  interests  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  integrity  and  credibility  of  market  institutions.  It 
facilitates the building of confidence and trust that allows corporation access to external finance and to 
make reliable commitments to creditors, employees and shareholders. It is this contract that underpins 
economic growth in a market economy.  
Distinguished  participants,  having  talked  in  general  terms  about  the  imperatives  of  balancing 
stakeholders(cid:146) interests, permit me to take a moment to outline the challenges facing directors in the 
financial  services  sector  with  regard  to  meeting  the  expectations  of  your  numerous  stakeholders, 
including the regulatory agencies. As a regulator and supervisor of the financial services industry in 
Nigeria, the Central Bank has come across some unwholesome practices by top management and, 
sometimes with the active collusion and connivance of the board that are detrimental to the interest of 
other  stakeholders  in  the  organization.  A  good  example  of  this  is  the  large  scale  insider  loans  to 
management staff, directors, major shareholders and their relations and companies, which eventually 
become non-performing and, thereby, impair the operations of these institutions. I will hasten to add 
that, in a perfect world, directors of a company serve as a check on the excesses of the management, 
but  where  the  directors  themselves  collude  and  are  involved,  it  becomes  difficult  to  protect  other 
stakeholders(cid:146) interests. The situation is further compounded where the management has a stronghold 
on  the  non-executive  directors.  Given  the  observed  lapses  in  our  system,  the  CBN  has  taken  a 
position that directors would be held responsible/accountable for any misdemeanor on the part of the 
management of their institutions. Directors must live up to their responsibility and protect the interests 
of all stakeholders alike. The norm now, the world over, is that the entire board can be removed for 
failure/lapses in performing their role. 
The challenge to you, directors, now is to redress the lapses in our financial services industry. When 
shareholders (or investors), whether major or minority shareholders, invest, their expectation is that 
companies will be run according to sound business principles that minimize the possibilities for corrupt 
practices and mismanagement. This expectation is legitimate and must be protected. Similarly, when 
creditors, particularly depositors, decide to part with their savings they have expectations that they are 
entrusting their funds to a trusted and honest management and, therefore, expect safety of and some 
returns from their foregone consumption. When this trust is undermined, then public confidence in the 
financial system is eroded and the entire economy becomes the loser and the worse for it. As I have 
observed  in  my  previous  addresses  to  bankers,  our  most  valuable  assets  are  public  trust  and 
confidence. Therefore, we should always do whatever it takes to jealously guard it. 
We  need  to  learn  from  recent  encounters  with  financial  sector  crises,  the  recurrence  of  which  we 
should  do  our  utmost  to  prevent.  We  also  need  to  draw  some  lessons  from  the  global  events, 
particularly from the Asian and Latin American financial crisis of the 1990s and the more recent wave 
of corporate financial scandals such as the collapse of Enron, World Com and a slew of others, and 
change  the  way  we  do  things  in  Nigeria.  The  world  has  become  a  global  village,  thus  we  have  no 
choice other than to conform with international best practices. Balancing stakeholders(cid:146) interests and 
embracing good corporate governance practices are the prerequisites for attracting the much-needed 
foreign  investment  inflows  that  will  help  put  the  country  back  on  the  path  of  sustainable  economic 
growth and poverty reduction. It is noteworthy that the Bankers(cid:146) Committee has taken up the challenge 
for  ensuring  high  standard  of  behaviour,  through  the  establishment  of  a  code  of  ethics  and 
professionalism in banking with a sub-committee for its enforcement. 
Finally, distinguished participants, I am optimistic that you have a lot to gain by attending this seminar. 
I believe that the experts that have been assembled to handle the various sub-themes will do justice to 
them and will, in the process, also comprehensively address some of the issues raised in this keynote 
address and come up with recommendations that are implementable. 
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour and privilege to declare this seminar open.  
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2003
