 Koh Yong Guan: Review of Singapore’s economy and financial sector 
Opening remarks by Mr Koh Yong Guan, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the press conference releasing the MAS’s Annual Report, Singapore, 15 July 2003. 
 Introduction 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. Welcome to this media briefing for the release of the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore’s 2002/2003 Annual Report.    
MAS has had an eventful year. The economy performed weaker than expected in the first two quarters 
of  2003.  The  financial  sector  faced  more  volatile  markets,  heightened  competition,  and  continued 
global industry consolidation. Amidst this more challenging environment, MAS has remained focused 
on supporting non-inflationary  economic growth, promoting key growth areas in the financial sector, 
and enhancing the supervisory framework for a sound and resilient financial sector.  
Supporting non-inflationary economic growth 
Global  geopolitical  uncertainties  and  the  outbreak  of  SARS  derailed  the  recovery  of  the  Singapore 
economy earlier this year. We lowered our GDP forecast for 2003 to a range of 0.5-2.5 per cent. More 
recently,  however,  signs  have  emerged  of  a  pick-up  in  economic  activity.   Several  indicators  in  the 
global  electronics  industry  have  improved.  The  SARS-hit  services  sectors  are  turning  around.   We 
expect  the  economy  to  resume  a  modest  recovery  in  the  second  half  of  the  year,  although  some 
downside risks remain. At the same time, inflation has turned out lower than expected, and the outlook 
is for inflation to remain subdued into 2004.  MAS has therefore re-centred its exchange rate policy 
band at the current level of the nominal effective exchange rate of the S$, while maintaining a zero 
percent appreciation path and no change in the width of the policy band. 
Promoting key growth areas in the financial sector 
The weaker domestic and regional economic environment in the last two years has dampened growth 
in  Singapore’s  financial  sector.  Financial  sector  value-added  contracted  by  4.8  per  cent  in  2002 
compared  with  a  rise  of  2.2  per  cent  in  2001.  The  banking  industry  was  affected  by  weak  loan 
demand. The insurance industry experienced a sharp decline in activity following three years of rapid 
growth.  The  securities  industry  was  dragged  down  by  falling  equity  market  volumes  and  bearish 
market sentiment. 
But the weakness in overall financial activity masks strong performance in key growth areas such as 
asset  management  and  treasury  business.  Total  assets  managed  by  Singapore-based  financial 
institutions grew a healthy 12 per cent in 2002, bucking the global trend of a decline in assets under 
management. In the debt market, 2002 saw continued healthy growth in structured debt and a record 
number  of  issues  by  foreign  entities.  Singapore  has  also  benefited  to  some  extent  from  the 
consolidation of financial sector companies worldwide.  Various institutions have chosen to centralise 
their regional operations in Singapore. For instance, in treasury, several global players consolidated in 
Singapore their regional foreign exchange and derivatives business.  The Singapore dollar has been 
included as one of eight settlement currencies in the Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) system - a 
global  initiative  aimed  at  eliminating  foreign  exchange  settlement  risk  arising  from  time  zone 
differences. 
Going  forward,  the  outlook  for  the  other  segments  of  the  financial  sector  has  improved.  The  stock 
market has rebounded with daily transactions nearly tripling in Q2, compared to Q1. With the expected 
pick-up  in  domestic  and  regional  economic  activity  in  H2  2003,  we  are  also  likely  to  see  further 
improvement in commercial banking. The financial sector is expected to post a small positive growth 
this year, following the 4.8 per cent contraction in 2002. 
BIS Review 33/2003 
 1
 Enhancing supervisory framework for sound financial sector 
On the supervisory and regulatory front, MAS continued its efforts to move away from a prescriptive, 
rule-based approach to a more flexible, risk-based approach. This entailed strengthening risk-based 
and  disclosure-based  regulatory  frameworks,  enhancing  corporate  governance  standards  to  foster 
better  risk  management  on  the  part  of  institutions,  and  empowering  consumers  to  make  better 
informed investment decisions. Let me touch on key initiatives in each of these areas. 
An  important  step  towards  a  disclosure-based  regime  was  the  full  implementation  last  year  of  the 
Securities  and  Futures  Act  and  Financial  Advisers  Act.  MAS  will  continue  to  refine  the  regulatory 
framework for capital markets, taking into account industry feedback. 
In  the  area  of  risk-based  supervision,  we  implemented  last  year  the  new  Liquidity  Supervision 
Framework for banks. Several banks that have better risk management systems and processes have 
been allowed to lower their minimum liquid asset requirements from the existing 18 per cent on the 
basis of their liquidity risk profile and liquidity risk management capabilities. Similarly, in the area of 
capital  adequacy,  we  are  currently  developing  a  framework  for  setting  individual  bank-specific 
requirements according to their risk profile and risk management capabilities as part of our ongoing 
review  of  the  overall  capital  adequacy  framework.  For  securities  and  futures  intermediaries,  we 
introduced  a  risk-based  capital  framework  last  year.  For  insurance  companies,  we  tested  such  a 
framework last year and are working towards implementation in 2004. 
Shifting  from  a  rule-based  to  a  risk-based  approach  requires  MAS  to  sharpen  its  supervisory 
capabilities. It involves assessing key risks faced by individual financial institutions and their ability to 
manage  these  risks.  We  are  building  more  comprehensive  risk  profiles  of  individual  institutions, 
leveraging on technology and better information collection. 
Primary  responsibility  for  risk  management  rests  with  the  Board  and  senior  management  of  the 
institutions  themselves.  This  is  why  strengthening  corporate  governance  standards  in  financial 
institutions has been a key priority at MAS for several years. Building on earlier initiatives, we have 
issued a consultation paper, proposing to set higher standards of financial transparency and corporate 
governance for locally-incorporated banks and direct insurers. We have proposed making it mandatory 
for  the  roles  of  the  Chairman  and  CEO  to  be  separated,  and  strengthening  the  independence  of 
boards  of  directors  from  substantial  shareholders.  We  have  received  good  feedback  on  these 
proposals and will issue a final set of guidelines shortly. 
A  less  prescriptive  regulatory  approach  requires  that  consumers  be  empowered  through  enhanced 
disclosure and education to make better-informed decisions themselves. This is particularly relevant in 
the current context of financial innovation which has spawned a growing array of retail products and 
services  with  enhanced  distribution  networks.  MAS  will  work  closely  with  industry  associations  and 
other public sector agencies to develop consumer guides and educational programmes to raise the 
financial  literacy  of  consumers.  We  have  also  facilitated  the  development  of  industry-based 
mechanisms to offer consumers faster and more cost-effective ways to settle disputes with banks and 
insurers. The banking industry has set up a Consumer Mediation Unit and the insurance industry the 
Insurance Disputes Resolution Organisation. 
Enhancing organisational effectiveness 
The  year  was also  eventful for MAS  as an organisation,  as  we continued to build on our structure, 
systems,  and  people  to  better  meet  the  challenges  posed  by  a  changing  and  uncertain  external 
environment.  We  restructured  the  organisation  to  better  integrate  our  supervisory  functions,  align 
resources  with  our  objectives,  and  build  technical  and  managerial  depth.  We  stepped  up  efforts  to 
enhance  the  skills  and  expertise  of  our  staff,  sending  more  of  our  staff  on  external  attachments  to 
financial institutions and supranational organisations, and putting in place a more systematic approach 
in  functional  training.  The  integration  with  the  previous  Board  of  Commissioners  of  Currency, 
Singapore (BCCS) was carried out successfully following the merger on 1 October 2002. 
Annual accounts 
A  few  quick  words  on  MAS’  financial  statements.  The  Authority’s  total  assets  grew  18.6  per  cent 
during the year ended 31 March 2003 to S$153.9 billion. About 11 per cent or S$16 billion is due to 
the  transfer  of  the  Currency  Fund  from  BCCS.  All  other  assets  and  liabilities  of  BCCS  as  at  30 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2003
 September 2002 were similarly transferred to the MAS and have been incorporated into our financial 
statements. The net assets of the Currency Fund at the end of the financial year provided 112 per cent 
asset  backing  for  the  currency  in  circulation  of  S$13.8  billion.  MAS’  profit  after  provisions  for  the 
financial  year  ended  31  March  2003  declined  by  2.8  per  cent  to  S$623  million  as  our  investments 
continued to be affected by the low global interest rate environment and volatile financial markets.  
Conclusion 
In  closing,  let  me  restate  MAS’s  priorities  going  forward.  Supporting  economic  growth  while 
maintaining domestic price stability will remain the key focus of monetary policy. In the financial sector, 
we  will continue to partner with industry  players to  build on our successes in key growth areas like 
asset management, the debt market, and treasury business, while looking out for new niche areas and 
opportunities. We will continue to refine our regulatory and supervisory framework as we progressively 
shift the emphasis from a rule-based regime to a risk-based and disclosure-based approach. This is 
necessarily work-in-progress, as it will take several years of learning and adaptation by MAS, financial 
institutions, and market participants. But achieving this is an important part of ensuring that Singapore 
remains a resilient, competitive, and dynamic financial centre. 
Thank you very much. My colleagues and I will be pleased to take any questions that you may have. 
BIS Review 33/2003 
 3
