 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Rome, 3 April 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Governing Council of the European Central Bank today met for the seventh 
time  outside  Frankfurt.  Let  me  therefore  thank  both  Governor  Fazio  for  his  invitation  and  generous 
hospitality, and the staff of the Banca d’Italia for an excellently organised meeting. 
At our meeting today, which took place in the exceptional circumstances associated with the conflict in 
Iraq,  we  comprehensively  reviewed  monetary,  financial  and  economic  developments.  We 
discussed  at  some  length  the  potential  economic  implications  of  the  military  operations.  In  the 
Governing Council’s view, it is not possible at this juncture to assess what effect they will have on the 
global economy, and on economic developments and the medium-term outlook for price stability in the 
euro area. Overall, the basic elements of our assessment of 6 March on the outlook for price stability 
remain in place and accordingly we decided to keep interest rates unchanged. 
We also noted that the outbreak of the war has not affected the functioning of the financial system. As 
indicated  in  our  press  release  of  20  March,  the  Governing  Council  will  act  to  ensure  the  proper 
functioning of financial markets, providing sufficient liquidity in the euro area as needed. 
Let me now explain our assessment of economic developments in more detail. 
As regards the analysis under the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, the three-month average 
of the annual growth rate of M3 was 7.4% in the period from December 2002 to February 2003, up 
from 7.0% in the period from November 2002 to January 2003. Given the continued high volatility in 
financial markets, mainly related to the geopolitical uncertainty, M3 growth continued to be fostered by 
portfolio shifts away from more risky assets. However, M3 growth appears also to have been affected 
by  the  low  level  of  short-term  interest  rates  prevailing  in  the  euro  area,  as  indicated  by  the  strong 
growth in its most liquid components. At the same time, credit growth showed signs of stabilisation in 
early 2003, after the moderation observed throughout last year. 
Turning to the analysis under the second pillar, recent data and surveys continue to confirm that real 
GDP growth in the euro area remained weak in early 2003. In particular, the persistence of geopolitical 
tensions continued to negatively affect sentiment and dampen economic activity, thereby adding to the 
forces which had already depressed the outlook for the euro area before the escalation of tensions in 
the  Middle  East.  As  a  result,  we  should  only  expect  a  modest  rate  of  economic  growth  for  2003. 
However, the evolution of economic growth for the rest of this year is particularly difficult to foresee at 
the moment, given the exceptional degree of uncertainty arising from the military conflict. Our baseline 
scenario continues to be one of a moderate recovery associated with diminishing uncertainty, starting 
in the second half of 2003. However, we will need to review the economic implications of the war as 
soon  as  a  clearer  picture  emerges.  A  number  of  scenarios,  implying  widely  different  outcomes  for 
economic activity, are conceivable at present. Yet it would be premature to assign specific probabilities 
to any such exercises, which are mainly of an illustrative nature. 
Looking at price developments, annual HICP inflation is estimated by Eurostat to have been 2.4% in 
March 2003, unchanged from February. The recent drop in oil prices is not likely to be reflected in the 
price statistics until April. 
As  for  the  outlook  for  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  it  is  particularly  important  to  clearly 
distinguish between short-term volatility and more fundamental factors. While oil price developments 
may very much influence the pattern of inflation rates over the coming months, other factors should 
dominate  beyond  the  short  term.  The  lagged  effects  of  the  appreciation  of  the  euro  exchange  rate 
since  mid-2002  will  continue  to  dampen  upward  pressure  on  prices,  as  will  the  modest  economic 
growth. If the recent significant reduction in oil prices is sustained, inflation rates will in all likelihood fall 
below  2%  in  the  course  of  2003  and  remain  in  line  with  price  stability  thereafter;  evidently,  this 
presupposes that wage moderation prevails. 
Overall, the present policy stance is consistent with the preservation of price stability over the medium 
term. It maintains a monetary environment that is in itself favourable to economic growth in a situation 
BIS Review 17/2003 
 1
 in which other factors are having an adverse effect on economic activity. Exceptional circumstances 
are  complicating  the  assessment  of  economic  trends. We  will  therefore  continue  to  monitor  events 
carefully and evaluate them in the light of our mandate. 
Regarding fiscal policies, the Stability and Growth Pact provides a robust and flexible framework for 
addressing  any  strains  on  public  finances  without  undermining  the  principle  of  budgetary  discipline. 
While  letting,  where  possible,  automatic  stabilisers  operate  in  reaction  to  changing  economic 
circumstances,  there  is  no  reason  to  pursue  fiscal  activism.  It  remains  essential  that  both  the 
commitments made in the stability programmes and the requests to further improve fiscal positions, as 
subsequently agreed in the ECOFIN Council, are implemented in full. This will help to build confidence 
in the fiscal framework and anchor expectations about the future macroeconomic environment. 
In a highly uncertain environment, it is all the more essential that governments help to boost investor 
and  consumer  confidence  by  taking  decisive  action  to  implement  structural  reforms  in  labour  and 
product  markets  and  in  public  finance.  On  the  one  hand,  there  appears  to  be  a  broad  consensus 
among policymakers and the public that such reforms are important to ultimately raise the euro area’s 
production potential, improve the flexibility of the economy and make the euro area more resilient to 
external  shocks.  On  the  other  hand,  notwithstanding  some  progress  in  individual  countries,  the 
effective  pace  of  reform  has  so  far  remained  slow  and  clearly  insufficient  to  meet  the  Lisbon 
objectives. Over the past few years this has given rise to an implementation gap. Efforts to overcome 
structural  inefficiencies  in  the  functioning  of  markets  must  be  stepped  up.  This  would  promote 
confidence in the medium-term production capacity of the euro area and therefore counteract to some 
extent the current high degree of uncertainty. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2003
