Glenn Stevens: Inflation targeting - a decade of Australian experience1 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to South Australian 
Centre for Economic Studies April 2003 Economic Briefing, Adelaide, 10 April 2003.  
 It is a pleasure to be here in Adelaide to take part in this Economic Briefing. 
As the title of this address makes clear, I would like to look back over a decade of experience using an 
inflation target for monetary policy in Australia. Just a couple of weeks ago saw the tenth anniversary 
of a speech by Bernie Fraser, then Governor of the Reserve Bank, in which the outlines of our target 
can be seen.2 It was, admittedly, a tentative beginning – there was no drum roll, or breathless talk of a 
new era. A reasonably careful reading of that speech was (and is) needed to see the contours of the 
approach to monetary policy which was being developed, and the framework was not fully formalised 
until the 1996 Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy.3 It is perhaps for this reason that some 
commentators believe that inflation targeting in Australia in fact began much later. 
But  those  who  were  there  at  the  time  –  as  I  was  –  saw  the  material  in  that  and  a  couple  of  other 
speeches  of  the  period  as  quite  significant,  in  that  it  associated  intent  of  policy  with  numerical 
objectives  for  inflation,  even  if  only  fairly  broadly  defined  ones.  The  behaviour  of  policy  over  the 
ensuing years was, moreover, quite consistent with those ideas. Hence I remain happy to claim that 
inflation targeting in Australia began about ten years ago in the first half of 1993. 
So it is appropriate to mark the occasion with a look back at how inflation targeting has worked as a 
system. This is not the first review I have done – I drew some initial conclusions in 1999 after six years 
of experience.4 But we now have four more years experience – four fairly eventful years – so we can 
refine our conclusions. 
I  shall  argue  that  inflation  targeting  has  been  a  success,  on  several  criteria.  It  remains,  in  my 
judgement,  the  best  model  available  for  Australia.  But  it  is  not  enough  to  look  backward.  It  is  only 
fitting that we consider the capacity of this framework to adapt to changing circumstances in the years 
ahead.  I  argue  that  it  will  be  an  adaptable  system  –  though  to  meet  some  of  the  challenges  may 
require even more emphasis on the medium-term nature of the target which has been a hallmark (and 
a strength) of the Australian approach thus far. 
Why Inflation Targeting? 
First,  some  history.  Graph  1  shows  a  long-run  series  for  inflation  in  Australia,  beginning  in  the  mid 
1950s.  The  post-World  War  II  era  was  the  time  when  persistently  rising  prices  became  a  normal 
feature  of  economic  life.  Prior  to  that,  there  had  been  periods  of  inflation  followed  by  periods  of 
deflation, with relatively little drift in the price level over long periods. Through the 1950s, Australia had 
positive  inflation,  but  it  was  quite  low  on  average,  even  if  rather  variable.  This  was  also  the  case 
through the first half of the 1960s.  
                                                      
1   Markus Hyvonen provided excellent research assistance for this speech. 
2  
'Some Aspects of Monetary Policy', Talk by the Governor, B.W. Fraser, to Australian Business Economists (ABE), Sydney, 
31 March 1993, Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, April 1993, pp. 1–7. 
3  See 
4 
on 
the 
Conduct 
Statement 
– 
http://www.rba.gov.au/MonetaryPolicy/Statement_on_the_conduct_of_monetary_policy_1996.html 
In  an  earlier 
Inflation  Targeting',  Sydney,  20  April  1999  –  available  at 
http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Bulletin/bu_may99/bu_0599_2.pdf),  I  treated  in  some  detail  the  way  the 
shift to inflation targeting was 'evolutionary rather than revolutionary'. Ian Macfarlane has provided a more comprehensive 
historical treatment of monetary policy (see 'Australian Monetary Policy in the Last Quarter of the Twentieth Century', Shann 
Memorial 
at 
http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Bulletin/bu_oct98/bu_1098_2.pdf). 
of  Western 
('Six  Years 
September 
University 
Australia, 
available 
available 
Monetary 
Lecture, 
speech 
Policy 
1998 
15 
at 
of 
of 
 BIS Review 18/2003 
 1
Graph 1 
   By  the  end  of  the  1960s,  it  had  become  clear  that,  not  only  did  prices  always  rise,  but  the  rate  of 
increase  was  getting  larger.  Inflation  was  trending  higher,  and  this  continued  in  the  1970s.  As  Ian 
Macfarlane has pointed out, Australian inflation was already at 10 per cent when the OPEC I rise in oil 
prices in late 1973 pushed global inflation up to levels rarely seen before. Australia's inflation reached 
17½ per cent. It did decline thereafter, but by the end of the 1970s, was still running at about 10 per 
cent. 
Following the recession of 1982–83, inflation fell to  about 5 per cent,  but quickly rose again as the 
recovery proceeded. Things were  not helped  by the  large depreciation of the currency in 1985 and 
1986, which pushed down the trade-weighted value of the Australian dollar by nearly 40 per cent in 
eighteen  months.  This  was  quite  inflationary,  given  that  a  background  environment  of  high  inflation 
and relatively uncompetitive markets meant that price rises resulting from the exchange rate fall could 
be fairly easily passed on, quite unlike the situation we have seen in recent years. 
The  depreciation  could  have  been  more  inflationary,  had  it  not  been  for  the  Prices  and  Incomes 
Accord  in  place  at  the  time.  This  framework  allowed  for  wage  claims  under  the  highly  centralised 
system then in operation to be 'discounted' for the estimated impact on the CPI of the depreciation. 
This was helpful in containing second-round impacts of the exchange rate change. More generally, the 
Accord  framework  provided  for  a  reduction  in  real  wages  and  lower  inflation  than  would  probably 
otherwise have accompanied the strong growth experienced through most of the second half of the 
1980s. 
Even so, by the end of the 1980s, Australia had experienced a period of two decades during which the 
rate of CPI inflation averaged 9 per cent. Not surprisingly, an inflation psychology was well and truly 
ingrained  in  the  Australian  community.  Measures  of  inflation  expectations  showed  them  to  be  in 
double digits. The financial advice to a whole generation of Australians presumed that high inflation – 
with  the  incentives  for  tax-effective  leverage  that  it  produced  –  would  be  a  permanent  feature  of 
economic life. Some people used to calculate the half-life of a dollar (about eight years) as a way of 
illustrating the erosion of the value of money. Another way of putting it was that a dollar in 1970 had 
purchasing power of 17 cents by 1990.5  
                                                      
5   This is not the place to rehearse at length the corrosive features of inflation, though we do well not to forget them. Inflation 
surely cannot foster saving, or a productive allocation of capital to long-term ends. The poor are more likely to be hurt by 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2003
Through  all  this,  various  monetary  policy  frameworks  had  proven  unsatisfactory. We  had  monetary 
targeting for about a decade, but targets were hard to hit in the regulated era, and even harder to hit 
after  financial  liberalisation,  so  that  there  was  doubt  about  the  role  of  money  as  an  intermediate 
objective. We  couldn't  rely  on  the  exchange  rate  as  an  anchor,  because  we  didn't  have  the  sort  of 
domestic structural flexibility consistent with a pegged currency, particularly given the nature and size 
of  the  external  shocks  which  hit  the  Australian  economy.  And  a  policy  of  completely  unconstrained 
discretion lacked credibility precisely because there had been two decades of high inflation. 
So when inflation came down during the aftermath of the recession in the early 1990s, to rates which 
were  lower  than  anything  seen  since  the  1960s,  the  question  was  how  to  take  advantage  of  the 
opportunity to lock in low inflation as economic growth recovered.  
Around the world, some countries were looking at a model in which there was no intermediate goal, 
like a monetary target, nor an operational goal, like a pegged exchange rate, but a numerical target for 
the final goal, namely inflation, combined with discretion to vary the policy instrument in pursuit of that 
goal. 
In the New Zealand case, the attraction of inflation targeting was based as much on management and 
governance considerations as on the niceties of monetary theory: the thinking was that inflation was 
the variable for which the central bank should be accountable, so make it explicitly part of a formal 
agreement  between  the  Governor  and  the  relevant  Minister.6  Canada  had  its  own  slightly  different 
conditions, as did the United Kingdom. What they all had in common was a relatively unsatisfactory 
history as far as inflation control was concerned. 
It is no secret that the RBA had some reservations about the new approach. We felt that the very low 
target  numbers  and,  more  importantly,  the  quite  narrow  target  bands  espoused  in  some  countries 
would  prove  too  demanding  in  Australia  (and  probably  elsewhere  too).  Nonetheless,  the  idea  of 
articulating the goals of policy in terms of the ultimate objective made a lot of common sense. And we 
felt that having achieved low inflation, articulating a policy of keeping it low and behaving consistently 
with that stated policy did offer the prospect of combining a measure of price stability and good growth 
(which was, after all, expected to be one of the benefits of having price stability). 
Why '2 to 3'? 
How did we come up with the particular formulation of '2 to 3 per cent, on average'? To be frank, this 
was  to  some  extent  serendipitous.  We  were  already  in  that  neighbourhood,  with  inflation  down  to 
about 2 per cent by 1992. When we looked around at the best performances on inflation, we saw first 
that no-one had managed to keep inflation within a very narrow band for long, and second, that the 
best average performances since World War II were in the 'two point something' region, with quite a 
wide degree of variation around that average.7  
We  formed  the  judgement  that  the  Bundesbank,  which  was  the  inflation-fighting  central  bank  par 
excellence of the 1970s, had been prepared to tolerate inflation of 2 per cent or a little more, but would 
always  act  to  reduce  inflation  if  it  rose  to  3  per  cent  or  more.  This  seemed  to  be  a  fairly  sensible 
approach. If we could achieve something like that in the 1990s, it would be a major improvement on 
                                                                                                                                                                      
inflation than the rich, whose affairs can be managed to protect them from, and in some cases to profit from, the effects of 
inflation. Society can learn to live with inflation by indexation, and adjustment to behaviour, but real resources are used in 
the process. 
Incidentally,  it  was  never  true,  contrary  to  popular  belief,  that  the  RBNZ  Governor's  salary  was  linked  to  inflation 
performance. What was true was that he could be dismissed for failing to achieve the target. 
6 
Average  
Minimum 
 7   From 1952–1970, the figures for two leading low inflation countries were as follows: 
 
 
 
  Germany  
 
 
 
Switzerland  
______________________________________  
-2.6  
-1.4  
Maximum  
4.6  
5.4  
2.0  
2.2  
BIS Review 18/2003 
 3
our performance of the 1970s and 1980s. We could always argue later about whether the target might 
be a little lower or more tightly defined. 
The 'on average, over the cycle' part of the formulation came from the observation that inflation was 
hard to control precisely, and that attempts to do so over short periods risked exacerbating the sort of 
economic instability we were trying to lessen. Experience has in my view borne out this judgement, 
even though the Australian approach was initially widely thought to be a bit too soft. 
How has performance turned out? 
So much for the history of how we came to inflation targeting. Now I want to address performance. I 
offer  several  tests.  First,  have  we  achieved  the  target?  Second,  has  the  inflation  psychology  been 
removed from the economy? Third, has this been associated with any cost to growth, or has it instead 
been associated with good overall economic outcomes? 
Inflation performance was shown in Graph 1 over a long period. The low average rate of inflation, and 
its greater degree of stability, since mid 1993 is quite clear. Table 1 shows some relevant data.  
 
Table 1: Inflation in Australia(a) 
  
  
CPI 
CPI ex interest 
Treasury underlying(b) 
Weighted median(c) 
Trimmed mean(c) 
Market Sector ex volatile items 
Target variable(d) 
1970s 
1980s 
1990s 
1993-2002 
10.1 
10.1 
10.1 
 
 
  
  
8.3 
8.1 
8.1 
7.9 
7.9 
  
  
2.3 
2.8 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.6 
  
2.3 
2.5 
n.a. 
2.2 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
    (a)  Adjusted for RBA estimates of the effect of the new tax system 
(b)  Treasury underlying inflation series published from March 1972 to June 1999 
(c)  See Box D in May 2002 Statement on Monetary Policy for details of the definition of underlying inflation 
(d)   Treasury  underlying  series  from  September  1993  to  June  1998.  CPI  ex  taxes  and  health  policy  changes 
 
thereafter 
  
In a paper given in 1995, my colleague, Guy Debelle, and  I explained the target as follows: 
'…if, some years hence, we can look back and observe that the average rate of inflation has a "2" in 
front of the decimal place, that will be regarded as a success.'8 
I can report that, after ten years, it is indeed the case that consumer price inflation, on any measure, 
has  a  2  before  the  decimal  place.  For  the  target  variable  (which  was  the  Treasury  underlying  CPI 
series  until  1998  and  the  CPI  thereafter9),  and  abstracting  from  the  effect  of  the  GST  in  2000,  the 
average inflation rate over the 38 quarters up to December 2002 is 2.4 per cent. 
 
                                                      
8   G. Stevens and G. Debelle (1995), 'Monetary Policy Goals for Inflation in Australia', in A.G. Haldane (ed.), Targeting Inflation, 
Bank of England, London, pp. 81–100. 
9   The  target  was  initially  specified  'in  underlying  terms'.  For  practical  purposes,  the  underlying  CPI  series  devised  by  the 
Commonwealth Treasury was used as the yardstick. A key factor behind this choice was the inclusion of interest charges in 
the CPI for some years, which made for a perverse short-term relationship between monetary policy and inflation. From the 
September quarter 1998, the compilation of the CPI was changed to remove this component, replacing it with an alternative 
means  of  estimating  housing  costs.  The  Bank  then  indicated  that  the  inflation  target  could  be  seen  as  applying  to  the 
published  CPI.  See  Box  D  in  the  November  1998  Semi-Annual  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  –  available  at 
http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Bulletin/bu_nov98/bu_1198_1.pdf. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2003
Graph 2 
    
There  have  been  a  few  cyclical  swings  in  inflation  over  the  period.  But  these  swings  were  pretty 
moderate  (which  is,  after  all,  the  intention  with  inflation  targeting).  The  targeted  inflation  measure 
varied between a high of 3.3 per cent and a low of 1.4 per cent. Measured in underlying terms using 
the median CPI, which is a measure often used by the Bank's professional staff, the lowest inflation 
rate in the period was 1.3 per cent in March 1998, and the highest was 3.2 per cent reached briefly in 
late 2001. Overall then, inflation has stayed within about 1 percentage point of 2½ per cent. This is, in 
my view, a most satisfactory performance.  
Has the inflation psychology so prevalent in the 1970s and 1980s been removed from the economy? 
The  answer  is  yes,  with  relatively  few  exceptions.  Measures  of  inflation  expectations  are  scarce, 
especially  ones  over  a  longer  horizon.  The  Melbourne  Institute's  measure  of  expected  inflation, 
derived from a monthly household survey and funded by the RBA over many years, showed a sharp 
break in 1990 when actual inflation came down. During the 1990s, it did not move much. It increased a 
lot in 2000 just ahead of the introduction of the GST which pushed the level of the CPI permanently 
higher and the rate of change of the CPI temporarily higher, and came down again shortly thereafter. 
The median measure averaged about 4½ per cent over the decade, which shows a persistent error in 
this measure of expectations (of the kind which is not supposed to occur in economics!). One reason 
for this is that there continues to be a significant proportion of households who anticipate inflation of 
10 per cent or more even after a decade of inflation of 2½ per cent. Presumably our message has yet 
to filter through completely.  
BIS Review 18/2003 
 5
 Graph 3 
   To the extent we can extract information from business surveys, they suggest that most businesses 
expect a low single-digit inflation rate to prevail for the economy in general. Perhaps more importantly, 
few businesses appear to believe they have 'pricing power', and individual price changes against a low 
inflation  backdrop  are  much  more  transparent  than  was  the  case  under  high  inflation.  Witness,  for 
example, the degree of scrutiny of price rises in the period after the introduction of the GST, or the 
attention  routinely  given  to  changes  in  petrol  prices.  Much  of  this  is  due,  of  course,  to  the  more 
competitive  nature  of  markets  and  the  activities  of  the  competition  authorities,  but  the  low  inflation 
environment is also an important factor.  
Perhaps the group who devotes most effort to anticipating inflation trends is professional investors in 
the bond market. Nominal bond rates are usually thought to embody an allowance for future inflation. 
The difference between the indexed bond yield – a real yield – and the conventional bond yield is a 
measure of the average rate of inflation anticipated over the life of the bond plus, probably, a premium 
for  the  variability  of  inflation.  Initially,  markets  were  sceptical  that  we  would  keep  inflation  to  the 
targeted  rate.  But  after  monetary  policy  passed  the  first  test  in  the  inflation-targeting  period  – 
tightening in 1994 ahead of a pick-up in inflation in 1995, which was successfully capped and reversed 
– this measure of inflation expectations came down to levels which were consistent with the inflation 
target. There have been ups and downs in this gauge of expectations, which broadly corresponded to 
the cycle in actual inflation. But on the  whole, from 1996 through to 2003, these expectations have 
been fairly closely matched to the 2 to 3 per cent target.  
In  general,  I  think  we  can  say  that  while  high  inflation  expectations  have  not  been  eradicated  from 
every  corner  of  the  economy,  generally  speaking  inflation  expectations  are  low,  consistent  with  the 
inflation target, and quite stable. That is no small benefit because it allows policy more flexibility than 
would otherwise be the case in assisting output in the face of shocks.  
Has this performance on inflation been associated with any cost to growth? While we cannot know the 
counterfactual,  I  think  everyone  now  acknowledges  that  Australia's  growth  performance  in  the  past 
decade  has  been  exceptionally  good.  Table  2  updates  a  table  from  an  earlier  evaluation  of 
performance  made  by  staff  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  in  1998,  which  compared 
Australia  with  other  inflation-targeting  countries  and  a  group  of  non-inflation-targeting  countries.10 
                                                      
10   R.  Brooks  (1998),  'Inflation  and  Monetary  Policy  Reform',  in  Australia:  Benefiting  from  Economic  Reform,  International 
Monetary Fund, pp. 63–94. 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2003
There are now more inflation-targeting countries than when that study was conducted and, of course, 
there are more years of experience. The Appendix details the construction of the data. For my present 
purposes,  I  will  simply  update  the  original  table,  but  the  Appendix  also  updates  the  sample  of 
inflation-targeting countries.  
 
Table 2: Inflation and Growth 
Per Cent 
   Australia 
1980–92 
1993–present 
Other OECD inflation-targeting countries 
1980 to adoption of targets(d) 
Adoption of targets to latest 
OECD non-inflation-targeting countries(e) 
1980–92 
1993–latest 
Annual inflation(a) 
Real GDP growth(b) 
Mean 
Stadard 
deviation(c) 
Mean 
Standard 
deviation(c) 
 7.2 
2.3 
 10.2 
2.7 
 6.4 
2.2 
 2.4 
0.6 
 6.1 
1.3 
 3.9 
0.9 
 2.8 
3.9 
 2.3 
3.0 
 2.6 
2.9 
 2.7 
1.1 
 2.6 
1.6 
 2.0 
1.8 
(a)  Headline consumer price inflation for all countries except Australia (the Treasury underlying CPI up to June quarter 1998 and 
the CPI since with an adjustment for the effects of tax and  health policy changes), New Zealand (the CPI excluding credit 
services  after  December  quarter  1989)  and  the  United  Kingdom  (the  Retail  Price  Index,  excluding  mortgage  interest 
payments). Inflation rates are calculated as the year-ended change in the quarterly index 
(b)  GDP  growth  rates  are  calculated  as  the  year-ended  change  in  the  quarterly  GDP  series.  Where  quarterly  data  are  not 
available, year-average growth calculated from IMF data are used 
(c)  Calculated as the average of standard deviations across countries 
(d)   Dates  used  for  adoption  of  targets  are:  Canada,  1991;  Finland,  1993;  Greece,  1998;  Iceland,  2001;  New  Zealand,  1990; 
Norway, 2001; Spain, 1994; Sweden, 1993; the United Kingdom, 1992 
(e)   Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Portugal and the United States. Finland and 
Spain are considered to have become non-inflation-targeting countries upon joining the third stage of the EMU in 1999, and 
Greece in 2001. The EMU is treated as a single entity after 1999 
 The table shows mean and standard deviations for inflation and real GDP growth for two periods: from 
1980 to the adoption of inflation targeting, and since the adoption of inflation targeting. The data are 
for  Australia  and  two  country  groups:  other  inflation-targeting  countries  in  the  Organisation  for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and other (non-inflation-targeting) countries in the 
OECD. 
The essential results are unchanged from those of a few years ago:  
• 
all  groups  observed  a  decline  in  inflation,  much  reduced  inflation  volatility,  a  pick-up  in 
growth and reduced volatility of growth – it was a good period for most economies;  
BIS Review 18/2003 
 7
  compared  with  non-inflation-targeting  countries,  inflation-targeting  countries  saw  a  bigger 
reduction  in  inflation  (from  a  higher  starting  point),  a  proportionately  larger  reduction  in 
inflation  variability,  a  larger  pick-up  in  growth  and  a  more  marked  reduction  in  volatility  of 
growth (again, from a higher starting point);  
Australia  enjoyed  a  smaller  absolute  variability  in  inflation,  a  bigger  pick-up  in  growth,  a 
bigger reduction in volatility of growth and a smaller absolute volatility in growth than either of 
the other two groups.  
This is a particularly good story for Australia. It is apparent that inflation targeting has been associated 
not  with  reduced  growth,  but  faster  growth  on  average  and  less  variable  growth,  as  well  as  less 
variable  prices.  I  will  be  the  first  to  say  that  monetary  policy  cannot  claim  all  the  credit  for  this 
performance.  There  were,  of  course,  major  pay-offs  during  this  period  from  a  wide  range  of  policy 
initiatives which aimed to liberalise markets, and make them more competitive. It is crucial that people 
understand the importance of these outcomes and the reforms which drove them. Monetary policy, as 
a demand instrument, cannot change the supply side of the economy, which is where the vast bulk of 
the community's gains in income and wealth originate.  
That said, monetary policy has to be made in a way which is cognisant of, and adapts to, the changes 
taking place on the supply side. Without that adaptability, the gains from other reforms would not have 
been  as  easily  or  as  quickly  realised.  It  also  has  an  important  role  in  responding  to  cyclical 
demand-side shocks in a prompt, measured way. In general, I think the conduct of monetary policy 
during  the  period  of  inflation  targeting  has  exerted  a  stabilising  influence  on  the  economy  over  the 
course  of  the  business  cycle,  and  has  allowed  the  supply-side  improvements  to  find  expression  in 
higher levels of non-inflationary growth. 
The Future 
The record of inflation targeting in Australia is a good one. But it is not enough to look only backwards. 
We need as well to be asking whether the system we have is capable of coping with circumstances 
different  to,  and  less  advantageous  than,  the  ones  we  have  seen  to  date.  I'd  like  to  organise  our 
thoughts here around three issues.  
First, deflation. An argument might be made that fighting inflation is fighting the last war. Maybe the 
new enemy is deflation. Certainly, more countries have experienced deflation in the past year than for 
many  years,  if  not  decades,  and  in  a  great  many  more  countries  inflation  is  very  low  and  renewed 
cyclical weakness could, if it occurred, push it down further, perhaps to or below zero in some cases.  
There is no time today to go into detail about how we ought to think about deflation.11 The point for 
today is that inflation targeting isn't just inflation fighting. It involves inflation fighting but it also involves 
deflation fighting  in  equal  measure. To my knowledge, all the countries practicing inflation  targeting 
view their targets as symmetric: undershoots are no better than overshoots. All targets are centred on 
a  number  above  zero,  partly  to  guard  against  unexpected  lapses  into  deflation.  Further,  credible 
inflation targeting that helps anchor expectations of inflation above zero helps to avoid the worst kind 
of deflation, which is not a temporary decline in prices but a persistent and widespread expectation of 
falling prices.  
The second potential challenge is dealing with adverse supply-side shocks. Monetary policy works on 
the demand side of the economy. When the prevailing disturbances come from that side too – as they 
have in the conventional business cycles which we have experienced in the past – monetary policy 
can dampen fluctuations in demand and by doing so it will be stabilising price fluctuations. When the 
shocks emanate from the supply side of the economy, on the other hand, things can be more difficult. 
Adverse supply shocks push activity down and prices up. Should this persist for any length of time, 
monetary  policy  is faced  with more awkward choices, though there is no uncertainty about  what its 
longer-term objective ought to be: to control inflation.  
For most of its history, inflation targeting has coincided with, if anything, favourable supply shocks. We 
have had positive surprises on productivity, and in the supply-enhancing effects of internationalisation 
                                                      
11  For  my  views,  see 
http://www.rba.gov.au/Speeches/2002/sp_dg_041202.html. 
'Inflation,  Deflation  and  All  That',  Sydney,  4  December  2002  –  available  at 
8 
 BIS Review 18/2003
of production. These surprises tended to push output up and prices down. This has been, we have to 
admit, a very benign environment in which to operate monetary policy. It may not always be this way in 
future.  
Inflation-targeting central banks will certainly find challenges if adverse supply disturbances occur, but 
this is also true of any other monetary policy model we could think of. I imagine that inflation targeters, 
if  faced  with  a  rise  in  inflation  above  target  due  to  supply  shocks,  will  focus  on  gradually  bringing 
inflation down again. If inflation expectations are well anchored near the target rate, as they appear to 
be in most countries, there is no reason to believe this will be unduly difficult, and in fact there would in 
such circumstances be flexibility to take some time to achieve convergence back to the target, which 
could help adjustment on the real side of the economy significantly.  
The third issue for the future is how, if at all, to respond to major movements in asset prices. This is 
the most difficult problem to tackle, both conceptually and in practice. Most people agree that asset 
price inflation per se should not be an objective of monetary policy. Most people also agree that, to the 
extent that asset price movements have implications for the course of the economy over the standard 
forecasting horizon of a couple of years – through wealth effects, for example – those effects should 
be  allowed  for  in  the  setting  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  really  just  saying  that  in  searching  for  the 
optimal policy setting to achieve the inflation target over a two-year horizon, all the relevant information 
should be taken into account. We can all sign up to that. 
But  there  is  a  lot  more  to  asset  price  dynamics  than  that.  These  events  typically  have  a  lower 
frequency than the business cycle frequency to which our normal policy practices are attuned. They 
build  up  over  a  number  of  years.  Furthermore,  asset  price  movements  and  their  effects  are  often 
asymmetric. When asset prices are rising, they can easily co-exist with low CPI inflation. But because 
this is often associated with a build up in debt, the ensuing correction in asset prices can cause acute 
distress to borrowers. This means both that spending behaviour is affected and that there can be a 
risk  of  systemic  financial  instability  because  distressed  borrowers  often  mean  a  deterioration  in  the 
asset quality of the lenders. This, if it occurs, weakens the economy significantly and can push inflation 
down sharply.  
In  that  final  phase  of  this  asset  price  cycle,  monetary  policy  will  need  to  be  easy.  The  question, 
however, is whether during the earlier phase it should be tighter than normal, in order to try to lessen 
the probability  of a bust, at the expense of having somewhat  lesser short-term growth and  inflation 
lower than the announced target. Put another way, should policy accept a mild short-term undershoot 
of the  inflation target in order to lessen the likelihood of a much bigger undershoot  in three or four 
years' time?  
Here  there  is  less  agreement.  Some  people  argue  that  there  is  a  strong  case  for  this  additional 
response, particularly on the grounds that if the costs of the bust are large it is worth paying some cost 
to avoid it if at all possible. Others argue that a modest response of policy to the asset price problem 
would be ineffective in dampening the asset price dynamics, and that an aggressive response would 
bring on the problems that policymakers are setting out to avoid. In this view, policy should stick to its 
usual  macroeconomic  concerns,  responding  to  any  after-effects  of  the  asset  price  cycle  when  they 
emerge.  
Does  inflation  targeting  allow  scope  for  responding  to  asset  price  concerns,  if  that  is  thought  to  be 
sensible? I think it does, provided we are prepared to adopt a sufficiently long time horizon. Inflation 
targeting is often presented, for expositional purposes, as a commitment to vary the instrument so as 
to keep the forecast inflation rate at the target at some particular horizon – two years, for example.12 
But surely policymakers care, in principle at least, not just about the inflation rate two years from now, 
but the whole path of future prices. We care not only about where inflation will be two years from now, 
but where it might be heading at that time and how quickly.  
Consider  two  hypothetical  outlooks.  In  one,  a  given  set  of  policy  interest  rates  assumed  for  the 
forecast is associated with inflation in two years' time at the target, but also with an asset price boom 
and increasing leverage, which means that there is an uncomfortably high probability that, beyond the 
two-year horizon, perhaps in year 4, there will be a crash which could impair the financial system, take 
the  economy  into  recession  and  reduce  inflation  well  below  the  target.  In  the  alternative  outlook,  a 
                                                      
12   For example, Lars Svensson (1997), 'Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets', European 
Economic Review, 41(6), pp. 1111–1146. 
BIS Review 18/2003 
 9
higher  assumed  set  of  policy  interest  rates  is  associated  with  lower  growth  and  lower  than  target 
inflation over the standard two-year horizon, but also with reduced risk of the really big fall in inflation 
and activity in year 4.  
 
Graph 4 
   Would we automatically select the first of these two possibilities purely on the basis that inflation is at 
target  in  two  years'  time?  There  would  be  a  fair  proportion  of  people  who  might  select  the  second 
alternative, given the choice.  
Of course, life is not quite as simple as the hypothetical choice I have concocted here. We don't know 
enough  about  the  behaviour  of  asset  prices,  much  less  their  linkages  to  the  economy  through  the 
financial sector, to make such forecasts with any confidence. Nor do we know much about how the 
dynamics might respond to monetary policy. So we cannot easily identify the optimal response to the 
situation.  There  would,  as  well,  be  significant  communication  issues  associated  with  a  policy  which 
sought to reduce the risks associated with asset price developments, but which carried the side effect 
of slowing the economy.  
But  despite  the  difficulties,  it  seems  to me  that  thinking  through  the  nature  of  risks  posed  by  these 
asset price swings is helpful. Policy should not rush to respond to every asset price movement that 
comes along. But a case might be made, on rare occasions, to adopt a policy of 'least regret' so far as 
asset prices are concerned, if financial and macroeconomic stability were thought to be at risk. To do 
so  would  probably  require  an  acceptance  of  a  longer  time  horizon  for  inflation  targets,  and  an 
acceptance of a bit more short-term deviation from the central point of the target. These issues remain 
unresolved among theorists and practitioners of monetary policy. There will be a good deal of further 
discussion about them in the period ahead.13  
Conclusion 
Inflation targeting has been a successful model for monetary policy in Australia. It has been associated 
with  lower,  less  variable  inflation,  and  better  and  less  variable  economic  growth. While  I  would  not 
claim that improved overall economic performance has been entirely due to the adoption of inflation 
targeting, I do claim that this approach to policy has made a significant contribution.  
                                                      
13   For discussion of these issues in more detail, see Claudio Borio and Philip Lowe (2002), 'Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary 
Stability: Exploring the Nexus', BIS Working Paper No. 114, July – available at http://www.bis.org/publ/work114.htm. 
10 
 BIS Review 18/2003
Inflation targeting allows a considerable degree of short-term flexibility for monetary policy decisions, 
but also imposes the appropriate medium-term constraints. That's a very good combination. There are 
no alternative models at the moment for Australia's monetary policy which offer a better mix.  
We must still be on the look-out for challenges. Coping with cyclical fluctuations in the economy and 
shocks of various types will remain constant tasks. But I think that the most difficult issues likely to 
confront monetary policymakers in most advanced countries remain those associated with asset price 
swings. Opinion remains divided as to how to cope with them. But in the event that opinion coalesced 
in  favour  of  some  more  active  response  to  asset  prices  in  the  interests  of  longer-run  financial  and 
economic stability, I think inflation targeting as a system is sufficiently adaptable to encompass that.  
Will we return here in another decade to celebrate twenty years of inflation targeting? Actually, I hope 
not. My hope would be that a system for running policy which has worked well will continue to do so, 
adapting as needed to changing conditions, to the point that a sound monetary system is just part of 
the economic furniture and we spend our time debating other issues. I think we are well on the way to 
that situation, and our part in the RBA is to keep us on that track.  
 APPENDIX (for Table 2) 
Table 2 is an updated version of a table prepared originally in Brooks (1998). The inflation rates are 
calculated as the year-ended change in the quarterly index. The GDP growth rates are calculated as 
the  year-ended  change  in  the  quarterly  GDP  series.  Where  quarterly  data  are  not  available, 
year-average  growth  calculated  from  IMF  data  are  used.  Other  overseas  data  are  sourced  from 
national  statistical  authorities  and  the  OECD,  while  Australian  data  are  sourced  from  the  Australian 
Bureau of Statistics (ABS). 
Mean  inflation and growth  rates for the country  groupings are calculated as simple averages of the 
country  means.  Similarly,  the  standard  deviations  are  calculated  as  simple  averages  of  the  country 
standard deviations. 
The  averages  for  the  'other  OECD  inflation-targeting  countries'  grouping  are  calculated  based  on 
dates when inflation targeting was adopted in each country, which are the same as in Brooks (1998). 
Large and small non-inflation-targeting countries are all put together in this version of the table, unlike 
in the original, because the advent of the euro left very few small non-inflation targeters.  
An alternative version of Table 2 is presented below, with Austria, Korea, Mexico, the Netherlands and 
Switzerland  included,  as  these  OECD  countries  were  omitted  by  Brooks  (1998).  The  inclusion  of 
Korea and Mexico as inflation targeters makes the decline in inflation and inflation variability for the 
targeter  group  larger,  but  the  pick-up  in  growth  smaller  and  probably  insignificant.  The  inclusion  of 
Austria, the Netherlands and Switzerland as non-targeters makes relatively little difference to the story 
for  that  group  as  a  whole.  In  this  version  of  the  table,  Australia's  performance  still  stands  out  as 
remarkably good.  
 
BIS Review 18/2003 
 11
    Inflation and Growth 
Per Cent 
Annual inflation(a) 
Real GDP growth(b) 
Mean 
Stadard 
deviation(c) 
Mean 
Standard 
deviation(c) 
Australia 
1980–92 
1993–present 
Other OECD inflation-targeting countries 
1980 to adoption of targets(d) 
Adoption of targets to latest 
OECD non-inflation-targeting countries(e) 
1980–92 
1993–latest 
 7.2 
2.3 
 13.0 
3.1 
 5.9 
2.1 
 2.4 
0.6 
 9.1 
1.2 
 3.5 
0.9 
 2.8 
3.9 
 2.8 
2.9 
 2.5 
2.7 
 2.7 
1.1 
 2.9 
1.6 
 2.0 
1.7 
     (a)  Headline consumer price inflation for all countries except Australia (the Treasury underlying CPI up to June quarter 1998 and the CPI 
since  with  an  adjustment  for  the  effects  of  tax  and  health  policy  changes),  New  Zealand  (the  CPI  excluding  credit  services  after 
December quarter 1989) and the United Kingdom (the Retail Price Index, excluding mortgage interest payments). Inflation rates are 
calculated as the year-ended change in the quarterly index 
(b)  GDP growth rates are calculated as the year-ended change in the quarterly GDP series. Where quarterly data are not available, year-
average growth calculated from IMF data are used 
(c)   Calculated as the average of standard deviations across countries 
(d)  Dates  used for adoption of targets are:  Canada, 1991; Finland, 1993; Greece, 1998; Iceland, 2001; New Zealand, 1990;  Norway, 
2001; Spain, 1994; Sweden, 1993; the United Kingdom, 1992 
(e)  Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Portugal and the United States. Finland and Spain 
are considered to have become non-inflation-targeting countries upon joining the third stage of the EMU in 1999, and Greece in 2001. 
The EMU is treated as a single entity after 1999 
BIS Review 18/2003
  12 
 