 Bank of Japan(cid:146)s September report of recent economic and financial 
developments1 
Bank of Japan, 16 September 2003. 
 The Bank(cid:146)s view2 
Economic activity still continues to be  virtually flat as a whole, although signs of improvement have 
been observed in such areas as the environment for exports. 
With  regard  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  recovering  gradually.  Meanwhile,  private 
consumption  continues  to  be  weak,  housing  investment  remains  sluggish,  and  public  investment  is 
declining. Net exports are virtually flat.  
Industrial  production  continues  to  be  basically  level  in  response  to  these  developments  in  final 
demand, and corporate profits are on a moderate uptrend. As for the employment situation, although 
the number of regular employees continues to decline, the total number of employees including both 
regular  and  non-regular  employees  has  stopped  falling.  The  pace  of  decline  in  wages  has  also 
slowed,  and  thus  the  decline  in  household  income  is  gradually  coming  to  a  halt.  However,  the 
unemployment  rate  continues  to  be  high,  and  hence  the  employment  and  income  situation  of 
households overall still remains severe. 
Turning  to  the  economic  outlook,  with  respect  to  overseas  economies,  the  likelihood  is  gradually 
increasing that the growth rate of the U.S. economy will accelerate and that the East Asian economies 
as a whole will resume a growth trend. Hence, exports and industrial production are likely to turn up 
gradually.  
With  respect  to  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  declining  trend,  and 
private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time since the employment and income situation 
is  unlikely  to  improve  markedly.  Meanwhile,  the  recovery  trend  in  business  fixed  investment  is 
expected  to  become  clearer  in  the  period  ahead,  mainly  in  large  manufacturing  firms,  whose 
investment has been thus far significantly restrained despite the recovery in their profits. However, as 
long  as  the  pace  of  increase  in  exports  and  production  continues  to  be  gradual,  the  recovery  in 
business fixed investment is likely to remain moderate.  
Overall, with the recovery in overseas economies, the uptrend in exports and production will resume 
gradually, which in turn will initiate the momentum for an economic recovery in Japan. However, a self-
sustaining recovery in domestic demand is unlikely to gain momentum for some time due to persisting 
downward pressures from structural adjustments, such as firms(cid:146) reduction of excess debt and labor 
costs.  In  addition,  as  for  the  outlook  for  the  environment  for  exports,  there  still  remains  uncertainty 
overall,  as  the  employment  situation  in  the  United  States  continues  to  be  sluggish  and  the  pace  of 
recovery  in  some  East  Asian  economies  such  as  South  Korea  is  slow.  On  the  domestic  side, 
continued  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  developments  in  financial  markets  such  as  the  volatile 
movements in long-term interest rates.  
On the price front, import prices have recently stopped declining, reflecting the uptrend in international 
commodity prices, especially crude oil prices. Under these circumstances, domestic corporate goods 
prices are more or less flat, which is also partly due to the rise in tobacco tax. Meanwhile, corporate 
services  prices  continue  a  year-on-year  decrease  of  slightly  over  1  percent.  Consumer  prices  also 
continue to decline, but the year-on-year rate of decrease has diminished to 0.2 percent due to special 
factors,  such  as  the  rise  in  medical  treatment  costs  in  April  in  line  with  the  reform  of  the  medical 
insurance system and the rise in tobacco tax in July.  
                                                      
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
September 11 and 12, 2003. 
2  The Bank(cid:146)s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on September 11 and 12, 2003 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 1
 Looking at the conditions influencing price developments, the outlook for import prices is unclear at 
present  because  it  largely  depends  on  developments  in  the  foreign  exchange  rate.  Turning  to  the 
domestic  side,  the  basic  conditions  surrounding  prices,  such  as  the  supply-demand  balance  in  the 
macroeconomy, technological innovations, streamlining of distribution channels, and pricing strategies 
of firms, are unlikely to change significantly for the time being. Under these circumstances, domestic 
corporate goods prices are likely to remain more or less flat for the time being. Consumer prices are 
basically projected to continue falling at the current moderate pace on a year-on-year basis, although 
there  are  possibilities  that  the  rate  of  decline  may  temporarily  diminish  further  depending  on  future 
special factors.  
As for the financial environment, the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank of Japan is 
moving  at  the  29-30  trillion  yen  level,  as  the  Bank  has  been  providing  ample  liquidity.  Under  these 
circumstances, the overnight call rate continues to move at around zero percent. Interest rates on term 
instruments  remain  steady.  Meanwhile,  interest  rates  on  Euroyen  futures  are  recently  declining 
gradually after rising noticeably from late August. 
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  rose  rapidly  reflecting  an  improved  outlook  for  Japan(cid:146)s 
economy, and are recently moving in the range of 1.4-1.6 percent. Meanwhile, yield spreads between 
private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds are widening slightly after the 
rebound in long-term interest rates. 
Stock prices have been rising sharply as foreign investors continue to invest in Japanese stocks. The 
Nikkei 225 Stock Average is recently moving at around 10,500 yen. 
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  appreciated  as  foreign  investors  continued  to  invest  in 
Japanese stocks. The yen is currently traded in the range of 116-118 yen to the U.S. dollar.  
With regard to corporate finance, private banks remain cautious in extending loans to firms with high 
credit risks, while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. Their 
lending  attitudes  seem  to  be  becoming  slightly  more  accommodative  in  areas  such  as  terms  and 
conditions for lending. Meanwhile, the lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms in 
general  are  improving  somewhat,  although  those  perceived  by  small  firms  remain  severe.  In  the 
corporate  bond  and  CP  markets,  the  issuance  spreads  remain  steady  and  the  favorable  issuing 
environment is virtually unchanged on the whole, especially for firms with high credit ratings, although 
some firms seem to be taking a wait-and-see stance in the corporate bond issuance market in view of 
the rise in long-term interest rates. 
Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because firms(cid:146) cash flow 
remains above business fixed investment and firms are continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid  these  developments,  private  banks(cid:146)  lending  continues  to  decline  at  around  2  percent  on  a 
year-on-year basis. The amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is around the previous year(cid:146)s 
level.  
Meanwhile, according to business surveys, financial positions of firms in general are improving slightly, 
although those of small firms remain severe. 
The year-on-year growth rate of the monetary base continues to be around 20 percent. The year-on-
year growth rate of the money stock rose slightly and is at around 2 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market 
conditions  continue  to  be  extremely  easy.  Meanwhile,  long-term  interest  rates  and  stock  prices  are 
rising. Growth rates of the money stock and the monetary base relative to economic activity remain 
high. In corporate finance, the favorable issuing environment of corporate bonds and CP is virtually 
unchanged  on  the  whole,  especially  for  firms  with  low  credit  risks.  However,  there  has  been  no 
significant change in the severity of fund-raising environment for firms, particularly with firms with high 
credit risks. Developments in the financial and capital markets, the behavior of financial institutions, 
and the situation of corporate finance continue to require close monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2003
