 Zdenek Tuma: Present and future challenges for the Czech National Bank 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Zdenek  Tuma,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  CNB 
Conference: ”Challenges of EU Accession”, Prague, 1 April 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
It is my pleasure and honour to welcome you here to the Czech National Bank for what I believe will 
be a very interesting policy-oriented conference. 
The Czech National Bank is this year celebrating a decade of its existence as the central bank of the 
Czech Republic. When we look back at that period, we can see many difficult challenges that we had 
to face in order to facilitate the economic transition and later on to bring our operations into line with 
best international practices. This experience is similar for all other central banks in the post-communist 
EU-accession  countries.  But  I  do  not  want  to  speak  about  those  past  challenges  today.  They  are 
mostly behind us, and our situation is now very different. Therefore, I would like to be forward-looking - 
as any modern central banker should - and to speak about the challenges that we all share at present 
and, most importantly, about those that lie ahead. 
As you all know, the accession treaties will be signed in two weeks. This will be a symbolic milestone 
in the EU integration process, which has been going on in the economic and political sphere for many 
years. The implications of this process for monetary policy - and economic policies in general - have 
been  debated  extensively  on  many  occasions.  These  academic  discussions  have  covered  the  pros 
and  cons  of  EU  and  EMU  accession,  its  optimal  timing,  the  associated  risks  and  so  on.  Not 
surprisingly, they have often been inconclusive and could continue for many years to come. However, 
time  presses  us,  as  monetary  policy-makers,  to  cope  with  these  fundamental  uncertainties  and  to 
make decisions, designing clear steps to be taken to meet the EU accession challenges. 
Therefore,  I  am  glad  that  we  have  gathered  here  to  discuss  our  future  policies.  The  topics  are  the 
same for all of us, and we thus have many ideas to share. But even before we get to the discussion, I 
would  like  to  stress  that  in  many  areas  we  are  unlikely  to  find  universal  solutions  for  all  countries. 
Policies need to take into account the particular circumstances of each accession country, such as its 
current economic situation, monetary policy regime and fiscal stance. For example, the way towards 
the eurozone in an accession country with a currency board will be completely different from that of an 
inflation targeting country with a floating exchange rate. But there may be important differences within 
these  two  broad  groups,  too.  So  it  should  come  as  no  surprise  that  a  number  of  countries  have 
indicated a clear preference for the “fast-track” approach, whilst others have adopted a more cautious 
approach. I hope that our debate today will cast more light on these country differences. 
EU  accession  per  se  will  probably  have  relatively  little  effect  on  the  way  monetary  policies  are 
conducted  in  the  new  member  states.  It  may,  however,  create  some  challenges,  for  example  by 
affecting inflation rates. Given that the harmonisation and integration processes in the economic field 
have been under way for a long time, I personally do not expect accession itself to be a pronounced 
shock.  Nonetheless,  there  are  still  some  remaining  factors,  such  as  the  final  steps  in  the 
harmonisation  of  indirect  taxes,  the  introduction  of  EU  customs  policies  and  the  adoption  of  the 
common  agricultural  policies,  which  may  have  a  non-negligible  one-off  impact  on  inflation.  It  is 
certainly useful to debate this impact in terms of its likely size and the appropriate responses by the 
central banks. 
EU accession is also likely to influence the real convergence process in the medium run. In fact, it has 
been  influencing  it  long  before  the  accession  date  itself,  through  FDI  inflows,  declining  risk  premia, 
pressure  for  structural  and  legal  reforms,  and  so  on.  Related  to  that,  there  have  been  many 
discussions on the potential trade-offs between the real and nominal convergence processes. It has 
been questioned whether the accession countries can simultaneously achieve low inflation, nominal 
exchange rate stability, consolidated public budgets and sufficiently fast economic growth. It has often 
been  argued  that  economic  growth  should  be  given  priority  at  the  current  stage,  and  only  later  on 
should the nominal convergence goals be pursued more vigorously. As a result, we have heard many 
warnings against fast EMU entry. 
In reality, however, most of the accession countries have already achieved impressive results in the 
nominal  convergence  process.  They  are  now  among  the  countries  with  moderate  or  even  very  low 
BIS Review 17/2003 
 1
 that 
inflation  rates,  and  their  nominal  interest  rates  have  converged  to  the  EU  levels.  In  the  majority  of 
cases, no practical problems with achieving the Maastricht criteria on inflation and long-term interest 
rates  are  thus  envisaged.  Moreover,  this  progress  has  often  been  achieved  simultaneously  with 
satisfactory growth performance, even though some countries have gone through periods of growth 
slowdown correcting previous imbalances in their economies. 
Therefore,  I  think  that  the  potential  conflict  between  real  and  nominal  convergence  has  often  been 
exaggerated. The two processes have different time horizons, nominal convergence being achievable 
in  the  medium-run,  whilst  real  convergence  remains  a  long-run  matter.  There  is,  however,  one 
particular link between the two processes that needs to be taken into account  when  we design our 
policies towards EMU accession. 
Faster GDP growth is likely to lead to a real exchange rate appreciation, making it impossible to have 
both very low inflation and a completely stable nominal exchange rate. This issue is well known and 
has  received  much  attention.  At  the  current  stage  of  development,  however,  we  need  to  shift  from 
purely  qualitative  judgements  to  quantitative  analyses  of  what  has  caused  the  real  exchange  rate 
appreciation trends in many accession countries. For example, the majority of empirical studies of the 
well-known  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  have  concluded 
this  hypotheses  explains  only 
1-2 percentage  points  (or  even  less)  a  year  of  the  observed  real  appreciation  in  Central  European 
countries. This necessitates searching for other influential factors and forecasting their development 
for the future. 
The implications of the real appreciation process are probably different for those countries with hard 
pegs  against  the  euro  compared  with  countries  that  have  floating  exchange  rates.  In  the  case  of 
currency  boards,  the  only  channel  of  real  appreciation  is  an  inflation  differential.  As  the  Maastricht 
inflation criterion  is relatively strict, even a relatively  modest pace of real appreciation might lead to 
complications.  It  will  be  certainly  interesting  to  hear  today  if  these  countries  really  perceive  this 
challenge  as  serious  and  what  alternative  policies  -  such  as fiscal  policies  and/or  income  policies  - 
they can use to overcome the problem successfully. For countries with more flexible exchange rates, 
the Maastricht exchange rate criterion is less binding, and a modest nominal appreciation trend can be 
accommodated within its fluctuation bands. It will be interesting to hear whether we all share this view. 
Another question is whether we see any implications of the real appreciation process for designing the 
details of our ERM2 membership, such as its duration or the chosen central parity. 
This brings me to the issue of ERM2 membership and its consistency with our current monetary policy 
regimes.  The  proponents  of  the  ERM2  regime  argue  that  it  is  a  useful  monetary  policy  framework 
which  can  have  a  disciplining  impact  on  domestic  policies,  limit  exchange  rate  volatility,  and  help 
determine the conversion rate for EMU entry, but at the same time provides enough flexibility. Even 
though there is no doubt a valid point in all these arguments, some of the accession countries’ central 
banks have expressed much less enthusiasm about the ERM2. I wonder whether we are able to reach 
a consensus on this subject today. On the practical level, we all have to define our policy positions as 
regards the  appropriate timing of ERM2 membership, choice  of central parity, supportive  policy mix 
and  so  on.  Our  debate  should  pay  attention  to  the  differences  among  the  individual  accession 
countries in addressing these policy issues. 
So far, I have focused on the monetary aspect of EMU entry only. In many cases, though, monetary 
policy  is  unlikely  to  be  the major  bottleneck  in  the  accession  process.  For  many  countries,  the  key 
practical constraint seems to be their public budgets. Notable exceptions are the Baltic States and a 
few other candidate countries, for which there seem to be few obstacles to early eurozone entry in this 
respect.  But  many  other  countries  run  large  public  deficits,  even  after  subtracting  one-off  transition 
costs. The necessary reforms would have to include changing the public finance structure to address 
the ageing problem, overly generous social security systems, etc. These are problems shared by all 
European countries, and are politically quite hard to resolve. The consolidation of public budgets to a 
sustainable position is thus one of the key challenges for some accession countries (as well as for the 
present EU members). This is all the more true because upon EU accession the Stability and Growth 
Pact will also become relevant to the new member states. This is something that has not been fully 
realised  and  appreciated  yet,  at  least  in  the  Czech  Republic.  It  will  be  very  interesting  to  hear  the 
experience of the other accession countries. 
There  are  many  more  aspects  to  the  accession  debate.  These  include  balance-of-payments 
developments  and  exchange  rate  issues;  the  role  of  structural  policies  in  achieving  the  optimum-
currency-area criteria; the role of fiscal and income policies in fulfilling the Maastricht criteria both on 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2003
 inflation  and  on  exchange  rate  stability;  financial  sector  reforms  and  developments,  including  their 
implications for monetary transmission; and so on. 
I could spend much longer discussing these matters, as well as focusing more deeply on the issues 
that I have already mentioned. Nonetheless, I do not want to prejudice our debate by volunteering my 
own opinions at the very beginning of this conference. Therefore, let me stop at this point and pass the 
floor to the chairman of our first panel debate, Mr Jakob A. Frenkel (from Merrill Lynch International). 
Before I do that, though, I would like to welcome you once again and thank all of you for accepting our 
invitation to this event. 
BIS Review 17/2003 
 3
