Alan Greenspan: Federal Reserve Board’s semiannual monetary policy report 
to the Congress 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  US  Senate, 
11 February 2003.  
 Mr  Chairman  and  members  of  the  committee,  I  am  pleased  this  morning  to  present  the  Federal 
Reserve’s semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. I will begin by reviewing the state of 
the US economy and the conduct of monetary policy and then turn to some key issues related to the 
federal budget.  
When I testified before this committee last July, I noted that, while the growth of economic activity over 
the first half of the year had been spurred importantly by a swing from rapid inventory drawdown to 
modest  inventory  accumulation,  that  source  of  impetus  would  surely  wind  down  in  subsequent 
quarters, as it did. We at the Federal Reserve recognized that a strengthening of final sales was an 
essential  element  of  putting  the  expansion  on  a  firm  and  sustainable  track.  To  support  such  a 
strengthening, monetary policy was set to continue its accommodative stance.  
In  the  event,  final  sales  continued  to  grow  only  modestly,  and  business  outlays  remained  soft. 
Concerns about corporate governance, which intensified for a time, were compounded over the late 
summer and into the fall by growing geopolitical tensions. In particular, worries about the situation in 
Iraq  contributed  to  an  appreciable  increase  in  oil  prices.  These  uncertainties,  coupled  with  ongoing 
concerns  surrounding  macroeconomic  prospects,  heightened  investors’  perception  of  risk  and, 
perhaps, their aversion to such risk. Equity prices weakened further, the expected volatility of equity 
prices rose to unusually high levels, spreads on corporate debt and credit default swaps deteriorated, 
and  liquidity  in  corporate  debt  markets  declined.  The  economic  data  and  the  anecdotal  information 
suggested that firms were tightly limiting hiring and capital spending and keeping an unusually short 
leash  on  inventories.  With  capital  markets  inhospitable  and  commercial  banks  firming  terms  and 
standards on business loans, corporations relied to an unusual extent on a drawdown of their liquid 
assets rather than on borrowing to fund their limited expenditures.  
By  early  November,  conditions  in  financial  markets  had  firmed  somewhat  on  reports  of  improved 
corporate profitability. But on November 6, with economic performance remaining subpar, the Federal 
Open Market Committee chose to ease the stance of monetary policy, reducing the federal funds rate 
50  basis  points,  to  1¼%.  We  viewed  that  action  as  insurance  against  the  possibility  that  the  still 
widespread  weakness  would  become  entrenched.  With  inflation  expectations  well  contained,  this 
additional  monetary  stimulus  seemed  to  offer  worthwhile  insurance  against  the  threat  of  persistent 
economic weakness and unwelcome substantial declines in inflation from already low levels.  
In the weeks that followed, financial market conditions continued to improve, but only haltingly. The 
additional  monetary  stimulus  and  the  absence  of  further  revelations  of  major  corporate  wrongdoing 
seemed to provide some reassurance to investors. Equity prices rose, volatility declined, risk spreads 
narrowed,  and  market  liquidity  increased,  albeit  not  to  levels  that  might  be  associated  with  robust 
economic  conditions.  At  the  same  time,  mounting  concerns  about  geopolitical  risks  and  energy 
supplies, amplified by the turmoil in Venezuela, were mirrored by the worrisome surge in oil prices, 
continued skittishness in financial markets, and substantial uncertainty among businesses about the 
outlook.  
Partly as a result, growth of economic activity slowed markedly late in the summer and in the fourth 
quarter,  continuing  the  choppy  pattern  that  prevailed  over  the  past  year.  According  to  the  advance 
estimate, real GDP expanded at an annual rate of only  ¾ last quarter after surging 4percent in the 
third quarter. Much of that deceleration reflected a falloff in the production of motor vehicles from the 
near-record  level  that  had  been  reached  in  the  third  quarter  when  low  financing  rates  and  other 
incentive programs sparked a jump in sales. The slowing in aggregate output also reflected aggressive 
attempts by businesses more generally to ensure that inventories remained under control. Thus far, 
those  efforts have  proven  successful in that  business inventories,  with  only  a few exceptions, have 
stayed  lean  -  a  circumstance  that  should  help  support  production  this  year.  Indeed,  after  dropping 
back  a  bit  in  the  fall,  manufacturing  activity  turned  up  in  December,  and  reports  from  purchasing 
managers suggest that improvement has continued into this year. Excluding both the swings in auto 
BIS Review 6/2003 
 1
and truck production and the fluctuations in non-motor-vehicle inventories, economic activity has been 
moving up in a considerably smoother fashion than has overall real GDP: Final sales excluding motor 
vehicles are estimated to have risen at a 2¼% annual rate in the fourth quarter after a similar 1¾% 
advance in the previous quarter and an average of 2% in the first half.  
Thus, apart from these quarterly fluctuations, the economy has largely extended the broad patterns of 
performance that were evident at the time of my July testimony. Most notably, output has continued to 
expand,  but  only  modestly.  As  previously,  overall  growth  has  simultaneously  been  supported  by 
relatively  strong  spending  by  households  and  weighed  down  by  weak  expenditures  by  businesses. 
Importantly, the favorable underlying trends in productivity have continued; despite little change last 
quarter, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose 3¾% over the four quarters of 2002, an 
impressive gain for a period of generally lackluster economic performance. One consequence of the 
combination of sluggish output growth and rapid productivity gains has been that the labor market has 
remained quite soft. Employment turned down in the final months of last year, and the unemployment 
rate moved up, but the report for January was somewhat more encouraging.  
Another  consequence  of  the  strong  performance  of  productivity  has  been  its  support  of  household 
incomes despite the softness of labor markets. Those gains in income, combined with very low interest 
rates  and  reduced  taxes,  have  permitted  relatively  robust  advances  in  residential  construction  and 
household expenditures. Indeed, residential construction activity moved up steadily over the year. And 
despite  large  swings  in  sales,  underlying  demand  for  motor  vehicles  appears  to  have  been  well 
maintained.  Other  consumer  outlays,  financed  partly  by  the  large  extraction  of  built-up  equity  in 
homes,  have  continued  to  trend  up.  Most  equity  extraction  -  reflecting  the  realized  capital  gains  on 
home sales - usually occurs as a consequence of house turnover. But during the past year, an almost 
equal  amount  reflected  the  debt-financed  cash-outs  associated  with  an  unprecedented  surge  in 
mortgage  refinancings.  Such  refinancing  activity  is  bound  to  contract  at  some  point,  as  average 
interest rates on outstanding home mortgages converge to interest rates on new mortgages. However, 
fixed mortgage rates remain extraordinarily low, and applications for refinancing are not far off their 
peaks. Simply processing the backlog of earlier applications will take some time, and this factor alone 
suggests that refinancing originations and cash-outs will be significant at least through the early part of 
this year.  
To be sure, the mortgage debt of homeowners relative to their income is high by historical norms. But 
as  a  consequence  of  low  interest  rates,  the  servicing  requirement  for  the  mortgage  debt  of 
homeowners  relative  to  the  corresponding  disposable  income  of  that  group  is  well  below  the  high 
levels of the early 1990s. Moreover, owing to continued large gains in residential real estate values, 
equity in homes has continued to rise despite sizable debt-financed extractions. Adding in the fixed 
costs  associated  with  other  financial  obligations,  such  as  rental  payments  of  tenants,  consumer 
installment  credit,  and  auto  leases,  the  total  servicing  costs  faced  by  households  relative  to  their 
incomes  are  below  previous  peaks  and  do  not  appear  to  be  a  significant  cause  for  concern  at  this 
time.  
While household spending has been reasonably vigorous, we have yet to see convincing signs of a 
rebound in business outlays. After having fallen sharply over the preceding two years, new orders for 
capital equipment stabilized and, for some categories, turned up in nominal terms in 2002. Investment 
in equipment and software is estimated to have risen at a 5% rate in real terms in the fourth quarter 
and a subpar 3% over the four quarters of the year.  
However, the emergence of a sustained and broad-based pickup in capital spending will almost surely 
require the resumption of substantial gains in corporate profits. Profit margins apparently did improve a 
bit last year, aided importantly by the strong growth in labor productivity.  
Of course, the path of capital investment will depend not only on market conditions and the prospects 
for  profits  and  cash  flow  but  also  on  the  resolution  of  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  business 
outlook. Indeed, the heightening of geopolitical tensions has only added to the marked uncertainties 
that have piled up over the past three years, creating formidable barriers to new investment and thus 
to a resumption of vigorous expansion of overall economic activity.  
The intensification of geopolitical risks makes discerning the economic path ahead especially difficult. 
If  these  uncertainties  diminish  considerably  in  the  near  term,  we  should  be  able  to  tell  far  better 
whether  we  are  dealing  with  a  business  sector  and  an  economy  poised  to  grow  more  rapidly  -  our 
more probable expectation - or one that is still laboring under persisting strains and imbalances that 
have  been  misidentified  as  transitory.  Certainly,  financial  conditions  would  not  seem  to  impose  a 
significant hurdle to a turnaround in business spending. Yields on risk-free Treasury securities have 
fallen, risk spreads are narrower on corporate bonds, premiums on credit default swaps have retraced 
most of their summer spike, and liquidity conditions have improved in capital markets. These factors, if 
maintained, should eventually facilitate more vigorous corporate outlays.  
If  instead,  contrary  to  our  expectations,  we  find  that,  despite  the  removal  of  the  Iraq-related 
uncertainties, constraints to expansion remain, various initiatives for conventional monetary and fiscal 
stimulus will doubtless move higher on the policy agenda. But as part of that process, the experience 
of  recent  years  may  be  instructive.  As  I  have  testified  before  this  committee  in  the  past,  the  most 
significant lesson to be learned from recent American economic history is arguably the importance of 
structural flexibility and the resilience to economic shocks that it imparts.  
I  do  not  claim  to  be  able  to  judge  the  relative  importance  of  conventional  stimulus  and  increased 
economic  flexibility  to  our  ability  to  weather  the  shocks  of  the  past  few  years.  But  the  improved 
flexibility of our economy, no doubt, has played a key role. That increased flexibility has been in part 
the  result  of  the  ongoing  success  in  liberalizing  global  trade,  a  quarter-century  of  bipartisan 
deregulation  that  has  significantly  reduced  rigidities  in  our  markets  for  energy,  transportation, 
communication, and financial services, and, of course, the dramatic gains in  information technology 
that  have  markedly  enhanced  the  ability  of  businesses  to  address  festering  economic  imbalances 
before  they  inflict  significant  damage.  This  improved  ability  has  been  facilitated  further  by  the 
increasing willingness of our workers to embrace innovation more generally.  
It is reasonable to surmise that, not only have such measures contributed significantly to the long-term 
growth potential of the economy this past decade, they also have enhanced its short-term resistance 
to recession. That said, we have too little history to measure the extent to which increasing flexibility 
has boosted the economy’s potential and helped damp cyclical fluctuations in activity.  
Even  so,  the  benefits  appear  sufficiently  large  that  we  should  be  placing  special  emphasis  on 
searching for policies that will engender still greater economic flexibility and dismantling policies that 
contribute to unnecessary rigidity. The more flexible an economy, the greater its ability to self-correct 
in response to inevitable, often unanticipated, disturbances, thus reducing the size and consequences 
of cyclical imbalances. Enhanced flexibility has the advantage of adjustments being automatic and not 
having  to  rest  on  the  initiatives  of  policymakers,  which  often  come  too  late  or  are  based  on  highly 
uncertain forecasts.  
Policies intended to improve the flexibility of the economy seem to fall outside the sphere of traditional 
monetary and fiscal policy. But decisions on the structure of the tax system and spending programs 
surely  influence flexibility  and thus can  have major consequences for both the  cyclical performance 
and long-run growth potential of our economy. Accordingly, in view of the major budget issues now 
confronting the Congress and their potential implications for the economy, I thought it appropriate to 
devote some of my remarks today  to fiscal policy. In that regard, I  will  not  be  emphasizing specific 
spending  or revenue programs. Rather, my focus will be on the  goals and  process determining the 
budget  and  on  the  importance,  despite  our  increasing  national  security  requirements,  of  regaining 
discipline in that process. These views are my own and are not necessarily shared by my colleagues 
at the Federal Reserve.  
 One  notable  feature  of  the  budget  landscape  over  the  past  half  century  has  been  the  limited 
movement in the ratio of unified budget outlays to nominal GDP. Over the past five years, that ratio 
has  averaged  a  bit  less  than  19%,  about  where  it  was  in  the  1960s  before  it  moved  up  during  the 
1970s and 1980s. But that pattern of relative stability over the longer term has masked a pronounced 
rise  in  the  share  of  spending  committed  to  retirement,  medical,  and  other  entitlement  programs. 
Conversely, the share of spending that is subject to the annual appropriations process, and thus that 
comes  under  regular  review  by  the  Congress,  has  been  shrinking.  Such  so-called  discretionary 
spending has fallen from two-thirds of total outlays in the 1960s to one-third last year, with defense 
outlays accounting for almost all of the decline.  
The increase in the share of expenditures that is more or less on automatic pilot has complicated the 
task  of  making  fiscal  policy  by  effectively  necessitating  an  extension  of  the  budget  horizon.  The 
Presidents’  budgets  through  the  1960s  and  into  the  1970s  mainly  provided  information  for  the 
upcoming fiscal year. The legislation in 1974 that established a new budget process and created the 
Congressional Budget Office required that organization to provide five-year budget projections. And by 
the mid-1990s, CBO’s projection horizon had been pushed out to ten years. These longer time periods 
and  the  associated  budget  projections,  even  granted  their  imprecision,  are  useful  steps  toward 
allowing the Congress to balance budget priorities sensibly in the context of a cash-based accounting 
system.1 But more can be done to clarify those priorities and thereby enhance the discipline on the 
fiscal process.  
A general difficulty concerns the very nature of the unified budget. As a cash accounting system, it 
was adopted in 1968 to provide a comprehensive measure of the funds that move in and out of federal 
coffers.  With  a  few  modifications,  it  correctly  measures  the  direct  effect  of  federal  transactions  on 
national saving. But a cash accounting system is not designed to track new commitments and their 
translation into future spending and borrowing. For budgets that are largely discretionary, changes in 
forward  commitments  do  not  enter  significantly  into  budget  deliberations,  and  hence  the  surplus  or 
deficit  in  the  unified  budget  is  a  reasonably  accurate  indicator  of  the  stance  of  fiscal  policy  and  its 
effect on saving. But as longer-term commitments have come to dominate tax and spending decisions, 
such cash accounting has been rendered progressively less meaningful as the principal indicator of 
the state of our fiscal affairs.  
An  accrual-based  accounting  system  geared  to  the  longer  horizon  could  be  constructed  with  a 
reasonable  amount  of  additional  effort.  In  fact,  many  of  the  inputs  on  the  outlay  side  are  already 
available.  However,  estimates  of  revenue  accruals  are  not  well  developed.  These  include  deferred 
taxes  on  retirement  accounts  that  are  taxable  on  withdrawal,  accrued  taxes  on  unrealized  capital 
gains,  and  corporate  tax  accruals.  An  accrual  system  would  allow  us  to  keep  better  track  of  the 
government’s  overall  accrued  obligations  and  deferred  assets.  Future  benefit  obligations  and  taxes 
would be recognized as they are incurred rather than when they are paid out by the government.2  
Currently, accrued outlays very likely are much greater than those calculated under the cash-based 
approach. Under full accrual accounting, the social security program would be showing a substantial 
deficit  this  year,  rather  than  the  surplus  measured  under  our  current  cash  accounting  regimen.3 
Indeed, under most reasonable sets of actuarial assumptions, for social security benefits alone past 
accruals  cumulate  to  a  liability  that  amounts  to  many  trillions  of  dollars.  For  the  government  as  a 
whole, such liabilities are still growing.  
Estimating the liabilities implicit in social security is relatively straightforward because that program has 
many of the characteristics of a private defined-benefit retirement program. Projections of Medicare 
outlays,  however,  are  far  more  uncertain  even  though  the  rise  in  the  beneficiary  populations  is 
expected  to  be  similar.  The  likelihood  of  continued  dramatic  innovations  in  medical  technology  and 
procedures  combined  with  largely  inelastic  demand  and  a  subsidized  third-party  payment  system 
engenders  virtually  open-ended  potential  federal  outlays  unless  constrained  by  law.4  Liabilities  for 
Medicare are probably about the same order of magnitude as those for social security, and as is the 
case for social security, the date  is rapidly  approaching  when those liabilities  will be converted  into 
cash outlays.  
Accrual-based accounts would lay out more clearly the true costs and benefits of changes to various 
taxes  and  outlay  programs  and  facilitate  the  development  of  a  broad  budget  strategy.  In  doing  so, 
these accounts should help shift the national dialogue and consensus toward a more realistic view of 
the  limits  of  our  national  resources  as  we  approach  the  next  decade  and  focus  attention  on  the 
necessity to make difficult choices from among programs that, on a stand-alone basis, appear  very 
attractive.  
Because the baby boomers have not yet started to retire in force and accordingly the ratio of retirees 
to  workers is still relatively low,  we  are in the midst of a demographic  lull.  But  short of an outsized 
acceleration  of  productivity  to  well  beyond  the  average  pace  of  the  past  seven  years  or  a  major 
expansion of immigration, the aging of the population now in train will end this state of relative budget 
                                                      
1   Unfortunately,  they  are  incomplete  steps  because  even  a  ten-year  horizon  ends  just  as  the  baby  boom  generation  is 
beginning to retire and the huge pressures on social security and especially Medicare are about to show through. 
In particular, a full set of accrual accounts would give the Congress, for the first time in usable form, an aggregate tabulation 
of federal commitments under current law, with various schedules of the translation of those commitments into receipts and 
cash payouts. 
2  
3   However, accrued outlays should exhibit far less deterioration than the unified budget outlays when the baby boomers retire 
because the appreciable rise in benefits that is projected to cause spending to balloon after 2010 will have been accrued in 
earlier years. 
4   Constraining these outlays by any mechanism other than prices will involve some form of rationing - an approach that in the 
past has not been popular in the United States. 
tranquility in about a decade’s time. It would be wise to address this significant pending adjustment 
sooner  rather  than  later.  As  the  President’s  just-released  budget  put  it,  “The  longer  the  delay  in 
enacting reforms, the greater the danger, and the more drastic the remedies will have to be.”5  
Accrual-based  revenue  and  outlay  projections,  tied  to  a  credible  set  of  economic  assumptions,  tax 
rates,  and  programmatic  spend-out  rates,  can  provide  important  evidence  on  the  long-term 
sustainability  of  the  overall  budget  and  economic  regimes  under  alternative  scenarios.6  Of  course, 
those projections, useful as they might prove to be, would still be subject to enormous uncertainty. The 
ability of economists to assess the effects of tax and spending programs is hindered by an incomplete 
understanding of the forces influencing the economy.  
It is not surprising, therefore, that much controversy over basic questions surrounds the current debate 
over budget policy. Do budget deficits and debt significantly affect interest rates and, hence, economic 
activity?  With  political  constraints  on  the  size  of  acceptable  deficits,  do  tax  cuts  ultimately  restrain 
spending increases, and do spending increases limit tax cuts? To what extent do tax increases inhibit 
investment and economic growth or, by raising national saving, have the opposite effect? And to what 
extent does government spending raise the growth of GDP, or is its effect offset by a crowding out of 
private spending?  
Substantial efforts are being made to develop analytical tools that, one hopes, will enable us to answer 
such questions with greater precision than we can now. Much progress has been made in ascertaining 
the effects of certain policies, but many of the more critical questions remain in dispute.  
However,  there  should  be  little  disagreement  about  the  need  to  reestablish  budget  discipline.  The 
events of September 11 have placed demands on our budgetary resources that were unanticipated a 
few years ago. In addition, with defense outlays having fallen in recent years to their smallest share of 
GDP since before World War II, the restraint on overall spending from the downtrend in military outlays 
has surely run its course - and likely would have done so even without the tragedy of 11 September  
The  CBO  and  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  recently  released  updated  budget  projections 
that  are  sobering.  These  projections,  in  conjunction  with  the  looming  demographic  pressures, 
underscore the urgency of extending the budget enforcement rules. To be sure, in the end, it is policy, 
not process, that counts. But the statutory limits on discretionary spending and the so-called PAYGO 
rules,  which  were  promulgated  in  the  Budget  Enforcement  Act  of  1990  and  were  backed  by  a 
sixty-vote point of order in the Senate, served as useful tools for controlling deficits through much of 
the 1990s. These rules expired in the House last September and have been partly extended in the 
Senate only through mid-April.  
The Budget Enforcement Act was intended to address the problem of huge unified deficits and was 
enacted in the context of a major effort to bring the budget under control. In 1990, the possibility that 
surpluses might emerge within the decade seemed remote indeed. When they unexpectedly arrived, 
the problem that the budget control measures were designed to address seemed to have been solved. 
Fiscal discipline became a less pressing priority and was increasingly abandoned.  
To  make  the  budget  process  more  effective,  some  have  suggested  amending  the  budget  rules  to 
increase their robustness against the designation of certain spending items as “emergency” and hence 
not subject to the caps. Others have proposed mechanisms, such as statutory triggers and sunsets on 
legislation,  that  would  allow  the  Congress  to  make  mid-course  corrections  more  easily  if  budget 
projections go off-track - as they invariably will. These ideas are helpful and they could strengthen the 
basic structure established a decade ago. But, more important, a budget framework along the lines of 
the  one  that  provided  significant  and  effective  discipline  in  the  past  needs,  in  my  judgment,  to  be 
reinstated without delay.  
I  am  concerned  that,  should  the  enforcement  mechanisms  governing  the  budget  process  not  be 
restored, the resulting lack of clear direction and constructive goals would allow the inbuilt political bias 
in favor of growing budget deficits to again become entrenched. We are all too aware that government 
                                                      
5   Office  of  Management  and  Budget,  Budget  of  the  United  States  Government,  Fiscal  Year  2004,  Washington,  D.C.:  US 
Government Printing Office, p 32. 
In general, fiscal systems are presumed stable if the ratio of debt in the hands of the public to nominal GDP (a proxy for the 
revenue base) is itself stable. A rapidly rising ratio of debt to GDP, for example, implies an ever-increasing and possibly 
accelerating  ratio  of  interest  payments  to the  revenue  base.  Conversely,  once  debt  has  fallen  to zero,  budget  surpluses 
generally require the accumulation of private assets, an undesirable policy in the judgment of many. 
6 
spending programs and tax preferences can be easy to initiate or expand but extraordinarily difficult to 
trim or shut down once constituencies develop that have a stake in maintaining the status quo.  
In  the  Congress’s  review  of  the  mechanisms  governing  the  budget  process,  you  may  want  to 
reconsider whether the statutory limit on the public debt is a useful device. As a matter of arithmetic, 
the debt ceiling is either redundant or inconsistent with the paths of revenues and outlays you specify 
when you legislate a budget.  
In addition, a technical correction in the procedure used to tie indexed benefits and individual income 
tax  brackets  to  changes  in  “the  cost  of  living”  as  required  by  law  is  long  overdue.  As  you  may  be 
aware,  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  has  recently  introduced  a  new  price  index  -  the  so-called 
chained  CPI.  The  new  index  is  based  on  the  same  underlying  data  as  is  the  official  CPI,  but  it 
combines the individual prices in a way that better measures changes in the cost of living. In particular, 
the chained CPI captures more fully than does the official CPI the way that consumers alter the mix of 
their  expenditures  in  response  to  changes  in  relative  prices.  Because  it  appears  to  offer  a  more 
accurate measure of the true cost of living - the statutory intent - the chained CPI would be a more 
suitable series for the indexation of federal programs. Had such indexing been in place during the past 
decade, the fiscal 2002 deficit would have been $40 billion smaller, all else being equal.  
At the present time, there seems to be a large and growing constituency for holding down the deficit, 
but  I  sense  less  appetite  to  do  what  is  required  to  achieve  that  outcome.  Reestablishing  budget 
balance will require discipline on both revenue and spending actions, but restraint on spending may 
prove the more difficult. Tax cuts are limited by the need for the federal government to fund a basic 
level  of  services  -  for  example,  national  defense.  No  such  binding  limits  constrain  spending.  If 
spending  growth  were  to  outpace  nominal  GDP,  maintaining  budget  balance  would  necessitate 
progressively higher tax rates that would eventually inhibit the growth in the revenue base on which 
those rates are imposed. Deficits, possibly ever widening, would be the inevitable outcome.  
Faster  economic  growth,  doubtless,  would  make  deficits  far  easier  to  contain.  But  faster  economic 
growth alone is not likely to be the full solution to currently projected long-term deficits. To be sure, 
underlying  productivity  has  accelerated  considerably  in  recent  years.  Nevertheless,  to  assume  that 
productivity  can  continue  to  accelerate  to  rates  well  above  the  current  underlying  pace  would  be  a 
stretch, even for our very dynamic economy.7 So, short of a major increase in immigration, economic 
growth cannot be safely counted upon to eliminate deficits and the difficult choices that will be required 
to restore fiscal discipline.  
By the same token, in setting budget priorities and policies, attention must be paid to the attendant 
consequences  for  the  real  economy.  Achieving  budget  balance,  for  example,  through  actions  that 
hinder economic growth is scarcely a measure of success. We need to develop policies that increase 
the  real  resources  that  will  be  available  to  meet  our  longer-run  needs.  The  greater  the  resources 
available - that is, the greater the output of goods and services produced by our economy - the easier 
will  be  providing  real  benefits  to  retirees  in  coming  decades  without  unduly  restraining  the 
consumption of workers.  
 These are challenging times for all policymakers. Considerable uncertainties surround the economic 
outlook,  especially  in  the  period  immediately  ahead.  But  the  economy  has  shown  remarkable 
resilience in the face of a succession of substantial blows. Critical to our nation’s performance over the 
past  few  years  has  been  the  flexibility  exhibited  by  our  market-driven  economy  and  its  ability  to 
generate substantial increases in productivity. Going forward, these same characteristics, in concert 
with sound economic policies, should help to foster a return to vigorous growth of the US economy to 
the benefit of all our citizens.  
                                                      
7  
In  fact,  we  will  need  some further  acceleration  of  productivity  just to  offset  the  inevitable  decline  in  net  labor  force,  and 
associated overall economic, growth as the baby boomers retire. 
