 Toshihiko Fukui: Europe’s single currency and Japan’s contributions to Asian 
development 
Speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  on  the  occasion  of  dinner  in  the 
French Embassy, Tokyo, 11 June 2003. 
 Fighting deflation 
I. 
I am very  happy to be  invited to speak at this Euro  50 banquet. My relationship with Europe  dates 
back  to  thirty  years  ago.  At  that  time,  I  was  working  for  the  Bank  of  Japan(cid:146)s  Paris  office.  I  vividly 
remember  those  days,  especially  when  I  took  a  walk  in  the  streets  of  Paris,  painted  with  so  much 
history, culture and esprit, and when I took a rest reading books in the relaxing atmosphere Æ la Place 
des Vosges. Actually, I asked Ambassador Montferrant to look at a photograph I had taken there when 
he visited me recently in my office. 
I was appointed Governor of the Bank of Japan three months ago. On the same day with my assuming 
office, the war in Iraq started. As I will explain in more detail later, I am thinking that the globalization 
could  be  really  fruitful,  only  if,  on  its  process,  we  are  able  to  overcome  conflicts  between  different 
values and jointly to create new values. The outbreak of the war, however, seemed to expose the flip 
side of this process. Moreover, it increased uncertainty in the world economy, and therefore I had to 
prepare myself for a rocky start in taking up my new duties. 
Good news as you see, the Iraqi War came to an end quickly and the accompanying uncertainty is 
now waning, but the situation remains to be difficult. The governments and central banks all over the 
world are far from being reassured that the economy will return rapidly to sustained economic growth. 
We at the Bank of Japan are waging a tough war against deflation. Indeed, it is at the top of our policy 
agenda. I have spent a total of about 40 years working in the central bank and for virtually all of that 
period the emphasis has been placed on how to prevent inflation. However, both globalization and the 
advances  in  IT  have  intensified  the  global  trend  towards  disinflation  and  created  a  new  awareness 
among central banks that they must deal symmetrically with both inflation and deflation. 
We at the Bank of Japan stand on the front line of the war against deflation. However, we have used 
up the greatest weapon in a central bank(cid:146)s arsenal, that is interest rates, which have all declined to 
virtually  zero  in  our  short-term  markets.  Thus,  in  the  spring  of  2001  we  stepped  into  new  territory, 
where no central bank has ever ventured, namely (cid:147)quantitative easing(cid:148). Here, there are two important 
points.  The  first  is  to  set  quantitative  targets  in  the  form  of  outstanding  balance  of  current  account 
deposit with the Bank and then to aggressively supply abundant liquidity into financial markets. The 
second  is  to  make  a  commitment  to  maintain  such  an  accommodative  policy  stance  until  the 
Consumer Price Index registers a year on  year increase of zero percent or above on a sustainable 
basis.  The  fundamental  aim  of  this  point  is  to  lower  long-term  interest  rates  across  the  board  by 
borrowing future monetary easing through the commitment. Furthermore, we are now exploring ways 
to improve the transmission mechanism of monetary policy so that the beneficial effects of quantitative 
easing can more smoothly penetrate every corner of the economy. 
Obviously, the war against deflation will not be won with monetary policy alone. All economic agents 
must review the legacies of past high growth period and make every effort to enlarge the capacity to 
create value added. It has become clear to us that we will only find a way out of deflation when the 
efforts  of  the  private  sector,  the  government,  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  generate  synergies  in  this 
endeavor. 
Interest in Europe 
II. 
I fear my introductory remarks might have been getting too long, so I will move on. In October 1970, 
shortly  after  I  arrived  in  Paris,  the  Werner  Report  came  out,  officially  advocating  economic  and 
monetary union in Europe. 
Frankly speaking, as an outsider, I considered the grand idea of the economic and monetary union, 
however grand it would be, to be no more than an (cid:147)adventurous experiment(cid:148). No one could tell where 
it would go. Therefore, I was profoundly moved to witness the introduction of the Euro in January 1999 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 1
 and  the  conversion  of  all  cash  to  Euro  last  year.  The  EMU  was  not  just  another  (cid:147)experiment(cid:148).  The 
people  of  Europe  gathered  their  wisdom  and  courageously  marched  forward  to  turn  a  dream  into 
reality.  In  this  regard,  we  must  remember  in  particular  the  efforts  that  were  made  to  overcome  the 
(cid:147)Euro pessimism(cid:148) of the late seventies and early eighties. 
To me, the single currency symbolizes many things. The first is the great potentiality that Europe has 
in terms of (cid:147)creating history(cid:148). I have nothing but respect for the strong leadership and the persistent 
efforts that were exerted to complete this job, a job requiring 50 or 100 years to accomplish. Second is 
the strong desire for peace that has been underlying the spirit of solidarity ever since the European 
Coal  and  Steel  Community.  Having  suffered  through  repeated,  terrible  wars,  the  people  of  Europe 
have  a  strong  resolution  never  to  go  to  war  again.  Third  is  the  emphasis  on  (cid:147)social  discipline(cid:148)  that 
underpins the solidarity of Europe. I think this is particularly well embodied in the Stability and Growth 
Pact and the efforts to ensure independence of the ECB. 
I am also much interested in the future of the enlarged EU. Recently, the (cid:147)Convention on the Future of 
Europe(cid:148)  chaired  by  former  French  President  Valery  Giscard  d(cid:146)Estaing,  advocated  the  drafting  of  a 
(cid:147)European Constitution,(cid:148) the creation of a (cid:147)European presidency,(cid:148) and a reduction in the number of 
seats  on  the  European  Commission.  Although  this  recommendation  adds  weight  towards  political 
union,  I  also  find  it  extremely  significant  in  light  of  the  awareness  that  our  age  must  (cid:147)overcome 
conflicts of values(cid:148). 
And  on  the  economic  front,  I  look  forward  to  seeing  how  the  people  of  Europe  will  lead  the  EU(cid:146)s 
integrated market into an ever larger entity in a form that is always open to the outside and in harmony 
with globalization. 
Japanese contributions to the further development of Asia 
III. 
Compared  to  Europe(cid:146)s  long  history  in  working  towards  regional  integration,  cooperation  and 
coordination in Asia are still at their early stage, and a clear vision for the future has yet to emerge. In 
this we are different from the Americas, too, which have set a course towards the achievement of the 
Free Trade Area of the Americas. 
Asia is characterized by its diversity. We have a large number of ethnic groups, languages, religions, 
and cultures, and there are considerable differences in our stage of economic development. Asia has 
a long way to go before it could ever be considered as an (cid:147)optimum currency area(cid:148). 
But diversity is also Asia(cid:146)s strength. Economies with their own comparative advantages can and do 
create layers of linkages through trade and direct investment, which produce a dynamism of growth. 
And  this  has  enabled  Asia  to  emerge  as  one  of  the  world(cid:146)s  growth  centers.  China  has  achieved 
remarkable economic growth over the past several years, and it has given new momentum to dynamic 
international divisions of labor and global economic growth. China has such an enormous production 
capacity that other countries sometimes perceive it as a (cid:147)threat,(cid:148) but, at the same time, it should be 
noted  that  the  Chinese  big  domestic  markets  are  increasingly  providing  demand  and  business 
opportunities  to  the  neighboring  countries.  From  this  point  of  view,  the  sustainability  of  Chinese 
economic  growth  has  become  an  indispensable  factor  for  autonomous  expansion  of  the  Asian 
economy as a whole, particularly the East Asian economy. 
At  present,  with  the  exception  of  worries  about  SARS,  conditions  in  Asia  look  relatively  good. 
Economies in the East Asian region have been growing at an increasingly rapid pace. For example, 
the  ratio  of  intra-regional  trade  to  nominal  GDP  for  the  nine  East  Asian  economies  has  more  than 
doubled from 8% in the late eighties to 17% today. This ratio is roughly the same as that of the EU. 
At the beginning of my remarks I said that globalization was a process through which we overcome 
conflicting values and jointly create new values. The dynamism of Asia seems to embody this. That is, 
Asia is a place where different values come into contact with each other and create new knowledge in 
the process. 
Against  this  background,  Japan  is  making  progress  steadily  in  its  structural  reforms,  aiming  at 
reaching the final goal that it will become a home of high value added, a hub for gathering, creating 
and transmitting information that will contribute to further development of Asia as a whole. 
Here,  let  me  discuss  again  the  central  bank  job.  In  1991,  Asian  central  banks  established  EMEAP 
(Executives(cid:146)  Meeting  of  East  Asia-Pacific  Central  Banks),  which  serves  as  a  forum  for  the  regular 
exchange  of  information  and  views  among  them.  Over  the  weekend,  I  attended  my  first  EMEAP 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 governors(cid:146)  meeting,  and  what  I  took  away  from  that  meeting  was  the  increasing  complexity  of  the 
challenges  that  face  central  banks  in  East  Asia,  challenges  that  cannot  be  solved  with  domestic 
remedies alone. Along with this, I also perceived a growing momentum for central banks to pool their 
wisdom and act together to solve these challenges. 
These  efforts  are  beginning  to  bear  fruit.  At  the  beginning  of  this  month,  EMEAP  announced  the 
project of the Asian Bond Fund which will invest part of the foreign reserves held by East Asian central 
banks in Asian bonds, thereby serving as a catalyst to greater activity on fixed income markets in the 
region. The Bank of Japan supports this initiative and will actively participate in the fund. 
Both dialogue and cooperation among East Asian central banks have only just begun. It is too early to 
tell whether this dialogue and cooperation will eventually lead to regional integration. Even if it does, 
the orientation of that integration is unlikely to be the same as Europe(cid:146)s in view of the historical and 
economic differences between the two regions. 
However, if we take an optimistic look at the future, our steady efforts may result in the formation of an 
open,  flexible  and  surprisingly  well-organized  regional  economic  zone  within  the  context  of  (cid:147)future 
globalization of complexity(cid:148). 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 3
