 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: A brief review of economic and financial 
developments in the UK  
Speech  by  The  Rt  Hon  Sir  Edward  George,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Finance  and 
Leasing Association Annual Dinner, London, 24 March 2003. 
 Mr Chairman, my Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I must confess that I was surprised when I discovered that it was seven years since I last spoke at this 
Finance and Leasing Association Annual Dinner.  
I'm delighted to be with you here this evening.  
On  that  earlier  occasion  -  in  1996  -  I  emphasised  the  corrosive  and  debilitating  effect  of  high  and 
variable inflation that we had experienced in this country over much of the previous 50 years. 
I  stressed  the  damage  that  this  had  done  to  our  economy  -  the  pervasive  uncertainty  and 
unpredictability, and the short-termism that it induced, in personal and business as well as financial 
behaviour, the incentive to borrow and spend rather than save and invest, the masking of real price 
signals as the guide to efficient resource allocation, and the masking, too, of productive inefficiency 
that was too easily covered up by generally rising prices and earnings. 
But I suggested that the tide had already then finally begun to turn. I drew attention to the growing 
constituency in support of stability in this country - as a necessary condition for sustainable growth - 
after our particularly bitter experience of boom and bust in the late 1980's and early 1990's. 
I was able to point to the preceding four years - during which inflation had averaged just under 3¼%, 
compared with almost 10% over the previous 20 years. I was able, too, to point to sixteen consecutive 
quarters of positive economic growth. And I was able to point to a continuing, relatively steady fall in 
unemployment from its peak - in terms of the claimant count measure - of almost 10% in 1993. 
Then I held out to you the prospect of continuing stability - with low inflation and sustained economic 
growth - as far ahead as I could see. 
You didn't believe a word of it! You listened - very courteously, as I would expect from the members of 
your very professional association - but you listened with a good deal of scepticism, which, I confess, I 
could perfectly  well understand.  As I left that  evening, one of  your members said to me "I do hope 
you're right, Eddie, but we've heard it all before. We'll believe it when we see it!" I suspect he spoke for 
most of the rest of you. 
Well,  tonight  I  can  tell  you  that  inflation  -  on  the  Government's  target  measure  -  has  averaged  just 
2.5% over the past 10 years. We have now had 42 consecutive quarters of positive economic growth - 
which is much the longest period of continuous growth since quarterly data became available in 1955. 
And unemployment has continued to decline fairly steadily to just over 3% - its lowest rate for more 
than a quarter of a century. 
Now don't get me wrong. I'm not for a moment suggesting that we have finally reached the promised 
land. I'm very well aware that there are many people in this country - no doubt including many here 
tonight - for whom economic life is still pretty tough. My post bag never let's me forget that! 
For most of the time since I last spoke to you we have in particular been confronted with a very difficult 
international economic and financial environment. This began with the Asia crisis. But it was followed a 
couple  of  years  later  by  a  sharp  economic  slowdown,  into  mild  recession,  in  the  major  industrial 
countries.  And  that  was  accompanied  by  a  sustained  fall  in  global  equity  markets  from  their 
"irrationally exuberant" peaks - aggravated and protracted by the threat of terrorism following 9/11 and 
by  corporate  governance  and  accounting  failures  in  the  United  States.  Most  recently,  of  course, 
uncertainty surrounding the possibility of war with Iraq has weighed heavily on sentiment. 
All of this, together with the persistent weakness - until relatively recently - of the euro exchange rate, 
has made conditions intensely difficult for internationally-exposed business in the UK, including much 
of the manufacturing sector; and that, in turn, has been reflected not just in weak net external demand 
but also in declining business investment in this country and elsewhere in the industrial world. 
BIS Review 16/2003 
 1
 It's  made  life  pretty  difficult,  too,  I  have  to  say  for  those  of  us  involved  in  macro-economic 
management! 
Macro-economic  policy  -  that's  to  say  monetary  policy  and  overall  fiscal  policy  taken  together  - 
operates, directly, on the demand side of the economy, aiming essentially to keep aggregate - external 
and  domestic  -  demand  growing  broadly  in  line  with  the  underlying  supply-side  capacity  of  the 
economy to meet that demand. Stable, low, inflation is in fact essentially a measure of how far we are 
successful in that. 
There has been very little, quite frankly, that either we at the Bank, through monetary policy, or the 
Chancellor could do to influence the international environment. The problems originated abroad and 
we could not avoid their effects. What we could do - and what we have tried to do - was to seek to 
offset those effects, and compensate for the external weakness, by stimulating domestic demand here 
in the UK. Given weak business confidence, that meant essentially, in the case of monetary policy, 
encouraging  the  growth  of  consumer  demand  -  by  cutting  interest  rates  to  their  lowest  level  in 
40 years. 
In the event we managed - just about - to avoid recession over the winter of 2001/2002 but we did so 
but at the cost of growing imbalances within the economy between domestic and external demand on 
the one hand and, domestically,  between consumption and  investment on the other. Essentially  we 
took  the  view  that  unbalanced  growth  was  better  than  no  growth  at  all  -  which  was  the  only  other 
option we had. 
This  "two  speed"  economy  has,  I  know,  been  reflected  in  the  pattern  of  your  own  activity  as  FLA 
members, with consumer finance volumes growing strongly in recent years where business volumes 
have been relatively flat. In the past year alone new business written to consumers was nearly three 
times that written to business customers. 
Now clearly the imbalances can't go on increasingly indefinitely. The build-up of household debt and 
the related strong rise in house prices we saw last year in particular must begin to moderate at some 
point.  So  much  of  the  recent  debate  has  been  about  whether  the  eventual  adjustment  will  occur 
gradually, within the context of continuing overall expansion, or more abruptly in which case the overall 
expansion could prove more difficult to sustain. 
On the macro-economic data it seems clear that the global economy in fact bottomed out around a 
year or so ago, and that we have since seen the beginnings of a recovery, notably in the US, on which 
so much of the rest of the world currently depends. And it is also clear that monetary policy generally - 
and  in  some  countries  also  fiscal  policy  -  remains  supportive.  On  that  view,  and  given  the  recent 
moderate  decline  in  sterling's  effective  exchange  rate,  it  is  reasonable  to  look  forward  to  a  gradual 
improvement  -  and  I  emphasise  gradual  improvement  -  in  the  external  environment  which  would 
clearly be very helpful from a UK perspective. 
I don't deny that there are downside risks to this scenario. The Eurozone has for example recently put 
back  its  projected  expansion  until  later  this  year.  And  financial  markets,  and  both  business  and 
consumer sentiment, have recently been severely affected by uncertainty over Iraq - though financial 
markets,  certainly,  now  that  the  war  has  started,  have  factored  in  its  rapid  conclusion.  I  hope  they 
prove to be right - for more than purely economic reasons. 
Notwithstanding these risks, I still think that the most likely outcome is that we will see a gradual pick-
up in the pace of global recovery over the next year or two - which is the view shared by the Monetary 
Policy Committee in our February Inflation Report and by most other economic commentators. 
On that basis we would also expect to see a gradual recovery in domestic business investment as we 
go through this year and into next. And, while fiscal prudence is clearly important for the stability and 
efficiency  of  the  economy  over  the  medium  term,  the  Chancellor's  projected  increase  in  public 
spending is in my view positively welcome in the immediate situation confronting us. Taken together, 
these developments should accommodate the moderation in the rate of growth of consumer spending, 
which we anticipate and may now be beginning to see. 
In the meantime we have seen a rise in the rate of inflation - to 3% on the target measure - driven 
notably by last year's sharp rise in house prices and by the rise in the oil price in the run up to the 
invasion of Iraq. And it may well rise somewhat further, for example, as a result of the prospective rise 
in Council Tax and the somewhat weaker exchange rate. But most of these influences at this stage 
seem likely to be largely one-off effects on the level of retail prices, rather than persistent influences on 
the rate of inflation. There is no significant evidence at this point of continuing, second-round, effects, 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2003
 for example in the labour market, so that inflation seems likely to fall back to the 2½% target rate in the 
course of next year. 
On this basis - and although the MPC will of course be monitoring the inflation prospect very carefully - 
we concluded at our most recent meeting that policy should remain on hold.  
Mr Chairman, you can see that I meant it when I said earlier that we haven't yet reached the promised 
land! We have in fact been going through  a difficult  patch,  and  we remain heavily  dependent  upon 
developments abroad which are beyond our control. Certainly we face risks and uncertainties in the 
short  term.  But  it  is  important  that  we  don't  exaggerate  those  risks  and  allow  them  to  cloud  our 
judgement. The more likely outcome in my view - looking ahead over the next couple of years - and 
reflected in the Inflation Report - is for inflation close to target with growth close to trend - and with the 
imbalances within the economy beginning to adjust. 
In  any  event  I  am  totally  confident  that  Mervyn  King,  my  successor  from  July,  with  his  Deputies, 
Andrew Large and Rachel Lomax, and with the MPC, will be ready to adjust policy in either direction 
as  the  prospect  changes,  and  that  they  will  be  as  totally  committed  as  I  have  been  to  maintaining 
stability and hitting the Government's inflation target, as a necessary condition for sustainable growth. 
That will provide the best possible context for the continued development of your business, and the 
important contribution that you make to the economy. 
I, myself, of course, will be looking for a new lease of life in retirement! I'm not aware that it's a lease 
product any of you actually provide. Given our ageing population perhaps you should develop one - 
though you'd better be careful how you market it! In any event I wish you well. 
BIS Review 16/2003 
 3
