 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Frankfurt, 8 May 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB. 
The  first  news  I  can  report  is  that  today  we  successfully  concluded  our  discussions  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy strategy. However, I would ask you to postpone any questions you may have on this 
subject to a little later this afternoon. A press release will be issued on this matter and Mr. Issing will 
join us for a special press briefing in the form of a seminar on the outcome of our discussions. This 
seminar will take place in this room immediately after the press conference. You will also note that, as 
a  consequence  of  the  conclusions  we  reached,  I  have  restructured  today’s  introductory  statement 
somewhat,  and  I  will  be  following  this  new  structure  in  the  future.  The  introductory  statement  will 
henceforth  present  first  economic  analysis,  followed  by  monetary  analysis.  It  concludes  by  cross-
checking the analyses conducted under these two pillars. 
Turning now to our discussion of monetary policy, we have decided to keep our key interest rates 
unchanged.  Taking  due  account  of  new  economic  and  monetary  information  as  well  as  the  latest 
geopolitical developments, we concluded that the current monetary policy stance remains consistent 
with the preservation of price stability over the medium term. At the same time it maintains a monetary 
environment that is conducive to economic growth. With the end of the military action in Iraq, important 
downside risks to the economic recovery have diminished, and our focus is now again on the other 
forces  that  have  been  shaping  the  economic  outlook.  The  Governing  Council  will  carefully  monitor 
future developments and assess whether conditions for price stability continue to develop favourably. 
Let me explain our assessment in detail. 
In the context of our economic analysis, focusing on the short to medium term, recently published 
survey data and the latest information from conjunctural indicators suggest that economic activity in 
the euro area has remained subdued so far this year. Looking ahead, we continue to expect a gradual 
strengthening of real GDP growth to start later in 2003 and to gather more pace in the course of next 
year.  Factors  supporting  this  outlook  are  an  expected  recovery  of  global  demand,  the  prospect  of 
falling inflation benefiting real disposable income growth, and the low level of interest rates. Moreover, 
the  recent  unwinding  of  uncertainties  associated  with  geopolitical  tensions  should  contribute  to  an 
economic  recovery.  Such  an  assessment  also  seems  to  be  reflected  in  recent  financial  market 
reactions. Since the end of the war in Iraq, financial market volatility has declined significantly, with a 
notable increase in stock prices. 
Nevertheless, there continue to be downside risks. First, there are the risks originating from the past 
accumulation of macroeconomic imbalances outside the euro area, and lately concerns have arisen 
with  regard  to  the  SARS  virus.  Moreover,  there  is  also  some  uncertainty  over  the  extent  of  the 
adjustment  still  needed  in  the  euro  area  corporate  sector  in  order  to  enhance  productivity  and 
profitability, which could have an impact on employment growth and thus private consumption. 
As  regards  price  developments,  the  annual  rate  of  HICP  inflation  generally  fluctuated  at  around 
2.3-2.4% between the autumn of last year and March 2003. Broadly speaking, declining inflation rates 
in services and non-energy industrial goods have been offset by rising rates in energy and processed 
food prices. Conversely, in April energy prices are expected to reflect the decline in oil prices following 
the developments in Iraq. This expectation is in line with Eurostat’s flash estimate for the inflation rate 
in April, which was 2.1%, i.e. 0.3 percentage point lower than in March. 
Looking  ahead, current indications do not  point to further strong declines  in the inflation rate  in  the 
immediate future, but lower oil prices, an environment of moderate economic growth and, of course, 
the  effects  of  the  significantly  higher  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  should  all  contribute  to  reducing 
inflationary pressure beyond the short term. The outlook for inflation will also depend to a significant 
extent  on  wage  developments.  The  available  indicators  suggest  that  labour  cost  growth  has  shown 
signs of stabilising in the course of 2002. Moderate wage trends are indeed crucial both to maintain 
price stability and to foster employment growth. 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 1
 In the context of our monetary analysis, focusing on the medium to long term, the broad monetary 
aggregate M3 has now been growing strongly over a protracted period. Moreover, the data for more 
recent months do not suggest that a process of correction has started. As a consequence, the euro 
area  economy  continued  to  accumulate  liquidity  significantly  above  the  amount  needed  to  sustain 
non-inflationary growth. The strong monetary expansion contrasted with the more moderate growth in 
loans  to  the  private  sector.  This  is  consistent  with  our  assessment  that  monetary  developments 
continue to be fostered by portfolio shifts, reflecting a sustained preference on the part of investors for 
liquid and secure assets in an environment of high uncertainty. However, the low level of interest rates 
has also contributed to strong monetary growth. 
When interpreting monetary trends, particular account needs to be taken of the portfolio shifts towards 
increased  demand  for  monetary  assets  for  precautionary  reasons.  The  reduction  in  geopolitical 
tensions should support an unwinding of these portfolio shifts. A reversal in monetary trends would in 
any case dampen the concerns regarding  the medium to long-term implications of recent monetary 
dynamics. As a consequence, monetary developments will continue to be monitored closely. 
Overall, it currently appears that inflation rates should decline to below 2% over the medium term, in 
particular given the outlook for economic activity and the significant appreciation of the euro. It also 
appears that the strong expansion of M3 should not  adversely  affect this outlook, as portfolio shifts 
have played a prominent role; in particular, the build up of liquidity should not translate into inflationary 
pressure as long as economic growth remains modest. Hence, cross-checking the information from 
the  two  pillars  leads  us  to  conclude  that  the  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  remain 
limited. 
Regarding fiscal policy, developments in 2002 were generally not satisfactory. In particular, countries 
that had not achieved sound fiscal positions in earlier years when the economic conditions were more 
favourable  are  now  struggling  to  keep  their  budgets  under  control.  Looking  ahead,  it  is  crucial  to 
underpin  the  fiscal  policy  framework  with  decisive  action,  strong  peer  pressure  and  consistent 
implementation  of  the  rules  of  the  Treaty  and  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Countries  should 
maintain budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus over the cycle, and, where this is not yet 
the case, take the required structural consolidation measures. This also creates the necessary room 
for  the  operation  of  automatic  stabilisers.  At  the  same  time,  governments  are  advised  to  place  the 
emphasis  on  growth-oriented  consolidation  policies  that  strengthen  the  productive  forces  of  the 
economy. By strengthening confidence, a credible medium-term fiscal consolidation strategy will also 
support economic growth in the short term. 
Finally, structural reforms are essential to increase the euro area’s growth potential and enhance its 
ability to better withstand external shocks. Indeed, such reforms, which should aim to reduce rigidities 
in  labour  and  goods  markets,  could  significantly  strengthen  the  degree  of  resilience  of  economic 
activity to such shocks, both in the euro area as a whole and in its regions. Renewed momentum in 
the  process  of  structural  reform  will  be  important  to  foster  consumer  and  investor  confidence  in 
medium and long-term growth and employment opportunities in the euro area.  This, in turn, should 
also have a positive short-term effect on spending and investment decisions in the euro area. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2003
