 Jaime Caruana: Basel II - the road ahead 
Remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the Institute of International Finance Annual Meeting, Dubai, 21 September 
2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  an  honour  and  a  pleasure  for  me  to  address  the  members  of  the  IIF.  In  the  kind  invitation  to 
participate in this meeting, two topics were proposed to me, the first being the economic situation and 
Spain(cid:146)s experience in the euro area, and the second the new Basel II capital accord. 
I thought that Basel II would be more appropriate, given the very crucial stage we have now reached. 
But  these  two  topics,  the  economic  situation  and  the  new  accord,  have  suggested  to  me  two 
preliminary comments. 
First,  while  policymakers  have  long  understood  the  importance  of  price  stability  to  the  health  of  an 
economy, in recent  years we have all learned much about the concurrent need to promote broader 
financial stability as well. A number of different episodes of economic crisis and financial disturbance 
have plainly illustrated the threats that weak financial systems and poorly managed banks can pose to 
the macroeconomy. 
This is why I have always stressed that banking regulation should be analyzed not only from a micro 
viewpoint  but  also  from  the  macro  perspective.  Creating  the  right  incentives,  consistent  with  good 
market practices and sound risk management, appears to be an important way of promoting the safety 
and soundness of the financial system and therefore a good way of sustaining both the stability and 
growth  of  the  economy.  This  is  not  only  relevant  for  prudential  regulation;  other  areas  such  as 
accounting should also be consistent with this broad perspective. 
This  consideration  underlines  the  importance  of  taking  seriously  certain  concerns  such  as 
procyclicality.  In  my  view  Basel  II  goes  in  the  right  direction.  I  am  convinced  that  when  banking 
systems  are  adequately  capitalised,  well-managed  and  risks  are  correctly  assessed  within  the 
appropriate time horizon and the financial system becomes more stable, less procyclical, better able to 
promote sustainable growth, and more resilient during periods of distress. 
My  second  reflection  is  that  one  of  the  most  significant  conclusions  of  the  analysis  of  the  recent 
economic and financial evolution of the world economy has been the resilience of banking systems in 
most countries. In my view, this resilience has been the result not just of the presence of sufficient 
capital in the system, but also of improvements in banks(cid:146) risk management systems. 
I think we owe the industry a special vote of congratulations with respect to the latter, but we also owe 
it a commitment on the part of supervisors to continue to support such developments. This is exactly 
what we are all trying to do with the proposals for a new Capital Accord, which I would like to address 
now. 
As you are aware, the comment period for the third consultative paper (CP3) closed at the end of July. 
If you have seen the (cid:147)comments on CP3(cid:148) page of the BIS website, you will not be surprised to hear 
that we have received over 200 responses. I must admit that this is more than we had expected, even 
if  it  is  below  the  250  responses  we  received  on  the  second  consultative  document  two  years  ago. 
Obviously,  not  all  of  the  comments  are mutually  compatible,  nor  would  it  be  feasible  to  incorporate 
them  all.  However,  there  are  some  substantive  issues  which  have  been  raised,  and  I  will  mention 
some of these briefly in a moment. But just let me say first that the Committee is taking the comments 
very seriously and working extremely hard to resolve the issues that have been raised. What is most 
important to the Committee is the quality and consistency of the new Accord, and we are clear that this 
cannot be unnecessarily constrained by deadlines and timetables. 
Michelangelo once said that, having seen an angel in a block of marble, he carved until he set it free. 
From  most  of  the  letters  of  comment  received  by  the  Committee  this  summer,  it  seems  that  the 
industry sees an angel in the proposals and wants to carve away at the text until it(cid:146)s been set free. 
Indeed, even among the most critical of respondents we had support for the Committee(cid:146)s three pillars 
and its intent to align capital more closely to risk; to introduce greater consistency in the supervisory 
review of capital adequacy; and to promote effective market discipline by enhancing transparency. It 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 was, moreover, satisfying for us that most commentators acknowledged substantial improvements in 
the proposals since the release of the second consultative paper in early 2001. 
Respondents have raised a large number of issues for consideration, including several that address 
some very fundamental concepts and many that have been debated throughout the entire process. In 
addition,  some  member  jurisdictions  will  continue  to  receive  responses  through  their  national  rule-
making processes up until late autumn of this year, during which time we can expect to hear additional 
views on the proposals. 
For those of you who have not yet managed to make it through all of the responses posted on the BIS 
website, I would like to mention some of the most common issues which have been raised. First of all, 
the complexity of the proposals. This has also been raised in the past, and is, I think, a valid concern. 
At the same time, we mustn(cid:146)t forget that many of the areas of the new Accord have expanded in size 
and complexity precisely as a response to calls from the industry for different types of business to be 
more finely reflected. Another key issue, mentioned in many comments, is the need to maintain a level 
playing field. The Committee is very conscious of this matter, and I will say something about our efforts 
in this respect a little later. Finally in relation to the general issues raised in the comments, I would 
mention fears of over-conservatism in the proposals when taken as a whole. 
I would like also to pick out a few of the more technical comments on CP3. For example, one issue, a 
high-level issue, which has also received a lot of attention, is the calibration of capital requirements to 
expected  and  unexpected  losses.  We  have  also  received  many  comments  on  the  securitisation 
proposals,  on  the  issue  of  (cid:147)double  default(cid:148),  on  the  incentive  structure  and  on  the  recognition  of 
insurance within the operational risk proposals. 
After  five  years  of  work,  the  process  has  reached  a  critical  stage.  Leading  market  participants  and 
supervisors  alike  have  long  understood  that  sophisticated  banks  have  (cid:147)outgrown(cid:148)  the  1988  Accord 
and are in need of a more refined regulatory capital regime, and we have all worked extremely hard to 
achieve  this.  So  it  is  important  to  finalise  the  new  Accord,  and  open  the  way  to  its  effective 
implementation. 
To that end, as I have already said, we appreciate the candour and thoughts that members of the IIF 
and other institutions have shared with the Committee and its working groups over the years. We are 
studying your latest letters and suggestions carefully. 
As you will have gathered from my earlier summary, many comments have focused, as in the past, on 
the minimum requirements laid out  in  Pillar 1,  but  as we get closer  to finalisation, comments about 
implementation are becoming more important. I  would like to take a few minutes now to talk about 
these other aspects of the New Accord that deserve equal consideration. 
Let me address four specific issues: 
    Pillar 2 and consistency 
Home / host implementation issues on a world-wide basis 
Accounting Standards and Basel II 
The recognition of diversification 
Pillar 2 and consistency 
On the first of these subjects, as you well know, the innovation of the New Accord does not rest solely 
on  the  refinements  to  the  quantitative  measures  of  risk.  Another  innovation,  and  one  of  the  most 
beneficial, is the incorporation of supervisory review into the international framework. This represents 
a real breakthrough for all of us, since supervisors in each jurisdiction have until now found their own 
ways to evaluate the adequacy of a bank(cid:146)s capital base. That is an unsatisfactory solution since it can 
lead to inconsistencies in the way that a global banking organisation(cid:146)s operations are supervised at a 
local level. 
By incorporating into the New Basel Accord the requirement for supervisors to evaluate the internal 
processes  behind  a  bank(cid:146)s  view  of  its  need  for  capital,  the  Committee  expects  that  bankers  and 
supervisors  will  engage  in  a  more  focused  discussion  of  risk management.  Pillar  2  recognises  that 
national supervisors may have different ways of entering into such discussions and provides flexibility 
to accommodate those differences. At the same time, Pillar 2 will ensure that supervisors share insight 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
 information  sharing  and  cooperation  among 
into  their  approaches  with  others  and  will  foster  a  better  understanding  among  supervisors  and 
bankers about the differences in national regulatory practices. 
Over time, discussions among supervisors will undoubtedly improve our understanding of each other(cid:146)s 
processes  and  promote 
regulatory  agencies. 
Consequently,  Pillar  2  should  help  us  to  reduce  the  supervisory  burden  on  globally  active  banking 
organisations  and  foster  more  consistent  supervisory  approaches  and  practices  across  national 
borders. 
This corresponds directly to the mandate of the Committee(cid:146)s Accord Implementation Group, or (cid:147)AIG(cid:148). 
The AIG was set up at the end of 2001 under the Chairmanship of Nick Le Pan of the Canadian Office 
of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, and Vice-Chair of the Committee. The group comprises 
high-level supervisors from member countries, who share planned approaches to implementation. The 
intention  is  that  this  exchange  of  information  should  enhance  the  consistent  application  of  the  New 
Accord and thereby promote a level playing field - which we all agree is an important objective. In this 
sense, the AIG has a practical focus, while policy issues remain the responsibility of the Committee 
itself. 
Home / host implementation issues on a world-wide basis. 
This brings me to the second topic on my list, which is home/host implementation issues. As part of 
the Committee(cid:146)s general efforts in recent years to enhance its relationships with supervisory agencies 
outside its member countries, the AIG has itself begun a dialogue with other supervisory agencies. In 
fact, based on the AIG(cid:146)s early discussions, the Committee published a paper in August on the (cid:147)high 
level principles for the cross-border implementation of the New Accord(cid:148). 
In  this  document,  we  reiterate  our  view  that  home  and  host  supervisors  will  retain  their  traditional 
responsibilities  in  regulating  internationally  active  banks  under  the  New  Accord.  Nonetheless,  the 
revised capital framework will require an even higher level of cooperation among supervisors. Let me 
mention  areas  such  as  the  initial  approval  and  validation  of  (cid:147)advanced(cid:148)  approaches  to  credit  and 
operational  risk  under  Pillar  1;  the  supervisory  review  process  under  Pillar  2;  and  ongoing 
assessments of compliance with the requirements for the use of (cid:147)advanced(cid:148) approaches. 
Although  supervisors  must  make  practical  arrangements  to  carry  out  these  responsibilities,  the 
Committee  wishes  to  implement  the  New  Accord  in  a  manner  that  strengthens  the  quality  of 
supervision across all countries.  Moreover,  we recognise the special role  we can play  in  helping  to 
ensure  that  all  host  supervisors,  and  especially  those  from  emerging  market  countries,  are  able  to 
supervise  the  local  operations  of  foreign  banks  effectively.  We  will  continue  to  work  with  emerging 
market supervisors and the World Bank and IMF, as well as with the Financial Stability Institute and 
others to exchange ideas  on  ways to strengthen the regulation of both domestic and internationally 
active banks. 
A  key  question  for  many  supervisors,  and  particularly  for  our  colleagues  in  emerging  market 
jurisdictions, is whether the New Accord represents the next step to take. 
The  Committee(cid:146)s  view  has  always  been  that  the  fundamentals  come  first.  It  is  only  after  a  solid 
foundation for a sound banking and regulatory system is in place that anyone should contemplate the 
more sophisticated  requirements  of  the  New  Accord.  Over  time,  it  is  our  hope  that  more  and  more 
countries will adopt the new framework, but not before they are ready. The better capitalised and the 
better managed that all banking systems are worldwide, the more resistant the global financial system 
will become to periods of distress. 
For this reason, the Committee developed a (cid:147)simplest standardised approach(cid:148) during the consultations 
leading up to CP3. This approach has been developed with the assistance of some of our non-G10 
colleagues.  More  recently,  we  have  developed  guidance  to  assist  non-G10  supervisors  in  making 
decisions about adoption of Basel II and to help them achieve the transition in the way best suited to 
their  national  circumstances.  Emerging  market  supervisors  have  welcomed  both  the  simplest 
standardised approach and the transition guidance. 
And  we  will  do  more  in  this  regard. We  are  currently  considering  how  we  might  best  enhance  and 
upgrade our structures for co-operation with non-G10 countries at the Committee level. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 3
 Accounting Standards and Basel II 
I would like to turn now to the third topic on my list. One trend in the market environment that we must 
track concerns the increasing harmonisation in accounting rules and practices internationally. The IIF 
has quite correctly noted the need to align the supervisory framework more closely with the emerging 
framework  for  harmonised  accounting  guidelines.  A  greater  (cid:147)meeting  of  the  minds(cid:148)  is  warranted 
especially  now  that  the  New  Basel  Accord  includes  explicit  disclosure  requirements  intended  to 
promote greater insight into a bank(cid:146)s risk profile. 
Yet as the Institute(cid:146)s comment letter reminds us, there are also other areas of the New Accord, such 
as  its  treatment  of  provisions  and  the  valuation  of  financial  instruments,  where  supervisors  and 
accounting professionals should continue to work toward convergence. 
We think that In  order to contribute to financial stability,  accounting standards should  be consistent 
with sound risk management and control practices in banks and should facilitate market discipline. The 
Committee  has,  therefore,  attached  great  importance  to  taking  an  active  role  in  the  international 
debates on accounting and to promoting the supervisory perspective on key accounting issues. 
The Committee has consulted extensively with representatives of the accounting profession and this 
dialogue will continue. I should add that we are interested in pursuing new opportunities for discussion 
on  issues  of  mutual  concern  with  accounting-standard-setting  bodies  and  private  sector  accounting 
professionals.  In  this  respect,  we  very  much  welcome  your  initiative  to  enhance  this  important 
dialogue. 
Recognition of diversification 
An  area  of  change  that  capital  rules  must  mirror  is  the  constantly  evolving  state  of  the  art  in  risk 
management. The 1988 Accord became outdated to a large extent because it was a relatively simple 
and  static  document:  its  one-size-fits-all  approach  to  capital  regulation  represented  an  important 
advance  as  a  universally  accepted  standard,  but  it  did  not  provide  a  means  to  recognise  more 
advanced risk measurement techniques. It quickly fell behind as the pace of innovation in technology, 
financial products, and markets accelerated. 
In response, the Committee designed the New Accord to be a more flexible document and one that 
would  be  more  welcoming  of  improvements  in  risk  management  techniques.  Its  evolutionary 
approaches to credit risk and to operational risk, for example, give banks a range of options to choose 
from and create explicit incentives for banks to strive to adopt the most advanced approaches. 
The New Accord still has its limits, however. Members of the IIF and others have cited as an example 
the failure to recognise use of full credit risk models, which would adjust a bank(cid:146)s capital requirements 
in  accordance  with  the  benefits  of  diversification  in  its  balance  sheet.  As  you  know,  the  Committee 
evaluated proposals that would have allowed advanced banks to estimate the degree to which their 
assets might behave similarly or default together. 
For  the  time  being,  we  have  decided  instead  to  establish  standard  estimates  of  diversification  that 
banks would apply. I know that many members of the IIF have accepted that choice as prudent for 
now, but you have also cautioned us that this decision is incompatible with the existing treatment of 
market risk and the emerging practices in operational risk management. 
We know that some banks are making commendable progress in thinking about ways to estimate the 
value of diversification. Nonetheless, we remain concerned about the degree of confidence one might 
have in those estimates, given the relative lack of data available on which to base them. Furthermore, 
we  are  concerned  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  third  parties  to  validate  any  estimates  at  this  time. 
Finally, we are not convinced about the consistency of application of these diversification effects. For 
example  we  are  not  certain  that  any  leading  bank  today  consistently  adjusts  the  value  of  all  of  its 
assets based on each asset(cid:146)s contribution to diversification. 
Portfolio theory suggests that an obvious next step to further enhance the risk-sensitivity of the capital 
framework would  be to incorporate calculations  of diversification  benefits into the framework. In the 
coming  years,  and  we  can  start  very  soon,  we  look  forward  to  working  with  banks,  with  banking 
associations such as the IIF, and with academics and researchers to find ways to move Basel in the 
direction  of  full  credit  risk  models,  and  to  harness  other  improvements  in  risk  measurement  and 
management practices. 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2003
 As  we  consider  the  long-term  view,  we  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  we  are  just  at  the 
beginning. The New Accord represents another important milestone in the adoption of more advanced 
risk measurement and management practices. But to remain robust and relevant to the demands of 
twenty-first  century  banking,  our  capital  regulations  must  keep  pace  with  changes  in  the  market 
environment and with the state of the art in risk management. 
On that note, I would like to emphasise the importance of research and debate in promoting the safety 
and soundness of the financial system. The Basel Committee owes a debt of gratitude to the studies 
and efforts undertaken by  economists, risk management professionals, and researchers in both the 
public and private sectors as we have sought ways to refine the proposals. We know that your work 
has  helped  to  inform  ours.  The  future  evolution  of  the  Accord  will  be  dependent  on  input  and 
contribution  from  the  industry,  and  I  look  forward  to  continuing  our  healthy  and  fruitful  exchange  of 
views. 
In  closing  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  stress  again  the  Committee(cid:146)s  commitment  to  having  a 
balanced Accord of the highest quality. Although we are encouraged by the general support for the 
proposals shown through the CP3 process, we recognise that there are some high-level issues still to 
be addressed and we are working hard to find the best ways to resolve them. I should also stress that 
no formal decisions have yet been taken in this respect. As you probably know, the Committee will 
meet  next  month  for  the  first  time  since  the  comment  period  closed.  I  can  assure  you  that  we  will 
continue to do our utmost to ensure that you - the industry - can take advantage of the benefits of the 
new Accord at the earliest possible opportunity. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 5
