Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and the economic situation 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, 2 September 2003.  
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
The speech is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank(cid:146)s press conference following the Executive 
Board(cid:146)s monetary policy meeting on 13 August and on previous speeches.  
The Charts in pdf can be found on the Norges Bank(cid:146)s website. 
 The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is inflation of close to 2.5 per 
cent over time. 
The inflation target provides economic agents with  an anchor for their decisions concerning saving, 
investment, budgets and wages. The inflation target is a vehicle for monetary policy(cid:146)s contribution to 
stabilising  output  and  employment.  This  intention  is  also  expressed  in  the  Regulation  on  Monetary 
Policy. High demand for goods and services and labour shortages normally point to higher inflation. 
When interest rates are increased, demand falls and inflation is kept at bay. When demand is low and 
unemployment rises, inflation will tend to slow. Interest rates will then be reduced.  
Norges Bank sets the interest rate so that future inflation will be equal to the inflation target of 2‰ per 
cent. The interest rate has been reduced since December last year in response to the change in the 
inflation  outlook.  This  was  the  result  of  weaker  cyclical  developments  in  the  world  economy  and  a 
sharp  drop  in  interest  rates  internationally.  In  addition,  the  Norwegian  business  sector  has  felt  the 
effects of the high Norwegian cost level. The weak prospects at home and abroad have in turn had an 
impact  on  the  Norwegian  labour  market  and  the  outlook  for  wage  growth  and  inflation  in  the  years 
ahead.  
The mandate implies that the interest rate must be adapted to the outlook for the Norwegian economy. 
If it appears that inflation will be higher than 2‰ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest 
rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2‰ per cent with unchanged interest 
rates, the interest rate will be reduced. This orientation of monetary policy will normally also contribute 
to stabilising output and employment. 
The impact of monetary policy occurs with a lag. The current inflation rate does not provide sufficient 
information to determine the level at which interest rates should be set now. Our analyses indicate that 
a  substantial  share  of  the  effects  of  an  interest  rate  change  will  occur  within  two  years.  Thus,  two 
years is normally a reasonable time horizon for reaching the inflation target. 
The interest rate influences inflation indirectly via domestic demand for goods and services and via its 
effect on the exchange rate. When interest rates rise, it becomes more profitable for households to 
save,  and  they  will  therefore  postpone  consumption.  Borrowing  also  becomes  more  costly,  with  an 
associated decline in investment. Lower demand in turn curbs the rise in prices and wages. Higher 
interest  rates  make  it  more  attractive  to  invest  in  NOK  and  borrow  in  foreign  currency.  Therefore, 
higher  interest  rates  normally  lead  to  an  appreciation  of  the  krone.  This  makes  imported  goods 
cheaper.  In  addition,  a  strong  krone  reduces  activity,  profitability  and  the  ability  to  pay  in  the 
internationally exposed sector. 
Expectations  in  the  US  as  to  how  far  the  interest  rate  will  fall  have  been  adjusted  downwards 
considerably since summer 2002. Last summer, market participants expected the key rate in the US to 
be increased to about 5 per cent towards the end of 2004. Now interest rates are believed to have 
reached  their  lowest  level  and  are  expected  to  remain  at  1  per  cent  until  the  end  of  2003,  with  a 
gradual rise to about 2.5 per cent in 2005.  
Clearer signs of the expected upswing have emerged recently, however. GDP grew by 3.1 per cent 
(seasonally adjusted, annual rate) in the second quarter. Optimism among participants in the financial 
markets is increasing; both equity prices and long-term interest rates have risen.  
Despite improvement in the US economy, some aspects still give rise to uncertainty as to whether the 
expected upswing will be sustained. Capacity utilisation in manufacturing is still low. The household 
saving ratio is low and household debt is high. The current account is showing a large deficit.  
BIS Review 38/2003 
 1
At  its  monetary  policy  meeting  in  August,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  decided  to  keep  its 
target for the federal funds rate unchanged at 1 per cent. The Committee perceived that the upside 
and  downside  risks  to  the  attainment  of  sustainable  growth  for  the  next  few  quarters  were  roughly 
equal. The Committee judged that, on balance, the risk of inflation becoming undesirably low is likely 
to  be  the  predominant  concern  for  the  foreseeable  future.  In  these  circumstances,  the  Committee 
believed that policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period.  
Asia is showing signs of recovery. China is leading the field with economic growth approaching 10 per 
cent  and  Thailand  is  showing  strong  growth.  But  the  picture  is  not  all  positive.  South  Korea  has 
experienced slower growth this year. South Korea is one of the countries that is particularly affected by 
the  competition  from  China.  In  Japan,  where  growth  has  been  low  for  a  long  period,  there  are 
indications that growth is picking up, although it is still too early to say whether it is sustainable. 
The key rate in the euro area has been reduced to 2 per cent. Forward rates imply that interest rates 
are expected to remain at 2 per cent to the end of 2003, before rising slightly next year.  
GDP growth in major European countries is low or negative. In the Netherlands, GDP has dropped for 
three consecutive quarters, and Germany has recorded a decline over the past two quarters. France(cid:146)s 
GDP showed growth in the first quarter and a decline in the second quarter of this year. For the euro 
area as a whole, preliminary figures indicate zero growth in the second quarter. Some consumer and 
business confidence indicators have recently shown signs of improvement, and the EU Commission(cid:146)s 
estimates point to moderate growth in the next few quarters. There are, however, no clear signs of an 
imminent and rapid recovery. 
Among  our  trading  partners  as  a  whole,  economic  developments  over  the  past  year  have  been  far 
weaker  than  Norges  Bank  and  others,  both  analysts  and  international  organisations,  had  expected. 
Growth projections for 2003 have been revised downwards substantially over the past year, reflecting 
the effect on the world economy of a number of negative shocks such as the war in Iraq and SARS. 
Global growth is still expected to pick up gradually towards a more normal level, but the upswing may 
come at a later stage than previously assumed. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that the 
global economy is facing a relatively long period of stagnation with low and possibly falling inflation. 
This  risk  is  reflected  in  the  low  short-term  interest  rates  in  the  US,  Europe  and  Japan.  Long-term 
interest  rates  have  edged  up  again  recently.  This  may  be  an  indication  that  financial  market 
participants are now somewhat more optimistic and expect that the economic policy stimulus will have 
the desired effect. 
In spite of weak economic developments, oil prices have remained high. Low levels of production in 
Iraq  have  contributed  to  holding  up  oil  prices.  Strikes  and  production  problems  in  Venezuela  and 
Nigeria  have  also  played  a  role.  These  developments  may  keep  oil  prices  high  until  growth  in  the 
global economy returns to normal. The oil industry will then have come through this period of sluggish 
growth in the global economy since 2000 without a fall in revenues. This has, in isolation, curbed the 
effects of the international downturn on Norway. However, the situation, as a whole and with regard to 
oil prices, is still highly uncertain. 
Weak  external  developments  have  in  particular  had  negative  spillover  effects  on  the  Norwegian 
economy through the appreciation of the krone, the fall in equity prices last year and lower demand for 
Norwegian exports. 
The  krone  exchange  rate  is  the  price  of  our  currency  measured  in  terms  of  a  foreign  currency. 
Developments in other countries are just as important for the krone as developments in the Norwegian 
economy.  The  krone  has  been  strong.  As  a  result,  prices  for  imported  goods  have  fallen.  This  has 
contributed to low inflation despite strong wage growth over a period of several years. 
Our analyses indicate that the most important reason for the appreciation of the krone from May 2000 
to the end of 2002 was the positive and widening interest rate differential. Combined with the interest 
rate  differential,  the  fall  in  equity  prices  and  reduced  fluctuations,  or  volatility,  in  foreign  exchange 
markets contributed to the appreciation of the krone last year. The effect of the interest rate differential 
on  the  krone  has  been  amplified  by  developments  in  international  capital  markets.  Part  of  the 
appreciation in 2002 may also be due to higher oil prices. In a highly uncertain situation and with fears 
of war in Iraq, the Norwegian krone, buoyed by a relatively high interest rate and oil wealth, may have 
been  regarded  as  an  attractive  alternative.  Investment  in  NOK  may  have  been  considered  a  good 
hedge against a downturn in the world economy as a result of fears of war and high oil prices. Since 
December last year, the interest rate differential between Norway and other countries has narrowed by 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2003
about  3  percentage  points.  Since  the  beginning  of  2003,  the  krone  measured  in  terms  of  the 
trade-weighted exchange rate index (TWI) has depreciated by 11 per cent.  
At the beginning of the 1990s, the Norwegian economy was in a deep recession. Production was far 
below capacity. When growth in the economy picked up, capacity utilisation increased. The output gap 
shows the difference between actual GDP and the level indicated by trend growth - estimated at close 
to 2‰ per cent in Norway. Around 1996, there was full capacity utilisation, and the output gap, as we 
normally  measure  it,  closed.  Subsequently,  costs  increased  and  prices  for  goods  and  services 
produced  for  the  Norwegian  market  accelerated.  The  upturn  peaked  in  1997,  with  GDP  growth 
approaching 5 per cent. In 1997 and 1998 the economy shifted from an upturn with high growth rates 
to  an  expansion  with  lower  growth  but  low  unemployment,  labour  shortages  in  many  sectors  and 
strong growth in labour costs. Unemployment has increased again since 2001. Capacity utilisation in 
the mainland economy  has fallen again from a high  level  and is now on  a par  with the  level in  the 
years  1995-1997,  before  cost  inflation  accelerated.  The  output  gap  has  again  closed.  At  the  same 
time, wage growth has dropped to a more sustainable level. 
However,  growth  in  the  economy  stalled  last  winter.  It  has  therefore  been  appropriate  to  reduce 
interest rates markedly. 
Even  though  the  krone  has  depreciated  this  year,  competitiveness  is  still  fairly  weak.  In  the  period 
1996-2003, competitiveness in Norwegian manufacturing has deteriorated by about 13 per cent. The 
deterioration is solely ascribable to higher growth in labour costs in Norway than among our trading 
partners. The krone measured in terms of the trade-weighted exchange rate index (TWI) is currently at 
about the same level as in 1996. Compared with the average for the last 30 years (1970-2003), wage 
growth has contributed to a deterioration in competitiveness of 15 per cent. In the years around the 
turn  of  the  millennium,  the  depreciation  of  the  krone  veiled  the  underlying  deterioration  in 
competitiveness. In May 2000, the krone exchange rate reached its lowest level in six years. In the 
following period and until the end of 2002, the krone appreciated, and the effect of high wage growth 
gradually  came  into  evidence  in  overall  corporate  results.  Results  last  year  were  affected  by  a 
particularly strong krone in the second half of the year. The krone exchange rate, measured in terms 
of the TWI, has now returned to the level of the mid-1990s, while the business sector is still grappling 
with the high level of costs that has built up since 1998. Changes in the krone exchange rate have 
proved to be reversible, but the loss of competitiveness and jobs caused by the relatively high level of 
domestic wage growth is more difficult to recoup. 
In recent years, labour costs have accounted for an increasing share of corporate earnings. In 2002, 
labour costs accounted for more than 90 per cent of total factor income in manufacturing.  
The  increase  in  wage  shares  is  affecting  corporate  behaviour.  The  demand  for  labour  is  declining. 
Credit  demand  and  investment  in  the  enterprise  sector  are  low.  At  the  same  time,  the  commercial 
property market is weak. Vacancy rates for commercial premises are high and rents have fallen. This 
will have an impact on investment in the period ahead. 
Lower interest rates will normally result in higher inflation, partly because the krone depreciates, and 
partly because of a rise in demand. Enterprises will thus be able to increase their earnings. Business 
sector activity is stimulated most effectively by low interest rates and a weak krone.  
Due to the past few years(cid:146) wage settlements, households have strengthened their financial position at 
the expense of private and public enterprises. House prices have edged up after stagnating earlier this 
year. Household borrowing has moderated somewhat, but is still high. Against this background, growth 
in private consumption is expected to be fairly high in the period ahead. Consumer spending on goods 
is rising, pointing towards growth in private consumption this year on a par with our projections in the 
June Inflation Report. 
Mainland GDP is projected to rise less than trend growth this year and to reach trend levels in 2004.1 
In  2005,  GDP  growth  is  projected  to  be  higher  than  trend  growth.  Investment  activity  in  mainland 
Norway  is  low.  Investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  is  rising,  but  a  large  share  of  the  increase  in 
demand is being met by imports. Public consumption increased sharply in 2002, but there will be little 
stimulus  to  the  economy  from  the  public  sector  this  year.  Growth  will  mainly  be  fuelled  by  private 
                                                      
1  Projection  in  Inflation  Report  2/03  based  on  assumptions  concerning  forward  rates  and  a  gradually  declining  krone 
exchange rate. 
BIS Review 38/2003 
 3
consumption  in  the  second  half  of  this  year  and  into  2004. We  expect  that  investment  in  mainland 
enterprises will gradually pick up from a low level. 
In order to set an appropriate interest rate, it is important to be be able to form a reasonably accurate 
picture of the economic situation. Economic statistics are the most important source of information, but 
they are published with a lag and some of the figures are revised frequently. 
In autumn 2002, Norges Bank established a regional network as a tool to gauge the level of activity in 
the Norwegian economy. 
The network consists of companies, organisations and municipalities throughout Norway. In the two 
rounds  of  talks  in  connection  with  Inflation  Report  2/03,  450  contacts  were  interviewed.  We  will  be 
having  six  rounds  of  talks  each  year  with  business  and  community  leaders  concerning  financial 
developments in their enterprises and industries, with about 200 visits in each round. The selection of 
contacts represents the production side of the economy, both industry-wise and geographically. In the 
course of 2003, the number of contacts in the network will rise to about 1000 persons, who  will be 
contacted once or twice a year. The Department of Economics at the Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology is responsible for the network in Trłndelag county and conducts contact meetings. 
Official  statistics  and  current  market  information  will  continue  to  be  the  main  basis  for  our 
assessments, but due to the time lag and revisions of statistics, supplementary information is useful. 
The regional network provides up-to-date information on the state of the Norwegian economy. Regular 
communication  with  local  contacts  in  Norway’s  business  and  community  life  provides  us  with 
information that supplements available official statistics. It also provides us with additional information 
on areas not covered by official statistical sources, and we learn which issues are of particular interest 
to enterprises.  
Information received from the regional network supported the picture presented in the June Inflation 
Report: enterprises are reducing costs while households(cid:146) financial position is strong. We are waiting to 
see if the results of the current round of talks will point to increased optimism in the business sector 
and in public entities or if the prospects for the future continue to be regarded as somewhat negative. 
Inflation  is  low  in  Norway.  The  rise  in  consumer  prices  adjusted  for  taxes  and  excluding  energy 
products (CPI-ATE) has slowed primarily due to developments in prices for imported consumer goods. 
Low inflation is due to the appreciation of the krone throughout last year and low inflation abroad. The 
rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services has also slowed. This is particularly the 
case for domestically produced goods influenced by world market prices. Domestic price inflation has 
nevertheless remained close to 3 per cent, due to high wage growth over several years. 
In July, the year-on-year rise in the CPI-ATE was 0.7 per cent, which is lower than projected in the 
June Inflation Report and substantially lower than the inflation target. There are also prospects that 
inflation  will  be  low  for  some  time  ahead.  The  analysis  in  the  June  Inflation  Report  showed  that  a 
reduction in the sight deposit rate towards 3 per cent, combined with some depreciation of the krone, 
could bring inflation up towards the target two years ahead.2 More moderate wage settlements in the 
future would provide a basis for even further monetary  policy easing and a  weaker krone.3 Without 
considerable monetary policy easing, inflation might have remained too low for an extensive period.  
The short-term nominal interest rate in Norway has now reached a historically very low level. Interest 
rates have not been lower since the first nine to ten years following the Second World War. The real 
interest rate  is also  low,  although by no means as low  as it  was  when inflation plagued Norwegian 
savers in the 1970s and 1980s. 
The low interest rate must be viewed against the risk of persistently low inflation both in Norway and in 
other  countries.  So  far,  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  do  not  point  to  any  substantial  deviation 
from the inflation target of 2‰ per cent. However, if inflation should remain too low for an extensive 
period, there is a risk that expectations of continued very low inflation will be generated. It may then 
prove difficult to fuel economic activity by stimulating demand. A marked easing of monetary  policy 
has therefore been appropriate. The inflation target is symmetrical. It is equally important to avoid an 
inflation rate that is too low as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high. 
                                                      
2  Based on assumptions concerning forward rates and a gradually declining krone exchange rate. 
3  Based on assumptions concerning forward rates and a gradually declining krone exchange rate, and an assumption that 
monetary policy easing will not translate into stronger wage growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2003
Capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  is  now  neither  abnormally  high  nor  abnormally  low. 
However, available statistics indicate that economic growth came to a halt during the winter. A global 
upswing  will  contribute  to  stronger  growth  in  Norway.  Growth  is  sluggish  already,  however,  with 
stagnation in many business sectors. Since inflation is also low, a low interest rate is appropriate now. 
But it is always a question of weighing one consideration against another. Since December last year, 
monetary  policy  has  been  eased  to  a  greater  extent  and  more  rapidly  than  has  been  customary. 
Following this phase of substantial easing, uncertainty with regard to economic developments in the 
period ahead has been somewhat greater than normal. With the easing that has been implemented, 
we must be particularly alert to changes in private consumption, wage growth and the krone exchange 
rate. 
If households expect the interest rate to remain low, private consumption may increase more than has 
been  assumed.  House  prices  and  household  borrowing  may  again  accelerate.  However,  increased 
slack in the labour market and declining migration to the largest towns will reduce these effects. The 
risk of stronger growth in household demand must be weighed against the sluggish developments in 
the business sector. Even though the krone has depreciated from its strong level at the beginning of 
the  year,  competitiveness  is  still  relatively  weak  after many  years  of  high  wage  growth.  In  addition, 
vacancy rates for commercial premises are high and rents have fallen.  
Another risk is that wage growth may accelerate again, as it did following the interest rate reductions in 
1999.  This  risk  is  also  being  reduced  by  a  slackening  labour  market.  Unemployment  in  2004  will 
probably be on a par with the level in 1996 and 1997. Annual wage growth in these years was a little 
less than 4‰ per cent. 
The low pay increases in this year(cid:146)s wage settlement also indicate that the social partners have placed 
more  weight  on  the  effects  of  pay  increases  on  future  developments  in  interest  rates,  the  krone 
exchange rate and employment. In addition, activity in public and particularly sheltered industries is 
probably still feeling the impact of the expensive pay increases last year and earlier years. We expect 
that in light of the experience gained in 2002, public entities will exercise more caution in future wage 
settlements. 
Developments in the krone exchange rate represent another source of uncertainty. The relationship 
between  the  krone  exchange  rate  and  the  interest  rate  differential  against  other  countries  is  not 
necessarily stable over time. Themes in international financial markets shift. However, the depreciation 
of the krone this year is contributing to stabilising inflation and activity in the economy. We may not yet 
have seen the full effects on the krone exchange rate of the interest rate reductions that have been 
implemented. At the same time, the krone can be influenced by fiscal policy and the outlook for wage 
growth. 
Norges Bank(cid:146)s Executive Board sets the interest rate with a view to achieving the inflation target of 
2‰ per cent. The inflation target is also a vehicle for monetary policy(cid:146)s contribution to stabilising output 
and employment. When setting the interest rate, the Executive Board seeks to achieve a balance. The 
objective of stimulating growth in the Norwegian economy and achieving the inflation target is weighed 
against  the  risk  of  new  pressures  building  up  in  the  economy  over  the  long  term.  Since  December 
2002, we have judged that to achieve this balance it was appropriate to reduce the interest rate to a 
low level. At the last monetary policy meeting on 13 August, it was decided to reduce the interest rate 
to  3.0  per  cent.  With  an  interest  rate  of  3.0  per  cent,  the  Executive  Board(cid:146)s  assessment  remained 
unchanged, i.e.  that the probability that  inflation two  years ahead  will  be  lower  than 2‰ per cent  is 
greater than the probability that it will be higher. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 38/2003 
 5
