 Ian Plenderleith: The aim and operation of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Ian  Plenderleith,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Merrill 
Lynch Macro Day, Johannesburg, 25 March 2003.  
 I was honoured and delighted to have the opportunity  to join the South African Reserve Bank as a 
Deputy Governor at the start of this year. As still very much a newcomer to the South African scene, I 
thought  I  might  take  this  opportunity  to  share  of  few  of  my  early  impressions  of  the  South  African 
economy - and specifically of the operation of monetary policy, which is the particular responsibility of 
the Reserve Bank 
I should say at the outset that these impressions are very positive. There is, in my view, a great deal to 
be admired in the performance of the economy, and in the contribution monetary policy is making to 
promoting that performance; and in parallel, a great deal of progress is being made in pressing ahead 
with structural reform, across a wide front, in order to ensure that the economy can fulfill its potential in 
the future. 
Perhaps the most remarkable achievement that strikes me in the economic sphere is that the South 
African  economy  has  continued  to  achieve  steady  and  sustained  growth  over  the  past  few  years 
despite the global economic slowdown in the surrounding world economy. As the world economy has 
moved into slowdown over the past two years or so, the South African economy has continued to grow 
at  around  3%  -  not,  to  be  sure,  as  fast  as  one  would  hope  to  achieve  in  a  more  favourable  world 
environment, but nonetheless a great deal better than many other economies have experienced. The 
current  cyclical  upswing  in  the  South  African  economy,  which  began  in  September  1999,  has  now 
been in progress for 3½ years; and, looking ahead, the prospects are encouraging for the economy to 
continue to grow.  
How has this been achieved? There are no doubt many contributory factors, but I think an important 
one  is  the  coherent  and  responsible  macroeconomic  policy  framework  which  the  authorities  have 
steadily and consistently pursued over recent years, covering both fiscal and monetary policy. 
The fiscal side is not for me, as a central banker, to dwell on. But there is no doubt that the steady 
commitment the government has shown to keeping the budget deficit to low and manageable levels 
and to containing the burden of public sector debt has delivered real benefits in terms of a strong and 
sustainable structure in the public finances. The result, as evident in the Budget last month, is that, as 
the economy has grown and as revenue collection has strengthened, there has been enhanced scope 
both  to  reduce  taxes  and  to  continue  building  up  essential  spending  programmes  on  a  sustainable 
basis. 
In the monetary field, on which I want to say a little more, there has similarly been a commitment to a 
coherent and responsible framework steadily and consistently pursued. This is the inflation-targeting 
framework,  which  mandates  the  Reserve  Bank  to  keep  inflation  low  in  order  to  deliver  broad  price 
stability across the economy as a whole. 
South  Africa  is,  of  course,  not  alone  in  setting  price  stability  as  the  priority  for  monetary  policy. 
Maintenance of low inflation is the universal aim that central banks around the world are set to pursue. 
But in pursuing this aim within the framework of an explicit  low  inflation target,  South Africa is very 
much in the forefront of international best practice. 
Why  this  emphasis  on  low  inflation  and  the  commitment  to  price  stability?  At  one  level,  the  socio-
economic damage that flows from a failure to control inflation is all too evident. High and volatile rates 
of  inflation  disadvantage  the  poor,  who  are  least  able  to  protect  themselves  from  the  ravages  of 
inflation, to the benefit of those more able to preserve their standards of living. Inflation disadvantages 
in particular those living on fixed incomes, often the elderly reliant on pensions or savings. Across the 
board, inflation will tend to discourage savings and undermine the ability of people to plan their future 
personal  finances  on  a  prudent,  long-term  basis.  By  eroding  values  in  a  corrosive  and  insidious 
fashion, inflation can undermine sociably responsible behaviour and threaten the stability of society as 
a whole. Not for nothing has inflation been called a silent and invisible thief.  
In  more  specifically  economic  terms,  too,  inflation  is  the  enemy  of  long-term  sustainable  economic 
growth, weakening the capacity of the economy to achieve the rate of growth of which it is capable. 
BIS Review 16/2003 
 1
 Past history, in South Africa and in many other countries, illustrates this all too vividly. If demand in the 
economy  is  allowed  to  grow  faster  than  the  output  supply  capacity  of  the  economy,  the  result  is 
inevitably rising inflation. This is because excess demand cannot induce the economy to deliver more 
output  than  it  is  capable  of  producing:  it  simply  bids  up  the  price  of  the  output  the  economy  can 
produce, generating inflation. If inflation is allowed to gather pace, the process of reining back excess 
demand, through higher interest rates, is inevitably more wasteful, in terms of an extended period of 
growth below capacity, than if timely action is taken by the monetary authorities to keep the pace of 
demand  in  line  with  the  supply  capacity  of  the  economy.  To  try  to  maintain  that  balance,  between 
demand and supply in the economy, is essentially the task of monetary policy and the aim the central 
bank is pursuing when it sets interest rates. If it succeeds, inflation will be kept low and the economy 
can continue to grow at a steady and sustainable rate on a continuing and lasting basis. 
There is an important corollary of this process. This is that there is not, in any meaningful sense, a 
trade-off  between  growth  and  low  inflation.  It  is  not  in  practice  feasible  to  contemplate  living  with  a 
somewhat higher rate of inflation, even for a period, in the hope that this would bring higher growth. 
The  reason  is  that  low  inflation  is  not  an  alternative  to  growth,  but  a  necessary  and  essential 
pre-condition.  Without  a  commitment  -  made  and  delivered  -  to  keeping  inflation  low,  we  will  not 
achieve  on  a  sustainable  basis  the  growth  of  which  the  economy  is  capable.  With  low  inflation, 
demand, and hence output, in the economy can continue to grow on a steady and sustainable basis. 
In pursuing low inflation, therefore, the central bank is aiming for exactly the same goals that we all 
desire  -  continuing  sustainable  growth  in  output  and  employment  and  living  standards  across  the 
economy as a whole.  
The inflation-targeting framework in South Africa has a critical role to play in maintaining low inflation. 
Its strength lies in the fact that its structure contains what I believe to be the four key elements for an 
effective monetary framework. Let me say a word briefly about each. 
First, the framework provides for an explicit target to be set for inflation. This is currently that inflation, 
as measured by the CPIX, should be brought back down to, and held within, a range of 3-6%. The 
value of setting an explicit target in this form is that it helps to anchor inflation expectations to a low 
level. Business and industry, and individuals, in making their own financial plans, will hopefully do so 
on the basis that inflation will be kept in that range over time; and on the basis that, if, as at present, 
inflation moves outside that range, the policy stance will be adjusted promptly to bring it back within 
range - as indeed was done last year. Anchoring expectations in this way helps in turn to build low 
inflation  into the fabric of the economy as a  whole.  The target also, importantly, provides a means, 
quite  properly,  of  holding  the  central  bank  to  account  for  its  performance.  I  shall  touch  on  this  last 
aspect again in a moment. 
Secondly,  the  inflation-targeting  framework  gives  the  responsibility  for  achieving  the  target  to  the 
central bank, and specifically to the Reserve Bank's Monetary Policy Committee, acting independently 
and under a clear mandate to deliver the target. It also gives the MPC the means to achieve the target, 
through its decision on setting the Reserve Bank's repo rate at each of its meetings. The framework 
thus ensures that there is a clear allocation of responsibility; and it ensures that interest rate decisions 
are taken by a competent authority dedicated to the task and acting independently. 
Thirdly  and  fourthly,  the  inflation-targeting  framework  is  one  that  delivers  a  high  degree  of 
transparency  and  accountability.  Transparency  and  accountability  is  achieved  through  the  full 
statement  the  MPC  issues  immediately  after  each  meeting,  through  the  range  of  publications  the 
Reserve Bank issues setting out its view of developments, and through the public appearances the 
Governor and his colleagues make in explaining the Reserve Bank's policy activities. I think this is a 
very important and beneficial part of the process for several reasons - partly because it is right that in a 
democratic system public agencies should be required to be open and accountable in explaining their 
activities; partly because that process hopefully helps to maintain public confidence in the performance 
of the agency and public support for the objective of low inflation; partly because that in turn should 
encourage  business  and  individuals  to  conduct  their  affairs  on  the  basis  that  low  inflation  will  be 
maintained; and partly because openness and accountability helps promote a better public debate on 
the issues. These are all elements that I believe help to strengthen the effectiveness of the inflation-
targeting process. 
This  framework  has,  of  course,  been  tested  in  the  past  18  months  by  the  inflationary  shocks  the 
economy  has  faced  from  the  fall  in  the  value  of  the  rand  in  the  latter  half  of  2001  and  the 
accompanying  upwards  pressure  on  food  prices  and  fuel  costs.  The  steps  taken  last  year  to  raise 
interest rates were necessary to prevent these shocks generating a self-reinforcing process of rising 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2003
 inflation. As  indicated  in  the statement issued  after last week's meeting  of the  MPC, there are now 
signs  that  the  inflationary  pressures  are  beginning  to  abate  and  that  the  outlook  for  inflation  is 
improving, though there is little room for complacency given the considerable risks we still face. 
But to return to my initial impressions, what is particularly encouraging, I believe, is that the coherent 
and  responsible  policy  framework  provided  by  inflation-targeting  has  demonstrated  its  ability  to 
address the shocks in a steady and considered manner and, in doing so, has helped considerably to 
maintain  confidence  in  the  economy.  This  is  particularly  evident  in  the  international  markets,  where 
confidence in the fundamentals of the South African economy has undoubtedly been a factor in the 
recovery of the rand; and it is evident, too, in the positive attitude to South Africa encountered more 
generally abroad - notably, for example, in the upgrades that have already been put in place by the 
rating agencies, with further upgrades in prospect. This, more than anything, - a well-structured policy 
framework,  steadily  and  consistently  pursued  -  is  what  has  helped  the  South  African  economy  to 
continue to grow through the current world slowdown. This is strong evidence that a commitment to 
low inflation works, in helping to maintain sustainable growth, and that it will help us to achieve the 
future growth that is essential to enable all of us to develop the huge potential of this fine country.  
BIS Review 16/2003 
 3
