 Toshiro Muto: What have we learned from (cid:147)unconventional(cid:148) market 
operations? 
Speech by Mr Toshiro Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, on the occasion of a meeting with 
participants in market operations, Tokyo, 23 July 2003. 
 Monetary policy in uncharted territory 
I. 
As the Japanese economy has been facing severe adjustment in recent years, the Bank of Japan has 
effected various measures that are unprecedented for any central bank, including the zero interest rate 
policy, quantitative easing, and a commitment to continuing the current policy until the consumer price 
index  stably  reaches  zero  or  above.  Moreover,  the  Bank  will  be  able  to  purchase  asset-backed 
securities from the end of July, thus expanding the scope of the assets it purchases. People often talk 
about the so-called (cid:147)unconventional monetary policy(cid:148) under deflation. All of the above measures can 
be considered unconventional in light of traditional central banking. 
Until  recently,  it  appears  that  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  and  quantitative  easing  have  been 
considered  a  special  case  for  Japan,  a  country  suffering  from  deflation.  However,  there  are  now 
several countries whose policy interest rates are approaching zero. For example, the short-term policy 
rate is 1 percent in the United States and zero to 0.75 percent in Switzerland. As a result, the zero 
interest  rate  policy  and  quantitative  easing  have  been  increasingly  attracting  the  attention  of  other 
countries. 
Since the Bank began to conduct monetary policy in uncharted territory, it has constantly made new 
findings in the area of financial markets and money market operations. As the pioneering central bank 
in this uncharted territory, the Bank is in a unique position to explain to the audience both at home and 
abroad the experience under the zero interest rate policy and quantitative easing. As all of you here 
are experts in market operations and other financial market transactions, I feel it may be stimulating to 
focus  my  talk  on  the  issues  of  mutual  interest  related  to  market  operations  and  financial  markets, 
rather than talking about developments in the economy and monetary policy in general. It is often said 
that the devil is in the details. Therefore, I believe it is useful for fruitful discussion on monetary policy 
that  we  share  a  few  findings  from  market  operations  under  quantitative  easing,  even  though  these 
findings may appear rather technical. 
Findings in the area of market operations 
II. 
There are a few important pillars in the current quantitative easing framework. Among them, the most 
important  is  to  use  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  account  deposits  at  the  Bank  as  the  main 
operating target and to provide ample funds through market operations. 
Increase in demand for current account deposits 
A. 
Obviously, if we provide ample funds to the market, short-term interest rates will fall to zero. If short-
term interest rates are significantly above zero, financial institutions will limit the amount of funds in 
their current account deposits, which pay no interest, roughly to the required reserves. Such behavior 
has been familiar to many central banks for many years. But what would happen if short-term interest 
rates were to decline to zero? A little more than two years ago when the target for market operations 
was changed from the overnight call rate to the outstanding balance of current account deposits, both 
market participants and the Bank doubted whether it was really possible for the Bank to provide the 
current account deposits with funds far in excess of around 4 trillion yen, the required reserves at the 
time. In fact, in the month of May  2001, only  two months after a new target of 5 trillion  yen for the 
current  account  deposits  was  introduced,  we  frequently  observed  undersubscription  in  market 
operations where bids fell short of the Bank(cid:146)s offers. You may recall that undersubscription occurred 
repeatedly also in subsequent market operations. 
However,  since  autumn  2002  when  the  target  for  the  current  account  deposits  was  raised  from 
(cid:147)around 10 to 15 trillion yen(cid:148) to (cid:147)around 15 to 20 trillion yen,(cid:148) undersubscription has rarely occurred. 
The target has been raised since then, and now stands at (cid:147)around 27 to 30 trillion yen.(cid:148) Indeed, this 
high level of the target was unthinkable when quantitative easing was first introduced. With the caveat 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 1
 that  there  is  probably  a  limit  to  increasing  the  target  since  it  is  inconceivable  that  all  financial 
institutions hold their assets in the current account deposits at the Bank, the first of the findings from 
our experience of more than two years of quantitative easing is that a central bank can provide a fairly 
large amount of funds even under zero interest rates. 
Among the factors that enabled the provision of a large amount of funds, initially considered almost 
impossible,  the  following  two  factors  stand  out  in  significantly  increasing  the  financial  institutions(cid:146) 
demand for current account deposits at the Bank. 
One factor is the growing conviction of many financial institutions that they would not have a problem 
holding  current  account  deposits  substantially  exceeding  the  required  reserves,  as  a  result  of  the 
virtual disappearance of the opportunity cost for holding the current account deposits. At present, not 
only major banks but also regional banks and foreign banks(cid:146) branches in Japan hold sizable current 
account  deposits  at  the  Bank.  The  interest  income  earned  in  the  money  market  is  so  small  that 
financial institutions keep their daily excess funds in the current account deposits at the Bank rather 
than invest them in the money market in view of administrative costs and possible losses, however 
unlikely, due to the defaults of counterparties. 
Another factor relates to the periodic rise of concern over financial system stability triggered by such 
events as the fall in stock prices. When the availability of funds tends to be tight as at the end of the 
financial year, including the mid-year book closing, or the calendar-year end, financial institutions try to 
smooth out their funding.  This will increase the demand for holding current account  deposits at the 
Bank.  In  fact,  during  the  financial  crisis  of  1997-98,  the  money  market  shrank,  and  the  liquidity 
shortage  forced  a  number  of  financial  institutions  with  rapidly  deteriorating  creditworthiness  into 
bankruptcy. It may be quite natural that renewed memories of this period prompted extremely strong 
demand for current account deposits at the Bank. 
Factors leading to undersubscription 
B. 
Such an increase in the demand for current account deposits by market participants must somehow 
be met by supply. Otherwise, interest rates will rise. As you all know, supply is being made in the form 
of  the  Bank(cid:146)s  funds-supplying  operations,  where  market  participants  place  bids  against  the  Bank(cid:146)s 
offers. Thus, the second finding under quantitative easing is that the Bank needs to devise a variety of 
measures  to  provide  ample  funds.  For  example,  even  when  some  market  operations  resulted  in 
undersubscription, others were successful. Also, the extent of undersubscription varied depending on 
the time of year. It is not easy to deduce these situations from the theoretical analysis of aggregate 
supply of and demand for the current account deposits. 
Having said this, one of the main reasons for undersubscription was the growing sense of a surfeit of 
funds in the market. This was the case in May 2001, soon after the target for current account deposits 
was  introduced,  when  sentiment  that  the  additional  supply  of  funds  was  redundant  seemed  to  be 
growing stronger day by day. The undersubscription in February and March 2002 and the summer of 
2002 was caused in part by such sentiment, but other factors were also at work. 
Undersubscription is likely to occur when there is an increase in market participants(cid:146) demand for the 
financial assets the Bank offers to purchase in its market operations. Funds-supplying operations are 
the  transaction  where  a  central  bank  provides  funds  to  the  current  account  deposits  of  financial 
institutions against its purchase of a specific financial asset. For example, during February and March 
2002, uncertainty about financial system stability was heightening as full protection of time deposits 
was  about  to  be  lifted  from  April.  Moreover,  the  demand  for  such  risk-free  assets  as  treasury  bills 
(TBs)  and  financing  bills  (FBs)  by  all  economic  agents,  including  financial  institutions,  increased 
significantly in the market. In such circumstances, the Bank(cid:146)s offers to purchase TBs and FBs failed to 
attract a sufficient number of bids, and undersubscription ensued. 
A  change  in  the  long-standing  skewed  distribution  of  funds  across  financial  institutions  also 
contributed to undersubscription. In the past, major banks had a balance-sheet structure in which the 
deposits they received fell short of their loans. At present, the deposits at these major banks are in 
excess of their loans reflecting an inflow  of deposits. As a result, their funding  needs in the market 
have been reduced. 
It  is  not  certain  whether  undersubscription  will  recur  in  the  future.  But  what  is  certain  is  that  the 
success  of  the  central  bank  in  providing  a  massive  amount  of  funds  under  zero  interest  rates  will 
depend on micro-level factors, including the funding position of individual financial institutions and the 
demand for specific assets used in the Bank(cid:146)s market operations, in addition to the overall supply of 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2003
 and demand for current account deposits at the central bank. In this regard, by closely monitoring the 
changes in each financial market, the Bank has been carefully selecting the means by which it carries 
out  market  operations  for  the  smooth  provision  of  funds.  For  example,  the  Bank  has  recently 
expanded the scope of acceptable bills by lengthening the maturity period up to 12 months as well as 
the  range  of  eligible  counterparties  for  its  bill  purchasing  operations.  It  has  also  conducted  a 
combination of longer-term funds-providing operations and shorter-term funds-absorbing operations. 
III. 
Challenges under quantitative easing 
Criteria for assessing financial market stability 
A. 
The first challenge under quantitative easing is to select the criteria by which the Bank should assess 
the state of financial markets when conducting market operations. Some economists may argue that 
the quantitative  easing framework requires the  Bank to do  no more than mechanically maintain the 
target balance for current account deposits every day. Unfortunately, this is not necessarily the case. 
Even when the Bank maintains the target balance, there are cases in which financial markets remain 
unstable. In these cases, ensuring financial market stability becomes most important. 
Then, the question is how to assess subtle changes in financial markets in light of maintaining their 
stability.  In  the  money  market,  a  tightening  of  the  market  will  not  necessarily  be  translated  into  a 
change in overnight interest rates, as these rates have been at around zero. For example, even when 
concern about financial system stability intensified in autumn 2002, the unsecured overnight call rate 
stayed at 0.001 percent. However, the repo rate on forward transactions, the yield on TBs with longer 
maturity,  and  the  offer  rate  of  the  Bank(cid:146)s  funds-supplying  operations  all  increased.  Thus,  when 
conducting market operations under such circumstances, it becomes important to judge how and to 
what extent the target balance for current account deposits should be achieved and various interest 
rates should be stabilized to ensure financial market stability. Moreover, the criteria for such judgment 
differ depending on the economic and financial conditions. Therefore, it has become very challenging 
to judge whether financial market stability is being maintained. 
How to evaluate the functioning of financial markets 
B. 
The second challenge is to maintain the functioning of financial markets. The word (cid:147)call(cid:148) in the money 
market  derives  from  the  phrase  (cid:147)money  at  call,(cid:148)  referring  to  the  money  available  on  demand.  The 
amount  outstanding  of  the  call  market  decreased  substantially  after  financial  institutions  felt  that  it 
would not be a problem to hold reserves far in excess of required reserves. Since the call market is the 
market in which participants lend and borrow short-term funds, the shrinking of the market implies a 
possibility  that  financial  institutions  may  not  be  able  to  appropriately  perform  their  banking  activity. 
Therefore, the Bank inevitably has a serious concern about maintaining the functioning of the market. 
Lenders  in  the  money  market  are  reluctant  to  lend  when  market  rates  fall  to  virtually  zero.  Some 
regional banks have closed down their Tokyo branches. It has also been pointed out that, with liquidity 
in  the  call  market  declining  as  a  result  of  less  market  participation,  the  market  may  not  function 
effectively in funds procurement in times of emergency. 
Let me elaborate by illustrating these points with examples. 
The amount outstanding of the call market stood at 26.5 trillion yen at the end of February 2001 just 
before the introduction of quantitative easing. This amount fell by roughly 10 trillion yen in two years to 
16.5 trillion yen at the end of February 2003. In addition to the introduction of quantitative easing, two 
factors  among  others  are  considered  to  have  contributed  to  this  reduction:  one  is  the  progress  in 
consolidation among large financial institutions, and the other is the shift of deposits to large banks, 
which are usually on the funding side in the call market, as a result of the partial removal of blanket 
deposit insurance. 
Let  us  look  at  the  contrast  between  call  transactions  involving  overnight  instruments  and  those 
involving term instruments. The amount outstanding of overnight transactions fell by some 20 percent, 
from  15.3  trillion  yen  at  the  end  of  February  2001  to  12.3  trillion  yen  at  the  end  of  February  2003. 
During the same period, the amount outstanding of transactions involving term instruments decreased 
from 11.2 trillion yen to 4.2 trillion yen, about one-third the level at the end of February 2001. Looking 
at  the  money  market  in  terms  of  secured  transactions,  the  total  amount  of  bond  gensaki  and  repo 
transactions  hardly  changed,  remaining  at  around  18  trillion  yen  per  business  day  during  the  same 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 3
 period. In fact, the amount outstanding of the secured call market now is even larger than before the 
introduction of quantitative easing. These facts suggest that the deterioration in the functioning of the 
money  market  is  a  phenomenon  related  not  only  to  zero  interest  rates,  but  also  to  the  extremely 
cautious attitude of market participants in taking on credit risks. 
I have just mentioned that in Japan, with short-term market rates declining virtually to zero, lenders 
become  reluctant  to  lend,  and  that  some  regional  banks  have  closed  down  their  Tokyo  branches. 
Similarly, in the United States, with the decline in the federal funds rates, there is heated discussion as 
to how far the interest rate on money management funds could decline relative to the returns on trust 
funds, and  whether  the decline in interest rates  would interfere  with the  effective functioning of this 
major  channel  of  funds  intermediation.  In  essence,  the  discussions  in  the  United  States  and  Japan 
have  something  in  common.  The  transaction  and  settlement  of  funds  and  securities  as  well  as  the 
assessment of credit risks always entail some fixed costs. And when short-term market rates approach 
zero, interest revenues may fall short of these costs. This tends to hinder the smooth implementation 
of various financial transactions. 
The relationship between the zero interest rate policy or quantitative easing and the market functioning 
requires  a  multifaceted  examination.  Thus,  we  would  like  to  examine  this  issue  from  a  broader 
perspective, not focusing narrowly just on the decline in the amount outstanding of the call market. 
Outright purchase of long-term Japanese government bonds (JGBs) 
IV. 
I commented earlier that one of the findings under quantitative easing was the need for the Bank to 
devise  a  variety  of  measures  to  provide  ample  funds.  I  have  also  just  mentioned  financial  market 
stability  and  the  deterioration  of  market functioning  in  the  context  of  concern  and  challenges  under 
quantitative  easing.  As  an  application  of  these  discussions,  I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  outright 
purchase of long-term JGBs by the Bank. 
Many central banks in major industrialized countries conduct monetary policy mainly through money 
market  operations.  It  is  only  those  in  the  United  States  and  Japan  that  also  conduct  the  outright 
purchase of long-term government bonds on a large scale. Even before the Bank began quantitative 
easing,  it  was  effecting  the  outright  purchase  of  long-term  JGBs  to  provide  liquidity  for  sustainable 
growth in line with the long-term trend increase in banknotes. When introducing quantitative easing, 
the Bank adopted a  new framework for market operations according to  which  it would increase the 
amount of its outright purchase of long-term JGBs when it considered such an increase necessary for 
the  smooth  provision  of  liquidity,  subject  to  the  limitation  that  the  outstanding  amount  of  long-term 
JGBs effectively held by the Bank should be kept below the outstanding balance of banknotes issued. 
Based on such thinking, the Bank increased the amount of its outright purchase of long-term JGBs 
four times, from an initial 400 billion yen per month to the current 1.2 trillion yen per month. As a result, 
the Bank now holds more than 60 trillion yen of long-term JGBs, which accounts for about 60 percent 
of the monetary base. 
From the viewpoint of conducting market operations, the outright purchase of long-term JGBs, after 
the  adoption  of  quantitative  easing,  has  greatly  contributed  to  achieving  smoothly  the  target 
outstanding  balance  of  current  account  deposits  at  the  Bank.  Undersubscription  has  not  yet  been 
repeated in the Bank(cid:146)s market operations. However, should such cases arise again, it would be highly 
reassuring  from  a  practical  standpoint  that  the  Bank  has  a  means  of  securing  a  fixed  amount  of 
increase in the outstanding balance every month. 
Let me share with you some observations in relation to the significant increase in the outright purchase 
of long-term JGBs. 
The first observation is that we regard the outright purchase of long-term JGBs as a market operation 
that does not result in undersubscription. The question is why market participants take the trouble to 
bid on the Bank(cid:146)s offers for the outright purchase of long-term JGBs when they can sell these bonds in 
the market. 
If asked, market participants give the following explanations to this question. First, the Bank requires 
market  participants  to  bid  actively  against  its  offers,  which  is  one  of  the  Bank(cid:146)s  requirements  for 
participation  in  market  operations.  Second,  selling  a  large  amount  of  long-term  JGBs  through  the 
Bank(cid:146)s outright purchase has a smaller effect on market prices than selling them in the market. And 
third, unlike short-term interest rates, interest rates on long-term JGBs have not yet reached zero. All 
these explanations appear plausible, but cannot be conclusive. The first explanation also applies to 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2003
 the  Bank(cid:146)s  market  operations  for  providing  short-term  funds,  and  these  operations  have  actually 
experienced undersubscription. The second one may hold true to some extent. The third explanation 
that interest rates on long-term JGBs have not yet reached zero seems the most convincing. Whatever 
the  explanations,  from  the  viewpoint  of  providing  ample  funds  and  analyzing  the  effect  on  market 
prices of JGBs, we should pay more attention to the motivation of market participants for bidding on 
the Bank(cid:146)s offers. 
The second observation is that the provision of funds dependent largely on the outright purchase of 
long-term  JGBs  has  created  concern  in  the  Bank(cid:146)s  market  operations.  The  Bank  is  currently 
conducting  the  outright  purchase  of  long-term  JGBs at  a  high  rate  of  1.2  trillion  yen  per  month.  Its 
balance  sheets  at  the  end  of  March  2003  revealed  that  the  total  of  banknotes  and  current  account 
deposits increased by about 6.5 trillion yen from a year earlier on the liability side. On the asset side, 
the  outright  purchase  of  long-term  JGBs  increased  substantially,  while  money  market  operations 
decreased. In fact, the amount outstanding of long-term JGBs held by the Bank at the end of March 
2003  increased by roughly 9 trillion  yen from a  year  earlier,  while the amount of funds provided by 
money  market  operations  decreased  by  about  7  trillion  yen.  The  difference  of  about  3  trillion  yen 
between the increase in the total of banknotes and current account deposits and the amount of funds 
provided by the Bank is explained by the decrease in government excess funds, which were paid to 
the private sector. 
If the decrease in the volume of transactions in the money market were to cause difficulties to financial 
institutions in smoothly raising short-term funds, the Bank(cid:146)s money market operations may provide an 
alternative means of securing smooth funding. In this context, a decrease in the Bank(cid:146)s money market 
operations could be a destabilizing factor for financial markets. Even when there is a surplus of funds 
in  the  money  market  as  a  whole,  money  market  rates  could  rise  slightly  due  to  a  decrease  in  the 
supply of short-term funds by the Bank. If money market rates were sufficiently positive and there were 
no  concern  about  financial  system  stability,  the  Bank  would  be  free  to  use  any  assets  for  its 
operations,  because  a  surplus  or  shortage  of  funds  would  ultimately  be  adjusted  in  the  market. 
However, this is not currently the case in Japan. 
The outright purchase of long-term JGBs is a means to smoothly increase the outstanding balance of 
current account deposits, and has played a significant role in securing financial market stability. At the 
same  time,  such  a  purchase  has  engendered  some  unexpected  side  effects,  such  as  fewer 
opportunities  for  the  Bank to  conduct  money  market operations,  which  has  in  some  cases  led  to  a 
slight rise in money market rates. 
Let me briefly touch upon the relationship between long-term interest rates and the outright purchase 
of long-term JGBs. Market participants often point out that the decline in long-term interest rates up 
until  mid-June  was  partly  due  to  the  Bank(cid:146)s  outright  purchase  of  long-term  JGBs.  The  outright 
purchase  of  long-term  JGBs  of  1.2  trillion  yen  per  month  could  facilitate  the  adjustment  of  dealers(cid:146) 
position in the market. And it appears easy to understand that when long-term interest rates fall for 
some reason, the existence of such a purchase would make dealers more bullish than otherwise. But, 
based on the observation that the yield on ten-year JGBs has been fluctuating between 0.4 percent 
and 1.4 percent for the past month or so, the relationship between long-term interest rates and the 
outright purchase of long-term JGBs may not be as simple as it appears. 
V. 
Relationship between the Bank and its counterparties in market operations 
Findings in the area of supply and demand for funds 
A. 
The  number  of  counterparties  in  the  Bank(cid:146)s  market  operations  is  close  to  150  at  present.  When 
financial  institutions  become  eligible  as  a  counterparty  in  the  Bank(cid:146)s  market  operations,  they  are 
requested  to  bid  actively  against  the  Bank(cid:146)s  offers  for  market  operations,  process  transactions 
accurately  and  swiftly,  and  provide  the  Bank  with  market  information  and  analyses  useful  in 
conducting  monetary  policy.  In  addition,  the  Bank  recently  began  considering  the  amount  of 
successful  bids  in  the  previous  year  as  a  criterion  for  the  selection  of  counterparties  for  market 
operations in the following year. These requests are being made because the central bank needs to 
effect  monetary  operations  through  the  smooth  provision  of  funds.  Also,  the  eligibility  criteria  for 
counterparties must be as transparent as possible since it is impossible to conduct transactions with 
all market participants. 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 5
 Having said all this, let me note that the Bank and its counterparties in market operations are important 
to each other as trading parties in financial markets. In my opinion, the term (cid:147)trading party(cid:148) has two 
significant implications. 
The first implication is that both the Bank and its counterparties aim to achieve their respective goals 
through the transactions in funds and JGBs. The Bank controls the amount of money in the market or 
the  level  of  interest  rates,  while  the  Bank(cid:146)s  counterparties  adjust  their  position  in  funds  and  JGB 
holdings and improve profitability. 
Let  me  take  the  example  of  undersubscription.  Undersubscription  in  the  Bank(cid:146)s  funds-supplying 
operations occurs in the following cases: financial institutions have already secured enough funds to 
satisfy reserve requirements for the period; they have managed to raise sufficient funds in the market 
to cover themselves over interim and fiscal year-end book closings; and, they can sell any TBs or FBs 
or  CP  they  hold  to  end-investors  without  difficulties.  Thus,  undersubscription  occurs  when 
counterparties  do  not  need  the  Bank(cid:146)s  market  operations.  This  implies  that,  in  order  to  smoothly 
conduct market operations, the Bank must understand and satisfy its counterparties(cid:146) need for market 
operations. It also means that the Bank must devise market operations that create such a need. 
This rather obvious point was not clearly recognized under the past framework where interest rates 
were the target. In that framework, the Bank was rather passive. It provided funds when interest rates 
rose higher than the target, and absorbed funds when interest rates fell below the target. In contrast, 
under the present framework where funds are amply provided to achieve the target balance of current 
account  deposits,  the  Bank  has  been  under  pressure  to  increase  funds  held  in  current  account 
deposits in line with the target. This has increased more than ever our awareness of the significance of 
transactions in financial markets. 
For example, if for some reason we observe a tightening of the conditions in a certain market in the 
money markets, the Financial Markets Department of the Bank will consider providing funds to that 
market.  Given  its  responsibility  to  ensure  market  stability,  the  provision  of  funds  in  such  a 
circumstance  would  clearly  be  an  appropriate  decision.  Looking  at  this  differently,  a  tightening  of 
market conditions suggests that there is a demand for funds in that particular market. As the Bank is 
trying  to  maintain  the  balance  of  current  account  deposits  at  unprecedentedly  high  levels,  it  should 
take advantage of such a demand for the smooth provision of funds. 
Exchange of information through market operations 
B. 
The second implication of a trading party is that the Bank and its counterparties exchange information. 
As is suggested by the term (cid:147)market intelligence,(cid:148) we may be able to obtain a variety of information 
and  knowledge  by  carefully  monitoring  market  movements.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  request  the 
counterparties  to  provide  us  with  market  information  and  analyses  useful  in  conducting  monetary 
policy. 
We conduct market operations daily, and the results of these operations are a very important source of 
information for us in gaining insight into the counterparties(cid:146) assessment of our offers. Of course, this is 
not a one-way flow of information. Presumably the results of market operations offer the counterparties 
valuable information on overall market conditions, including insight into the action of other participating 
players. It may perhaps seem counterintuitive, but the results of market operations have come to play 
an increasingly important role, given the reduced number of transactions taking place in the money 
market. 
I  would  like  to  add  that,  as  players  in  the  same  market,  the  Bank  and  its  counterparties  in  market 
operations should exchange information and ideas on how to improve the market infrastructure and 
make the market function more smoothly. 
Concluding remarks 
My  talk  today  has  focused  on  technical  aspects  of  market  operations  conducted  under  quantitative 
easing. It includes a  number of issues that are of fundamental  importance  when thinking about the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Market  functioning,  which  I  touched  upon,  is  one  of  these  important 
issues. We at the Bank will continue to exert every effort to enhance the transmission mechanism of 
monetary  policy,  while  ensuring  the  smooth  provision  of  funds  within  the  framework  of  quantitative 
easing. 
6 
 BIS Review 36/2003
 We  are  closely  monitoring  the  market  for  even  the  slightest  change  through  various  channels, 
including daily market operations. However, we believe it is major market players like yourselves who 
possess the most reliable information and insight into market conditions through direct dealing with a 
variety  of  customers.  As  we  are  now  in  uncharted  territory  for monetary  policy,  we  appreciate  your 
sharing with us your insight so that we can together navigate these waters safely. 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 7
