Jean-Pierre Roth: Switzerland as an industrial location and National Bank 
policy 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Europa Forum Lucerne, Lucerne, 27 October 2003. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 In a high-wage country such as Switzerland enterprises can only maintain their position in the face of 
international competition  by  a  process of  ongoing  innovation.  The  resulting structural change  in  the 
direction of highly technological and increasingly productive economic sectors is also a prerequisite for 
strong economic growth. In an international comparison, however, Switzerland’s growth is poor. This 
weak perfomance in terms of growth highlights the need for action in economic policy. 
Monetary policy cannot, however, fulfil this role. The primary task of monetary policy is to ensure price 
stability. Price stability is an important locational advantage that Switzerland has to offer. Moreover, 
monetary policy can also contribute to stabilising the economy and warding off undesirable exchange 
rate  shocks.  It  is,  however,  not  in  a  position  to  bring  about  a  sustained  improvement  in  economic 
growth.  The  result  of  such  an  attempt  would  merely  be  economic  overheating  with  the  threat  of  a 
subsequent slide of the economy into recession. 
Lasting effects on economic growth may, by contrast, emanate from education policy, research policy, 
policy on foreigners and fiscal policy. Weak growth in Switzerland, however, may be explained mainly 
by the conspicuous productivity gap between the innovative export sector and the domestic sector set 
in its traditional structures. The reason for this lethargy of the domestic sector is a dense network of 
regulations which limit competition and obstruct technical progress. The result is an excessively high 
domestic  price  level  from  which  not  only  consumers  but  also  exporters  suffer.  Growth-promoting 
measures must therefore aim primarily at wedging impediments to competition in the domestic sector. 
BIS Review 49/2003 
 1
