Klaus Liebscher: The challenges facing an “enlarged Europe” 
Opening remarks by Mr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the East-West 
Conference 2003, 2-4 November 2003, Vienna, 4 November 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all to Vienna and to our 9th East-West Conference. A 
special welcome goes to the IMF’s Managing Director Horst Köhler, who is going to take over the floor 
in a few minutes to continue with the opening address. I am very grateful to you, Mr. Köhler that you 
came to the official opening ceremony of the JVI, which we celebrated yesterday evening, and that 
you participate again in our East-West-Conference this year. At the very outset, let me also extend my 
thanks to all the chairpersons, speakers and panelists for their work and their important contributions 
to  our  conference.  We  are  glad  that  we  have  again  attracted  a  sizeable  number  of  distinguished 
speakers and key experts from various fields. A warm welcome also goes to President Jean Lemierre 
and Deputy Director-General Kipkorir Aly Azad Rana.  
The  East-West  Conference  looks  back  at  an  impressive  history.  The  first  OeNB  seminar  focusing 
explicitly on the transition economies in Central and Eastern Europe took place in October 1989, not 
long after the opening of the Iron Curtain. Since 1995 the conference has become established as an 
annual  Vienna-based  event.  It  is  designed  as  an  international  forum  in  which  leading  experts  from 
government and international organizations, central and commercial banks as well as universities and 
research institutes discuss questions related to the transition process and to EU enlargement.  
Previous  conferences  have  dealt  with  all  the  major  topics  relevant  for  European  integration  and 
enlargement:  the  restructuring  of  the  banking  system,  financial  crises,  the  convergence  progress, 
regulatory aspects of transition and other structural challenges, the quest for an adequate policy mix 
and  the  challenges  of  transition  in  general.  The  range  of  topics  is,  however,  not  just  impressive 
because of its broad coverage, it also reflects the evolution of the transformation process. Some of the 
earlier  conference  topics,  as  for  example  the  regulatory  aspects  of  transition  or  issues  related  to 
institution  building,  have  lost  importance  over  recent  years,  given  the  successful  completion  of  the 
major transition steps in these areas.  
On the other hand, we have also seen the focus shift from purely transition-related topics toward a 
more  global  perspective  and  a  more  horizontal  approach  to  specific  topics.  The  most  recent 
conferences proved especially rewarding owing to the exchange of views and research cooperation 
among experts from transition and industrialized countries.  
In  previous  years,  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  co-organized  the  conference  on  several 
occasions with other institutions, such as the IMF, the Institute of International Economics, the Banca 
d’Italia  or  The  Vienna  Institute  for  International  Economic  Studies.  This  year,  as  in  2000,  the 
Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  has  the  Joint  Vienna  Institute,  the  major  provider  of  training  in 
transition  issues  for  central  bankers,  government  officials  and  private  sector  representatives  from 
countries in Central and Eastern Europe and from former republics of the Soviet Union, as its co-host. 
Let me at this point give a special welcome to Ms. Bradley, the Director of the JVI, and thank her for 
the excellent cooperation.  
The  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  and  the  Joint  Vienna  Institute  look  back  at  a  long  history  of 
cooperation  and  this  year’s  conference  bears  testimony  to  our  close  collaboration.  The  Austrian 
authorities have provided the JVI with a new building that meets the technology and accommodation 
requirements of a modern training facility. This new location which has been in use since May of this 
year will guarantee continuity in training for the years to come. We are especially pleased that we have 
the opportunity to combine the official opening with this year’s East-West conference so that we can 
celebrate  this  festive  occasion  together.  Many  of  you  already  joined  us  yesterday  evening  for  the 
official opening reception and had a chance to visit the new facilities.  
Now, after almost 15 years since the first seminar in the spirit of the East-West Conference, we stand 
at a point where the most important step of EU enlargement, one major focus of the conference series, 
is  only  a  few  months  ahead.  In  May  2004,  ten  countries  will  join  the  European  Union.  This 
enlargement round is not only the most important one to date in terms of scale, diversity and economic 
BIS Review 48/2003 
 1
growth potential, but also - as Commissioner Verheugen once put it - the best prepared in the history 
of the European Union.  
The challenges facing Europe in the coming years and decades are manifold, complex and exciting. It 
is these challenges, tasks and prospects that the East-West conference series is designed to address. 
We are convinced that the conference has played a significant role in providing a forum for discussion 
among experts and politicians from Western Europe and the current and future acceding countries, 
especially in times when the enlargement project that we are facing now still sounded like an overly 
visionary project.  
With  the  most  important  wave  of  enlargement  about  to  become  reality,  I  believe  that  this  is  the 
opportune time to revisit. Consequently, the topic of this year’s conference “The economic potential of 
a larger Europe - Keys to Success” is meant to cover the most important topics of previous East-West 
conferences.  Today  and  tomorrow  we  will  be  discussing  issues,  such  as  human  capital  formation, 
financial stability, the specification of a suitable policy mix or structural reforms - topics that are key to 
a successful transition process and therefore also to the provision of a prosperous growth environment 
within a larger Europe.  
On the eve of the upcoming EU enlargement, we will take a look at these increasingly relevant topics 
from two perspectives. On the one hand, we will investigate the importance of the above-mentioned 
factors for the success of the past integration process within the European Union as well as for the 
ongoing transition process in the current group of acceding countries. On the other hand, we will also 
take a forward-oriented approach and address the challenges ahead. Here, we will, however, not only 
focus  on  the  South-eastern  European  countries  that  are  already  on  the  accession  track,  but  also 
debate the role the European Union and the Eurosystem can play in fostering the cooperation with 
and in promoting reforms in the countries as summarized under the “Wider Europe” strategy of the 
European  Commission  -  Russia,  the  Ukraine,  Moldavia,  Belarus  and  the  Southern  Mediterranean 
region.  
Today’s morning is dedicated completely to celebrating the opening of the new Joint Vienna Institute 
and will revolve around the people and institutions that have played a major role in the success story 
of the JVI. You will be hearing about the importance of capacity building, human capital formation and 
central bank cooperation for the effectiveness of development programs as initiated by international 
institutions.  Even  though all  of  these  programs  each  have  a  special  focus,  they  share  the  common 
characteristic  that  they  can  only  be  successful  if  training  courses  like  the  ones  offered  by  the  JVI 
provide the essential sound human capital base.  
Deputy Minister Pyatnytskiy from the Ukraine, a prominent graduate of a JVI training course will open 
the following panel discussion with an introductory statement, giving us a first-hand account of his JVI 
experience.  During  the  panel  discussion  distinguished  representatives  of  international  training 
institutes  will  get  the  floor  to  relate  their  experience  with  technical  cooperation  programs:  the  BIS 
Financial  Stability  Institute,  The  World  Bank  Institute,  the  IMF  Institute  and  the  OECD.  All  these 
institutions boast a track record of training and cooperation initiatives and have played a major role in 
supporting the acceding countries during the transition process.  
While the formal enlargement of the European Union is scheduled for May 2004, an “enlarged Europe” 
has already become reality for all of us in many respects. Preparations for the final step have been 
progressing steadily and I can imagine that many representatives from the acceding countries feel as 
if they were part of the European Union already. To mention just one example: Delegates from the 
acceding countries have observer status in all ESCB and EU committees and thus closely follow the 
discussions about the future challenges of economic and monetary policy.  
We  appreciate  the  medium-term  prospect  of  a  number  of  new  members  joining  the  euro  area.  Of 
course, they will have to fulfill the same conditions for EMU accession as earlier members did, which 
are:  European  Union  membership,  participation  in  ERM  II  for  at  least  two  years  without  severe 
tensions  and  sustainable  compliance  with  the  Maastricht  criteria.  These  are  sensible  and  sound 
milestones on the route to full monetary integration.  
As to the single monetary policy, sticking to the primary objective of maintaining price stability remains 
a  key  factor  for  the  credibility  of  both  EMU  and  the  euro.  By  maintaining  price  stability,  monetary 
policymakers optimally contribute to enhancing the long-term prospects for economic growth and thus 
also employment in the euro area. Even though the short-term nominal interest rates are at the lowest 
level  in  50  years,  inflationary  expectations  are  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price  stability.  At  this 
juncture,  it  may,  however,  be  particularly  warranted  to  stress  that  monetary  policy  cannot  by  itself 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2003
generate lasting and sustainable growth and employment in the euro area. To stimulate the economy 
and employment, economic policymakers are called upon to devise adequate structural measures that 
tackle the fundamental weaknesses and set off pressing adjustments.  
Whereas EMU entails a common monetary policy for all of its members, fiscal policy is formulated and 
executed  at  the  national  level.  Fiscal  policy  must  be  part  of  a  comprehensive  and  growth-oriented 
strategy that focuses on improving the structure of public expenditures. Besides, we must continue to 
credibly  meet  the  provisions  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  is  crucial  for  the  smooth 
functioning of EMU. Let me emphasize that in a monetary union we need fiscal policy rules to prevent 
one  country’s  unsound  fiscal  policy  from  negatively  impacting  on  other  members  of  the  monetary 
union. What is more, our complying with the Stability and Growth Pact not only favors other countries 
but also future generations, which is particularly important in those countries where population aging is 
a  significant  phenomenon.  Against  the  grain  of  some  critics  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  I  am 
strongly  convinced  that  the  Pact  is  sufficiently  flexible  to  support  budgetary  discipline  also  in 
economically difficult times. Without the Stability and Growth Pact, EMU would - in my opinion - suffer 
from a “design flaw.”  
Let me conclude with expressing my conviction that the enlargement of the European Union and the 
economic and monetary integration of the acceding countries will not only strengthen the role of the 
European  Union  as  a  global  player  in  the  long  term,  but  also  make  a  sustainable  contribution  to 
stability, peace and welfare in Europe.  
As this is the last East-West Conference before the upcoming EU enlargement, we wanted to take this 
opportunity to mark this historical event with a reception welcoming the new members. I hope you will 
be pleasantly surprised by what we have planned for tonight, but let me, at this stage, only tell you this 
much: we will all have a chance to learn more about each other’s countries, cultures and institutions.  
Before I hand over the floor to IMF Managing Director Horst Köhler, let me conclude by welcoming you 
once again to Vienna and wishing you a fruitful, stimulating and successful conference.  
BIS Review 48/2003 
 3
