Ewart S Williams: The role of credit unions in the emerging financial landscape 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at a Breakfast 
Seminar  hosted  by  CUNA  Mutual  Group/CUNA  Caribbean  and  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Unit  Trust 
Corporation, Port of Spain, 6 November 2003. 
 Thanks  for  inviting  me.  Let  me  give  my  belated  congratulations  to  you  Mr.  Chairman  on  your 
celebration  of  Credit  Union  month  in  October.  I  read  with  interest  the  many  accolades  that  you 
received,  and  deservedly  so,  for  the sterling  contribution  that  the  credit  union movement  has  made 
towards encouraging the practice of thrift, self-help, and cooperation among its members and towards 
promoting the development of co-operative ideals. 
As I reviewed the history of the credit union movement in Trinidad and Tobago I could not help but be 
impressed by the resilience of the movement and its ability to survive and prosper through good times 
and bad. 
I noted, for example, that the period of the first economic boom, between 1973 and 1983, was one of 
very rapid growth for the credit union movement reflecting the registration of new credit unions. The 
growth of credit union resources was flat in the late 1980’s and early 1990’s, a period of economic 
decline,  when  many  credit  unions  either  collapsed  or  were  merged.  In  1986,  the  Government 
introduced  tax  incentives  to  help  boost  savings  in  credit  unions  and  in  1993  a  Task  Force  was 
established  to  examine  the  conditions  of  some  specific  credit  unions  and  to  provide  proposals  for 
generally strengthening the sector. 
In recent years, the credit union industry has been going through further adaptations to cope with 
the changing financial environment. While there has been growth in the last few years, it has been 
lopsided  way.  Some  institutions  that  have  adapted  to  cope  with  the  new  market  reality  have 
prospered, while many of those that have remained in the traditional mould have languished. 
What is the picture today? 
According to the available data: 
• 
• 
We now have about 130 operating credit unions from about 400 in the early 1980s. 
Total assets of the movement are now estimated at around $3 billion which is a fairly sizable 
sum  and  makes  the  credit  union  movement  a  very  important  part  of  the  overall  financial 
system. 
Interestingly,  the  6  largest  credit  unions,  with  assets  from  about  $200  million  up  to  about 
$750 million accounts for 50 percent of total credit union assets and the largest 17 account 
for three quarters of the industry assets. 
The smaller institutions raise resources from shares and savings deposits and make small 
loans  for  consumer  purposes;  these  are  essentially  run  as  co-operative  societies  and  are 
based on principles of volunteerism. 
  In the case of the large credit unions, we have a new paradigm involving products and services more 
readily associated with the commercial banks. 
These  larger  credit  unions,  in  addition  to  shares  and  savings  deposits,  now  offer  certificates  of 
deposits,  make  mortgage  and  commercial  loans,  provide  credit  and  debit  cards  to  be  used  in 
automatic teller machines and also provide cambio and travel agency services. 
The expansion of the credit union sector over the last 35 years has taken place in the absence of an 
appropriate  legislative  framework.  As  you  know,  the  present  legislation,  covering  the  credit  union 
movement {The Co-operative Society Act} dates back to 1971 and does not address prudential issues. 
In an attempt to fill this gap, the Co-operative Credit Union League, over the past few years, has been 
promoting a system of prudential management based on adherence to the “PEARLS” system, which 
provides guidelines for capital adequacy, liquidity and non-performing loans. 
The League’s efforts have had mixed results. The preliminary data that I have been able to muster 
suggests: 
(i) 
that about 40 percent of the operating unions maintain a liquidity ratio below the 10 percent 
suggested in the PEARLS system; 
that non-performing loans in the industry average a relatively high 20 percent; 
that  about  only  40  percent  of  operating  credit  unions  maintain  a  capital  adequacy  ratio  of 
under 10 percent, which is the recommended ratio. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The  need  for  the  stricter  regulation  of  credit  unions  was  recognised  several  years  ago.  Indeed  the 
1993 Task Force Report recommended amendments to the Co-operative Act: 
(i) 
to provide for the regulation and supervision of credit unions by a new supervisory agency 
responsible to the Minister of Finance; 
to give the regulator power to make regulations with respect to prudential criteria for credit 
unions; 
to  grant  full  enforcement  powers  which  should  include  the  removal  of  directors  and  the 
suspension of a license to operate. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Later  in  1996,  an  IDB  project  implemented  with  participation  of  the  Credit  Union  League  initiated  a 
review  of  the  regulatory  framework  and  established  the  Credit  Union  Supervisory  Unit  within  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  with  responsibility  for  the  development  and  implementation  of  a  system  of 
surveillance for credit unions. It is not clear what is the status of the new draft legislation which was 
prepared in the context of the project. 
From my vantage point, and let me emphasise that these are my views, and not official government 
policy. 
The sheer volume of resources being intermediated by the credit unions as well as the rapid changes 
taking place in the more aggressive segments of the sector underscore the critical need for stricter 
regulation to protect the funds of their members and more generally to help in maintaining the 
soundness of the financial system. The lower interest rate environment which is promoting greater 
competition within the financial sector, in my opinion, adds to the urgency for tighter regulations. 
But getting the right regulatory framework for the credit union is not that easy. 
It is indeed ironic that the main strengths of credit unions constitute unique challenges for supervision 
and regulation. For example, in traditional credit unions there is a collective ownership by all members, 
who technically have equal voting rights, regardless of the size of their monetary investment. Control is 
therefore not legally vested in any one person or group of persons by virtue of their having more at 
stake. All this is particularly true for the smaller community or employment-based credit unions. Larger 
credit unions tend to operate with shares and savings of their members as well as from the general 
public, in much the same way as banks or non-banks. 
This dichotomy, in my personal opinion, makes a strong case for a two-tier regulatory system of the 
type that is common in several Latin American countries. 
In  the  typical  Latin  American  system  one  tier of  the  regulatory regime  pertains  to  the small  “closed 
type”  credit  unions  that  continue  to  rely  on  volunteers  to  manage  and  run  the  operations  and  that 
provide traditional basic services. The other regulatory tier pertains to the “more open credit unions” 
which have a more diversified resource base and are involved in a wide range of services, basically 
operating like banks. 
In applying this model to Trinidad and Tobago, I could envisage a regulatory regime for these closed-
type operations that would continue to be based on prudential criteria although these should be less 
rigid.  For  instance,  these  small  credit  unions  should  be  required  to  have  some  minimum  capital 
requirements (but this should be ‘real’ capital devoted solely to meeting losses). 
Even  these  small  credit  unions  should  continue  to  meet  modest  liquidity  ratios  and  should  be 
required  to  make  provisions  for  delinquent  loans.  Very  importantly,  they  should  be  required  to 
submit information about their operations at least on a quarterly basis and should be subject to closer 
monitoring if they do not meet the specified standards. 
These small credit unions could be monitored and supervised by a strengthened unit in the Ministry of 
Co-operatives. 
In  my  view,  the  larger  “open-style”  credit  unions  should  in  fact  be  subject  to  a  regulatory 
regime  pretty  similar  to  that which  obtains  for  the  banks  and  non-banks.  This  more  stringent 
regime should place emphasis on good governance and risk management structures. 
For instance, their supervisory regime should clearly define and distinguish between the roles of the 
Board  of  Directors  and  Management,  and  should  require  that  Directors  assume  a  purely  oversight 
function to ensure that the appropriate risk-management policies are in place. 
Because  of  the  diversity  of  services  being  offered  these  larger  credit  unions  should  be  required  to 
have professional management that meet fit and proper criteria and possess the technical ability to 
conduct credit risk analysis. They should be subject to higher levels of capital adequacy, liquidity, loan 
loss  provisions  and  more  ambitious  delinquency  standards.  They  should  operate  under  clear  rules 
establishing ethical standards of behaviour and controls for insider loans to avoid conflict of interest. 
For convenience these larger credit unions could be, in the first round, supervised from the Ministry of 
Finance pending consideration of a broader Financial Supervisory Authority with responsibility for the 
supervision of all financial institutions. 
Because of the unavailability of data I am unable to say whether any of the large credit unions would 
be  able  to  meet  the  current  standards  that  have  been  established  in  the  banking  and  non-banking 
sector. 
For the record, the delinquency ratio for commercial banks now averages around 3 to 4 percent; and 
for  non-banks  only  slightly  higher.  While  the  stationary  minimum  capital  ratio  for  commercial  and 
non-banks is 8 percent, the actual capital ratio for banks now averages about 20 percent and is even 
higher for non-banks. The liquidity ratio currently averages about 30 percent for banks and about 35 to 
40 percent for non-banks. 
I recognise that this is a very ambitious proposal which may not find favour with some current industry 
players  who  would  argue  that  they  have  been  operating  successfully  without  strict  regulation.  My 
point is that these large credit unions are now intermediating significant resources and assuming 
sizable risks and their operations can have contagion effects on the rest of the financial system. 
Let  me  make  a  few  general  observations  on  some  of  the  issues  that  credit  unions  would  need  to 
grapple with in the context of Trinidad and Tobago’s march to developed-country status. 
There is an issue, for instance, whether credit unions should not help their members become not only 
savers  but  investors  -  for  instance  through  pooling  resources  for  investment  in  equities  or  in  the 
government fixed income securities. Of course, some of these investments carry risks and members 
would need to be advised and be agreeable to such investments. 
There is clearly the issue about the role of credit unions in providing credit to small and medium sized 
industries,  an  area  which  will  be  critical  to  the  achievement  of  sustained  growth  in  employment  in 
Trinidad and Tobago. There is an argument that given the movement’s connection with the small man 
and with groups that have been deprived access to normal banking services, the entry of credit unions 
into micro finance is a logical and natural step. 
And  honestly,  I  believe  that  a  way  can  be  found  to  involve  the  credit  union  movement  in  this  area 
without incurring excessive risks. 
The fact of the matter is that, in general, lending to many small and medium sized enterprises carry 
higher transactions cost and greater risks and inadequate security. In many countries in Latin America 
and  Asia,  governments  have  intervened  to  mitigate  these  risks  through  credit  guarantee  schemes. 
Such  schemes seek  to help  overcome  the problem  of  loan applicants who  have  good projects, are 
creditworthy  but  cannot  offer  adequate  collateral  to  satisfy  normal  requirements  of  the  lending 
institutions. 
The objective of the guaranteed scheme, which could be financed by government with grants and low 
cost loans from multi-lateral agencies, is to share the risks with the lending institution (in this case, the 
credit unions) so that if the borrower defaults the lender will be compensated for all or part of the loss 
involved. 
In  our  case  I  can  envisage  a  partnership  between  institutions  like  NEDCO  and  the  Business 
Development  Corporation,  providing  the  technical  assistance,  project  management  and  consultancy 
services, on the one hand, with resources from the credit union movement backed up by government 
credit guarantees on the other. There are a number of best practice arrangements to reduce the risks 
of abuse of these subsidised arrangements, but perhaps that’s a discussion for another time. 
I would like to end with the following concluding remarks: 
Firstly, because the credit union movement is now intermediating significant financial resources and 
assuming greater risks, it would have to contend with higher regulatory standards. 
Secondly,  the  credit  union  movement  needs  to  pay  greater  attention  to  improving  its  systems  for 
co-operative governance, risk management and information disclosure. 
Thirdly, the movement needs to expand the range of investment opportunities that are available to its 
membership if it is to maintain a competitive position in the current financial market place. 
Fourthly, developing strategic alliances with institutions involved in the provision of financial services to 
small and medium sized enterprises should be a goal that the credit union movement should embrace. 
Finally,  let  me  congratulate  Cuna  Mutual  Group  on  its  sterling  contribution  to  the  credit  union 
movement in Trinidad and Tobago and let me wish this new initiative and this new partnership all the 
best. 
