David Dodge: Global challenges, Canadian opportunities 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Office  for  Partnerships  for 
Advanced Skills Annual Visionary Seminar, Ottawa, Ontario, 17 November 2003.  
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Let me begin by congratulating OPAS for its work in advancing 
partnerships between industry and universities. These partnerships will be increasingly important for 
Canada in the years ahead. Let me also say how honoured I am to receive the OPAS Visionary Award 
for 2003. When I look at the list of distinguished business leaders who have received this award in the 
past  -  Charles  Baillie  and  John  Cleghorn,  Ted  Rogers  and  Mike  Lazaridis,  John  Sheridan  and 
Jean Monty - I must say that I am absolutely delighted to join them. 
It’s a particular pleasure to receive this award since it marks the first time that it is being given to a 
person who has made a career in the public sector. This award recognizes that the public sector has 
an important role to play in promoting the economic health of a country. Far too often, people think that 
the private sector is solely responsible for creating wealth, and that the best the public sector can do is 
to redistribute that wealth. The reality is far more complex. That’s what I want to talk about today: how 
those complexities give rise not only to challenges, but also to opportunities. In particular, I want to talk 
about  the  challenges  posed  by  the  globalization  of  the  world  economy,  and  how  Canadians  in  the 
public and private sectors can take advantage of the opportunities that the global economy presents. 
It  is  certainly  nothing  new  to  say  that  economies  have  become increasingly globalized.  In  his  1962 
book,  The  Gutenberg  Galaxy,  Marshall  McLuhan  observed  that  the  electronic  mass  media  were 
collapsing time and space barriers. This enabled people to communicate on a global scale. He coined 
the term “global village” to describe this change. 
Of  course,  even  McLuhan  couldn’t  have  foreseen  the  developments  in  transportation  and 
communications that have taken place over the four decades since his book was published. These 
developments have converted McLuhan’s abstract concept into reality.  
Satellite  technology  gives  us  live  broadcasts  from  anywhere  in  the  world.  Ideas  are  available 
simultaneously to those who have access to the Internet - and that number continues to grow at an 
exponential rate. As I stand here today, I can talk to, and hear from, thousands of people across the 
country at the same time. More to the point, these technological advances have allowed markets, not 
just of goods and services, but also of ideas, to expand as never before.  
Think  of  technology  as  the  enabler  of  so  many  of  the  trends  leading  towards  globalization. 
Technological  advances  have  slashed  the  cost  and  the  time  it  takes  to  reach  across  borders.  But 
whether  that  turns  out  to  be  good  or  bad  depends  on  all  of  us  here  today.  For  while  technology 
enables us to make huge progress, it does not guarantee that this progress will occur.  
We are all working to understand the impact of globalization on economic and social development. We 
still have a lot to learn. But one thing is clear: the societies that have progressed the furthest in the last 
century are those that have embraced the opportunities that stem from being open and adaptive. 
As I look around the world, I see a number of societies that are seizing these opportunities for the 
good. What I also see is that those societies that are open both to ideas and to economic competition 
from  abroad  are  societies  that  are  making  the  most  progress  in  improving  the  well-being  of  their 
citizens.  
The  technological  advances  that  created  McLuhan’s  global  village  will  continue.  While  the  pace  of 
evolution  may  speed  up  or  slow  down,  the  world  economy  seems  destined  to  become  ever  more 
global  in  nature.  The question  is  then,  What  challenges  and opportunities will  this  present?  Let  me 
raise three points, which can serve as the basis for our discussion later. 
Thinking and Acting Globally 
The first is the importance of having a global point of view. The old adage tells us to “think globally and 
act locally.” But we should really think and act globally.  
BIS Review 50/2003 
 1
Let me put that idea in more concrete terms. During the 1980s and 1990s, free-trade agreements with 
the  United  States and Mexico  focused Canada’s  attention  on  the  opportunities  south  of  the  border. 
Individual Canadians and businesses have been making the tough adjustments that are necessary to 
face increased competition and to take advantage of new opportunities. While keeping that continental 
focus, it is now important that we broaden our sights and focus on opportunities that are opening up in 
the rest of the world.  
In  a  very  real  sense,  the  rest  of  the  world  is  becoming  part  of  our  world.  With  rising  incomes, 
foreigners are acquiring a taste for Canadian products and ideas. At the same time, our tastes and 
interests are becoming more international. We’re all shopping in the same global village market - for 
goods, for services, and for ideas.  
Still, this is a large planet with a wide variety of cultures, each with its own perspective and ways of 
doing things. We Canadians need to continue to broaden our horizons, and to think of ourselves as 
citizens of that world. That means getting as much global exposure as we can.  
Canadians are fortunate to have much of the world’s diversity reflected across our country at large, 
and in our universities. Six continents’ worth of culture can be found here in one country, sometimes in 
one city. That diversity allows for mutual enrichment that benefits us all. It is important for those from 
different  backgrounds  to  learn  about  the  strengths  and  rich  traditions  of  this  country.  It  is  equally 
important that those of us who were born here, into families with deep roots in Canada, to learn from 
the backgrounds and cultures of those who come from other continents. By listening to each other, we 
learn how to listen to the world. By speaking to each other, we learn how to speak to the world. That 
two-way learning adds a new dimension to the metaphor of the Canadian mosaic - the colours in the 
mosaic remain distinct, but they blend together to create a vibrant and dynamic picture.  
In short, Canada’s diversity is a real strength, and it will fall to you, the next generation of leaders, to 
ensure that we use this strength to our advantage. So that’s the first message I have: think globally, 
act globally, and experience the world’s diversity. 
The Importance of Finance 
During my career, I have spent a lot of time working with the financial sector in one way or another. 
From a global perspective, I have seen how people’s lives can be made better when countries choose 
to  open  their  economy  to  outside  investment.  So  let  me  now  take  a  few  minutes  to  talk  about  my 
second  point  -  the  opportunities  that  lie  within  the  financial  sector,  in  the  context  of  increased 
openness and globalization.  
Nowhere  have  the  advances  in  communication  and  information  technologies  had  a  greater  impact 
than in the financial sector. Technological advances and increased openness have led to greater flows 
of capital and new methods of financing development. Capital flows have become global, as investors 
look across national boundaries for the best opportunities for their savings. This has benefited not only 
countries that receive investment, but also allowed our aging society to generate higher returns on its 
savings, both private and public. 
Of course, a country that truly embraces openness in its markets leaves itself open to increased risks. 
We  have  all  seen  what  can  happen  when  investment  flows  into  countries  with  unreliable  or 
underdeveloped  financial  sectors.  We  have  also  seen  what  can  happen  when  investors  send  large 
capital flows abroad without doing their due diligence first. So seizing the opportunities that have come 
from  being  more  open  has  required  more  effective  risk  management.  For  savings  to  flow  smoothly 
around  the  world,  the  financial  sector  has  had  to  evolve,  inventing  new  instruments  that  facilitate 
appropriate investments. These trends are likely to continue, and those countries that have financial 
sectors that can deliver services efficiently, at home and abroad, will have an important advantage. 
But it is not only the private sector that has made advances in risk management. International financial 
institutions, such as the International Monetary  Fund, have made significant strides in developing a 
more  robust  international  financial  architecture.  And  co-operation  among  governments  and  central 
banks  has  played  an  important  part,  whether  within  the  G-7,  the  G-20,  or  the  several  specialized 
groups that have emerged, such as the Financial Stability Forum. 
These efforts have paid off. Despite several dramatic events that might have rocked financial systems 
worldwide, the work done by these groups has led to the development of ways to mitigate shocks that, 
in previous decades, would have been very destructive.  
2 
 BIS Review 50/2003
But obviously, huge challenges remain both for private financial institutions and for the public sector - 
nationally  and  internationally.  The  public  sector  in  every  country  must  take  the  necessary  steps  to 
ensure  that  its  financial  sector  is  appropriately  regulated.  And  countries  need  to  continue  to  work 
together to develop and implement best practices to promote financial stability. Once again, with the 
trend towards increasing globalization, the importance of the financial sector and the need to ensure 
that it is appropriately regulated will become even greater. 
So that’s my second message - recognize the opportunities that the world of finance offers not just in 
the private sector, but in the public sector as well. That leads me to my third point, which is the role of 
the public sector.  
The Role of the Public Sector 
As I said earlier, there is a popular but simplistic view that it is the private sector’s job alone to create 
wealth,  and  that  the  most  the  public  sector  should  do  is  to  make  minimal  attempts  at  income 
redistribution. Such a view grossly underestimates the nature and the scope of the public sector’s role 
in promoting a country’s economic health. It ignores history, which clearly shows that those societies 
that  have  done  the  most  to  improve  the  economic  well-being  of  their  citizens  are  those  where  the 
public sector has provided the right social climate for the dynamism and creativity of individuals and 
businesses to thrive.  
In practice, this means that those working in government must have the right incentives to provide the 
appropriate  framework  -  one  that  facilitates  higher  productivity  and  innovation  in  the  private  sector. 
The flip side of the coin is that we should also have the right incentives for the private sector to work 
towards enhancing the public good and the productivity of collective action by governments.  
The  bottom  line  is  that  we  cannot  afford  to  have  the  private  and  public  sectors  operating  as  two 
solitudes. To work efficiently, individuals and businesses need a well-functioning public sector and the 
appropriate  framework  that  provides  the  right  incentives.  The  public  sector  has  a  responsibility  to 
understand  how  businesses  and  individuals  work  in  order  to  provide  the  appropriate  setting  and 
support. While this applies to all parts of the public sector, it is perhaps most critical for those who are 
responsible for the country’s economic and financial framework - including us at the Bank of Canada.  
Creating and maintaining this framework, in the context of a changing global environment, will be a 
daunting challenge indeed. Part of that challenge will come from developing a public policy framework 
that has two dimensions. First, it must have enough consistency with the rest of the world so that we 
remain open to competition and to the flow of ideas from abroad. Second, our policy framework must 
create unique strengths for Canada so that our public sector is a source of competitive advantage and 
does not detract from our other advantages.  
What does this mean for students in terms of opportunities for tomorrow? It means that you should be 
thinking  of  careers  that  combine  public  and  private  sector  experience,  as  well  as  academic.  The 
lessons you learn in one place will give you a greater ability to work and contribute elsewhere. And this 
diversity of experience will give you a set of skills that you will find are in great demand.  
And it really doesn’t matter where you begin. For example, if you want to make a real contribution as 
an academic, some experience in either the private or the public sector will be tremendously important 
in  letting  you  bring more  to  the  table as  a  teacher. In  the  private  sector,  academic  or  public  sector 
experience will let you view the world strategically, which is difficult if your experience is confined to 
just one firm or industry. And if you want to contribute in the public sector, as I have already said, it is 
extraordinarily  important  to  have  private  sector  experience  so  that  you  can  better  understand  how 
business functions. Why? Because, in the end, public policies must foster the effective and efficient 
delivery  of  public  goods  and  provide  the  incentives  to  encourage  private  activities  that  will  create 
positive outcomes for the benefit of everyone.  
Developing such policies is much easier said than done. But in the last 15 years, we in Canada have 
made  considerable  progress  in  our  macroeconomic  policies.  The  challenge  in  the  future  will  be  to 
maintain  that  progress  and  to  make  comparable  progress  in  microeconomic  policies.  Progress  will 
need to come from the federal, provincial, and municipal levels of government, in such diverse areas 
as 
infrastructure 
investments. This is where challenges lie, but it is also where opportunities present themselves. 
law,  health,  environment,  and 
labour  market  policies, 
intellectual  property 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 3
Conclusion 
Having  mentioned  opportunities,  let  me  close  by  saying  a  few  words  about  the  opportunities  for 
Canada and young Canadians in the years ahead.  
I  talked  earlier  about  the  great  advantage  of  Canada’s  cultural  mosaic.  In  a  globalized  world,  this 
provides a real opportunity because it gives us the ability to understand what is going on elsewhere on 
the  planet,  while  at  the  same  time  drawing  on  the  real  strengths  we  have  in  terms  of  our  unique 
Canadian social and economic culture.  
When I travel abroad, I am always amazed by how welcoming foreign businesses and public entities 
are  towards  Canadian  participation.  At  the  same  time,  I  am  also  amazed  by  how  little  effort  we 
sometimes  make  to  take  advantage  of  this  good  will.  As  young  people,  you  are  going  to  have  to 
capitalize on these opportunities. 
So  I  hope  that  you will  take  my  three messages  to  heart:  have a  global perspective,  recognize  the 
importance of the financial sector, and understand the crucial role of the public sector. With the global 
economy continuing to evolve, it will become increasingly important to act on these ideas, no matter 
where your career path leads you. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2003
