R Basant Roi: Present challenges of monetary policy in Mauritius  
Address  by  Mr  R  Basant  Roi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  annual  dinner  with  major 
economic stakeholders, Sugar Beach Resort, 28 November 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen  
Good evening  
I am pleased to welcome you to the Bank of Mauritius Annual Dinner.  
Right  from  the  year  I  set  the  tradition  of  holding  an  annual  dinner  with  the  major  economic 
stakeholders in the country I focused mostly on regulatory and supervisory issues in my addresses. 
Intentionally, I chose certain regulatory and supervisory issues as the leading themes of my addresses 
for reasons that I strongly believe should be clearer by now.  
Tonight  I  shall  briefly  outline  the  present  challenges  of  our  monetary  policy  in  the  context  of  an 
external  environment  characterized  by  uncertainties.  Before  I  proceed  with  the  main  theme  of  my 
address  let  me  reiterate  a  few  remarks  I  made  in  the  post  February  2003  months  this  year.  The 
perceptions that emerged in the wake of the discovery of a fraud at the Mauritius Commercial Bank 
(MCB)  inevitably  make  it  compelling  that  I  should  re-emphasize  some  of  the  remarks.  The  guiding 
principle of any regulatory and supervisory authority in any economic and financial system is to first 
and foremost attempt to save troubled financial institutions. The legal frameworks of regulatory and 
supervisory  authorities  are  designed  to promote  financial  stability  rather  than  to  jeopardize financial 
stability. This is what is envisioned in the Bank of Mauritius and the Banking Acts. The Acts are an 
instrument  that  empowers  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to  promote  and  sustain  monetary  and  financial 
stability. Regulatory and supervisory authorities the world over do not use any of the provisions of their 
laws  to  defeat  the  very  objective  of  the  laws.  Arbitrary  decisions  motivated  by  emotional  or  even 
personal  considerations  should  be  set  aside  in  favour  of  a  genuinely  professional  approach  of 
sustaining  the  soundness  of  banks  in  situations  similar  to  the  one  the  Mauritius  Commercial  Bank 
found itself in. The regulatory and supervisory authority cannot but exercise its independence of mind. 
Without being presumptuous the MCB/NPF case was handled by the Bank of Mauritius in a manner 
that best serves the interests of our financial sector and of our economy. I should like to re-underline 
that supervision of banks is control and procedure oriented and not transaction oriented. Viewed in the 
light of determined steps taken by the MCB in the realm of risk management along with a number of 
other prudential measures taken in the months after the discovery of the fraud, the MCB/NPF case is 
expected to be over soon as far as the Bank of Mauritius is concerned. Regulatory issues relating to 
the  Worldcom  and  Enron  scandals  in the  US were  dealt with  and settled within  a  few  months.  Our 
banking  industry  is  blessed  in  having  to  surmount  only  one  tyranny:  adverse publicity  motivated  by 
considerations that go beyond acceptable norms of conduct. The Bank of Mauritius will ensure that the 
steps taken by the MCB to fully revamp its internal controls and procedures are carried through to the 
finish  and  that  internal  controls  are  appropriately  exercised  and  procedures  are  strictly  followed. 
Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  MCB/NPF  episode,  despite  the  traumas  associated  with  it,  serves  a  good 
lesson to our financial industry.  
Having said that let me turn to the main theme of my address tonight. As I explained in April last at a 
Seminar  a  full  appreciation  of  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  stance  requires  a  perspective  stretching 
beyond a few months or even beyond a single year. A few months or even a year is rather a short time 
to really gauge what monetary policies of central banks can accomplish on a lasting basis. Monetary 
policy  tends  to  impact  on  economies  with  a  long  and  variable  lag.  Unforeseen  events  having 
undesirable  consequences  for  economies  can  take  place  in  minutes.  Predictability  of  the  course  of 
monetary policy is disturbed in such circumstances.  
Policies in the post World War II were quite predictable. They were predictable because of the steady 
economic  performance  of  the  leading  economies  of the  world  in  the context  of  a remarkably  stable 
international socio-political and economic and financial environment. Central banks and governments 
all over the world enjoyed full sovereignty in policy making. In sharp contrast, the international socio-
political  and  economic  context  is  far  from  being  that  predictable  today.  Additionally,  in  the  wake  of 
financial  liberalization  across  the  world,  with  an  estimated  US$1.2  trillion  being  traded  daily,  capital 
moves in and out of countries with a remarkable ease and at a speed never witnessed before. The 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 1
monetary policy stance of one country affects the monetary policy of another and in this process part 
of  our  sovereignty  in  monetary  policy-making  is  thus  lost.  Central  bankers  necessarily  have  to 
constantly watch their radar screens and determine for themselves how to steer their monetary policy 
in the best interest of their economies. “The manner in which central bankers must operate can be 
compared to the decisions people make whenever they cross the street. If there is no traffic, there is 
little risk, and pedestrians don’t need to worry about the speed with which they cross the street. But if 
the road is heavy with fast moving traffic, it’s a different story, and safety demands that pedestrians 
wait until they are confident they can make it to the other side. The same holds true for central bank 
governors.”  
The introduction of the Euro, the September 11 attacks that impacted seriously on the US economy 
which  is  an  importer  of  the  last  resort,  the  ever  growing  instability  in  the  Middle  East,  the 
disagreements over trade policies and tendencies for countries to resort to protectionist measures in 
one  form  or  the  other,  volatility  in  the  exchange  rates  of  major  currencies  in  the  international 
exchanges  as  well  as  the  weak  performance  of  most  economies  across  the  world  have  not  made 
monetary policy making here and abroad a plain sailing endeavour. Successive years of uncertainties 
intensified by events beyond the control of central banks have increasingly blurred visibility. Central 
banks  have  to  constantly  chart  a  safe  way  forward  in  this  world  of  unexpected  twists  and  turns  of 
events.  
Five years ago, substantial capital outflows triggered by a loss of confidence in the rupee had brought 
down the foreign reserves of the Bank of Mauritius to unacceptable levels. The rapid weakening of the 
Euro  in  the  international  exchanges  following  its  introduction  in  January  1999  translated  into  a 
significant appreciation of the rupee. And that appreciation of the rupee was a quick reversal of the 
preceding three years of rapid depreciation of the rupee. The mood of pessimism that emerged in the 
wake of the September 11 attacks brought down the world economy to the throes of deflation. Central 
banks around the world effected a series of cuts in interest rates in a bid to revitalize their respective 
economies.  Notwithstanding  the  policies  adopted  by  central  banks,  the  leading  world  economies 
entered a period of balance sheet recession in recent years. In the wake of drastic fall in equity prices, 
many companies the world over could no longer afford to maximize profits. They chose to restructure 
their  balance  sheets  for  corporate  governance  so  demanded.  However,  the  household  sector 
continued to save money and the business community almost stopped borrowing money even at low 
rates of interest. This is a peculiar situation or rather a fallacy of composition problem that exacerbated 
the recessionary trend in the world economy. Monetary policy becomes much less effective when only 
few  companies  are  willing  to  borrow  in  this  type  of  a  recession.  Fiscal  policy  takes  over  as  an 
absolutely important instrument to boost up aggregate demand as well as to keep money supply from 
shrinking.  
In  such  troubled  waters  the  navigational  hazard  is  impaired  visibility,  which  is  quite  often  the  case. 
Monetary policy judgments become a question of balancing risks more so in a small open economy 
like  ours  with  all  its  vulnerabilities.  Observers  from  outside  the  walls  of  the  central  banks  may  find 
monetary policy making a mechanical process as described in textbooks hardly realizing that in such 
circumstances policy decisions are more about weighing probabilities. This is an area in policy making 
where even thinking people do differ in the judgments regarding the course of policy actions. I cannot 
claim  divine  insight.  Nor  do  I  think  anyone  of  us  here  may  claim  having  been  gifted  with  such  an 
insight. However, it would be surprising if all of us always agreed in the judgments. When everyone 
agrees with each other all the time no one is really thinking enough. Criticisms of the Bank of Mauritius 
policy stance are profoundly appreciated so long as the criticisms are educated criticisms.  
The hazard posed by troubled waters abroad and the third party threat to the competitiveness of our 
Export Processing Zone has rendered the conduct of our monetary policy quite a puzzling exercise. 
Basically,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  recent  years  has  aimed  at  bringing  down  the  rate  of 
inflation. The informal inflation targeting approach of monetary policy making has paid good dividends. 
The  average  inflation  rate  in  the  first  five  years  of  the  1990s  was  6.8  per  cent,  6.1  per  cent  in  the 
second half of the 1990s and 5.2 per cent in the last five years. For the current year the rate of inflation 
is forecast at close to 4 per cent. Clearly, the tendency is for the rate of inflation to either post a further 
marginal decline or to stay at the current rate of around 4 per cent. That excessive monetary tightening 
could  adversely  affect  growth  performance  of  our  economy  is  a  consideration  that  is  well  borne  in 
mind.  
The successive cuts in interest rate like in several other countries have induced borrowings but not to 
the desired extent. The pace of bank credit expansion is currently subdued. Some corporate bodies 
are borrowing in foreign currencies substituting for borrowings in rupees. While the rates of interest on 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2003
foreign borrowings are lower compared to the rates of interest charged by local banks, borrowers need 
to be mindful of the risks involved. Risks associated with external borrowings could turn out to be high. 
With the upside risk of inflation being minimal in the foreseeable and the need for re-aligning interest 
rate parity being felt in order to prevent a built up of short-term foreign liabilities, the Bank of Mauritius 
effected a further cut in the rate of interest yesterday.  
Against  a  backdrop  of  four  successive  years  of  surpluses  recorded  in  the  current  account  of  our 
balance  of  payments  and  less  than  buoyant  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy,  the  Bank  faces  a 
policy  dilemma.  The  market  is  flushed  with  liquidity  for  quite  sometime.  Excess  supply  of  foreign 
exchange  has  given  rise  to  a  situation  of  excess  rupee  liquidity.  In  the  last  two  years  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius  purchased  foreign  currencies  on  the  domestic  market  for  an  amount  equivalent  to  over 
US$500  million.  The  rupee  counterpart  of  the  purchases  amounted  to  around  Rs14  billion  that  has 
ultimately  landed  in  the  balance  sheet  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  as  well  as  in  the  balance  sheet  of 
Government. The interest burden on this rupee counterpart of the foreign currencies purchased by the 
Bank  is  indeed  heavy.  To  what  extent  the  Bank  can  keep  buying  foreign  currencies  on  the  market 
remains a complex policy question should the considered view that the current exchange rate level 
have to be maintained.  
Given the volatility of exchange rates on the international foreign exchange markets should we take 
the exchange rate of the rupee as a given price to us ignoring all considerations regarding domestic 
economic fundamentals? Economics textbooks teach us that in a market economy, the invisible hands 
of the market promote economic efficiency. Do we systematically take what the international financial 
markets decide as given to us despite the common belief that the invisible hands of the market often 
suffer  from  arthritis?  Sometime  back  a  Council  member  of  the  European  Central  Bank  likened  the 
behaviour of currency markets to herds that all ran in the same direction. He had this to say, “I have 
met a lot of sheep who know they are running in the wrong direction. But they only want to run in the 
opposite  direction  if  they  are  certain  the  rest  of  the  herd  will  follow.”  The  problem  is  how  best  the 
determination of the exchange rate of the rupee in our foreign exchange market reconciles domestic 
economic fundamentals with what the international financial markets dictate to us. The Bank’s policy 
concern  is  about  the  need  for  stemming  excessive  foreign  exchange  inflows  while  sustaining  the 
current exchange rate levels. This is a policy dilemma not only specific to Mauritius but also to giant 
economies  like  China  and  others.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  but  only  one  instrument  to  strike  an 
appropriate balance and that is interest rate.  
In the last 30 months the Bank of Mauritius reduced interest rate on 9 occasions. The Lombard rate 
was reduced step by step from 12.5 per cent to 9.75 per cent. The Prime lending rates of banks fell 
from 11 per cent to 8.5 per cent; it will be further reduced as a result of yesterday’s cut. However, 
borrowers  with  default  risk  pay  a  premium  over  the  Prime  lending  rates  of  banks.  The  higher  the 
default risk the higher is the premium. Monetary policy has its limits; it cannot influence the premium in 
either direction. In this policy scenario savers face the vicissitudes of interest rate not only in Mauritius 
but the world over. Our household sector has traditionally placed its savings with banks. Risk averse 
investors, particularly those depending on their pensions for a living, have not had the benefit of risk-
free investment avenues. In December 1998 the Bank of Mauritius started with the sale of Treasury 
bills over-the-counter to individuals. Over Rs4 billion from more than 11,000 individual investors were 
soaked  up  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  Evidently  the  market  for  Government  debt  instruments  has  a 
growth potential in Mauritius.  
The sale of bills was subsequently suspended in view of our decision to develop a secondary market 
for  Government  debt  instruments.  There  have  been  many  requests  from  the  public  to  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius  for  the  regular  sales  of  Treasury  bills  over-the-counter.  Though  helpful  as  a  rudimentary 
method of conducting open market operations in a less developed market, the sale of Treasury bills 
over-the-counter by the Bank of Mauritius is not the way forward. We have decided that Treasury bills 
and over time other Government debt instruments be traded on the Stock Exchange of Mauritius. Our 
Stock Exchange has good operating characteristics for trading in Government papers. We expect the 
market to eventually develop into a bond market with an efficient system of good price discovery. The 
Bank of Mauritius, the Stock Exchange of Mauritius and Stockbrokers have made united efforts to start 
trading sometime in the next few weeks. The Stock Exchange of Mauritius and stockbrokers will come 
up with more details this December.  
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  a  keen  interest  in  the  development  of  the  market  for  Government  debt 
instruments.  Such  a  market  would  provide  the  Bank  with  a  good  medium  for  the  conduct  of  its 
monetary policy.  
BIS Review 55/2003 
 3
Ladies and gentlemen, my address tonight is based on a decision to make the monetary policy stance 
of the Bank of Mauritius increasingly more transparent. It is an adopted practice among central banks 
in most countries to move for transparency in the area of monetary policy making. I for one do really 
believe  in  it  and  will  move  further  in  this  direction.  Before  concluding  may  I  say  that  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius will live up to the challenges of monetary policy in the years ahead. In an uncertain external 
environment the Bank has so far charted the best possible course to support non-inflationary growth. 
The Bank will pursue the course in the same spirit.  
May I on behalf of the Board of Directors of the Bank of Mauritius and on my own behalf wish you and 
your family Merry Xmas and a Happy New Year.  
4 
 BIS Review 55/2003
