Klaus Liebscher: European Economic and Monetary Union - how to continue a 
success story? 
Speech by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the International Financial 
and Economic Forum, Vienna, 13 November 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
By  the  end  of  last  month,  the  successful  era  of  President  Willem  Duisenberg  at  the  helm  of  the 
European  Central  Bank  came  to  an  end.  At  the  beginning  of  this  month,  Mr.  Jean-Claude  Trichet 
became second President of the European Central Bank. Certainly, already this change at the top of 
the ECB provides a good opportunity for both looking back and looking into the future. Moreover, from 
a broader perspective, we are at the threshold of the historic event of the accession of five Central 
European and three Baltic countries as well as two Mediterranean islands to the European Union. 
When  eleven  EU  member  states  entered  the  third  stage  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  by 
adopting  the  common  currency,  the  euro,  on  the  1st  of  January  1999,  this  historic  step  was 
accomplished in such a smooth way that it is often simply taken as a matter of fact. However, looking 
back, it should be highlighted that there were not at all any problems, despite heightened uncertainties 
in the international financial markets following the turbulences in Asia, Russia and Brazil. Certainly, 
this was due to the fact that this step was indeed well-prepared. Moreover, the acting persons, and in 
particular  the  first  President  of  the  ECB,  Willem  Duisenberg,  whose  appointment  became  effective 
already as of June 1st 1998, had a strong commitment and merited high credibility. 
In the meantime, the ECB became a successfully working institution, the Eurosystem prepared and 
realized a great number of logistical, operational and organizational issues - highlighted by the smooth 
Cash Changeover in 2002. And the euro establishes itself as a leading world-currency. 
In 2002, the share of the euro in the settlement and invoicing of global exports of individual euro area 
countries to countries outside the euro area has risen to between 40% and 58%. Moreover, the euro 
has been well-received in the financial markets. In particular, a significant European corporate bond 
market has emerged. 
Further to its role in trade and financial markets, the euro has been used by many third countries as an 
important official reserve currency and as an anchor in their exchange rate regimes. 
The success of the Economic and Monetary Union in Europe can be measured not only by looking at 
all that what happened, but also by taking into account what could be avoided. Within the euro area, 
the  monetary  union  has  kept  member  countries  from  being  exposed  to  harmful  intra-European 
exchange rate tensions of the type that many countries used to suffer when external shocks occurred. 
It has become quite obvious that the countries constituting the euro area are protected from negative 
shocks  much  more  comprehensively  now  than  was  possible  under  past  regimes.  Indeed,  major 
external developments in recent years, like the bursting of the equity bubble, the repercussions of the 
terrorist attack on September 11, 2001 and the more recent substantial depreciation of the US dollar 
that  has  resulted  from  the  sizeable  imbalances  in  the  US  economy,  otherwise  might  have  led  to 
phases of instability within the European economy. Instead, they could be weathered within a stable 
framework. 
During the past five years, the Eurosystem successfully achieved its primary objective of maintaining 
price stability over the medium term. Despite some years of rising world energy prices combined with 
a  strong  appreciation  of  the  US  dollar,  the  Eurosystem  managed  to  achieve  low  inflation  and  low 
interest rates, which will ultimately stimulate further investment and contribute to sustainable growth in 
the euro area. Thereby, the euro will contribute to more balanced global growth and to more stability in 
the international financial system. 
The current  state  of  the European  Economic  and Monetary  Union,  its  “stability  architecture”  and  its 
developed rule-based “stability culture” truly represent a culminating point in the process of European 
integration.  Indeed,  over  the  last  half century,  Europe  has  followed  an  impressive  path  of  voluntary 
integration  of  nations,  so  far  unparalleled  in  history.  Economic  integration,  in  particular,  was 
successively  deepened.  Moreover,  in  parallel  to  the  process  of  deepening  the  integration,  the 
European Union was successively enlarged. At present, we are at the threshold of a further historic 
BIS Review 49/2003 
 1
enlargement of the European Union. The accession of ten new Member States, scheduled for May 1st 
2004, is of great political importance and also has non-negligible economic implications. 
Looking  into  the  future,  there  are  two  main  challenges  for  the  European  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union. The first challenge consists in strengthening the hitherto developed architecture and culture of 
stability, the second in successively integrating the incoming new Member States, and both challenges 
are certainly inter-linked. 
Regarding the “stability architecture”, the legal fundaments of the Economic and Monetary Union have 
to  be  transposed  appropriately  into  the  Treaty  establishing  a  Constitution  for  Europe,  in  order  to 
ensure  that  the  essence  of  the  stability  orientation  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  will  be 
preserved  and  the  institutional  position  of  the  Eurosystem  within  the  whole  European  Union  will  be 
better defined. 
At  least  as  important  as  the  architecture  is  the  way  how  the  authorities  live  in  the  well-established 
house of the Economic and Monetary Union. This is what I would like to term the “stability culture”. It is 
certainly a significant task for monetary policy makers to thoroughly honour their obligations to conduct 
a  stability-oriented  balanced  monetary  policy  for  the  whole  euro  area.  Moreover,  it  is  a  formidable 
challenge  for  fiscal  policy  to  maintain  a  culture  of  stability,  in  particular  in  times  of  slow  growth. 
Nonetheless, it is essential that all EU Member States remain credibly committed to and, thus, comply 
with the existing framework of democratically established self-imposed rules. The challenge consists in 
responding  positively  to  the  fiscal  consolidation  pressure  which  results  from  obeying  the  rules.  In 
addition,  acute  pressures  may  be  avoided  by  anticipating  longer-term  reform  measures  in  a  timely 
manner. Obviously, this is directly linked to the next major ingredient of a “stability culture”, namely 
structural reform. Finally, the required “culture of stability” comprises also a responsible attitude on the 
side  of  both  employers  and  employees,  in  particular  in  member  countries  where  central  wage 
bargaining prevails. 
Ladies  and Gentlemen,  I  am  convinced  indeed  that  the  solid  foundation  of  the  stability  architecture 
and  the  attitude  of  a  stability  culture  will  certainly  make  the  decisive  contribution  to  continue  the 
success of the EMU. 
Now, turning to the second main challenge for the Economic and Monetary Union, I would like to state 
very clearly that I highly welcome the acceding countries’ joining the European Union. After the fall of 
the  “iron  curtain”  14  years  ago,  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  have  undergone  an 
impressive  and  successful,  if  often  painful,  process  of  transformation  and  we  see  their  joining  our 
Union as a well-deserved and historic step. 
Upon entering the European Union, the new Member States also become members of the Economic 
and Monetary Union. While they do not take part in EMU to the full extent, as they cannot immediately 
join  the  euro  area,  they  are  already  required  to  observe  a  number  of  obligations  embodied  in  the 
stability  architecture  of  EMU:  They  generally  have  to  bring  into  line  their  economic  and  monetary 
policies with the overall goals of EMU. Their central banks will be represented in the General Council 
of the ESCB and take part in monetary policy coordination within the EU. The new Member States will 
participate in the coordination of economic policies and in the multilateral fiscal surveillance. Moreover, 
they  shall  treat  its  exchange-rate  policy  as  a  matter  of  common  interest,  as  the  functioning  of  the 
single  market  must  not  be  weakened  by  real  exchange-rate  misalignments  or  excessive  nominal 
exchange rate fluctuations. 
From my point of view, it is vital for the new member countries to perform catching-up real growth that 
permits their income-per-capita levels to gradually approach the average income level in the present 
EU member countries. 
Therefore,  economic  policies  of  the  new  member  countries  and  any  further  steps  in  monetary 
integration should be oriented towards achieving real and sustainable nominal convergence, as both 
convergence processes are complementary to each other and should be pursued in parallel. 
The speed of further monetary integration must not compromise its quality and there will be no uniform 
appropriate  speed,  due  to  differences  in  the  economic  situation  among  new  member  countries. 
Decisions have to be taken in accordance with the legal fundaments on a case-by-case basis, and, 
simultaneously,  equal  treatment  between  new  and  current  EU  member  states  must  be  ensured 
throughout the whole process. 
The acceding countries are in midst of an integration and catching-up process, and their equilibrium 
exchange rates will be subject to gradual changes and shocks over time. Therefore, any premature 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2003
euro  area  participation  has  to  be  avoided.  This  corresponds  to  the  economic  reasoning  behind  the 
Treaty provision that the Commission and the ECB have to examine the achievement of a high degree 
of sustainable convergence in their convergence reports to the Council before a decision will be taken 
on any new Member State’s adoption of the euro. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am sure that the participation of the new member countries in the stability 
architecture  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  from  their  accession  onwards  will  decisively 
contribute  to  enhancing  the  success  of  EMU  into  the  enlarged  European  Union.  Therefore,  I  am 
looking forward to this new era, which lies in front of us, characterized by a larger number of Member 
States and, in terms of ideas, by an even larger potential of human beings. For the Eurosystem, this 
new era will be personalized by the new president of the ECB, Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, whom I wish 
all the best, indeed. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 49/2003 
 3
