Klaus Liebscher: Global development and stability - the challenge for 
international institutions 
Speech  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the  Sozial-  und 
Wirtschaftswissenschaftliche Fakultät der Universität Innsbruck (CSI), Innsbruck, 21 November 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The organizers of today’s conference have presented me with a formidable challenge. The topic I am 
to cover is vast, and it is a challenge to delineate the essentials without neglecting the overall picture. 
As the Governor for the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for the Republic of Austria, let me focus my 
deliberations on the role especially the IMF plays in fostering global development and stability. This 
does not imply that other organizations or agencies are less relevant or minor. However, the IMF is 
tasked with providing the global public good of a stable international financial and monetary system, 
without which nation states around the world would not enjoy economic growth and rising standards of 
living. 
The main challenge international institutions face today is how to provide the best framework for the 
governance  of  globalization  such  that  this  process  becomes  a  win-win  situation,  in  which  all 
economies ultimately benefit through productivity and growth effects. This means that a level playing 
field  should  govern  the  international  division  of  labor  and  the  integration  of  national  economies  via 
trade in goods and services to minimize unfair cross-border competition. This also means that there 
have to be rules which regulate corporate and foreign direct investment as well as financial flows. In 
the political arena, the United Nations (UN) attempts to deliver global public goods, while the World 
Bank, the World Trade Organization, the International Labour Organisation, the Bank for International 
Settlements  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  are  charged  with  delivering  these  goods  in  the 
economic arena. 
I believe that the market is the best coordinating mechanism between free agents. However, there is 
also  no  doubt  that  market  forces  alone  are  not  sufficient.  That  is  why  we  need  an  international 
regulatory  framework  for  the  global  community,  with  recognized  and  clear  rules  and  with  effective 
institutions. This framework also has to ensure that global public goods such as international financial 
and  monetary  stability,  a  clean  environment  and  free  trade  are  defined  and  provided,  even  if  this 
requires nation states to give up part of their sovereignty. 
I do not want to imply that international institutions must endeavor to impose a global harmonization of 
economic  and  social  models.  The  market  economy  has  many  different  facets  and  competition  is 
healthy  for  the  world  economy.  International  institutions  help  preserve  such  social  and  cultural 
differences  by  making  all  countries  stakeholders  in  the  global  polity.  The  1930s  have  shown  that 
without multilateral cooperation, the lack of national self-responsibility and of international cooperation 
can have dramatic and devastating effects. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
A recent World Bank1 study gives clear evidence that opening markets and integrating them into the 
world economy has contributed to enormous economic progress for many developing countries over 
the past 20 years. Countries such as Brazil, China, India or Mexico have doubled their ratio of trade to 
income. Many of these countries have moved up the value chain from mere raw material exports to 
intermediate  and  even  to  finished  products  and  services.  The  average  annual  per  capita  economic 
growth has increased from 1% in the 1960s to 5% in the 1990s. Real per capita income in China has 
increased  more  than  fivefold  since  1978.  Hence  on  average,  the  global  income  distribution  has 
improved rather than deteriorated.2 Life expectancy, too, has improved: for example in China, it has 
                                                      
1  Subsequent  references  to  the  World  Bank  refer  to  “Globalization,  Growth  and  Poverty”,  A  World  Bank  Policy  Research 
Report, World Bank and Oxford University Press, 2002. 
2  Xavier Sala-i-Martin, The Disturbing “Rise” of Global Income Inequality, NBER Working Paper 8904, April 2002. 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 1
increased by nearly 30 years.3 Hovever, some countries, especially countries in Africa which have not 
been integrated into the global economy and have not been exposed to globalization, have been left 
behind. 
Dramatic and distressing poverty is still widespread. And I believe that one of the major challenges the 
international  community  as  well  as  international  institutions  face  is  the  eradication  of  poverty. 
According to a World Bank classification, nearly 1.2 billion people continue to live in absolute poverty, 
with  incomes  of  less  than  USD  1  a  day.  In  many  countries,  durable  economic  and  social  progress 
remains elusive. In most of these countries, trade has decreased and on average, economic growth 
has not kept pace with population growth. The situation in Africa is particularly dramatic because it is 
aggravated by the AIDS pandemic. The fight against global poverty is therefore the greatest challenge 
for stability and security in the 21st century. 
In  its  fight  against  poverty  the  international  community  is  following  a  strategy  based  on  three 
interrelated elements: 
First, the UN has set a specific objective with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) which have 
identified  eight  key  areas,  including  for  example  the  halving  of  absolute  poverty  or  the  reduction  of 
child mortality by two thirds by 2015. 
Second,  the  International  Conference  on  Financing  for  Development  held  in  Monterrey,  Mexico  in 
2002 called for a partnership for development. Industrialized countries offered more comprehensive 
support  while  developing  countries  agreed  to  greater  efforts  with  respect  to  good  governance  and 
ensuring a better investment climate. 
Third, the World Bank and the IMF have formulated the HIPC (Highly Indebted Poor Countries) and 
PRSP  (Poverty  Reduction  and  Strategy  Papers)  processes  as  operational  vehicles  to  achieve  the 
MDGs. Both initiatives are encouraging developing countries to develop their own long-term poverty 
reduction plans in the form of Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers. 
Experience4 over the past decades has shown that especially IMF programs are more successful if 
these  programs  are  owned  by  the  government  and  if  the  support  is  based  on  a  broad consultation 
process including government and civil society, who set the priorities for development. 
Almost simultaneously with the genesis of the enhanced HIPC, a further basic change in the Fund’s 
approach to low-income countries occurred. A review of the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, 
ESAF,  led  the  Fund  to  substantially  reframe  its  role  in  the  low-income  countries  by  launching  the 
PRSP  and  PRGF  (Poverty  Reduction  and  Growth  Facility)  approaches,  making  poverty  reduction, 
growth,  and  a  participatory  process  that  enhances  ownership  the  key  objectives  and  modalities  for 
program supported by the Fund’s concessional lending. While the PRGF relates strictly to the Fund’s 
role, the HIPC and the PRSP are initiatives that guide all cooperation with developing countries, not 
only that of the Fund, but also that of the World Bank and increasingly the entire community of donors. 
The Fund’s role in the developing countries is increasingly becoming an essential and integral part of 
the efforts of the whole international community to advance development. The HIPC and PRSP are 
clear examples of such integration and of the coordination of development efforts. They are also novel, 
given  that  heavily  indebted  poor  countries  must  design  poverty-reducing  strategies  in  collaboration 
with  their  parliaments,  subnational  entities,  business  and  trade  union  organizations,  and  civil 
organizations representing the poorest members of society. 
I also think that much more progress is needed in coordinating multilateral and bilateral support more 
closely with the poverty reduction strategies and in reducing the administrative burden linked to aid. 
Better governance in the poorest countries, and the pursuit of best practices by donor countries under 
the  guidance  of  the  OECD’s  Development  Aid  Committee  (DAC)  could  help  to  reduce  these 
administrative burdens. 
Finally, patience and perseverance are needed. Effective poverty reduction requires that the recipient 
countries receive consistent support from donor countries, international financial institutions (IFIs), and 
UN organizations to help them pursue the right policies unswervingly for very long periods. 
                                                      
3  Angus Maddison, The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, OECD 2001. 
4 
James  Boughton,  Who’s  in  Charge?  Ownership  and  Conditionality  in  IMF-Supported  Programs,  IMF  Working  Paper 
WP/03/191. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2003
I  believe  that  if  we  follow  through  with  the  elements  I  have  outlined,  developing  countries  stand  a 
reasonable chance to eradicate poverty. Therefore, I do not think it is productive to constantly start 
new initiatives to fight poverty, which I also judge to be a sign that the involved parties are not willing to 
live up to their responsibilities. 
Poverty will only be eradicated by economic growth, which also depends on integrating in particular 
African countries into the world economy and offering them fair and equitable access to markets in 
developed countries. Trade is one of the best forms of self-help. Therefore, it was very disappointing 
that the multilateral trade talks in Cancún failed a few weeks ago. However, at the Annual Meetings of 
the IMF and the World Bank in Dubai, there was a general consensus that the parties have to return to 
the negotiation table as soon as possible. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Next to the fight against poverty, I perceive the strengthening of the international financial architecture 
as a major challenge. 
Since  the  Asian  crisis,  the  international  financial  system  has  undergone  significant  reform.  An 
important outcome of these reforms has been the relative resilience of international financial markets 
to a series of shocks over the past three years: Owing to the decisive intervention and cooperation of 
the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  Eurosystem,  September  11  did  not  produce  a  major  financial 
crisis,  the  synchronised  economic  slowdown  of  major  industrial  countries  has  not  led  to  any  major 
stress  in  the financial system,  and  the financial  meltdown  in  Argentina  did  not entail  any  significant 
contagion except on Uruguay, which proves that financial market agents may be pricing risk better and 
have become more discriminating without falling into irrational herding behavior. 
I see that particular progress has been made on three fronts: 
First,  the  international  dialogue  has  been  broadened  and  has  been  made  more  inclusive.  The 
committees of the BIS as well as the creation of the G-20 have enabled emerging market countries 
(EMCs) as well  as developing countries  to  get  involved  in  the discussion  on how  to strengthen  the 
international financial system. 
Second, the establishment of the Financial Stability Forum in 1999, which brings together high-ranking 
G-7 officials and market participants, has been an important step to identify gaps and weaknesses in 
the international financial system. 
Third, the IMF with its near universal membership is devoting an increasing amount of resources on 
crisis  prevention.  The  main  element  that  the  IMF  has  at  its  disposal  is  bilateral  and  multilateral 
surveillance  work,  with  which  it  regularly  examines  the  economic  developments  and  policies  at  the 
national and international level. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
One can also identify a shift in the crisis prevention strategy the IMF employs. Indeed, mistakes were 
made  in  assessing  vulnerabilities  up  to  the  Asian  crises.  But  now  the  IMF  is  concentrating  on 
identifying  vulnerabilities  such  as  excessive  sovereign  debt  or  balance  sheet  mismatches.  Also,  its 
stance on capital account liberalization has changed. Now the IMF advocates that member countries 
should  first  have  the  institutional  capacity  and  a  relatively  strong  financial  sector  with  a  good 
supervision before taking this major step of liberalization. IMF members are advised to move to flexible 
exchange  rates  as  a  shock  absorber  as  well  as  to  implement  fiscal  policies  that  permit  cyclical 
behavior in the case of a crisis. One important initiative is the Financial Sector Assessment Programs 
(FSAP)  which  are  conducted  together  with  the  World  Bank.  An  FSAP  draws  up  profiles  of  the 
strengths and weaknesses of a financial sector of a country. This initiative is not only geared towards 
EMCs or developing countries, but also towards industrial countries. Austria, for example, is currently 
conducting an FSAP. 
Another  key  area  is  economic  and  financial  standards  and  codes,  which  are  formulated  in 
collaboration  with  public  and  private  sector  institutions.  The  aim  of  such  standards  is  to  promote 
meaningful comparable statistics, transparency rules for fiscal and monetary policies and supervisory 
standards for the banking, securities and insurance sectors. The idea behind this is to facilitate the 
integration of countries into the global economy. 
Will  all  of  these  initiatives  prevent  financial  crises  from  occurring?  Overshooting  and  correction  will 
always be part of financial markets. This means that in an open and dynamic market economy there 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 3
are limits to our capacity to anticipate and prevent crises. With skillful and prudent economic, monetary 
and financial policies, however, crises should be rarer and less severe. 
An  important  initiative  which  the  IMF  started  to  discuss  in  2001  proposed  the  establishment  of  an 
international bankruptcy procedure for unsustainable sovereign debt. However, the time may not have 
been right yet to establish such a comprehensive framework for the restructuring of sovereign debt. 
Nevertheless, public and academic awareness has been raised; the debate has helped prompt many 
EMCs  to  introduce  Collective  Action  Clauses  (CACs)  in  their  sovereign  bond  contracts,  as  the  EU, 
Canada and Switzerland have. Also, this awareness has induced the Paris Club to change its debt 
restructuring procedures for insolvent countries. Nevertheless, I am still firmly convinced that we need 
an international treaty which would facilitate the orderly resolution of sovereign debt crises. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I have the impression that very often, the strong track record the IMF as well as the World Bank have 
established in transition countries is overlooked. At the beginning of the 1990s, all of those countries, 
apart from Slovenia, had some form of IMF involvement via a fully fledged IMF program or technical 
assistance. The IMF together with the World Bank and the country authorities concerned have worked 
hard  to  stabilize  the  economies  of  those  countries,  devise  economic  policies  and  build  up  modern 
institutions. The Bretton Woods Institutions have thus successfully contributed to transforming these 
economies into today’s very successful market economies. We have also contributed to this effort by 
setting up the Joint Vienna Institute together with the IMF, which has trained many officials from these 
countries. 
Their successful work in that area has also helped pave the way for the inclusion of many of these 
countries into the European Union, while for other transition economies the EU represents an anchor 
of  stability.  The  Bretton  Woods  Institutions  supported  by  the  EU  will  help  them  to  successfully 
graduate from the status of transition economies to that of modern market economies. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
With  my  remarks,  I  have  only  been  able  to  scratch  the  surface  of  the  problems  involved.  At  the 
moment, I see a certain tendency in some parts of the world to turn back the hands of time. I believe 
that instead, we must look ahead and work to find global solutions to global problems, solutions that 
are  both  practical  and  that  garner  sufficient  support.  While  they  are  not  without  flaws,  international 
institutions contribute to making the global economy more stable and to promoting economic growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2003
