Willem F Duisenberg: TACIS “Central Bank Training” contract project 
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the 
occasion of the signing of the TACIS “Central Bank Training” contract and of a Protocol between the 
European Central Bank, the Delegation of the European Commission in Russia and the Central Bank 
of Russia, Moscow, 13 October 2003. 
 It is a pleasure for me to be here in Moscow today. 
While the European Central Bank is among the youngest central banks in the world, we have been 
actively setting up working relations with foreign central banks since our establishment in July 1998. In 
particular, we have already established contacts with the Central Bank of Russia, the central bank of a 
prominent country in what we call the "Euro Time Zone". In this context, I should like to stress that 
today's  signing  of  the  TACIS  "Central  Bank  Training"  contract  and  of  the  related  tripartite  Protocol 
mark a crucial step in the co-operation between our institutions, which I very much welcome. 
This  brings  me  to  the  TACIS  project  funded  by  the  European  Union  for  the  training  of  around 
400 experts of the Central Bank of Russia over 24 months. Our project will concentrate mainly on the 
areas of banking supervision and regulation, inspection and licensing, as well as bank rehabilitation. 
There  are  two  main  points  that  I  would  like  to  emphasise:  first,  the  Eurosystem's  approach  to  the 
TACIS project and, second, the focus on the important issue of banking supervision. 
First, the Eurosystem – which comprises the ECB and the euro area national central banks – is fully 
committed  to  the  TACIS  project.  The  project,  which  will  start  on  1  November,  will  be  implemented 
jointly  by  the  ECB  and  nine  national  central  banks  (NCBs)  of  the  euro  area  (the  central  banks  of 
Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain) on the basis of 
what  we  call  a  "Eurosystem  approach".  By  "Eurosystem  approach",  we  mean  the  following.  The 
project  will  be  co-ordinated  by  an  ECB  team  consisting  of  Mr.  Boris  Kisselevsky,  who  will  be  the 
project  co-ordinator  in  Moscow,  and  Mr.  Michael  Olsen,  senior  financial  supervision  expert,  and  an 
Administrative  Assistant  in  Frankfurt.  The  NCBs  as  well  as  the  non-central  bank  supervisory 
authorities  of  the  United  Kingdom,  Finland  and  Sweden  will  provide  the  experts  for  the  planned 
courses and seminars, most of which will take place in Moscow at the CBR premises. Study visits of 
CBR experts to EU countries will also be organised. A number of representatives of the participating 
NCBs are present in Moscow today to mark their institutions' strong commitment to the project.  
The second point I would like to mention pertains to the importance we as central bankers attach to 
banking supervision. As stressed by Ambassador Wright, the involvement of the Eurosystem in the 
TACIS  project  stems  from  the  long-standing  experience  many  NCBs  have  in  the  field  of  banking 
supervision.  It  is  this  vast  experience  that  we  wish  to  share  with  our  Russian  counterparts.  Sound 
practices and effective supervision provide a key basis for financial stability and an important platform 
for the conduct of monetary policy. We have noted with great interest the significant progress made in 
Russia over the past few years in reforming banking supervision. With this project, the Eurosystem 
hopes to contribute to further strengthening the CBR's banking supervision function as a key measure 
to foster a more stable financial environment. 
Let  me  conclude  on  the  hope  that  the Eurosystem's involvement  in  the  TACIS  project  will  act  as  a 
catalyst for deepening the working relations between our institutions further. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 1
