Panayotis Thomopoulos: The financial environment in Southeast Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Panayotis  Thomopoulos,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Second 
International  Banking  Forum  for  the  Southeast  European  Markets  Economist  Conference,  Athens, 
4 December 2003. 
 It is a great pleasure to address this Banking Forum at this juncture as I believe that the economies 
are  turning  the  corner  and  can  now  start  enjoying  the  benefits  of  stability  and  growth  within  the 
framework of closer ties with the European Union. After a difficult and hesitant start in the 1990s, there 
is  now  clear  evidence  that  the  transition  economies  of  Southeastern  Europe  have  improved  their 
macroeconomic management and enhanced their financial systems so that they can look forward to 
sustained and high-quality growth. 
Greece, as the only member of the European Union in the region, has a clear interest in promoting the 
stability  and  growth  of  all  our  neighbors,  and  I  can  be  proud  that  both  the  public  and  the  private 
sectors of Greece have played a role in the emerging success story of Southeastern Europe. We see 
our  neighbors'  economies  mainly  as  complementary  to  our  own,  not  as  competitors,  and  the  many 
Greek  businesses  that  are  active  in  the  region,  especially  in  the  financial  sector,  are  proof  of  the 
increasing collaboration between my country and its neighbors. I believe that Greece will continue to 
make a positive contribution to the economies of the region, but, I must admit, that I draw comfort from 
the  fact  that  Greece  is  now  surrounded  by  open,  dynamic  economies,  and  I  would  add  friendly 
countries. It would be an understatement to say that we have turned a page of our history. In effect, 
the collapse of communism ended not the thirty, or hundred years wars, but more than one thousand 
years of intrabalkan conflicts and Greece is fully supporting Balkan countries' E.U. membership, which 
would further strengthen the political and economic ties between all Balkan countries. 
Let  me  start  with  a  short  look  at  the  international  environment  that  the  countries  in  Southeastern 
Europe  are  facing.  The  overall  economic  situation  has  improved  significantly  during  the  last  few 
months. After months when expectations of a recovery were based mostly on so-called "soft data," like 
surveys of consumer and business confidence, we are now seeing real "hard data" that point to the 
resumption of growth in all the main regions of the world economy. All members of the EU have now 
emerged from recession, although the growth rate is not what we would have wished it to be. Growth 
in the eurozone should accelerate slowly, and within the next year the growth rate should gradually 
approach its potential, estimated at around 2 ? % per annum. The US, on the other hand, is growing 
fast, maybe too fast. Certainly, I do not wish to belittle the achievements of the American economy, 
especially its high productivity growth, but the continuation of the twin deficits are certainly a cause for 
concern, in that a sudden correction could have far-reaching implications for the international financial 
system. The US sees with benign neglect its twin deficits. On the one hand, it expects that continuing 
fast  rate  of  growth  would  generate  sufficient  tax  revenues  over  the  medium  term,  which,  in 
combination with the gradual phasing out of some tax relief measures, will reduce the deficit and, on 
the  other  hand,  they  expect  the  current  balanced  of  payments  correction  to  be  realized  via  a 
devaluation  of  the  US  dollar,  which  would  help  the  sustainability  of  the  US  recovery  and  generate 
higher profits in dollar terms from the US investments abroad. In summary, they don't expect an abrupt 
and substantial rise in interest rates, which would have had adverse effects both on the fiscal deficit 
and  on  consumer  demand,  thus  precipitating  a  cyclical  downturn.  However,  the  European  point  of 
view, if I am allowed to summarize, is that an unsustainably fast growth rate, based on private and 
public borrowing is not good for anyone and the US cannot be an exception. 
The EU, and especially the eurozone, has played a constructive role in promoting a stable financial 
environment.  The  recent  appreciation of  the  euro  is  an  indication  of  the  markets'  confidence  in  our 
economies. I believe that a strong euro is good for Europe and the world, as it helps fight inflationary 
pressures and supports the confidence of consumers and producers. It is also clear that the eurozone 
cannot solve all the imbalances that threaten the stability of the international economy. I do not wish to 
enter the debate on whether the fiscal stimulus in the US was necessary two years ago, at the onset of 
the  economic  slowdown,  but  certainly  it  has  to  be  reversed  now  as  the  US  is  growing  at  an 
unsustainable  rate.  At  the  same  time,  third  countries,  especially  those  in  Asia,  should  contribute 
themselves by allowing market forces to play a greater role in the determination of their exchange rate, 
and  by  abandoning  their  mercantilistic  attitudes.  However  I  should  mention  that,  there  is  an  open 
debate  whether  a  revaluation  of  the  chinese  renminbi  is  at  present  appropriate,  given,  on  the  one 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 1
hand, the fact that it will make relatively small difference, as far as it concerns China's trade surplus, if 
the chinese wage expressed in US dollars from about 10% of the US or EU average wage rises to 
15%  or  20%  as  a  result  of  the  revaluation,  and  on  the  other  hand,  a  revaluation  could  lead  to  a 
deterioration of the already Chinese banks' fragile conditions and would also make more expensive 
the acquisitions of Chinese factories, commercial sites, etc by foreign investors. 
One  positive  development  that  I  cannot  stress  enough  is  the  absence  of  any  challenges  to  the 
financial stability in Europe and the US. Unlike the situation in the early 1990s, we have recently gone 
through a period of a prolonged and synchronized slowdown, made worse by geopolitical risks, with 
no major financial institution being impaired. There have been of course problems, especially in the 
European  insurance  sector,  exacerbated  by  natural  catastrophes,  but  all  financial  institutions  have 
managed  through.  Undoubtedly,  those  who  make  mistakes,  or  are  simply  unfortunate,  suffer  in  a 
market economy. Nonetheless, such problems, whenever they surfaced, were contained and did not 
have  systemic  repercussions  that  could  threaten  the  macroeconomic  stability  of  our  economies. 
Indeed,  in  our  E.U.  economies we  have  long  recognized  the  key  role  of  the  banking sector  and  its 
health has been a constant preoccupation of the authorities, especially of Central banks which, even 
those not directly involved in supervision, have a wider responsibility for the good functioning of the 
financial system as a whole and the payment systems. We have been building sound banks, which not 
only  can  withstand  successfully  cyclical  pressures  and  other  kinds  of  shocks,  but  also  they  bring 
crucial  support  to  the  economy  when  failures  appear  in  other,  less  important,  parts  of  the  financial 
system. The bursting of the stock exchange bubbles and the subsequent substantial decline in their 
capitalization, in certain countries amounting to as much as 30 to 50% of GDP, produced relatively 
little damage and which was, moreover, contained thanks to the banking sector. Likewise, as a result 
also of what I would say, the least, "not very prudent policies" the significant losses of insurance and 
re-insurance companies in the last few years have been partly absorbed by the banking sector, which 
responded  promptly  to  their  needs  for  liquidity  and  capital  injections.  The  banking  sector  in  some 
countries  has  unwillingly  assumed  the  responsibility  for  the  well  being  of  the  financial  sector  as  a 
whole, because it understands the danger of systemic risks, that can wreak havoc. 
I cannot pretend that there were not tensions here and there, or losses due to the write-offs of non-
performing  loans,  to  plummeting  share  values  and  to  laying  off  costs,  but  only  a  few  banks  posted 
operating losses and, moreover, those, as a rule, were relatively small. Even today, after three years 
of  a  downturn,  the  capital  adequacy  ratio,  has  remained  well  above  the  minimum  8%  in  almost  all 
cases, and for the E.U. as a whole the average is above 10%, which underlines the good health of the 
banking  system.  Moreover,  it  is  expected  that  it  will  continue  to  improve  as  the  recovery  gets 
underway. 
Here, I wish to repeat the very positive role of Central banks, which, almost all were over more than 50 
years,  and  many  of  them  still  are  the  supervisory  authorities.  Indeed,  central  banks  succeeded  in 
creating a competitive and sound banking system in Europe during the last fifteen years or so, during 
a period characterized by liberalization in financial markets and intense competition both within Europe 
and from the US banks. The lesson I draw is that with the help of their natural interlocutor, the central 
banks,  the  private  sector  has  become  more  adept  in  dealing  with  risks  and  the  supervisors  have 
learned from the mistakes of the past and improved their vigilance. Looking ahead, the new prudential 
practices to be introduced under Basel II will further improve our ability to deal with financial risks and 
better tailor our prudential requirements to each market's special needs. 
Another  positive  development  is  the  diminishing  danger  of  contagion,  as  we  have  seen  after 
Argentina's default, which did not lead to widespread withdrawal of funds from emerging markets. This 
is particularly significant for the emerging market economies in Southeastern Europe, which look to a 
greater  integration  in  the  world  economy  without  the  fear  of  being  hit  by  a  crisis  that  originates 
elsewhere. All this of course, provided they maintain healthy fundamentals. 
Turning now to the developments in the Southeastern Balkans themselves, the present situation is a 
far cry from the bleak picture at the early stages of transition, more than a decade ago. Apart from 
often-bloody conflicts, hyperinflation and financial stability seemed endemic in the region only a few 
years  ago.  Regarding  the  financial  sector,  starting  from  an  initial  position  with  practically  no 
commercial  banks,  the  countries  in  the  region  faced  problems  that  were  often  beyond  their 
administrative  and  regulatory  capabilities.  Financial  institutions  were  reformed  with  insufficient 
regulation  and  unclear  focus  and  expansion  was  associated  with  improprieties,  scandals  and 
fraudulent schemes during the early stages of transition. Therefore, the financial sector was unable to 
attract deposits and develop extensive client networks. Finally, state banks were compelled to carry a 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2003
the 
the  beginning  by 
financial  sector  was  hampered  at 
high number of non-performing loans, which had been accumulated by the government subsidization 
programs to state run enterprises. 
The  development  of 
inadequate 
macroeconomic  management.  Fiscal  deficits  were  mostly  excessive,  and  often  monetized,  and  the 
inevitable  outcome was  high  inflation.  It  is  encouraging  that  in  the  last  few  years we can see  clear 
evidence of maturity in economic management. 
The  path  to  macroeconomic  stabilization  was  different  for  every  country.  In  the  region  we  can  now 
observe  all  types  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  regimes,  from  formal  euro-ization  and  currency 
boards linked to the euro, all the way to monetary targeting. This is proof, if proof was needed, that 
there  is  no  single  solution,  to  economic  problems  but  that  the  policies  of  each  country  should  be 
tailored  to  its  specific  needs.  Going  beyond  the  diversity  of  the  region,  at  this  point  I  would  like  to 
underline two characteristics of the financial system of practically all countries in the region, which are 
the result of their past, but will also shape their future developments. 
The first is extensive currency substitution. As a result of past inflation, but also because of the large 
numbers of people working abroad, foreign currencies, and especially the euro, play a large role and 
they have often become the main currency in use. One can gauge the degree of currency substitution 
by noting that in all countries in the region deposits in a foreign currency account for at least half of all 
bank deposits. One must add to this, money "kept under the mattress" and capital flight. Undoubtedly 
all these were a vote of no confidence in domestic policymakers. People showed their dissatisfaction 
with local financial institutions and monetary authorities by moving their savings abroad, or by using 
other, more stable currencies. This high degree of currency substitution can only be found in some 
Latin American countries and undermined the effectiveness of monetary policy. The ability of monetary 
authorities  to  extract  seignorage  was  severely  limited,  and  this  is  a  partial  justification  of  the  high 
inflation rates. At the same time, monetary management became more difficult, as small shocks had a 
disproportionately big impact on inflation and the exchange rate. 
In  some  countries,  namely  Bulgaria,  the  extent  of  hyperinflation  and  currency  substitution  left  little 
alternative to the authorities but to accept the reality and move to a hard peg in the form of a currency 
board linked initially to the Deutschemark and now to the euro. Similar regimes were also imposed on 
Bosnia,  after  the Dayton Accord, and Kosovo.  The  euro  is an  appropriate  anchor  for an exchange-
rate-based policy in these countries, as they are closely integrated with the countries of the eurozone. 
Most of their transactions, not only trade-related, but also workers' remittances, official transfers and 
financial transactions are with countries of the eurozone. 
A measure of macroeconomic success is the receding level of currency substitution. In 2002, the last 
year  for  which  we  have  full  data,  bank  deposits  in  foreign  currencies  fell  as  a  proportion  of  total 
deposits in all countries in the region, sometimes quite fast in countries with strong performance in the 
context of monetary or inflation targeting, with only one exception. This is indicative of a growing trust 
in  the  domestic  currency  and  the  effectiveness  of  stabilization.  It  is  all  the  more  important  that  this 
achievement should not be squandered, and that prudent macroeconomic policies should continue. 
Nonetheless, I would like to warn of possible problems, especially in those countries that have tied 
their  exchange  rate  to  the  euro,  one  way  or  another.  The  weakness  of  the  euro  until  last  year 
undoubtedly helped both their growth performance and their external competitiveness. From now, in a 
period  of  strong  euro  they  will  have  to  rely  more  on  domestic  productivity  gains  and  structural 
adjustments  to  maintain  their  growth  rates.  In  addition,  and  as  growth  takes  hold  in  advanced 
economies,  countries  in  the  region  will  have  to  adjust  to  interest  rates  higher  than  their  current 
historically low levels. 
An area where much remains to be done is the area of developing an efficient and stable financial 
system. In this respect, the economies in the region lag behind the other transition economies that are 
due to join the EU next year. The public sector still controls a substantial part of the banking system, 
and there is an obvious need to continue the efforts to privatize the remaining state-controlled banks. 
As  in  most  transition  economies,  state  interference  has  not  been  a  stabilizing  factor,  quite  the 
opposite. State controlled banks have often lost substantial sums in politically-motivated investments 
and have contributed to systemic crises in all those countries. 
As in other transition economies, we can foresee that an increasing number of banks will been taken 
over or become affiliated with foreign ones. Setting aside nationalistic prejudices, I think this should be 
seen  as  a  welcome  development  as  a  whole,  provided  the  foreign  entrants  are  strong  and  well-
supervised  financial  institutions.  In  the  acceding  countries  of  Central  Europe  foreign  banks  already 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 3
play a major role after the crises that hit those countries in the late 1990s, and the overall experience 
has  been  positive.  (Foreign  banks  control  more  than  80%  of  the  domestic  market  in  a  few  central 
european acceding countries). 
Foreign  banks  bring  with  them  many  advantages,  especially  in  the  case  of  countries  with  a  limited 
experience  with  sophisticated  financial  markets.  At  first,  they  have  access  to  better  know-how  and 
technology.  More  importantly,  they  are  mostly  immune  from  political  interference.  While  local 
participants  are  often  intimidated  or  pressured  to  give  loans  to  well-connected  borrowers,  foreign 
institutions generally feel stronger to resist such pressures. Also, foreign banks are considered "safer" 
by local depositors, who recognize that they are not manipulated by the political authorities, and who 
also  understand  that  foreign  banks  are  supervised  by  the  more  experienced  supervisors  at  home. 
Finally, experience with other emerging markets shows that foreign banks are better able to withstand 
losses  in  cases  something  goes  wrong.  The  international  evidence  shows  that  banks  affiliated  with 
ones from advanced economies have access to capital at lower cost than local ones and can be re-
capitalized faster and more easily than the others. 
Of course, foreign banks may have its disadvantages. Foreign-owned financial institutions may lack 
understanding of how the local market works. Indeed, it has been noted that such banks often tend to 
concentrate on financing affiliates of foreign firms, or only large local firms. There is thus a danger that 
local  small  and  medium  enterprises  may  find  their  access  to  credit  curtailed.  There  is  also  the 
possibility that foreign-owned banks will alter their credit based not on the local conditions, but on the 
conditions in their home economies. 
Indeed, in Greece we have observed that foreign banks have entered the market and subsequently 
they  expanded  or  left  in  a  haphazard  way,  not  on  the  basis  of  local  conditions  or  profitability,  but 
mostly on the basis of wider strategies whether to expand globally or not. Formally, we can say that 
this increases the correlation of emerging markets with the outside world. Research shows that the 
operations of financial multinationals are becoming a major channel for the transmission of business 
cycles. For that reason, economies in the Southeastern Europe will find that their economies are more 
and  more  affected  by  what  is  happening  in  the  rest  of  Europe  than  with  what  is  happening  locally. 
Although at times of local euphoria you may regret being held back by the European business cycle, 
over  time  the  benefits  of  becoming  tied  to  the  more  stable  economy  of  the  eurozone  will  become 
overwhelming.  This  is  especially  so  for  countries  that  are  applying  for  EU  membership.  Greater 
synchronization  with  the  European  cycle  will  smooth  their  path  towards  full  membership.  Foreign 
ownership of banks will also allow a greater risk diversification than what might be achievable by small 
local banks whose whole portfolio is locally invested. Foreign banks can thus behave in a less risk-
averse way than local ones. 
The issue of financial stability and proper supervision is very important for us, at the Bank of Greece, 
as Greek firms have invested heavily in our neighboring countries. In most of them Greece is among 
the  five  biggest  suppliers  of  foreign  direct  investment.  Of  course,  this  has  to  some  extent  caused 
delocation of greek companies, with a negative impact on investment and employment in Greece over 
the  short  to  medium-term,  but  for  an  economy  growing  at  almost  4%  p.a.  since  1997  and  with  an 
investment GDP ratio of 24% delocation does not pose a serious threat to its long term performance. 
Looking at the data in preparation for this speech, I was amazed by the number of branches of Greek 
banks  in  our  neighboring  countries.  This  shows  that  Greek  banks  have  entered  planning  to  offer  a 
wide range of services and they see their future closely linked to the evolution of the host economies. 
They are not entering in order to concentrate in just a few lucrative activities and offer services to other 
Greek firms. 
The  positive  effects  of  the  presence  of  foreign  banks  predicted  by  theory  are  supported  by  the 
experience of Greek banks in the countries of Southeastern Europe. Greek banks are already well-
established in Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro, Albania and FYROM, representing at least 20 
percent of the banking system according to assets and in some of them their share is between one-
third and two thirds. Overall, they are better capitalized than their competitors, something that could be 
expected as they have access to a more diversified source of funds. Their better capitalization allows 
them  to  take  somewhat  higher  risks,  as  shown  by  the  fact  their  loans  to  the  private  sector  are 
generally a higher share of their assets than for the average bank. Although they take somewhat more 
risk, they are profitable overall, more than their average competitors. This signifies that Greek banks in 
the  region  have  some  comparative  advantage,  either  in  the  form  of  access  to  capital  markets,  or 
because of superior organization and know-how, and good understanding of local conditions. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2003
While Greek banks play a major role in the neighboring economies, their exposure to these economies 
is generally small. For no Greek banks does the exposure to Southeastern Europe exceed 3 percent. 
This is simply a reflection of the different levels of development in Greece and nearby countries. The 
result  is  that  while  Greek  banks  face  little  risks  from  their  exposure  to  these  economies,  they 
themselves are important for the stability of the financial system in the Balkans. In the Bank of Greece 
we are well aware of this, and we take our responsibilities to our neighbors very seriously indeed. As 
home  country  supervisors  we  recognize  that  our  ability  to  exert  prudential  supervision  has  effects 
beyond Greek borders. 
In recent years we have signed several agreements, in the form of memoranda of understanding, and 
we  are  discussing  some  further  ones  with  other  supervisors  in  the  region  in  order  to  enhance  our 
ability  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  banks  under  our  jurisdiction.  What  is  needed,  beyond  formal 
agreements, is the confidential and frank exchange of all information among supervisors in order to 
identify problems early on, before they become threatening. In this era, we should also be vigilant to 
avoid  abuses  of  the  financial  system  for  illegal  activities,  such  as  money  laundering  and  terrorism 
financing. 
Of course, we take comfort from the fact that the Greek banks that have expanded in the Balkans are 
quite strong, well above the necessary prudential ratios. Actually, the fact that Greek banks have been 
able  to  retain  a  very  high  share  of  their  local  market  is  also  an  indication  that  they  have  some 
comparative advantages that allow them to thrive in an internationally competitive environment. 
I must admit that our interest in the stability and growth of our neighbors is to some extent a reflection 
of selfish instincts. We realize that strong and growing economies in this region are not only useful for 
the Greek economy, but also a prerequisite for the political stability of the Balkans. I mentioned before 
that the presence of foreign financial firms in the Southeastern Europe would transform their business 
cycles. But it works the other way round. Greece's orientation toward the dynamic economies in our 
region has helped us somewhat weather better than most the recent economic slowdown. In a very 
specific way, one can see the growing interlinkages in the Balkans as evidence of how trade in goods 
and financial services can help growth and stability. 
Looking ahead, the challenges for our neighbors remain formidable. Now that the first steps towards 
stabilization and growth have been taken, what lies ahead is the more difficult issues of managing an 
emerging  economy.  Top  of  their  priorities  I  would  like  to  put  the  improvement  of  their  governance 
structures, the further deregulation and privatization and the strengthening of the respect for property 
rights. I should end by saying that they can count on our continued support. 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 5
