Vepa Kamesam: Retail banking - challenges ahead in distribution channels in 
urban/rural India 
Address by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Twenty-Fifth 
Bank Economists' Conference - 2003, Mumbai, 12 December 2003. 
 The promise of lower transaction costs, increased sales productivity, and more convenient service has 
lured banks into setting up new delivery channels. Earlier, vast brick and mortar branch network has 
been  considered  as  an  inherent  advantage  of  established  banks  and  new  entrants  were  at  huge 
disadvantage vis-à-vis the established players in terms of customer reach. However, post 1990s new 
players are effectively taking on the branch network advantage of the established players by optimally 
leveraging technology and cost-effective delivery channels.  
The goal for banks’ senior management is to turn today’s “all things to all people” branch network into 
highly differentiated system for delivery of multiple products. The foundation for creating such delivery 
channels  is superior  insights  into  customer  behaviour.  These can  come  in  many  forms,  but  at  their 
most basic they entail understanding customer needs for the delivery of different products, how these 
needs vary by customer types (including small businesses), current customer behaviour (especially as 
it  relates  to  channel  usage),  and  customer  profitability.  It  is  this  multifaceted  understanding  of 
customers  that  yields  actionable  implications  for  distribution  strategy.  Although  banks  may  invest 
heavily in new delivery channels, the success and sustainability of these channels critically lie in the 
ability to convert that investment into lower distribution costs. The steps to be followed in making a 
new distribution channel successful: 
a) 
b) 
Understand customers’ current channel/transaction behaviour and their underlying attitude;  
Use sophisticated experimental customer research to assess the economic impact of tactics 
designed to change that behaviour; 
Develop  an  integrated  channel  migration  plan  which  blends  economic  and  non-economic 
incentives to ensure that right initiatives are targeted at the right customers; 
Protect sales effectiveness by utilizing the ability of non-branch channels to select amongst 
prospects and differentiate the marketing message; 
Design non-branch channels to emphasize personalized interaction to counteract decreased 
loyalty among remote customers; 
Develop tracking mechanisms to allow you to assess and revise your migration strategy on 
an ongoing basis.  
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Turning our attention to delivery channels used by banks in India, in comparison with their international 
counterparts, it is observed that the banks are yet to exploit the delivery channels to the maximum 
extent technology permits. Increase in off-site delivery channels has led to new product development, 
speed of transaction processing and reduction in transaction costs. In India the major issue about new 
technology related delivery channels is their impact on the processing of information, which lies at the 
core of banking business. Inspite of their advantages, reliance on technology based delivery channels 
often  exacerbates  traditional  risks:  operational  risk  (since  it  requires  changes  in  procedures), 
reputational  risk  (if  the  bank  fails  to  deliver  secure,  accurate  and  timely  service)  and  legal  risk 
(uncertainty  about  which  legislation  applies  to  e-banking  transactions),  besides  emergence  of  other 
risks (business and credit risks). ATMs still remain the most successful delivery channel followed by 
telephone banking and internet banking. With about 9000 off-site and on-site ATMs installed, banks 
are effectively reaching out to a large customer base at a substantially lower cost. Typically, it costs 
close to Rs.50 per transaction if conducted in a branch and the same if done through ATM costs about 
Rs.15. In order to reduce the cost of transaction banks have started out-sourcing and sharing of ATM 
services  and  this  trend  will  gather  momentum  in  near  future.  As  this  delivery  channel  gains  mass 
acceptability and is user friendly, the bank can use it to cross-sell its as well as others’ products. For 
example, banks have already started dispensing railway tickets, movie tickets through their ATMs. In 
future  a  bank’s  ATM  would  function  like  a  kiosk  delivering  more  of  non-cash  transactions,  thereby 
simultaneously reducing the fixed and operating cost of ATM.  
BIS Review 57/2003 
 1
Internet Banking-an emerging delivery channel-offers significant cost advantage to banks. A net-based 
transaction costs the bank only around Rs. 4 and costs per transaction are even lower than those of 
an ATM, mainly due to savings on prohibitive real estate costs. Internet Banking has failed to take off 
due to a combination of psychological, legal, technological and socio-economic factors. Lack of critical 
mass of early adopters, lack of a strong trust environment, slowness in adoption of the internet, low 
penetration  of  PCs  and  access  to  internet  are  some  of  the  impediments  in  the  adoption  of  internet 
banking in India. With drastic fall in cell phone tariff and emergence of seamless connectivity between 
fixed and mobile lines, mobile banking is set to emerge as one of the cost-effective delivery channels 
in near future. Toll-free-numbers would also gain popularity as an important delivery channel. Although 
banks abroad are using call centre as a delivery channel for some time, banks in India have just begun 
to exploit it as an effective non-branch delivery channel. 
The bankers will have to take a comprehensive view about their delivery channels. Till now delivery 
channels  were  viewed  in  terms  of  cost  and  technology.  Delivery  channels  were  devised  focussing 
mainly  on  time  and  place  advantage  to  the  customers.  However,  with  the  continuing  advances  in 
wireless  technology,  flexibility  in  delivery  channel  device  would  be  the  forte  of  banks.  Successful 
adoption of wireless technology would help banks to offer not only any time, anywhere, but also any 
device banking. Further, banks will have to build integrated delivery channels with both vertical and 
horizontal  integration.  In  order  to  do  so  the  banks  should  install  an  enabling  and  compatible 
multi-channel  platform  which  should  support  and  seamlessly  integrate  both  the  existing  and  future 
delivery channels.  
In today’s distributed computing environments, retail users sign onto many different applications and 
systems  including  email,  networks,  databases  and  Web  servers  each  typically  requiring  its  own 
security procedure. The more systems users must navigate, the more IDs and passwords they must 
remember. 
Systems should be developed in such a way that a customer can use his ATM card and his own ATM 
PIN  (Personal  Identification  Number)  for  customer  authentication  in  a  Web  transaction,  which  is 
normally not done in a Web-based transaction or in any other delivery channel. 
The  process  cycle  of  the  above  single  ‘Signon’  should  be  that  once  the  customer  initiates  the 
transaction by entering the PIN from any of the delivery channels, the PIN entered by the customer is 
verified with the PIN details of the customer and once the verification yields a positive response the 
customer will be allowed to perform the transaction. The PIN, which the user enters to perform the 
transaction,  should  be  a  unique  PIN  that  can  be  used  by  the  customer  to  perform  the  transaction 
across any delivery channel. In short, the banks should have a comprehensive system which will allow 
them  to  deliver  dynamic  end-to-end  customer  service  that  can  reshape  customer  base,  maximise 
cross-selling  opportunities  and  generate  a  positive  ROI  (Return  on  Investment)  in  the  changing 
business economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2003
