Lars Nyberg: Some Swedish experiences with financial stability surveillance  
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the Bank Indonesia, Jakarta, 
10 December 2003. 
 Introduction 
First of all I want to express my thanks to the Bank of Indonesia for inviting me to this conference. 
Financial stability - or the lack of it - is a very topical subject in the light of events in the past decades. 
Furthermore,  financial  stability  issues  seem  to  be  strikingly  similar  between  countries,  whether  they 
are  big  or  small.  It  makes  good  sense,  therefore,  to  have  different  central  banks  talk  about  their 
experiences.  And,  as  always,  the  best  experience  comes  from  mistakes  made.  With  this  in  mind,  I 
shall tell you a little of how we in Sweden look at stability surveillance today. 
First,  some  background.  Systemic  stability  came  under  serious  threat  during  the  Swedish  banking 
crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. As was later the case in Indonesia, the risk of severe financial 
instability  led  to  government  intervention.  A  decision  at  very  short  notice was required  of  Sweden’s 
government  and  parliament  in  the  autumn  of  1992:  Should  they  choose  to  support  Swedish  banks 
financially without really knowing how expensive the support might have to be, or should they risk a 
financial  crisis  with  unforeseeable  consequences  for  the  Swedish  economy?  The  decision  that  was 
taken  was  the  only  reasonable  option  -  to  rescue  the  Swedish  banks.  The  government  issued  a 
general guarantee for the banks’ liabilities and set up a special Bank Support Authority to cope with 
the  banks  that  were  in  serious  difficulties.  The  government,  explicitly  supported  by  the  opposition, 
acted just as vigorously and promptly as the situation required. But this did entail making a decision - 
on  the  basis  of  insufficient  information  about  the  causes  and  depth  of  the  crisis  -  that  could  have 
burdened  the  government  budget  with  at  least  10  billion  US  dollars.  Having  to  take  such  important 
decisions at short notice and without adequate information about the financial system is an experience 
we do not wish to repeat. 
The Riksbank is accountable to the Swedish parliament with regard to keeping a stable price level - 
our  inflation  target  -  but  also  with  regard  to  promoting  financial  stability  and  a  safe  and  efficient 
payment system. After the crises there was room for some self-criticism in this respect. In practice, we 
had  not  supported  our  stability  target  with  any  systematic  analytical  work  on  overall  stability.  To 
address  this,  we  started  to  build  up  knowledge  and  analytical  capability  in  the  field  of  stability.  By 
publishing  a  Financial  Stability  Report  in  1997,  we  were  among  the  first  central  banks  to  issue  a 
periodic public account of our appraisal of financial system stability. Its example has been followed to 
date by about thirty other countries, including Indonesia. 
Today, interest in financial stability is well established. The crises during the 1990s revealed serious 
flaws not only in macroeconomic management but also, just as importantly, in the structure, regulation 
and operation of the financial system. Most major financial crises in various countries around the world 
emanated  from  overriding  economic  or  financial  problems  rather  than  bank-specific  issues.  If  these 
overriding problems had been identified at an earlier stage, the crises might have been prevented or at 
least their effects might have been reduced. 
Financial stability work 
Banks are the focus of all work on financial stability. This is because banks are the institutions that 
ensure  the  functioning  of  the  payment  system.  We  know  from  experience  that  if  individuals  and 
companies are unable to make ordinary payments, or if the credit function of society is disrupted, this 
may  have  disastrous  effects  on  the  economy.  Insurance  companies,  finance  companies,  security 
brokers and other firms may also be important in society, but they are not critical to the system in the 
same way as banks. 
But  banks  are  not  only  critical  for  stability.  Their  balance  sheets  also  contain  a  built-in  source  of 
instability.  Banks’  funding  is  generally  short  term  in  nature  and  can  quickly  disappear,  while  their 
assets have long maturities and cannot be realised as quickly. Should depositors and financiers lose 
confidence  in  a  bank,  it  could  face  an  acute  liquidity  crisis.  Moreover,  problems  in  one  bank  can 
spread  to  other  banks.  Banks  have  liabilities  to  one another  due to  loans  and securities  trading,  or 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 1
because they participate in the payment system. Contagion effects can also arise if other economic 
players suspect that there are connections between the banks. Banks can then encounter difficulties, 
even if the original suspicions were completely unfounded. 
Given  this,  the  work  on  financial  stability  may  be  undertaken  along  three  main  strands.  The  first 
concerns  the  rules  and  regulations  that  set  the  bounds  for  the  operations  of  financial  institutions, 
notably  banks.  The  second  is  the  continuous  surveillance  of  the  system  that  is  performed  by  the 
supervisory authority as well as by the central bank. Thirdly, there is the management of crises, since, 
unfortunately, we must assume that crises may occur and we must be prepared to handle them. I will 
discuss these three strands in turn, concentrating on the last two. 
Regulatory framework 
1. 
First,  of  course,  financial  stability  rests  on  a  legal  structure,  which  establishes  the  bounds  for  the 
operations of financial institutions. The parliament is responsible for legislation on financial operations, 
while the supervisory authority issues more detailed instructions. In many countries, including Sweden, 
the experiences of the 1990s have paved the way for a thorough review of the legal structure of the 
financial sector. In this context, it is worth noting that laws and regulations today to a great extent are 
developed through international negotiations such as in the Basel Committee and, for us in Europe, 
the EU. 
The  role  of  the  central  bank  in  this  process  is  the  comfortable  one  of  a  knowledgeable  observer, 
posing  relevant  questions  in  working  groups  and  committees  and  pointing  out  inadequacies  in 
suggested solutions. There is much to say about this process, but I shall have to leave it for a different 
occasion. 
Day-to-day oversight 
the first pillar is the supervision of individual banks, 
the second pillar is the surveillance of systemic stability, 
and the third pillar is payment system oversight. 
2. 
The second strand of financial stability work is the day-to-day oversight. 
This may be described as resting on three pillars: 
• 
• 
• 
The first pillar is clearly the responsibility of the supervisors, whether they are a separate FSA or, as in 
many  countries,  a  department  within  a  central  bank.  The  supervisors  collect  data  from  the  banks, 
analyse these data and make on-site inspections. Prudential supervision performed by a competent 
authority must be the basis for all day-to-day oversight. 
The second pillar is the joint responsibility of the FSA and central bank. The division of responsibility is 
really  one  of  perspective.  While  the  FSA  bases  its  work  on  individual  institutions,  the  central  bank 
looks at the banking system as a whole and attempts to assess the risks that could arise in it both in 
the short and the long run. Of course, there is overlap in the tasks of the FSA and the central bank, but 
it  is  often  fruitful  to  approach  a  problem  from  somewhat  different  angles.  Details  are  important,  but 
looking at details you sometimes miss the overall picture. This, at least, is one conclusion we drew in 
Sweden from the experiences of the 1990s. 
The third pillar of oversight is the supervision of the financial infrastructure. This is a relatively new task 
derived from the complicated technical and legal systems that handle all financial transactions today. 
The infrastructure is of particular importance to the central bank, since we would most probably have 
to provide emergency liquidity assistance if anything went wrong. The infrastructure is dominated by 
the  systems  for  clearing  and  settlement  of  payments.  In  Sweden,  like  in  many  other  countries,  we 
manage the large-value payment system in-house at the central bank.  
But  the  infrastructure  also  includes  the  stock  exchange,  the  derivatives  exchange,  the  central 
securities depositary (CSD) and connected trading systems. Well-designed systems reduce the risk of 
contagion  from  the  financial  markets  or  between  institutions.  They  also  reduce  the  risk  of  the 
infrastructure itself causing problems through, for instance, operational disturbances. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2003
The Financial Stability Report 
In Sweden, the main tool for addressing the oversight of systemic stability is the report on Financial 
Stability. The Report, in Sweden as well as in other countries, basically aims to provide a picture of the 
banks’ ability to stand up to any disruptions. Factors which might influence banks simultaneously are 
in focus, for instance the emergence and bursting of financial bubbles, excessive debt leverage in a 
certain  economic  sector  or  structural  changes  leading  to  reduced  revenues  or  increased  risks.  The 
purpose  is  to  identify  conceivable  risks  and  present  an  analysis  that  will  influence  the  behaviour  of 
market participants. 
A first and very relevant question is whether a stability report really would help to prevent a crisis. Will 
the financial sector read and listen to what the central bank has to say? Will this kind of moral suasion 
be sufficient? Could we have written a report in the late 1980s that would have made the banks see 
what they did not see? We do not know. But at least as long as managements have a memory of the 
last crisis, they are likely to listen. And if the crisis develops slowly, there are certainly things to be 
done. I shall return to this question when I talk about crisis management. Let me now turn to the main 
elements of a stability report as I see them. First, we look at the banks’ borrowers, because as long as 
they are healthy the banks usually are as well. 
Borrowers  are  analysed  in  terms  of  the  corporate  and  household  sectors  in  general,  with  particular 
reference to levels of debt and the future ability to pay. The real-estate sector is considered separately 
because lending to this sector is in most countries a major part of banks’ total lending. The prices of 
commercial properties and private housing are also analysed not least because they reflect the value 
of  the  major  part  of  the  collateral  that  is  pledged  for  loans  from  banks  and  mortgage  institutions. 
Insofar  as  your  banks  conduct  activities  in  foreign  countries,  stability  surveillance  also  needs  to 
encompass developments in these countries to ensure that negative developments will not destabilise 
your banks. 
Second, the major banking groups are analysed in various respects. Profitability trends illustrate the 
ability of the banks to build up reserves for future unexpected losses. Moreover, there is always the 
strategic risk that a bank with weak profitability will be tempted to try out new, bold but risky lines of 
business in order to generate a higher return on equity. 
Our  analysis  of  the  banks’  credit  portfolios  provides  an  indication  of  how  loan  losses  are  likely  to 
develop  in  the  coming  year  or  two.  Another  aspect  of  the  analysis  relates  to  banks’  liabilities. 
Traditional  banking  involves  accepting  deposits  and  using  the  funds  for  making  loans.  People’s 
growing propensity to save in other instruments than bank accounts has forced the banks to finance a 
major  part  of  the  growth  in  credit  by  borrowing,  mostly  short-term  funds,  in  the  capital  market.  The 
structure of bank funding provides an indication of the risks in bank liquidity. Monitoring this is perhaps 
the most difficult part since the liquidity situation is liable to change very rapidly. 
Crisis prevention 
3. 
Turning  to  my  last  financial  stability  issue,  that  of  crisis  management,  in  my  view  this  is  mainly  a 
question  of  being  prepared.  Or  as  prepared  as  possible,  I  should  say,  because  how  can  you 
adequately prepare for the unknown? 
There are basically two types of crisis: a slow crisis and a fast crisis. 
By a fast crisis I mean single but severe events like fraud, major loan losses or general events that 
quickly  lead  to  loss  of  market  or  creditor/depositor  confidence.  These  cases  call  for  quick  action. 
Normally  the  central  bank  takes  the  lead  because  of  its  ability  to  provide  emergency  liquidity 
assistance and because of its access to updated information on the liquidity situation in the market. 
But close cooperation is required, especially with the supervisory authority, which has information on 
individual  banks,  and  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  if  there  is  a  need  for  solvency  support.  In  my 
experience, there are many possibilities for such a process to fail. Misunderstood information, unclear 
leadership or conflicts of interest may delay the process until it is too late. The chances of solving a 
fast  crisis  increase  enormously  if  all  institutions  involved  have  prepared  for  it,  e.g.  through  crisis 
management drills. Such drills tend to uncover the shortcomings or conflicts that may prevent smooth 
cooperation when really needed. 
A slow crisis, on the other hand, may be detected but not always prevented by financial oversight. In a 
slowly developing crisis there is time to prepare action, which may even include new legislation, for 
instance on bank resolution. 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 3
To detect such a crisis may sound easy, but is in practice very difficult. For instance, when does a 
gradual increase in asset prices actually turn into an unsustainable bubble and no longer constitute a 
reflection  of  fundamental  values?  Look  at  the  housing  markets  in  some  countries  around  the  world 
right now. Are there bubbles and, if so, where are they?  
Another problem is timing. At what point should the central bank sound the warning bell? By acting too 
early, we might add to the volatility in the market place and hence worsen the situation. Remember 
that the central bank will be held accountable for the negative repercussions of pricking the bubble, 
not only for the potential but less tangible benefits of having done so. By acting too late, on the other 
hand, we do not fulfil our mandate and a full-blown crisis might not be prevented. 
In addition to the problem of timing, there is the problem of selecting an appropriate response to the 
threat. The first line of defence is moral suasion, i.e. trying to convince the banks and other market 
participants to act in a proper fashion. The problem with moral suasion is that it may be difficult to calm 
a  market  that  is  rushing  to  new  heights.  Still,  by  publishing  financial  stability  reports  and  issuing 
warnings to relevant parties, it should be possible to influence the public discussion. The second line 
of defence is prudential regulation. Discussions could be held with the supervisory authority and the 
Ministry  of  Finance  on  solutions,  such  as  stricter  formal  regulations,  calls  for  improved  risk 
management systems or other conditions in order to strengthen banks. A good example is the Hong 
Kong  Monetary  Authority,  which,  in  a  situation  of  unrealistic  property  prices,  used  its  power  to 
gradually lower the loan-to-value ratio of property collateral in order to limit bank lending. 
A  third  line  of  defence  of  course  is  the  use  of  monetary  policy,  which  in  practice  probably  means 
raising interest rates to prick a bubble. This, in my view, should clearly be an option. But there are also 
some strong arguments against a central bank trying to respond to asset prices and credit expansion 
by changing its monetary policy stance. And there are certainly situations when it is unlikely to work. I 
shall have to leave this issue for now, however, or you will have to listen to me for another hour. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by saying that much has been done in the work on financial stability in the past years. 
Still, it is not hard to identify areas with room for improvement. The analysis of borrowers and other 
counterparties to banks in the home country, but also abroad, needs to be enhanced. Central banks 
need to acquire a better understanding of how the banks manage their liquidity, how they select their 
sources of funding and the effects this has on their resilience to disturbances. The analysis of stability 
also needs to be supplemented with methods for stress tests, that is, ways of analysing the sensitivity 
of  banks  to  shocks.  Another  area  that  will  prove  challenging  for  both  stability  analysis  and  risk 
management  preparedness  in  the  future  is  the  ongoing  integration  in  Europe  and,  more  generally, 
banks’ tendency to set up cross-border establishments in many countries. 
I  see  great  scope  for  close  international  cooperation  on  these  issues,  both  in  terms  of  developing 
methods for analysis and for other aspects of stability surveillance and crisis management. I would like 
to thank the Bank of Indonesia once again for devoting an international conference to these important 
topics. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2003
