Alan Bollard: After the National Bank acquisition - living with big Australian 
banks 
An excerpt of an address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the 
Australasian Institute of Banking and Finance, Auckland, 6 November 2003. 
 Having a banking industry consisting mainly of banks with Australian parentage has many advantages 
for  us.  Despite  our  country’s  small  size,  our  banking  system  benefits  from  the  presence  of  strong, 
innovative, internationally-connected players that are from a highly-respected country and understand 
our preferred ways of banking. Of course, from time to time one hears complaints about “branch office” 
treatment  of  New  Zealand  borrowers,  but  overall  on  a  day-to-day  basis  banks’  customers  in  New 
Zealand do well out of the deal. Meantime, the Reserve Bank’s main concern remains to regulate for 
the  promotion  of  a  sound  and  efficient  New  Zealand  financial  system,  regardless  of  the  fact  of  its 
Australian parentage. 
The  conditions  we  put  on  ANZ’s  acquisition  of  the  National  Bank  do  not  signal  any  radical  new 
approach to banking regulation. However, they do represent ongoing enhancements that we are very 
serious about and have been working on for some time. These are aimed at ensuring that local boards 
have  effective  operational  reach  over  core  assets  and  people,  and  that  lines  of  responsibility  and 
accountability are clear. We have been able to effect these conditions due to the new powers put in 
place by the RBNZ Amendment Act in August, and they provide an indication of the direction of our 
generic policy thinking on these matters.  
The  Reserve  Bank’s  conditions  associated  with  the  acquisition  were  in  four  main  areas.  First,  any 
transfers  or  outsourcing  of  the  National  Bank’s  core  banking  functionality,  including  by  way  of  an 
operational  merger,  will  require  the  Reserve  Bank’s  further  consent.  Core  functionality  includes  all 
management, operational capacity and systems necessary to operate the bank on a standalone basis 
in  the  event  of  failure  of  an  outsourcing  provider,  including  a  parent  bank.  The  intent  of  this 
requirement  is  to  ensure  that  any  outsourcing  does  not  undermine  the  legal  authority  and  practical 
ability of the directors or statutory manager of the National Bank to run the bank on a standalone basis 
if  the  need  should  arise.  This  doesn’t  necessarily  mean  that  the  core  functionality  must  be  in  New 
Zealand - it means that legal and practical access to it in a crisis must be unimpeded.  
The second area where we imposed conditions of consent strengthens the first. We require that the 
National  Bank  chief  executive’s  employment  contract  be  between  that  person  and  the  board  of  the 
National Bank, and that any amendments to the National Bank’s constitution have our consent. The 
intent  of  these  measures  is  to  ensure  that  there  is  coherence  in  the  National  Bank’s  local 
accountability  arrangements  and  that  the  local  board  remains  in  a  strong  position  to  exercise 
independent  and  meaningful  governance  of  the  management  of  the  National  Bank,  in  the  best 
interests of the National Bank, in good times and in bad. This requirement should be seen as a means 
of reinforcing our emphasis on the role of directors in overseeing a bank’s operations, and our ability to 
manage a crisis involving the failure of any large bank in New Zealand.  
Third,  we  require  all  prospective  appointments  of  directors  or  senior  executives  to  the  ANZ  or  the 
National  Bank  to  be  advised  to  us  and  the  appointments  made  only  if  we  have  no  objection.  This 
measure  ensures  that  the  appointment  process  is  in  line  with  our  new  obligation  introduced  by  the 
RBNZ  Amendment  Act  to  have  regard  to  the  suitability  for  their  positions  of  directors  and  senior 
managers of registered banks. Generally speaking we would be unlikely to object to an appointment 
unless  there  were  strong  reasons  to  believe  the  individual  would  be  unsuitable  for  a  position  of 
responsibility over a registered bank.  
Finally, we require that each registered bank in the ANZ Group maintain a level of capital in line with 
our current policy on capital adequacy for consolidated banking groups. This tightens up the capital 
adequacy  rules  a  little  in  this  case,  to  account  for  the  fact  that  the  ANZ  Group  now  contains  two 
systemically important registered banks. We regard it as important that each of these banks maintain 
adequate capital on a solo basis. 
We took these steps in pursuit of our statutory obligations to promote the maintenance of a sound and 
efficient financial system in New Zealand, and to avoid significant damage to the financial system that 
could  result  from  the  failure  of  a  registered  bank.  We  don’t  think  the  conditions  will  make  a  great 
BIS Review 48/2003 
 1
difference  to  the  current  day-to-day  running  of  the  National  Bank’s  operations  under  normal 
circumstances. However, we do see them as important in bolstering our ability to deal with a crisis 
situation  involving  the  bank  or  the  ANZ  group.  We  sought  to  impose  the  conditions  in  a  manner 
consistent with our general approach to banking regulation, which is not to get into the business of 
managing banks, but to put the onus for effective bank management on the shoulders of those best-
placed to carry that task - the directors and senior executives of banks.  
In  giving  consent,  we  recognised  that,  under  certain  circumstances,  all  our  large  banks  being 
Australian-owned  could  increase  our  system’s  exposure  to  stress  emanating  from  the  Australian 
economy and financial system. We will be considering this further and have let it be known that we will 
take further measures to manage this risk if necessary. 
As  noted  before,  the  conditions  imposed  on  the  ANZ’s  acquisition  are  a  specific  application  of  our 
current  policy  thinking  around  governance  and  crisis  management,  coloured  by  the  additional 
considerations introduced by the RBNZ Amendment Act. This thinking is still developing, and relevant 
to all systemically important banks. Generic policies regarding these matters will be fleshed out as part 
of  our  broader  financial  stability  work  programme,  and  we  will  be  consulting  with  banks  on  those 
generic policies in due course. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2003
