Hermann Remsperger: Current challenges facing economic policy-makers 
Speech  by  Professor  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the ZIRP - the Rheinland-Palatinate Initiative, Mainz, 3 November 2003. 
 I 
Ladies and gentlemen, even if the global economy now appears to be picking up and overall economic 
recovery seems likely, there is no disputing the fact that economic policy in Germany is facing major 
challenges.  Everything  must  be  done  to  ensure  that  Germany  once  again  achieves  sustainable 
economic  growth.  Comprehensive,  systematic  reforms  are  essential  if  Germany  is  to  meet  this 
objective.  
Of course there is no denying that the sluggish economic trend over the past three years was partially 
caused by global factors. However, we should not overlook the problems of our own making. The very 
fact that Germany has been suffering not only from a cyclical downturn, but also from an inadequate 
growth momentum, means that it is not enough merely to expect the emerging improvement of the 
global  economy  to  rescue  Germany  from  the  economic  trough  permanently  and,  as  it  were, 
“automatically” solve its economic policy problems.  
After all, over the past few years, growth in Germany has been noticeably below the average across 
the euro area. While GDP in the other euro area countries has risen at an average annual rate of just 
over  2½%  since  1995,  in  Germany  it  has  only  increased  by  1½%  a  year.  There  are,  of  course,  a 
variety  of  possible  explanations  for  this.  For  example,  Germany  sustained  a  special  type  of 
“exogenous shock” - as the economists say - as a result of reunification. Furthermore, Germany was 
unable  to  profit  from  the  convergence  process  leading  up  to  European  monetary  union  by  which 
interest rates in those countries with previously stronger inflationary tendencies fell to Germany’s level. 
However, this does not suffice to explain why Germany is lagging behind.  
A review of the overall economic state of affairs should also include an intemporal comparison. In the 
1970s the average annual growth rate was 2¾% and in the 1980s it was still as high as 2¼%. Since 
the  reunification  of  Germany,  the  average  rate  has  been  barely  1½%.  If,  in  the  period  since  1991, 
Germany had managed to maintain on average at least the growth rate it achieved in the 1980s, real 
GDP would now be more than one-tenth higher.  
The  flagging  economic  dynamism  brought  with  it  a  noticeable  slowdown  in  investment  activity.  In 
recent years the capital stock (excluding housing) has increased at a rate of only 1½%, compared to 
an  average  growth  rate  of  2½%  in  the  1980s.  Such  weak  capital  formation  imposes  considerable 
restraints on the supply potential of the German economy.  
Thus in order to secure a higher expansion path in the future, it is essential that we not only stop the 
downward  trend  of  fixed  capital  formation,  but,  moreover,  reverse  it.  In  particular,  in  view  of  the 
increasingly shorter lifespan of assets and the subsequent greater need for replacement investments 
to maintain the capital stock, the share of investment in GDP must be raised significantly.  
Alongside the falling growth trend, the progressive rise in unemployment is another regrettable feature 
of the economic development over the past 30 years. Unemployment has risen markedly with every 
downturn in the business cycle. For example, in 1973 just under 300,000 people were registered as 
unemployed, rising to over one million in 1975, and subsequently from approximately 900,000 people 
in 1980 to 2.2 million in 1983.  
In the first half of the 1990s unemployment in Germany as a whole rose again from roughly 3 million in 
1992  to close  to  4.4  million  in  1997. Although  the  number  of  unemployed  subsequently  dropped  to 
less than 4 million, the latest jobless figure is once more in the region of 4.4 million.  
These  figures  clearly  show  that  in  the  subsequent  economic  upturns,  we  have  been  far  from 
successful at reintegrating the additional jobless people in the production process. Simultaneously, the 
labour supply in Germany rose considerably.  
Under the standardised EU definition, the unemployment rate in Germany is now around 9½%, one of 
the  highest  in  the  Community.  According  to  our  analyses,  the  greater  part  of  this  is  of  a  structural 
nature. Hence the need for structural reforms to lower unemployment.  
BIS Review 48/2003 
 1
Efforts to increase the effectiveness of the labour market in Germany must be made by parliament, as 
well  as  both  sides  of  industry.  It  is  the  task  of  parliament  to  create  the  appropriate  legal  and 
institutional framework. Management and labour must argue appropriate employment contracts.  
Back in spring of this year, with the First and Second Acts Promoting Modern Labour Market Services, 
the Federal Government acted upon some of the initiatives of the “Hartz Commission”. Alongside the 
objective  of  increasing  the  efficiency  of  job-placement  activities,  the  burden  of  taxes  and  social 
security contributions for low income groups was cut. In addition, special incentives were created for 
household services, so as to exploit more fully the potential which is undoubtedly available in this area. 
Further measures, such as reducing social security benefits for the unemployed, are under way and 
under currently being discussed in parliament. 
Altogether  this  should  undoubtedly  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  labour  market.  However,  the 
provision specifying that it is only reasonable to expect people to work for the actual local rates of pay 
would weaken the incentive to take up work. Moreover, further measures to make the labour market 
more  efficient  seem  necessary.  For  example,  consideration  should  be  given  to  extending  the 
favourability  principle  (Günstigkeitsprinzip)  to  include  the  safeguarding  of  jobs.  In  future,  it  should 
generally  be  possible,  in  the  interest  of  employees,  to  agree  on  a  pay  level  below  the  collectively 
negotiated rates if the very existence of the enterprise is in jeopardy. Similarly, employment protection 
legislation, which in its current form benefits those currently employed, but simultaneously increases 
the duration of unemployment, needs to be re-examined. 
Not least, the tax wedge on the labour market must be reduced. The wedge between the employer’s 
labour costs and the employee’s take-home pay in the form of social security contributions and wage 
tax  rose  from  43%  in  1991  to  48½%  in  1997.  While  it  is  true  that  the  burden  of  taxes  and  social 
security contributions eased slightly to 47½% in 2002, there is no doubt that the considerable rise in 
non-wage labour costs since reunification has had a negative effect on labour demand. 
In  recent  years  employers  and  trade  unions  have  agreed  on  a  number  of  measures  to  increase 
flexibility  on  the  labour  market  with  regard  to working  hours and wages. These  include  the  working 
hours  accounts  introduced  in  many  sectors  of  the  economy.  They  make  it  possible  to  adjust  the 
regular  working  hours  more  effectively  to  the  needs  of  the  business  without  payment  of  overtime 
bonuses.  Moreover,  in  many  sectors  it  is  possible  to  reduce  or  increase  the  weekly  working  hours 
within certain limits.  
There  is  now  not  only  a  greater  degree  of  flexibility  with  regard  to  working  hours,  but  also  wages. 
Remuneration corridors in the chemical industry mean it is possible to lower employees’ earnings in an 
enterprise for a limited period to below the collectively negotiated rates. The relaxation clauses for the 
thirteenth monthly salary in the chemical industry, the private banking sector and recently also in the 
construction sector are another example of increasing flexibility within industry-wide wage agreements. 
Equally  important  issues  are  sufficient  wage  flexibility  and  wage  differentiation,  particularly  for 
unskilled workers. However, hardly any progress worth mentioning has been achieved in this regard in 
recent years. To create employment opportunities for unskilled workers with low productivity, the wage 
scale needs to be brought more into line with productivity.  
II 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  current  political  discussion  in  Germany  demonstrates  almost  daily  that 
fiscal and social policy-makers are faced with major tasks. If they are tackled resolutely, Germany will 
be in a position to overcome its weak growth.  
In my opinion, there can be no question of further increasing the general government deficits in order 
to try to engineer a short-term cyclical stimulus. The real challenge lies in implementing wide-ranging 
structural  reforms  to  create  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  public  finances,  thereby  supporting 
macroeconomic momentum. 
However, it is no easy task to implement reforms of this kind in Germany. A broad consensus normally 
has to be reached between the individual government levels and also between the political parties. A 
full calendar of elections and the virtually continuous electioneering which they entail, as well as the 
considerable influence of various lobbies, mean that a great degree of inertia is inherent in the system.  
The  result  can  be  seen,  for  example,  in  the  extremely  complicated  tax  and  social  security  system, 
which  is  characterised  by  innumerable  piecemeal  amendments  and  supplements.  The  system  has 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2003
become immensely complex and, as a result, is increasingly perceived as unjust. The epithet “tax and 
subsidy  jungle”  indicates  the  loss  of  clarity  and  transparency.  This  is  another  reason  why  the 
stalemate over reform which has built up over decades must now be broken. The dismantling of the 
dense web of regulations, which this requires, would also enable us to reduce bureaucracy. A leaner 
government sector could then be financed with lower taxes, which, in turn, would benefit all.  
In my opinion, considerable “deconcentration” of government activity is also desirable. This includes a 
stricter  separation  of  government  tasks  together  with  increased  responsibility  of  each  tier  of 
government  for  both  expenditure  and  revenue.  Greater  emphasis  on  competitive  elements  in  the 
federal system and greater consideration of the different preferences in the individual regions could 
facilitate more efficient and more focused government activity.  
Allow  me  now  to  explain  in  more  detail  the  tasks  I  see  in  the  three  areas  of  budget  consolidation, 
taxation and social security. 
The consolidation of public finances constitutes a key task for all government levels. The budget 
deficits  of  central,  state  and  local  government  have  risen  dramatically  in  the  past  two  years  from 
€34 billion  to  €60  billion.  The  situation  is  expected  to  deteriorate  considerably  this  year,  with  the 
deficits  of  general  government  including  the  special  funds  rising  to  more  than  €80  billion.  In  many 
cases, the statutory borrowing ceilings set by budgetary law will be exceeded.  
The  social  security  funds  have  also  slipped  into  the  red.  The  fluctuation  reserves  of  the  statutory 
pension  insurance  scheme,  which  had  already  been  lowered  considerably  in  recent  years,  will  fall 
even  further.  The  statutory  health  insurance  funds  have  resorted  to  borrowing,  which  is  actually 
prohibited by law.  
Last year the general government deficit ratio came to 3.5%, which was well over the 3% limit set by 
the Maastricht Treaty. It will further increase this year and could even exceed 4%. While it is true that 
unfavourable  cyclical  developments  and  other  temporary  influences  are  playing  a  part  in  this,  this 
should not blind us to the fact that the bulk of the deficit - which we estimate at approximately 3% of 
GDP - is structural. Looking at public debt, in 2002 it amounted to 1.3 trillion or 1,300 billion €. The 
debt ratio increased to 60.8% and will grow further in the current year. 
The consolidation of public finances is not an end in itself, but an economic necessity1. High deficits 
entail rising interest payments, which restrict the government’s room for manoeuvre in the future. At a 
later  date  spending  must  be  cut  or  taxes  increased  to  finance  them.  This  poses  an  even  greater 
problem if, as in Germany’s case, the burden of taxes and social security contributions is already great 
and  considerable  further  strains  on  public  finances  are  already  expected  as  a  result  of  the 
demographic trend. 
Government  finances  that  are  perceived  to  be  unsound  and  unsolved  fiscal  problems  give  rise  to 
uncertainty about the future course of fiscal policy. This in turn leads to consumption and investment 
restraint and depresses economic growth. 
A reduction of the deficits is also essential if Germany is to fulfil its international commitments. In the 
run-up to European monetary union, particularly at Germany’s urging, the Stability and Growth Pact 
was concluded. The Pact laid an important foundation for a successful European monetary union by 
supplementing and fleshing out the details of the Maastricht Treaty.  
Euro area governments are required to reach a budgetary position that is at least close to balance in 
the medium term - in other words structurally. This requirement, together with the 3% deficit ceiling, is 
intended to ensure that sound public finances are achieved or maintained. Sound public finances are 
an important prerequisite for winning and keeping public confidence in a stability-oriented monetary 
policy, for achieving low inflation expectations and consequently for favourable medium and long-term 
capital market rates. 
A strict interpretation of the Pact therefore means that German fiscal policy must endeavour, also in 
line with the earlier provisions of the European Commission and the Ecofin Council, to comply with the 
3% ceiling for the deficit ratio in the coming year. This ceiling will be overshot in 2003 for the second 
                                                      
1   J. Stark, H. Remsperger, Regeln in der Budgetpolitik - Zur Kritik am Stabilitätspakt, in: Deutsche Bundesbank, Auszüge aus 
Presseartikeln, Nr. 40, 16.9.2003, p.10-13. 
BIS Review 48/2003 
 3
year running. If it is breached again in 2004, there is a risk of further damage to the credibility of the 
Pact, which is in the interest of neither Germany nor Europe. 
However, judging from the way things stand at the moment, the achievement of this target appears in 
jeopardy. Although the Federal Government has put together a package of consolidation measures, 
these will be offset by shortfalls arising from the planned advancement of the third stage of the income 
tax  reform  from  2005  to  2004.  Furthermore,  there  is  uncertainty  about  the  implementation  of  the 
measures announced in the parliamentary decision-making process and their actual financial impact. 
If  a  third  year  of  excessive  deficit  is  to  be  avoided, it  is  essential  that  the  announced consolidation 
measures be fully implemented. If, at the same time, the plan to bring forward the third stage of the 
income  tax  reform  is  adhered  to,  there  must  be  comprehensive  counter-financing.  Otherwise  -  as 
should  also be  the case  for  France -the  next  procedural  steps under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
should be implemented strictly.  
Experience  has  shown  that  successful  and  sustainable  consolidation  should  focus  primarily  on 
expenditure,  in  particular  non-investment  expenditure.  All  general  government  benefits  must  be 
reviewed.  A  reduction  in  subsidies,  which  distort  macroeconomic  allocation  and  therefore  inhibit 
growth,  would  be  especially  desirable.  Therefore  the  proposals  of  the  “Koch-Steinbrück  Initiative”, 
which envisage an across-the-board cut in numerous subsidies, are to be welcomed in this respect.  
At the same time, the option of completely eliminating out-dated subsidies (such as the home buyers’ 
grant) should not be excluded. A marked increase in the proposed linear cuts of 4% over three years 
also appears warranted, as does extending the cuts to include further subsidies. 
I have already mentioned that the tax wedge in Germany, which increased noticeably in the 1990s, 
poses  a  considerable  impediment  to  growth.  As  well  as  relieving  the  burden  of  social  security 
contributions, tax policy2, in particular, is faced with the task of lowering the high marginal tax rates in 
order to improve the incentives for labour supply, labour demand and capital formation. To achieve 
this,  fiscal  policy  must  likewise  have  a  clear  strategy  and  objectives,  something  which  -  to  put  it 
tactfully - has not always been in evidence in recent times.  
An  extensive  simplification  of  tax  law  would  take  us  a  big  step  forward.  The  widening  of  the  tax 
assessment  base  associated  with  the  abolition  of  current  tax  loopholes  could  be  used  to  lower  tax 
rates further. Moreover, in the context of a comprehensive income tax reform, consideration could also 
be given to a further shift from direct to indirect taxes by abolishing current turnover tax reductions. 
A deterioration of investment conditions must concurrently be avoided, not least in view of the current 
weak growth and low fixed-capital formation. To this end, a reintroduction of the wealth tax must be 
rejected  once  and  for  all  and  the  envisaged  restriction  of  the  facility  for  offsetting  corporate  losses 
against taxes must be abandoned.  
I  am  also  sceptical  of  attempts  to  reform  or  even  extend  the  existing  local  business  tax.  It  would 
appear far more advisable to me - also with a view to simplifying the tax system - to abolish it and 
replace it by an add-on facility on income and corporation tax for local governments.  
As regards the taxation of investment income, the proposed tax amnesty could help to broaden the 
domestic tax base on a lasting basis through the repatriation of exiled money. However, in order to 
achieve  this,  a  reliable  perspective  for  the  future  taxation  of  investment  income  is  particularly 
important. In this context the definition of a final tax rate would appear to be the right move.  
The social security system, which was characterised by a sharp increase in the contribution rate in 
the  1990s,  from  35½%  in  1990  to  over  41%  in  2000,  are  also  in  urgent  need  of  reform.  This  is 
particularly essential because the social security systems in their current form cannot cope with the 
demographic  developments.  While  relief  can  perhaps  be  expected  for  the  unemployment  insurance 
fund,  provided  there  is  a  considerable  reduction  in  the  high  level  of  unemployment,  the  pension 
insurance scheme,  the  health  insurance  fund  and the  long-term  care  insurance scheme  face  major 
structural problems in the longer run. 
Rising  life  expectancy  and  the  persistently  low  birth  rate  mean  that  the  population  is  progressively 
ageing. Given that the life expectancy of 65-year olds in Germany increased from 78½ years in 1970 
                                                      
2   See  H.  Remsperger,  Neue  Prioritäten  in  der  Steuerpolitik  -  Strukturreformen  und  Entlastung,  in:  Deutsche  Bundesbank, 
Auszüge aus Presseartikeln, Nr. 28, 25.6.2003, p. 3-5. 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2003
to 82½ in 2000, the Rürup Commission assumes a further increase of roughly 3 years to 85½ by 2030. 
It  is  also  assumed  that  the  birth  rate  will  stagnate  at  1.4.  Based  on  this  scenario,  the  elderly 
dependency ratio - the ratio of over 64 year olds to 15 to 64 years olds - having risen from 21.9% in 
1970 to 24.2% in 2000, will shoot up to 45.5% in 2030. This necessitates considerable adjustments in 
the  pay-as-you-go  statutory  pension  insurance  scheme.  Ultimately  there  are  only  three  possible 
approaches:  increasing  the  contribution  rates,  reducing  the  relative  pension  level,  or  raising  the 
retirement age including a shortening of the pension entitlement period.  
The reform strategies presented to date point to a mixture of these three approaches. It seems to me 
that, in the longer term, a curbing of the rate of pension increases and a rise in the standard retirement 
age  will  be  unavoidable.  A  further  increase  in  the  contribution  burden  should  be  avoided  as  far  as 
possible. Furthermore, a greater role in old age provision should be played by funded private pension 
schemes,  which,  in  the  event  of  an  objectively  insufficient  ability  to  save,  could  be  supported  by 
government transfers.  
The statutory health insurance funds are likewise facing considerable financial problems. Growing 
health expenditure is not a problem per se. Indeed, in an ageing society this presumably accords with 
the population’s preferences. However, the structure of the current system does not enable it to meet 
the challenges it faces.  
The measures agreed by the Bundestag and Bundesrat for the statutory health insurance funds are to 
be  welcomed  in  that  they  may  lead  to  a  lowering  of  the  contribution  rates.  At  the  same  time,  the 
increased participation by the patients in individual health costs should contribute to a more efficient 
use of resources. Last but not least, non-wage labour costs will be reduced. However, overall, these 
measures by no means obviate the need for further reforms. 
In particular, I believe it is necessary to decouple social security funding from non-wage labour costs 
and  clearly  differentiate  between  redistributive  and  earned  entitlements.  This  can  be  achieved  by 
introducing uniform contributions for all coupled with tax-financed social equalisation. In addition, more 
measures are needed to enhance the efficiency of health services providers.  
On  balance,  therefore,  I  see  a  need  for  considerable  further  fiscal  policy  action  and  reforms.  We 
should  therefore  welcome  the  fact  that  the  Federal  Government  has  taken  some  important  steps 
forward with “Agenda 2010”, and that a very open discussion on this subject has begun and, in many 
respects,  courageous  and  encouraging  proposals  have  been  made.  What  is  now  required  is  to 
assemble  them  in  a  cogent  overall  package,  to  place  public  finances  on  a  sustainable  long-term 
footing and thereby to incisively improve Germany’s overall economic outlook. 
Finally, let me point out that the conditions for growth have already improved at the microeconomic 
level. First, the profitability of the banks has picked up slightly. Second, many production enterprises 
have used the past few years to implement restructuring and consolidation measures.  
While the indebtedness of enterprises, in particular large companies, rose sharply from 63% of GDP in 
1995 to 85% in 2000, this debt ratio has since stabilised. This becomes particularly clear when one 
considers  the  new  borrowing.  In  2000,  the  new  borrowing  of  “non-financial  corporations”,  which 
includes partnerships, amounted to approximately 11% of GDP. In 2002, the ratio was only 1¾%. In 
the same period, the acquisition of financial assets by these companies fell from 10% to 4.3% of GDP.  
As well as shortening their balance sheets, enterprises also introduced many less visible innovations. 
The  restructuring  of  business  areas,  the  modernisation  of  product  ranges  and  the  review  of  value-
added chains are important elements in laying the basis for stronger future performance.  
Given these adjustments at the enterprise level, which form the link between structural change and 
economic growth, the urgently required reforms in the labour market and fiscal and social policy will be 
rooted in fertile soil. The ground has long been prepared as far as interest rate policy is concerned. A 
wind of change bringing plentiful reforms would enable us to reap even greater benefits. Unfortunately 
there is a risk that the climate for future harvests will be damaged by the collapse of the Stability and 
Growth Pact. Fiscal policy should do everything possible to avoid further damage to the credibility of 
the fiscal rules in Europe. 
BIS Review 48/2003 
 5
