Lars Heikensten: Introduction to monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance, Stockholm, 16 October 2003. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the opportunity to come here and talk to the members of the Riksdag 
Committee  on  Finance  about  monetary  policy.  I  believe  that  the  Committee's  public  hearing  of  the 
Riksbank governor provides a good basis for a constructive discussion of monetary policy in Sweden 
and comprises an important part of the openness the Riksbank wishes to safeguard. 
These open hearings began originally at the initiative of the Riksbank. They were an expression of our 
endeavour to bring about an open discussion on monetary policy, an endeavour that has since taken 
on many other aspects; lengthy Inflation Reports, published minutes from monetary policy meetings, 
press conferences where we account for our interest rate decisions and explain our deliberations, and 
so on. Now these hearings are a part of our legislation. 
The fact that the Committee closely follows our activities has become even more important since the 
Riksbank was given an independent status. These hearings illustrate the clear link between us and the 
democratically-elected body in Sweden. 
Today  I  shall  take  up  three  themes.  I  shall  begin  with  a  few  words  about  the  Riksbank's  situation 
following  the  referendum.  Then  I  shall  comment  as  usual  on  the  assessment  of  inflation  and  the 
interest  rate  decision  we  have  published.  Finally,  I  shall  discuss  the  Swedish  economy's  long-term 
growth prospects. 
The Riksbank after the referendum 
The result of the referendum was, as we all know, a "no" vote. What this means for the Riksbank is 
that we will continue to focus our operations on our statutory objectives; to maintain price stability and 
to  promote  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system.  Quite  simply,  it  will  be  "business  as  usual"  for 
monetary policy. This means that under normal circumstances we will continue to follow our simple 
monetary policy rule: if future inflation is forecast to be higher than the inflation target of 2 per cent, we 
will raise the interest rate, and vice versa if inflation is forecast to be lower than 2 per cent. This clear 
intellectual framework makes it easier to influence expectations of monetary policy in society and to 
evaluate the policy afterwards. Both we ourselves and external analysts can take a stand on whether 
the policy appears sensible in relation to the target, whether the forecasts we make are reasonable, 
and whether we follow the principles we claim to follow for attaining the inflation target.  
Even if the monetary policy framework remains intact, this is no reason to become too comfortable. 
During the spring we began work on a review of the process used to produce the information on which 
our  interest  rate  decisions  are  based.  This  includes  considering  how  one  of  our  most  important 
documents  - the  Inflation Report  - can  be  improved.  It  also  involves  improving  our  ability  to  predict 
price trends. 
Work on the Riksbank's other main objective - financial stability - has been characterised to a great 
extent by the experiences of the financial crisis that shook Sweden in the early 1990s. The Riksbank 
has  been  something  of  a  pioneer,  being  the  first  central  bank  in  the  world  to  publish  reports  on 
financial stability. There is also reason to make a fresh effort in this field. We are in the process of 
appointing a group of experts, which includes a couple of international experts, who will evaluate our 
work and present suggestions for improvements.  
The evaluations we make will be followed up with open seminars, where we can discuss the future 
direction of our operations with economists from the academic world as well as actors in the financial 
sector. 
The Riksbank is currently one of the world's most open central banks, but we can certainly become 
better. Our work will in future be aimed at ensuring that the Riksbank reaches a broader general public 
than  is  currently  the  case.  Our  ambition  is  to  create  even  broader  support  for  our  operations  and 
thereby greater understanding of what we do and why we do it. Personally, I intend to travel around 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 1
the  country  before  the  autumn  and  spring  monetary  policy  meetings  to  talk  and  listen  to 
representatives of local industries and regions.  
The inflation perspective 
It  was  observed  in  the  June  Inflation  Report  that  for  some  time  there  had  been  gradual  downward 
revisions to the forecasts for the world economy. The Riksbank's forecast, like that of other analysts, 
was that the international recovery would be slower and more prolonged. There were several reasons 
for this, including geopolitical unease and increased caution among households and firms in the wake 
of the stock market fall. The conditions for a clear recovery in the euro area were perceived as poorer 
than  we  had  earlier  believed,  which  made  a  recovery  in  other  countries,  including  Sweden,  more 
difficult. The more negative economic outlook, with inflation prospects below the target of 2 per cent, 
meant that we decided to cut the repo rate during the summer by a total of 0.75 percentage points. 
The rate is currently at 2.75 per cent. 
Minor changes in outlook for economic activity 
So far, international developments have been largely in line with our assessments from the summer. 
The  expansionary  policy  now  appears  to  be  taking  effect  in  certain  areas,  particularly  the  United 
States,  where  signs  of  a  recovery  are  becoming  more  apparent  and  the  risks  of  a  setback  appear 
more  slight.  The  Asian  economies  are  also  developing  relatively  strongly.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
prospects for the euro area still appear to be gloomy. In time, the expected upturn in the United States 
is expected to support a gradual upturn in Europe. All in all, the Riksbank's assessment is that GDP 
growth in the OECD area will be 1.9 per cent this year, 2.8 per cent in 2004 and 2.6 per cent in 2005. 
Neither has the Riksbank's outlook for the Swedish economy changed very much over the summer. 
However, new statistics indicate slightly stronger growth during the first half of this year compared with 
June. This means that the outlook for the Swedish economy now appears somewhat brighter than at 
that time. The repo rate cuts totalling 0.75 percentage points have also contributed to this. However, 
compared with August when we had our last Executive Board monetary policy meeting, we have not 
changed our assessment markedly.  
The Riksbank's assessment is now that continued stable growth in incomes, wealth and employment 
will  contribute  to  smooth  and  relatively  robust  growth  in  household  consumption.  During  2004  and 
2005  an  increase  in  investment  is  also  expected,  although  there  are  no  signs  of  a  turnaround  yet. 
Some upturn in exports is now expected to occur in much the same way as usually happens during 
economic upturns. However, as a similar upturn is expected in imports, the net export contribution to 
GDP growth will be limited.  Public consumption is expected to grow by approximately 1 per cent per 
year over the coming years.  
The improved economic activity will lead to slightly higher resource utilisation than forecast in the June 
Inflation  Report,  which  in  turn  means  that  wages  in  the  private  sector  are  expected  to  rise  at  a 
marginally higher rate during 2004 and 2005. As a result, domestic cost pressure will also be slightly 
higher during these years. On average, total wage costs are expected to rise by just under 4 per cent 
per year during 2004-2005. 
Inflation in line with target 
Inflation has fallen back slightly in recent months, although less than expected. This is because energy 
prices have not fallen as forecast. However, when adjusted for energy prices, inflation has been lower 
than expected. This may be due to the fact that productivity has grown unusually strongly so far this 
year,  while  preliminary  wage  bargaining  outcomes  indicate  slightly  lower  wage  increases  than 
expected.  
Over the coming months, energy prices are expected to remain at a relatively high level. Electricity 
prices  are  not  anticipated  to  return  to  more  normal  levels  until  spring  2004.  This  means  that  they 
cannot be expected to subdue inflation over the coming year as much as was estimated during the 
summer.  Instead,  some  of  the  restraining  effect  will  be  postponed.  However,  at  the  same  time  the 
forecast for underlying inflationary pressure is being revised upwards for 2004 and 2005, as a result of 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2003
the slightly higher resource utilisation. As before, the future path of inflation will be greatly affected by 
fluctuations in energy prices.  
The krona exchange rate has been slightly weaker on average over the summer than the Riksbank 
had forecast in June. However, following the referendum the krona rate has strengthened relatively 
rapidly  and  is  now  in  line  with  the  earlier  forecast.  This  recent  development  is  probably  due  to  the 
market's long-term assessment of the strength of the Swedish economy relative to the euro area, but 
also  to  the  general  weakening  of  the  dollar.  The  forecast  for  the  coming  two years  remains  largely 
unchanged since the June Inflation Report. 
All  in  all,  the  Riksbank's  inflation  forecasts  have  been  adjusted  only  marginally  since  August. 
Excluding  the  effects  of  energy  prices,  inflation  a  couple  of  years  ahead  is  in  line  with  our  target. 
Including energy prices, UND1X inflation is forecast to be 1.7 per cent while CPI inflation is expected 
to stand at 2.1 per cent at the end of the forecast period. 
Some risk factors 
Of course there are factors that could upset the main scenario I have presented for economic activity 
and inflation.  
As before, there is a risk that demand in both the United States and Europe could show weaker growth 
than expected. The deficits in the US public finances and the current account could push up interest 
rates, curbing consumption and investment. However, there is also a possibility that US GDP growth 
may surprise on the strong side if households choose not to increase their saving. There are as yet no 
clear signs of a recovery in Europe. The strained public finances are a source of uncertainty that could 
affect households and firms. In light of these factors, it is important to monitor new economic data in 
the coming months to see if it confirms the picture of a more clear-cut recovery.  
Another risk stems from a continued weakening of the dollar, although this may be motivated to the 
extent that it contributes to easing the adjustment to smaller deficits in the United States' budget and 
current  account.  The  problem  is  that  there  is  a  risk  of  negative  effects  on  exports,  production  and 
employment in the euro area and also Sweden. Adjustment problems and the effects on activity in the 
world economy could prove problematic if the dollar continues to depreciate at a rapid rate.  
However, there are also factors indicating that inflation could be higher than in the main scenario. The 
impending wage bargaining rounds comprise one risk. The Riksbank's current assessment is based 
on the assumption that a weaker labour market will hold back the rate of wage increases. However, 
there are examples of wage bargaining rounds where wage formation has got out of control despite a 
low demand situation, for instance, in 1995. The conflict concerning the Municipal Workers' Union is 
evidence of tensions in the labour market, which could have the effect of pushing up wage costs. 
No  single  factor  is  as  central  to  inflation  trends  -  and  thereby  to  monetary  policy  -  as  wages.  The 
Riksbank will therefore follow the development of the wage negotiations closely during the autumn.  
Another risk stems from energy price trends and in particular developments in electricity prices. The 
monetary policy stance so far has been based on the energy price rise being of a transient nature. We 
have refrained from changing the repo rate when energy prices have risen, although they have meant 
that inflation, and the forecast of inflation two years ahead, have periodically deviated from the 2 per-
cent target.  If energy prices remain at a high level over a longer period or continue to increase, the 
inflation rate could be higher than we have assumed. The conclusions for monetary policy would be 
different if this development begins to leave a mark on inflation expectations. 
All  in  all,  the  risks  of  lower  inflation  stemming  from  weaker  economic  activity  are  judged  to  be 
approximately  balanced  by  the  risks  of  higher  inflation  stemming  from  wage  and  energy  price 
developments. The balance of risks therefore does not change the forecast I have reported earlier. It 
indicates that the underlying, cyclically-related inflation rate will be in line with the inflation target at the 
end of the forecast period. The Executive Board of the Riksbank therefore found it natural to leave the 
repo rate unchanged. 
The future stance of monetary policy will depend as usual on the new information received and on how 
this affects the overall assessment of inflation prospects in the coming years. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 3
Long-term growth prospects 
Allow me at this point to shift focus and speak about long-term growth prospects. These are of course 
a decisive factor for welfare and deserve therefore to be given considerable attention in the economic 
policy debate. But they also have a huge impact on the Riksbank's operations, which I shall return to. 
This gives me reason to underscore the worrying signs that I perceive, especially at an opportunity like 
this, when I before you in the Riksdag Committee on Finance speak about how I see monetary policy 
and the Swedish economy in the future. This does not mean, however, that I am going to embark on a 
discussion of different concrete solutions to the problems. I don't believe that this is a natural task for 
us at the Riksbank.  
Over the last ten years, the task of monetary policy has been to safeguard price stability, that is to say, 
a low and stable inflation rate. This has worked fairly well; inflation has been largely in line with our 
target. In turn, this has contributed to relatively good economic growth, in clear contrast to the 1970s 
and 1980s. However, this is not enough. No matter how well stabilisation policy functions, it does not 
provide higher long-term economic growth.  
In  reality,  growth  potential  and  thereby  our  welfare  is  determined  by  how  much  we  work  and  how 
productive  we  are.  Nothing  can  change  this.  The  amount  that  we  work  depends  on  many  different 
factors,  for  instance,  how  many  people  are  of  working  age,  how  many  of  theses  are  employed, 
absenteeism, etc. Labour productivity, measured as GDP per hour worked, depends partly on the level 
of education and on technological progress or the prevailing conditions for businesses and investment. 
To  this  can  be  added  productivity  changes  resulting  from  the  labour  force  moving  over  from  less 
productive to more productive sectors.  
The number of hours worked rose during the years following the crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. 
But developments were strongly affected by the upturn in the economy, which enabled unemployed 
persons to gradually return to the labour market and obtain work. The positive growth in employment 
was supported by an increase in the number of persons of working age at the same time as sick leave 
was at a relatively low level. In recent years, this trend has been broken, partly due to an increase in 
sick leave. 
The picture of productivity in recent years has been somewhat brighter. For the economy as a whole it 
has stood at 2 per cent per year, or just above this figure. This is a marked improvement on the 1980s, 
when  the  increase  remained  at  around  1  per  cent  per  year,  and  even  more  so  compared  with  the 
1970s, when the productivity trend was negative. Factors such as the change in fiscal and monetary 
policy regimes and stiffer competition have probably played a role in this development.  
Despite the fact that the strong growth in productivity during the 1990s partly reflects both rapid growth 
in the private sector relative to the public sector and the large expansion in the ICT sector, there is 
reason for relative optimism regarding the future. Our economy has become more open, with greater 
competition and price pressure in many sectors.  
The problem is primarily the labour supply. Here, developments seem to have turned in a negative 
direction.  One  reason  for  this,  I  believe,  is  that  economic  policy  has  not  in  practice  been  aimed  at 
putting  people  in  work.  One  example  is  that  the  compensation  levels  in  several  transfer  payment 
systems were increased during the late 1990s. Now other changes are being discussed which would 
directly and tangibly have the same effect, for instance, a reduction in working hours.  
Another  problem  in  this  context  is  that  the  Swedish  labour  market  has  not  been  able  to  make 
adequate  use  of  the  many  people  in  Sweden  who  were  born  abroad.  The  employment  frequency 
among  these  people  has  been  much  lower  than  the  employment  frequency  among  people  born  in 
Sweden. This applies in particular to those who have arrived here quite recently. They include many 
university-educated or otherwise highly-qualified people who are completely without work or have jobs 
below their level of competence. 
In addition, the problem is exacerbated by the fact that the population's age structure in the near future 
will become less advantageous from a labour force perspective, with increasing numbers of exits from 
the labour force. An ever declining group of workers will have to support an ever increasing number of 
people, unless measures are taken. 
It is easy to see the significance for economic growth of measures to increase the labour supply. For 
example, the number of hours worked could increase by an average of 0.4 percentage points more 
per year if it were possible to halve the number of people on sick leave by 2008. This means that the 
number of hours worked could increase by an average of 0.8 per cent annually instead of 0.4 per cent 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2003
during  the  period  up  to  2008.  If  it  was  also  possible  to  break  the  negative  trend  for  persons  born 
abroad and bring them into the labour market to a greater extent than now, this would also increase 
the number of hours worked. In 2002, 75 per cent of the working-age population was employed on 
average, while the figure for those born abroad was 60 per cent. If it were possible to increase the 
employment rate for this group to the national average, the number of hours worked would increase by 
approximately  0.1  percentage  points  more  up  to  2008.  Ensuring  that  persons  with  a  non-Swedish 
background  can  enter  the  labour  market  is  a  central  issue,  partly  because  the  net  addition  to  the 
working-age population will come from this group over the coming decade.  
If  no  measures  are  taken  to  increase  the  labour  supply,  the  Swedish  economy's  long-term  growth 
prospects  are  likely  to  be  subdued  for  a  fairly  long  period.  The  Riksbank  usually  states  that  the 
potential  growth  rate  lies  in  the  interval  2-2.5  per  cent.  If  nothing  is  done,  it  is  likely  that  potential 
growth will decline. In concrete terms, this means that the Swedish economy could reach its capacity 
ceiling at an earlier stage. The implication of this is that the Riksbank could then be forced to raise 
interest rates and tighten monetary policy at a lower rate of growth compared with the last ten years.  
The  problems  of  a  weaker  labour  supply  are  particularly  serious  in  Sweden,  even  if  an  ageing 
population is something shared by many other countries. This is because an unusually large part of 
the expenditure ensuing from an ageing population in terms of medical treatment, care of the elderly 
and  pensions  comes  from  the  public  sector  budgets.  In  turn,  this  means  that  an  unfavourable 
population development will in our case have direct and tangible effects on the public finances. The 
only realistic means of counteracting these effects is for more people to work and pay taxes and for 
fewer to utilise the transfer payment system.  
Finally, we should have learnt from the crisis more than ten years ago that it is important to prevent 
problems. To deal with difficulties and challenges in good time - before they grow out of control. Failing 
to  take  action  does  not  make  the  problems  disappear.  On  the  contrary,  they  risk  becoming  much 
worse in a few years time, when the population development has taken a significantly negative turn. 
Then it might be necessary to make larger and more painful changes under less orderly conditions. 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 5
