Ernst Welteke: Reforming Europe 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  European 
Banking Congress, Frankfurt, 21 November 2003. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Delivering closing remarks at the end of an inspiring day is a curse and a blessing at the same time. 
On the one hand, the final speaker faces the problem that everything has already been said. On the 
other hand, it is a feature of human nature to remember best what one heard last. I will try to exploit 
the latter by widening the perspective and commenting on a few overarching issues. 
A constitution for the European Union 
2. 
A fully developed European identity is evolving only slowly. It may receive an additional boost from the 
European constitutional process. I am a strong proponent of the European Constitution. However, I 
have  some  objections  to  Articles  concerning  the  foundations  of  European  monetary  union.  The 
Constitution was drafted under a consensus that no changes of substance were to be made to the 
monetary framework. While the changes now envisaged look fairly small, they make a difference. As 
nobody  can  surely  want  to  endanger  the  stability  of  the  single  currency,  the  Intergovernmental 
Conference must redraft the Articles in question so as to preserve the tried and tested status quo - if 
they decide to renegotiate the draft. I am well aware of the difficulties of reopening the negotiations, 
and especially of finalising them again. 
I regard three issues as crucial: 
1. 
Article I-3 of the draft Constitution mentions “balanced growth” as one of the objectives of the 
European Union, whereas the wording “non-inflationary growth” has been in the Treaty up to 
now. Price stability must not be dropped from the list of objectives of the EU. 
The independence of the monetary authorities is a defining feature of European monetary 
union. Therefore, the Constitution must guarantee the independence not only of the ECB but 
also of the national central banks. Article I-29 of the draft must be amended accordingly. A 
second-rate independence of the national central banks, that is independence guaranteed by 
national laws only but not by the Constitution, is not acceptable. 
The  unique  status  of  the  ECB  as  an  institution  “sui  generis”  is  given  up  in  the  draft 
Constitution. This reclassification may open the door to assigning objectives other than price 
stability to the ECB. The mere possibility of the ECB being forced to abandon its crystal-clear 
stability orientation might be a risk. 
2. 
3. 
The  members  of  the  Intergovernmental  Conference  should  be  aware  how  the  draft  version  would 
change the monetary framework of the Union - contrary to the consensus. In my view, redrafting the 
Convention’s proposal in this respect is needed if the proposal is opened. 
Transforming Eastern Europe 
3. 
The  drafting  of  a  European  Constitution  comes  at  a  time  when  the  EU  is  preparing  for  the  most 
challenging  enlargement  in  its  history.  The  reform  process  in  the  acceding  countries  will  not  be 
complete upon accession on May 1st. The preparations for participation in European monetary union 
require further efforts. Their financial systems must be upgraded to the standard of the EMU countries. 
This is imperative in order to ensure smooth transmission of the single monetary policy in an enlarged 
monetary union. Furthermore, meeting the Maastricht criteria will require adjustments in fiscal policy. 
The  political  and  economic  transformation  process  which  the  central  and  east  European  countries 
have undergone is impressive. The notion of embracing the European political and economic model 
was  basically  undisputed.  Right  from  the  beginning  it  was  seen  as  a  golden  opportunity,  since  it 
implied the prospect of freedom and prosperity. 
BIS Review 52/2003 
 1
The  prospect  of  joining  the  European  Union  is  propelling  political  and  economic  reforms  in  the 
candidate  state  of  Turkey.  The  reform  process  in  Turkey  is  of  a  different  kind,  but  in  scope  it  is 
comparable to the transformation of the east European countries. Personally, I have the hope that the 
mere  prospect  of  Turkey’s  joining  the  EU  will  contribute  to  a  peaceful  political  stabilisation  of  the 
Middle East. The awful terrorist attacks have shown that this is urgently needed. 
Reforming Western Europe 
4. 
While reforms in eastern Europe were perceived as “opportunities”, western Europe likes to discuss 
upcoming  reforms  in  terms  of  losses.  The  west  European  countries,  especially  the  three  large 
countries, are in dire need of radical reforms. Strained public finances, persistent unemployment and 
ageing populations are putting the welfare state in its present form under pressure. 
The old ideal of providing social justice through a highly redistributive state is fading away. It simply did 
not live up to expectations. The role of the state is now being redefined as a more subsidiary one. The 
other side of the equation is that citizens are increasingly allowed - and expected - to manage their 
own affairs. Efficient markets and a proper set of incentives are reinforcing this trend. In short, today 
citizens row their own boat. And those who are unable to row their own boat can rely on the state for 
support. For a large part of Europe, this notion amounts to a minor revolution. 
As during the transformation process in eastern Europe, policy makers need to win people’s hearts 
and minds for these reforms. We must learn to think [and argue] in terms of gains rather than in terms 
of  losses.  In  this  respect,  policy  makers  in  the  EU  countries  can  learn  a  thing  or  two  from  the 
transformation countries. 
What  we  need  now  is  not  a  little  bit  of  reform  here  and  a  little  bit  of  reform  there.  Like  the 
transformation countries had, we need a coherent approach to reforms. The Bundesbank mapped out 
such  an  approach  for  Germany  in  its  paper  “Ways  out  of  the  crisis”  earlier  this  year.  The  German 
government’s “agenda 2010” reflects the new approach to reforms. It should stick to this approach and 
must not allow itself to be deflected from its course. 
Let me comment in a little bit more detail on that. 
I  would  like  to  start  with  the  fiscal  side  of  reforms.  Balanced  budgets  are  at  the  top  of  the  reform 
agenda. Public finances must be consolidated via the expenditure side. This is perfectly in line with the 
goal of a more subsidiary role of the state and should start with cutting subsidies. Past experience has 
also shown it to be the most effective road to achieving sound public finances. 
Financial  tensions  in  the  social  security  systems  are  weighing  heavily  on  budgets  in  the  west 
European countries. For expenditure-side consolidation to work in an ageing society, the pension and 
healthcare  systems  must  undergo  a  transformation.  Partial  privatisation  and  capital  funding  yield  a 
triple dividend: 
• 
• 
• 
they ease the burden on the budgets, 
they raise the systems’ resilience to demographic stress, 
and  they  are  perfectly  in  line  with  the  model  of  citizens  taking  on  greater  personal 
responsibility. 
The role of the state is changing. From being a provider of goods and services, it is being transformed 
into a facilitator which defines an overall framework designed to enable individuals to thrive on their 
own. This framework encompasses the market-based system: the labour market, the financial markets 
and the product markets. Flexibility is crucial for an efficient interplay of supply and demand. 
The  framework  for  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  has  its  fiscal  equivalent  in  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact. It was implemented in order to make sure monetary stability is not counteracted by fiscal 
leniency. The Pact itself is both sound and flexible. 
The current unfavourable debt dynamics in the wake of slow growth bode ill for the single currency. In 
my view, it is imperative for the European member states - prominent among them, unfortunately, my 
own country - to stick to the sound fiscal policies required by the Stability and Growth Pact. I know 
from my own experience how difficult it is for a finance minister. He needs the support of all others in 
order to achieve his goal. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2003
The Stability and Growth Pact has been declared dead at about weekly intervals during this year. But 
remember Mark Twain, who commented on the news of his death “The reports of my death have been 
greatly exaggerated”. The enforcement of the Pact must be ensured, and pressure must be raised to 
consolidate during economic expansions - and there is one in the offing right now! 
Conclusion 
5. 
What  contribution  can  central  banks  make?  In  a  nutshell,  they  can  deliver  price  stability.  European 
monetary union is designed to keep the price level stable and thereby to provide conditions conducive 
to employment and economic growth. 
Monetary  policy  in  turn  is  facilitated  by  flexible  markets.  In  an  environment  of  flexible  product  and 
factor markets, interest rates can stay low for a longer time during an upturn. Strong demand does not 
necessarily translate into an increasing price level. So a credible stability-oriented monetary policy and 
flexible markets add up to a coherent framework for a dynamic economy. 
At present, low interest rates and ample liquidity are highly conducive to growth in the euro area. In the 
ECB Governing Council we are ready to support the economic recovery as long as this is compatible 
with our mandate of maintaining price stability. The degree of confidence required for a self-sustaining 
recovery could be given a further boost by credibly promoting structural reforms in the west European 
countries. 
On the eve of EU eastern enlargement, the west European countries are experiencing their own type 
of change. I welcome this development. It will bring about a shift in decision-making from the state to 
the individual. 
The  prospect  of  freedom  and  prosperity  was  the  main  driver  of  the  transformation  process  of  the 
former communist countries in central and eastern Europe. Higher degrees of freedom and prosperity 
are also the rewards to be reaped from the transformation process in the West. 
I like the image of people rowing their own boat. The state is no longer a passenger who wants a say 
in steering. In other words, the European welfare state is in the process of being redefined. 
At the end of a long day I have to thank the speakers, the panelists, the participants, the guests, the 
organisers and all the helping hands. They all together made this European Banking Congress again a 
success. 
BIS Review 52/2003 
 3
