David Dodge: On economic education 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the David Dodge Tribute Dinner, 
hosted by the Canadian Foundation of Economic Education, Toronto, Ontario, 3 November 2003.  
 It’s an honour to be here with you tonight and to receive this award. 
One  of  the  great  privileges  of  working  in  the  public  sector  is  interacting  with  so  many  outstanding 
individuals from all parts of Canada and, indeed, from around the world.  
To be here tonight, surrounded by people I have worked with over the years, and whom I can truly call 
my friends, is very exciting and tremendously rewarding.  
The program this evening focuses on the value of public service and the importance of economic and 
financial literacy for the well-being of Canadians. These two themes have special significance for me, 
as  my  career  has  involved  time  spent  in  the  public  service  as  well  as  teaching.  My  long-standing 
interest in public service and economic education (indeed, education more generally) was sparked and 
nourished  through  my  formative  years  at  Ridley  College  and  Queen’s  University.  Ridley’s  motto  is 
Terar  Dum  Prosim  (which  roughly  translates  into  May  I  Be  Consumed  in  Service).  And  Queen’s  is 
Sapientia et Doctrina Stabilitas (that is, Wisdom and Knowledge Shall Be the Strength of Thy Times).  
So there it is: wisdom, knowledge, and service. Education focuses on wisdom and knowledge. And 
education confers an obligation to serve.  
Others here tonight have explored ways to strengthen the contribution of the public sector to our well-
being.  But  I  would  still  like  to  make  some  general  remarks  on  the  subject  before  moving  on  to 
economic education. 
As  an  economist,  the  question  I  most  often  ask  myself  is,  How  can  we  as  a  country  increase  our 
economic well-being? And when I look around the world, one thing is clear to me. The societies that 
have been the most successful in improving the welfare of their citizens are those that have provided a 
social climate in which the dynamism and creativity of individuals and businesses can thrive. They are 
societies that, in the words of Robert Wright,1 are able to create “win-win” situations for their citizens. 
They are the “efficient societies” that Joseph Heath talks about in his book of the same title.2  
To move in that direction, we should, among other things, continue to work towards strengthening the 
relationship between the public and the private sectors. In particular, it is important that we get the 
incentives  right  for  those working  in  government  to  encourage  and  facilitate  the  drive  in  the  private 
sector towards higher productivity and innovation. But we should also have the right incentives for the 
private sector to work towards enhancing the public good and the productivity of collective action by 
governments.  
The problem is that the private and the public sectors too often act as if they are completely different 
worlds. So, the difficulty and the challenge is for both to more fully recognize the symbiotic nature of 
their relationship and thus the importance of interaction and cross-fertilization.  
The bottom line here is that, as a society, we cannot afford to have the private and the public sectors 
operating as two solitudes. Individuals and businesses need a well-functioning public sector to ensure, 
first, the efficient operation of markets and, second, the cost-effective provision of public goods. At the 
same time, the public sector has a responsibility to understand how individuals and businesses work in 
order to provide the appropriate framework for the efficient functioning of markets. While this applies to 
all parts of the public sector, it is perhaps most critical for those of us (including the Bank of Canada) 
who are responsible for the economic and financial framework within which businesses and individuals 
operate. 
                                                      
1   Wright, R. 2001. “Nonzero: The Logic of Human Destiny.” Random House. 
2   Heath, J. 2001. “The Efficient Society: Why Canada Is as Close to Utopia as It Gets.” Viking Canada. 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 1
A  moment  ago,  I  talked  about  the  symbiotic  relationship  between  the  public  and  private  sectors. 
Nowhere  is  that  relationship  more  important  than  in  the  development  of  human  capital  through 
education, training, and learning-by-doing. 
What  I  want  to  explore  here  is  how  the  public  and  private  sectors  can  interact  to  enhance  the 
development  of  the  “economic”  capital  of  individuals.  By  “economic”  capital  I  mean  the  ability  of 
individuals  to  contribute  more  productively  at  work  -  as  employees  or  entrepreneurs  -  or  in  their 
personal lives, as managers of their own economic and financial affairs. 
To  frame  this  issue  in  economists’  terms,  if  we  are  looking  to  increase  our  output  of  goods  and 
services, to become more productive, and to improve our well-being as a nation, we need to augment 
our  investment  in  physical  capital.  But,  as  technology  becomes  more  complex  and  the  global 
environment  more  competitive,  it  is  equally,  if  not  more,  important  that  we  also  augment  our 
investment in human capital. This primarily means improving the skills of our workforce.  
So it is incumbent on all of us to think hard about how to do this. And about how to give individuals the 
tools  they  need  to  become  more  efficient  at  work  and  more  knowledgeable  and  competent  in 
conducting their own affairs. 
This requires that we focus on both the quantity and the quality of education - whether that education 
be formal or informal. 
There  is  a  vast  body  of  literature  on  the  returns  to  investment  in  formal  education.  Much  of  this 
literature focuses on the benefits of completing high school and post-secondary education. This kind 
of analysis generally shows that more formal education leads to higher earnings. Partly because of 
this analysis, we in Canada have focused on keeping children in school longer and ensuring that they 
go on to complete post-secondary education.  
This has paid enormous dividends, and should continue to feature on our agenda. But what we should 
also consider is how to make schooling more productive. And that is not simply about increasing the 
resources  for  education,  but  also  about  using  more  effectively  the  most  critical  and  most  valuable 
resource in this process - students’ time.  
How do we do that? For starters, in the future, we will have to pay more attention to early childhood 
development,  so  that  a  greater  proportion  of  our  6-year-olds  arrive  in  school  ready  to  learn.  I  have 
talked about this at some length in a speech I gave last May to the Sparrow Lake Alliance.3  
We should also focus more on the development of literacy skills in primary grades, given evidence that 
this really pays dividends later on. 
But  one  of  the  keys  to  making  schooling  more  productive  and  relevant  for  our  times  lies  in  linking 
formal education to practical experience - in other words, “building a bridge to the real world.”  
Learning-by-doing can help build that bridge. These practical forms of education can be delivered by 
the community inside and outside the school, by parents, and by businesses - in other words, pretty 
much by  everyone  in  this room  here  tonight!  Unfortunately,  this  type  of  education  has  been  largely 
neglected in the economic literature, which is why I would like to spend the next few minutes talking 
about it.  
When I was in Russia in the early 1990s, the thing that struck me was that, even though people had 
technical skills and some of them also had theoretical knowledge of a market economy, they could not 
relate  to  markets  intuitively.  They  had  not  had  the  opportunity  to  absorb  informally,  by  “doing,”  the 
skills that are absolutely critical in order to function effectively in a market economy. 
What does this mean? In part, it means ensuring that our school system does a better job of bringing 
students to a level of “functional literacy,” and I will have more to say about this in a moment. But it 
also means ensuring that children have an opportunity to really understand how the economy works.  
Based on my experience in Russia, it is not that the Russians that I worked with had not studied the 
theory of the market economy at university, but that they did not have the opportunity to experience at 
an early age how a market economy works, and to learn from that experience.  
                                                      
3   Dodge, D. 2003. “Human Capital, Early Childhood Development, and Economic Growth: An Economist’s Perspective.”  
2 
 BIS Review 47/2003
The  great  advantage  that  we  in  Canada  have  is  that  most  of  us  do  understand  intuitively  how  the 
market  system  works.  That’s  because  we  have  had  exposure  to  it  while  growing  up,  in  one  of  two 
ways:  as  mini-entrepreneurs,  delivering  newspapers,  cutting  grass,  or  babysitting;  or  as  young 
employees, working at a fast-food joint, or packing and carrying out groceries at a supermarket. As 
mini-entrepreneurs,  we  learned  that,  if  we  delivered  a  wet  newspaper,  we  wouldn’t  get  paid.  If  we 
didn’t show up on time for babysitting, we wouldn’t be called again. As young employees, we learned 
that, if we flipped the hamburger onto the floor, or if were rude to the customer, we would get fired. 
Importantly,  we  also  learned  that  there  is  a  relationship  between  the  quality  of  our  service  and 
remuneration.  
Today, some of these “early commerce” experiences and learning opportunities for children are gone. 
For  example,  the  morning  paper  is  now  delivered  by  adults  who  can  get  up  at  3  a.m.  And,  in  the 
interests of health and occupational safety, some Canadian provinces have labour laws that prevent 
anyone under 16 years of age from even being on a construction site. 
Because  some  of  these  “early  commerce”  experiences  are  gone,  and  because  more  are  likely  to 
disappear as technology changes, all of us, as parents, employers, and public policy-makers will have 
to keep thinking of ways to provide new opportunities for our youth to learn by doing.  
As parents, we can encourage our children to seek out “early-commerce” experiences. As employers, 
we  can  offer  opportunities  to  teenagers,  as  interns  or  part-time  workers.  As  educators,  we  can  do 
more to integrate work experiences with schooling. And as public policy-makers, we can ensure that 
workplace regulations do not prevent youth in school from gaining valuable work experiences. 
We should all be doing what we can to provide opportunities for high-school kids to work with skilled 
tradespeople on the shop floor, with computer technicians and programmers in our businesses and 
offices, and even with economists at the Bank of Canada. 
As  we  all  know,  kids  are  fascinated  with  computers.  We  should  build  on  this  fascination  to  provide 
opportunities  for  children  to  be  exposed  to  the  working  world.  Computers  also  provide  boundless 
opportunities  for  interactive  learning  in  our  schools,  which  we  should  try  to  exploit  more  fully. 
Textbooks  still  have  an  important  role  to  play  -  especially  if  done  well  and  if  properly  adapted  to 
Canadian youth. But the Internet, and especially interactive tools, such as games that simulate real-life 
situations, can be very valuable, effective learning vehicles. Kids can have fun with them and learn a 
lot  in  the  process  -  about  money  and  credit,  about  how  the  economy  works,  and  about  how 
government and other institutions function. 
Again, as I said earlier, the problem is that we often tend to think of the world as separate boxes - 
private sector here, public sector there; academic world here, work world over there. But, in fact, there 
are great benefits to be had by building bridges between the academic experience and the real world - 
both the world of business and the business of daily living.  
We  must  encourage  our  youngsters,  while  still  in  school,  to  start  familiarizing  themselves  with  the 
world  of  banking,  finance,  and  the  economy  more  generally  if  we  want  them  to  be  “functionally 
literate,” capable of handling their daily affairs effectively as tomorrow’s adult citizens. 
Individuals  with  a  good  knowledge  of  economic  and  financial  basics  can  make  more  informed 
decisions - to their benefit and to the benefit of the entire economy. Not only can they manage their 
personal affairs and their households better, they can be more effective and productive members of 
society. They can also be better citizens, capable of making reasonable judgments on public policy 
issues that have a bearing on their personal prospects and those of the nation. 
Now, children are not the only ones who need to learn. In our rapidly changing world, adults too need 
to  keep  up  with  developments  and  advances  in  many  areas.  Learning  ought  to  be  a  lifelong 
experience  if  we  are  to  keep  pace  with  a  rapidly  changing  economic,  financial,  and  technological 
environment.  
In this sense, it is important that all of us, as employers, pay greater attention to the management of 
knowledge and the management of learning. That way, our employees can continue to develop and 
function effectively in an increasingly complex, demanding environment.  
Community  programs  and  organizations  such  as  the  Canadian  Foundation  of  Economic  Education 
(CFEE) can also provide learning opportunities for youths and adults to improve their economic and 
financial  knowledge.  I  know  that  the  CFEE,  on  its  own  and  through  strategic  partnerships  with 
educators  and  business,  has  already  done  a  lot  to  further  economic  literacy  in  schools  and  among 
adult Canadians. And it plans to do considerably more as we look ahead. 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 3
We  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  feel  very  strongly  about  the  need  for  improved  economic  and  financial 
literacy  in  Canada.  An  economically  more  literate  public  means  a  more  effective  monetary  policy. 
When Canadians understand our functions, responsibilities, and policies, particularly with respect to 
the  economy  and  inflation,  they  can  plan  for  the  future  with  greater  confidence  and  make  better 
economic decisions.  
I spoke at the beginning about the need to ensure that the private and public sectors in Canada do not 
operate  as  two  solitudes,  but  that,  instead,  they  talk  to  each  other,  work  together  towards  national 
objectives, and do business in a more open and transparent way. It is in this spirit that the Bank of 
Canada has undertaken important initiatives to communicate with Canadians and to provide economic 
and financial intelligence.  
We  do  this  through  several  vehicles.  Our  Web  site  is  one.  It  supplies  a  wealth  of  information  on 
economic  and  financial  topics  as  well  as  interactive  features,  such  as  a  graphic  depiction  of  the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy and an inflation calculator. We also intend to use our Web 
site to provide learning opportunities for our kids.  
For example, we have developed a program called “Inflation Busters,” designed to help senior high-
school  students  learn  about  monetary  policy  through  games,  simulations,  discussions,  and  group 
activities. This is currently available, on-site, in our Currency Museum, but will be up on our Web site 
in the new year. In addition, we have “Museum in a Bag” kits that teachers and others can use for 
presentations to students. And on-site, in our Currency Museum, we provide exhibits and interactive 
games for students to learn about money and inflation. 
Given the importance we attach to improving economic and financial literacy in this country, we will 
continue  to  develop  educational  programs  and  materials  for  students.  We  will  also  continue  to 
enhance our communications with the Canadian public at large.  
 Let me conclude. 
In  an  increasingly  complex  and  competitive  global  economic  environment,  furthering  our  national 
economic welfare will depend importantly on the quality of our labour force. But it will also depend on 
the ability of our citizens to conduct their daily economic affairs competently and effectively.  
Improving  skills  and raising  the  level  of  economic  and  financial  literacy  in Canada  will  require,  first, 
concerted efforts from all of us - parents, educators, employers, community organizations, and policy-
makers - and, second, greater understanding, interaction, and co-operation between our private and 
public sectors.  
Organizations like the CFEE have played, and must continue to play, a very important role. You are 
leading a nationwide initiative - the “Building Futures Program” - to promote economic and financial 
literacy among Canadians. We at the Bank applaud your efforts.  
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for being here tonight. Your presence and your friendship 
over the years is my greatest personal reward. 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2003
