Willem F Duisenberg: Maastricht and the future of Europe 
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the presentation of a 
stamp  commemorating  the  ten-year  anniversary  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  Bundesfinanzministerium, 
Berlin, 22 October 2003. 
 Dr Eichel,  
Dr Genscher, 
Dr Waigel,  
Excellencies, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honour for me to make one of my final public appearances as President of the European 
Central  Bank  on  the  occasion  of  the  launch  of  a  “Sonderpostwertzeichen”  -  a  special  stamp  -  to 
commemorate the Treaty on European Union, better known as the Maastricht Treaty. 
It is not as a Dutchman that I consider this Treaty to be one of the most important milestones of the 
European  integration  process,  but  as  a  truly  convinced  European.  Together  with  the  Governing 
Council of the ECB, I have been responsible for managing the single monetary policy and the single 
currency of the euro area, and I will not deny that my job has been inextricably linked to the wider 
historical process of building an “ever closer union” of the peoples of Europe. In this respect, I consider 
that  the  Maastricht  Treaty  embodies  the  most  decisive  impulse  in  the  deepening  of  the  European 
Communities  established  in  the  1950s  and  strengthened  by  the  Treaty  of  Rome.  The  move  to 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  was  a  profoundly  political  act  -  despite  the  fact  that  the 
underlying  rationale  was  predominantly  economic,  namely  that  a  single  market  requires  a  single 
currency. 
Having been instrumental in laying the foundations for the euro, the principles of the Maastricht Treaty 
will  remain  vital  for  the  successful  functioning  of  EMU.  The  medium-term  macroeconomic  policy 
framework laid down in the Maastricht Treaty has contributed to a stable macroeconomic environment, 
and  will  continue  to  do  so.  In  addition,  the  Treaty  provides  for  a  clear  allocation  of  responsibilities 
between  EU  institutions  and  Member  States,  as  well  as  clear  mandates  for  all  involved.  The 
maintenance of price stability (the ECB’s primary objective), the independence of the Eurosystem and 
the  provisions  safeguarding  fiscal  discipline,  in  particular  as  enshrined  in  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact, are among the hallmarks of this framework. Furthermore, the path towards participation in the 
euro area mapped out in the Maastricht Treaty, focusing on sustainable economic convergence as a 
prerequisite for adoption of the euro, will also serve to guide prospective Member States. The name 
“Maastricht” will therefore always be connected with the euro and will forever have a prominent place 
in the history of Europe. 
When  the  Maastricht  Treaty  was  ratified  ten  years  ago,  many  doubted  whether  EMU  would  ever 
amount to more than the solemn words of a Treaty or a laudable objective to be reached at some point 
in  the  distant  future.  However,  during  the  1990s,  policy-makers,  governments,  central  bankers  and 
other political and economic agents showed great resolve and determination to ensure that the single 
currency  would  become  a  reality.  Today,  we  can  look  back  on  a  period  of  more  than  five  years  in 
which the ECB has successfully pursued a stability-oriented single monetary policy serving more than 
300 million citizens. And we all have the tangible proof of Monetary Union in our pockets, following a 
highly  successful  cash  changeover  process,  which  represents  another  historic  milestone  in  the 
process  of  European  integration.  With  the  euro,  this  network  of  interrelations  and  mutual 
dependencies in Europe has undoubtedly reached a new level. 
When  talking  about  the  possible  political  implications  of  the  euro,  there  are  fundamental  questions 
about the future of Europe to be answered, and I hope that my subsequent remarks will provide some 
interesting insights. Can Monetary Union function properly without some form of political union? Is a 
“currency  without  a  state”  a  viable  construct?  Indeed,  the  question  of  whether  a  single  currency 
requires - or inevitably leads to - a single state is hotly debated. 
I  think  that  one  of  the  reasons  for  this  confused  state  of  affairs  is  that  “political  union”  is  a  rather 
abstract concept. It can mean different things to different people. On the one hand, political union can 
be  broadly  understood  as  a  dense  network  of  integrated  policies,  common  rules  and  established 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 1
procedures, as a union with strong and active supranational institutions, with common symbols and a 
common identity. The European Union already exhibits many of these features. 
If, on the other hand, we understand political union as the establishment of an entity that resembles 
the traditional nation state, the European Union may still have some way to go, if indeed this is the 
direction that Europeans want to take. Today’s Union is not a European Federation, for example, or a 
United States of Europe, with a constitution and a single executive. 
The euro marks the achievement of full integration in the monetary field. In purely functional terms, it is 
therefore  an  end  point,  rather  than  an  intermediate  step.  However,  with  the  euro,  we  now  form  a 
“Schicksalsgemeinschaft”, a community with a shared future. Our economies are linked, and so our 
policy  decisions  have  become  a  matter  of  concern  for  all.  We  have  a  legitimate  interest  in 
developments and political actions in other euro area countries, since we are affected by them - for 
better or for worse. If I may use a “domestic” metaphor, the marriage in which the euro has joined our 
countries is about more than just living under the same roof, it is about sharing a common vision and 
about managing life together. 
Concluding remarks 
In the context of the current attempts to help the European Union work smoothly and on a sustainable 
basis  following  its  future  enlargement,  I  would  like  to  conclude  by  mentioning  the  draft  Treaty 
establishing  a  Constitution  for  Europe.  The  process  of  European  integration  has  delivered  half  a 
century  of  stability,  peace  and  prosperity.  It  has  helped  to  raise  living  standards,  built  a  single 
European market, launched the single European currency, the euro, and strengthened Europe’s voice 
in  the  world.  As  a  central  banker,  I  would  argue  that  the  draft  Constitution  has  incorporated  the 
substance of the EMU chapters of the Maastricht Treaty, while also introducing clarifications, additions 
and updates to the existing texts where necessary and appropriate. 
Clearly  it  is  now  up  to  the  governments  of  the  Member  States  to  move  forward  in  the 
Intergovernmental  Conference.  My  wish  for  the  draft  Constitution  is  that  it  will  achieve  the  same 
success as the economic and monetary policy part of the Maastricht Treaty. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2003
