Jean-Claude Trichet: Financial stability 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Forum Financier 
Belge, Brussels, 26 November 2003. 
 Introductory remarks 
A. 
It gives me great pleasure to be here in Brussels and to address you in this very well-known forum at 
the  kind  invitation  of  Governor  Quaden.  The  topic  I  shall  be  talking  about  today,  namely  “financial 
stability”, is obviously very broad and challenging.  
My main topic of discussion will be the probable consequences the profound changes currently taking 
place in the financial sector will have on financial stability and on the policies of the Eurosystem in this 
regard. The main reason why I am talking about this topic - and why we at the ECB are following the 
issue  -  is  that  the  stability  of  the  banking  sector  and  the  financial  system  at  large  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  for  the  Eurosystem,  as  it  is  for  any  central  bank.  It  is  the  precondition  for  a  successful 
conduct of monetary policy and the maintenance of smoothly functioning payment systems, which are 
major responsibilities of a central bank. 
I would like to focus on three specific developments: the increasing importance of financial markets in 
general  and  market  volatility  more  specifically,  financial  innovation,  and  the  process  in  hand  to 
increase the integration of financial systems across countries.  
When thinking about the major challenges for maintaining financial stability I find it useful to first look 
at the notion of how the “real world” deviates from the “frictionless” ideal world of academic textbooks. 
In order to organise my reasoning, this can serve as a useful starting point, since in the ideal world 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  financial  instability.  Indeed,  most  of  the  concerns  over  financial  stability 
actually stem from the fact that our “real world” financial markets have frictions or - in other words - 
market imperfections.  
A fundamental friction is that financial market participants very often have imperfect information. When 
information  is  not  perfect  -  or  when  markets  are  not  fully  transparent  -  investors’  decisions  may  be 
constantly subject to reassessment, which can lead to inevitable volatility in market prices. This does 
not necessarily mean that there is an inherent threat to financial stability. On the contrary, the very 
existence of some level of volatility indicates that markets are serving the function they are supposed 
to  deliver  -  that  they  are  an  efficient  exchange  mechanism  among  economic  agents.  Nevertheless, 
some recent episodes of extreme volatility have drawn our attention to more accurately delineating the 
boundary between “normal” and what could be called “harmful” volatility. 
The  second  source  of  friction  is  that  we  also  fall  short  of  the  ideal  of  having  complete  markets. 
Through the rapidly evolving process of financial innovation, new instruments - and often entirely new 
markets - are being created, taking us towards more complete markets and providing remedies for the 
shortcomings  of  more  traditional  instruments  and  markets.  While  this  process  clearly  increases  the 
efficiency of the financial system, some new risks may also be created along the way. A major recent 
example is the emergence of instruments to transfer credit risks between banks and other financial 
institutions. This is changing the activities and risk profiles of financial institutions, as previously credit 
risks were largely confined to banks.  
One could consider that a third friction is that we lack an international framework for crisis prevention 
and resolution. Owing to the fact that supranational governments and judicial systems do not exist, 
national autonomy causes problems when it comes to practical implementation, possibly hindering a 
resolution of crises on a global scale. As financial systems inevitably become more integrated, risks 
stemming  from  the  potential  lack  of  a  common  framework  increase  accordingly.  Substantial 
coordination efforts are being made by the international community to overcome this friction.  
Here in Europe we have a unique situation, as we have gone further than any other region in terms of 
integration across national borders. Indeed, financial stability is increasingly a European, rather than 
national, concept. In particular, the single currency, the European System of Central Banks and single 
market  for  liquid  reserves  -  the  money  market  in  euro  -  are  creating  a  much  more  interconnected 
European financial system than is usually acknowledged. Consequently, cooperation efforts are being 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 1
made by central banks and supervisory authorities to overcome the problems caused by the fact that 
supervision and oversight primarily remain a national responsibility.  
The ECB - and the Eurosystem as a whole - is also enhancing its activities in the field of European 
financial stability. One part of these activities is visible through the regular articles and reports. Many 
other  activities  are  less  visible  and  take  the  form  of  discussions concerning  financial  stability  in  the 
ECB  Governing  and  General  Councils  and  ESCB  Banking  Supervision  Committee,  or  our  regular 
contribution  to  the  strengthening  of  cooperation  among  relevant  European  authorities  and  our 
participation in international discussions.  
I would like to organise the rest of my remarks around the three themes I have identified. First, I will 
look at what evidence is provided by past crises about the severity of the market frictions. Second, I 
would like to discuss the changes in the policy framework which have been made and, third, are being 
made in order to preserve financial stability.  
The three themes and financial stability  
B.  
Past crises could give us some hints about what could also be important financial stability concerns in 
the future. One should not go too far back as the financial system is rapidly changing and one must 
always be prepared for surprises. Often the new crises come as complete surprises.  
The growing role of financial markets and volatility 
B.1 
Let me turn to my first theme - the growing role of markets. This development means that financial 
stability threats could increasingly stem from financial market problems. As I alluded to earlier, sudden 
and  extreme  shifts  in  expectations  concerning  the  value  of  an  asset  and  increased  volatility  could 
represent one major type of financial instability.  
In Europe, most historical periods of financial instability have been linked to traditional loan losses by 
banks. However, if one looks at the longer-term perspective over the past 15 years or so, European 
financial markets have grown very rapidly. No doubt, the recourse to market-based finance in Europe 
is still significantly below that of the United States, but the gap seems to be rapidly narrowing. As the 
markets have grown and have become more liquid - thanks also to the euro - investors have been 
moving from bank deposits to direct and collective securities investments.  
Whereas sharp and large price adjustments may not necessarily have systemic implications, financial 
institutions  with  leveraged  market  positions  may  be  directly  affected.  The  Russian  crisis  of  August 
1998  illustrates  the  point  well,  as  mature  markets  experienced  spillover  effects  through  investors’ 
leveraged positions in Russia and other emerging markets. One such leveraged exposure was held by 
the LTCM hedge fund. Prior to the rescue undertaken by private banks and aided by the US Federal 
Reserve,  liquidity  plunged  and  prices  in  many  markets  dropped  to  very  low  levels.  An  additional 
element threatening the stability of the global financial system was that virtually all of the leveraged 
Treasury bond investors had similar positions, including major financial institutions.  
Banks’  direct  exposures  may  be  an  important  aspect  of  financial  instability  in  periods  of  financial 
market volatility. In addition, banks may hold significant exposures with non-bank financial institutions, 
which themselves suffer from direct market exposures. The Barings crisis in 1995 is an example of the 
first case, while the LTCM case is an example of the second.  
In my view, the eventual scale of a systemic crisis might depend on the magnitude of the deviation of 
asset prices from fundamentals. How, then, do asset price bubbles get created in the first place? They 
may be created or exacerbated by some form of herding and overly buoyant investor expectations, as 
groups of investors imitate leading institutions’ strategies. Bubbles may be further boosted by a lack of 
adequate  disclosure,  problems  of  conflicts  of  interest,  and  destabilising  trading  or  investment 
strategies.  
Once bubbles burst, portfolio insurance strategies in the event of falling prices - or dynamic hedging - 
might heighten the downward spiral. Particularly in earlier episodes of equity-driven financial instability, 
such as the 1987 stock exchange crash, the initial wave of the sale of equity futures appears to have 
resulted in an accelerated decline in stock prices. However, the jury is still out on the role of tools such 
as portfolio insurance or automatic trading rules in exacerbating aggregate financial risk.  
Less controversial seems to be the observation that downward spirals in prices can be magnified by 
the institutions involved in the selling wave of the crash, thereby generating contagion across markets 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2003
and countries. In particular, the Russian and LTCM crises demonstrate the important role of market 
liquidity  as  a  potential  channel  of  crisis  contagion,  as  market  price  falls  due  to  liquidity  withdrawals 
could cause losses for many market participants.  
To  summarise  the  lessons  learnt  from  past  experiences,  it  seems  that  volatility  is  in  itself  not 
necessarily a threat to financial stability. Other elements are necessary before serious concerns arise 
over  financial  stability.  One  of  the  key  elements  is  the  risk  faced  by  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions, because this could be the channel through which the functioning of the financial system as 
a whole could be jeopardised. This view is supported by the recent episodes of market volatility in late 
2002 and early 2003, when the sequence of substantial market readjustment was generally managed 
in an orderly manner by financial institutions across the globe.  
Progressing financial innovation 
B.2  
Let  me  turn  to  the  second  theme  -  the  implications  of  progressing  financial  innovation.  In  fact,  the 
reason why the latest episode of stock market adjustments did not cause systemic problems could be 
attributed  to  the  contribution  of  financial  innovation  to  the  more  even  distribution  of  risks.  However, 
some  concerns  have  emerged  regarding  the  securitisation  and  credit  risk  transfer  markets,  for 
instance. From the perspective of the public authorities, concerns have been expressed in particular 
about  the  lack  of  transparency  on  the  identity  of  the  ultimate  risk  holders  and  about  adequate  risk 
management by the institutions dealing with these instruments. 
In particular, financial innovations may be subject to problems when their behaviour has not yet been 
tested in difficult market conditions. As for any new instruments, probability analysis on the basis of 
historical data cannot be used for the credit risk transfer instruments that have been around for a few 
years only, and, thus, an accurate pricing of risk is not always possible. Inadequate data was already a 
problem in the use of Value-at-Risk models for risk management purposes by hedge funds prior to the 
Russian and LTCM crises. This kind of experience could reflect a lack of full understanding by market 
participants of the nature of the risks they face. 
Turning back to the credit risk transfer instruments, these instruments allow banks to sell their credit 
risks, and in so doing the risk profiles of other financial institutions, particularly insurance companies, 
are also transformed. Hence, a major outcome of the financial innovation process is the transformation 
of the traditional risks faced by financial institutions.  
These developments also affect the effective supervision of financial institutions, as it is increasingly 
more difficult to obtain adequate information to monitor the complex and possibly fast-changing risk 
positions.  The  financial  innovation  process  has,  indeed,  necessitated  the  revision  of  the  traditional 
supervisory approach concerning banks and other financial institutions. It has also made it imperative 
to ensure that the risk management systems of the financial institutions themselves are able to handle 
the complexity of their activities.  
Integration of European and global financial markets 
B.3 
I would now like to turn to the last of my three themes. The increasing integration of national financial 
systems poses particular issues for the European Union and the euro area where integration is fairly 
advanced, although not fully complete. Integration and increasing international financing flows are also 
very much a global issue. Recently, in particular, some emerging market crises have had at least a 
potential for major spillover effects.  
These  financial  stability  risks  may  also  be  related  to  the  growing  complexity  of  the  financing  of 
emerging countries and the related coordination problems. With many more parties and instruments 
involved, it is inevitable that coordination is becoming a much more pressing problem than in the past, 
when a small number of major banks from the industrialised countries could come to an agreement 
with  the  issuer  on  the  terms  of  repayment.  With  more  sophisticated  funding  structures  and  the 
increasing  use  of  debt  securities,  equality  among  creditors  also  becomes  a  more  complex  issue  at 
times of debt restructuring. 
Policy framework aimed at preserving financial stability  
C. 
Let  me  now  look  at  policy  responses  to  the  issues  raised  by  the  market  developments  I  have  just 
described. The structure of this policy discussion will be based around three themes: the importance of 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 3
transparency in order to overcome information-related problems, reactions to financial innovation and, 
lastly, increasing integration and potential international spillovers of crises.  
Responses to the lack of information 
C.1 
The  information  imperfections  illustrated  by  recent  episodes  of  market  turmoil  notably  include 
incomplete and disparate published information by firms traded on the markets. I see key challenges 
in  harmonising  and  improving  the  availability  of  information.  The  ultimate  objective  is  to  allow  for 
rational investment decisions and a correct pricing of risk. Much has been done at global level and by 
the EU Financial Services Action Plan to increase the degree of transparency supporting the working 
of  financial  markets.  This  action  has  intensified since  the  high-level  corporate  failures  in  the  United 
States,  which  demonstrated  that  there  is  ample  scope  for  misleading  investors  through  the 
manipulation of accounts and the information disclosed. 
Maybe the most eye-catching reform - and a key challenge for companies and banks in particular - is 
the introduction of new accounting standards. The International Accounting Standard Board and the 
Federal  Accounting  Standard  Board  are  both  constantly  trying  to  improve  and  harmonise  these 
frameworks on both sides of the Atlantic. Indeed, harmonised and high quality accounting standards 
could make a significant contribution to the integration and efficiency of financial markets, and these 
could  also  help  in  Europe  where  the  differences  in  accounting  rules  could  affect  the  cross-country 
comparability of firms’ accounting information. 
In Europe, the reform of IAS 32 and 39 represents an attempt to improve the comprehensiveness of 
banks’ disclosure requirements. In recent years, banks’ risk exposure has shifted to instruments that 
have, up to now, not been reported as assets. What is maybe most important is the increased reliance 
of financial institutions on derivatives contracts, which has resulted in growing disparities between the 
information  contained  in  financial  statements  and  the  true  risk  profiles  of  the  reporting  entities.  The 
new accounting standards to be finalised next year will introduce a definition of financial instruments. 
They will also cover derivative instruments, which will have to be reported on balance sheets. As a 
consequence,  information  quality  and  coherence  will  be  improved,  providing  a  more  accurate 
reflection of the new financial environment.  
However,  the  framework  that  is  emerging  is  still  far  from  satisfactory.  The  revised  accounting 
standards will most likely include an option for banks to measure any financial asset or liability at fair 
value. This means that instruments for which a market price is not available could also be valued on 
the  basis  of  an  estimate  of  a  fair  value.  Several  serious  concerns  arise  from  this  approach. 
Comparability of financial statements could be affected, as the same transaction could be carried out 
at different values by competing financial institutions. Moreover, if the reliability of the valuation of non-
traded  assets  is  limited,  the  quality  of  the  information  contained  in  financial  statements  is  going  to 
deteriorate,  thus  allowing  imbalances  to  build  up  without  the  possibility  of  activating  correcting 
mechanisms.  
What concerns us most is the potential impact on financial stability. Empirical investigations recently 
conducted  by  the  ECB  suggest  that  the  extensive  use  of  fair  value  accounting  could  significantly 
increase  the  volatility  of  banks’  balance  sheets.  Valuation  effects  might  also  reduce  the  ability  of 
financial  institutions  to  react  to  adverse  shocks,  thus  enhancing  pro-cyclicality.  These  concerns  are 
severe and great caution is warranted in the reform of accounting standards.  
More  accurate  and  timely  market  information  is  also  useful  from  a  supervisory  perspective. 
Supervisors are indeed relying increasingly on markets as a disciplining tool for financial institutions - 
thus complementing their own activities. The future role of financial markets in the supervisory toolbox 
is likely to increase, despite possible periods of heightened volatility in financial markets. In particular, 
the  reform  of  the  capital  framework  for  banks  (Basel  II)  will  introduce  market  discipline  as  an 
independent pillar of the framework.  
Responses to financial innovation 
C.2 
The process of financial innovation I referred to earlier poses at least two key challenges for policy-
makers.  First,  the  supervisory  framework  needs  to  be  constantly  updated.  Second,  the  legislative 
process  needs  to  react  in  an  effective  and  timely  manner  to  the  challenges  created  by  market 
developments.  
4 
 BIS Review 53/2003
As regards banks, the first Basel Capital Accord agreed in late 1988 has served its purpose well in 
terms of raising the capital levels of banks and making them safer. However, financial innovation, in 
particular the securitisation of banks’ assets, has left Basel I outdated and easily circumvented. As a 
consequence,  the  need  to  reform  the  existing  Accord  is  widely  recognised  and  supervisors  are 
working very hard to shape the new Accord in close consultation with the private sector.  
The Basel II Accord is aimed at bringing the capital requirements closer to the true economic risks in 
banks’ portfolios and at offering a wide range of options and approaches to respond to the increased 
complexity of financial instruments. Basel II is achieving all of this basically by relying more on banks’ 
internal models in the supervisory process. An important by-product is, therefore, that there is a lot of 
pressure on banks to improve their risk management systems. Improvements are already visible. It 
seems clear to me that more supervisory efforts, similar to those in the banking sector, may also be 
needed in the other sectors of financial institutions, for example in insurance. 
The ECB has drawn attention since the early stages of the Basel II process and the implementation of 
the  framework  in  the  EU  to  macro-prudential  implications  and  to  the  possibility  of  increased  pro-
cyclicality  of  certain  provisions.  When  bank  capital  is  largely  based  on  risk  and  risk  increases  in  a 
recession, macroeconomic consequences might arise through a procyclical reduced ability of banks to 
lend.  These  concerns  have  been  appropriately  addressed  in  the  revised  proposals  submitted  for 
consultation  by  the  Basel  Committee  and  the  European  Commission.  Pro-cyclicality  concerns  are 
substantially mitigated and a good balance can be found between risk-sensitivity and macroeconomic 
stability. Of course, attention will have to be paid to these aspects in terms of the implementation of 
the new framework as well.  
Responses to further integration 
C.3 
Let  me  talk  next  about  the  challenges  caused  by  the  third  development,  progressing  financial 
integration. I will first discuss some of the relevant European issues and then turn to global issues. 
EU/euro area issues 
In  the  EU  there  is  first  of  all  the  challenge  of  increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  complex  regulatory 
process  to  meet  the  pace  of  innovation  sustained  by  the  markets  and  to  increase  regulatory 
convergence  across  countries  in  order  to  support  integration  and  reduce  the  burden  on  financial 
institutions  operating  in  several  countries.  The  so-called  Lamfalussy  procedure  -  where  some 
experience has already been gained in securities supervision - will seek to do precisely this, and will 
also improve the state of affairs in banking and insurance supervision.  
The  deepening  market  integration  experienced  in  the  EU  has  given  rise  to  the  need  for  enhanced 
supervisory  cooperation  and  common  financial  stability  surveillance.  As  regards  pure,  micro-level 
supervisory  cooperation,  cooperation  is  being  gradually  stepped  up  through  the  “Lamfalussy 
procedure”  and  the  establishment  of  the  so-called  level  three  committees,  where  supervisors 
exchange views - the primary aim being to achieve a consistent implementation of the existing legal 
framework.  
We  need  adequate  cooperation  between  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  as  well  as  a 
safeguard in relation to crisis prevention. The ESCB Banking Supervision Committee has long been 
working  as  the  interface  between  the  EU  central  banks  and  banking  supervisory  authorities.  It 
combines  the  macro-level  perspective  of  central  banks,  which  are  best  placed  to  monitor  ongoing 
developments  in  the  financial  system,  with  the  equally  important  micro-level  approach  of  the 
supervisory  authorities  to  provide  a  joint  and  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  stability  of  the  EU 
banking sector. 
Let me also note the importance of having appropriate arrangements at EU level for financial crisis 
management.  Good  progress  has  been  made  as  a  result  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Brouwer 
report. Notably, the Banking Supervision Committee has concluded a Memorandum of Understanding 
on cooperation and information-sharing in crisis management situations between all central banks and 
banking supervisors of the EU.  
Global issues 
At international level, examples of how effective crisis management and resolution is hindered by the 
absence of a common legal framework are well documented. However, a common legal framework is 
only one important element required for the orderly pursuit of international finance. Another would be a 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 5
concrete enforcement mechanism, but this is possibly inconceivable in the context of sovereign states. 
Indeed, contractual arrangements are increasingly aimed at compensating for the lack of a common 
regulatory and enforcement framework. 
The  response  of  the  international  community  to  coordination  problems  includes  efforts  in  crisis 
prevention  and  crisis  resolution.  In  the  context  of  crisis  prevention,  the  promotion  of  international 
standards  and  codes  is  a  promising  avenue.  The  policy  response  to  alleviate  crisis  resolution  has 
covered  all  three  aspects  involved:  domestic  adjustment,  official  financing  and  private  sector 
involvement. Although all three are crucial to a successful crisis resolution, let me focus here on the 
last.  
As  regards  private  sector  involvement,  several  proposals  have  been  put  forward,  including  the 
Sovereign  Debt  Restructuring  Mechanism  (SDRM)  proposed  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
(IMF).  This  legally  binding  mechanism  was  based  on  the  idea  that  some  elements  of  bankruptcy 
mechanisms applicable in the domestic context to private or public sector entities could be used in a 
sovereign  context.  The  idea  of  creating  an  SDRM  has  been  put  aside  for  the  time  being,  mainly 
because of concerns over the potential adverse effect on borrowing costs. 
A  second  proposal,  supported  most  enthusiastically  by  the  private  sector  and  by  a  number  of 
sovereign  issuers,  is  based  on  the  use  of  collective  action  clauses  (CACs).  These  clauses,  which 
facilitate coordination among creditors by creating clear rules for reaching a binding agreement over a 
debt restructuring proposal, would become a regular feature of all new international bond issuance. 
CACs  have  the  advantage  of  being  easily  integrated  into  market  practices  and  having  a 
straightforward structure, which makes them a powerful coordination tool for creditors holding debt of 
the  same  issuance.  However,  their  contribution  to  solving  coordination  problems  at  the  level  of  the 
total stock of outstanding debt of a country is less clear. 
Finally,  a  third  proposal  -  and  this  is  actually  one  I  myself  suggested  at  the  IMF  and  World  Bank 
annual meetings in Washington in September 2002 - currently being studied by the Group of Twenty is 
to  have  a  so-called  Code  of  Good  Conduct,  which  would  set  out  best  practices  and  guidelines  for 
borrowers, lenders and the international community. The Group of Twenty consists of the G7 major 
industrialised  countries,  the  largest  emerging  market  economics  and  also  the  EU  presidency,  ECB, 
IMF  and  the  World  Bank,  as  well  as  the  chairpersons  of  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial 
Committee and the Development Committee.  
Although  these  best  practices  would  be  non-binding,  they  could  improve  the  process  of  crisis 
resolution. In particular, the Code would spell out general principles for all parties involved and would 
also  offer  a  “toolbox”  of  agreed  instruments  and  best  practices  to  be  used  by  interested  parties 
depending on the circumstances. The Code would also include CACs in the set of instruments to be 
recommended. In the October meeting, the Group of Twenty decided to encourage a group of issuers 
and market participants to engage in further discussion. 
Concluding remarks 
D.  
In conclusion, the issues generated by the fast evolution of the financial system I have been speaking 
about today are very complex and demanding for public authorities. I hope that I have been able to 
demonstrate that some elements of the necessary public response are very encouraging, while others 
will require renewed efforts. My objective has also been to focus on European issues and to highlight 
the  special  conditions  of  the  euro  area  and  the  role  of  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  in  fostering 
financial stability.  
Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen, for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2003
