Philipp M Hildebrand: Monetary policy in a global context 
Speech by Mr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce, Zurich, 8 October 2003. 
 It  is  a  special  privilege  to  be  able  to  give  my  first  formal  address  as  a  central  banker  before  the 
distinguished audience of the Swiss-American chamber of commerce. I have always been very fond of 
the  Swiss-American  friendship.  It  has  been  an  integral  part  of  my  family’s  life  for  several  decades. 
More  importantly,  I  am  convinced  it  is  an  essential  ingredient  to  the  long-term  vitality  of  the  Swiss 
economy. Like any friendship, it has had to endure difficult moments. The vibrancy of your association 
is  testimony  to  the  fact  that  the  cultural  affinities  and  common  interests  between  our  two  countries 
provide a reliable foundation for extensive and mutually beneficial economic relations. 
Let us strive to make this foundation as solid as the public service record of the Geneva-born Albert 
Gallatin, whom Thomas Jefferson appointed as the fourth Secretary of the U.S. Treasury in 1801. To 
this day, Gallatin remains not only the longest serving Treasury Secretary in the history of the United 
States but the only Swiss-American to have occupied that most prestigious position in the then newly 
established capital in Washington D.C. 
My focus today will be on the long period of global disinflation following Paul Volcker’s paradigmatic 
shift of monetary policy in the United States. I will explore how the dramatic increase in international 
competition during the last twenty years has affected price levels. I will then return closer to home and 
attempt  to  illustrate  how  important  segments  of  the  Swiss  economy  have  remained  sheltered  from 
international  competition  through  a  web  of  regulatory  hurdles.  I  will  make  the  case  that  freeing  up 
these sectors would not only raise economic growth – something that is urgently needed in the effort 
to alleviate the growing stress on our social programs – but also render monetary policy more effective 
and provide it with more flexibility to focus not only on maintaining price stability but also on output 
stabilization. Finally, I will conclude with a brief economic and monetary policy outlook for the United 
States and Switzerland.  
Great Inflation to Great Moderation 
1. 
In the United States, the modern era of central banking began on October 6, 1979 when the Federal 
Reserve, under the leadership of its newly appointed Chairman Paul Volcker announced its adoption 
of monetary targets. Headline CPI inflation peaked at 15% at the beginning of 1980. Chairman Volcker 
slowed  the  growth  of  money  dramatically.  Interest  rates  rose  sharply  with  the  banks’  prime  interest 
rate exceeding 20%. The U.S. economy fell into a deep recession. Inflation began to recede steadily. 
Remarkably,  despite  the  vigorous  recovery  that  followed  after  1983,  inflation  remained  relatively 
subdued at 4%. It reached a temporary floor of 2.5% by mid-1992. 
As we revisit this dramatic moment in monetary history, we need to remember that it occurred against 
the  backdrop  of  nearly  15  years  of  disillusion  regarding  the  ability  of  activist  “Keynesian”  economic 
policies to guarantee low inflation and full employment. From 1965 onwards, inflation had been on the 
rise and unemployment surged in the 70’s, following the first oil shock. In the beginning of the 80’s, it 
appeared that fiat money was inherently prone to cause periodic bouts of inflation and that there was 
little one could do about it. (see annex for graph 1) 
Since  1979,  the  global  monetary  environment  has  evolved  dramatically.  Achieving  and  maintaining 
price  stability  has  become  the  undisputed  guiding  principle  of  a  vast  majority  of  the  world’s  central 
banks.  Price  stability  ensures  the  signalling  power  of  prices,  thus  bolstering  the  efficiency  of  the 
market  mechanism.  By  preserving  purchasing  power,  it  facilitates  long-term  planning  and  induces 
long-term investments. Price stability also prevents social injustices from emerging between debtors, 
workers and retirees. Finally, price stability minimizes tax related distortions linked to the interaction of 
inflation and the tax code.1 
                                                      
1   see Martin Feldstein (1983): “Inflation, tax rules, and capital formation”, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 1
The determined focus of monetary policy on price stability has contributed to anchoring the public’s 
inflation  expectations  at  low  levels.  The  increasing  scepticism  of  the  1960s  and  the  1970s  about 
monetary  policy’s  ability  to  fight  inflation  has  given  way  to  confidence  that  prudent,  consistent  and 
forward-looking monetary policy can contain the destructive forces of inflation. 
Global  inflation  figures  suggest  that  such  confidence  is  largely  justified.  In  the  industrialized  world, 
inflation declined from 12% in 1980 to 1.4% in 2002.2 In the developing world, the decline of inflation 
has been even more remarkable with yearly rates tumbling from an average of 31 percent in the early 
1980s to currently under 6%.3 
Along with a significant decline in inflation, volatility of economic growth has fallen everywhere. Both in 
the  U.S.  as  well  as  in  Germany,  the  volatility  of  real  GDP,  averaged  over  four  quarters, was  about 
30 percent less during the 1984 to 2002 period than it was between 1960 and 1983.4 The evidence 
therefore confirms that monetary policy efforts to achieve and maintain price stability promote stability 
in output and thereby help create economic conditions which are ultimately conducive to employment 
creation. (see annex for table 1) 
New Challenges for Monetary Policy 
2. 
Not unlike successful athletes, central bankers must never be complacent in victory. It would therefore 
be  at  best  inappropriate  and  at  worst  irresponsible  for  the  global  central  banking  community  to 
consider its job done. There will be no “End of Central Banking”. For one thing, there is no guarantee 
that the elimination of inflation throughout much of the world economy is a permanent achievement. 
Moreover,  with  the  achievement  of  what  constitutes  for  all  practical  purposes  price  stability  across 
many  economies,  a  number  of  central  banks  discovered  that  with  it  came  a  new  challenge:  policy 
could  no  longer  be  directed  exclusively  to  push  inflation  lower  but  had  to  pay  at  least  as  much 
attention to avoid inflation that could conceivably fall too low and thereby undermine the goal of price 
stability by initiating deflationary tendencies. As has traditionally been the case, vigilance will therefore 
continue to be the “Leitmotiv” for the world’s central banks. 
Global Competition and Disinflation 
3. 
A  number  of  factors  have  contributed  to  the  striking  disinflation  since  the  1970s.5  Good  monetary 
policy  has  undoubtedly  made  an  important  contribution  of  which  many  of  today’s  leading  central 
bankers have every reason to be proud of. In many cases, a precondition for good monetary policy 
was institutional independence. Politicians have therefore played an important role as well. They have 
empowered  central  banks  and  freed  them  from  political  interference.  Fiscal  policy  probably  also 
contributed  somewhat  to  an  improved  global  macroeconomic  environment  though  the  case  is  not 
entirely convincing.6  
Finally - and this is the point I would like to emphasize today – the global disinflation of the last twenty 
years has been facilitated by dramatic structural changes in the global economy. These changes are 
best  encapsulated  by  what  is  loosely  referred  to  as  globalization.  By  globalization  I  mean  the 
                                                      
2 
In the United States, consumer price inflation fell from an average of 7.1% between 1970 and 1979 to an average of 2.5% 
between 2000 and 2002. In Switzerland, consumer price inflation has declined from an average of 5% between 1970 and 
1979 to an average of 1% between 2000 and 2003. 
3  Kenneth Rogoff  (2003): “Globalization and  Global Disinflation”. Paper prepared for the  Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City Symposium “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty”, Jackson Hole, August 28-30, 2003.  
4  Stock,  James  H.  and  Mark  W.  Watson  (2003):  “Has  the  Business  Cycle  Changed?  Evidence  and  Explanations”.  Paper 
prepared  for  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Symposium  “Monetary  Policy  and  Uncertainty”,  Jackson  Hole, 
August 28-30, 2003. 
5   For an excellent recent discussion with specific reference to the effects of globalization, see Kenneth Rogoff (2003). 
6 
In the industrialized countries, public debt increased until 1995 when it reached 75% of GDP. This was followed by seven 
years of fiscal policy improvement, so that public debt decreased to 65% of GDP in 2002. More recently, fiscal balances are 
deteriorating  once  again,  in  some  countries  dramatically  so.  The  case  of  emerging  economies  is  slightly  different.  There 
government debt has been on the rise again since 1997. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2003
increasing  speed,  quantity  and  geographical  spread  of  technological,  commercial  and  financial 
interaction throughout the world economy.7  
These  forces  have  sharply  increased  competition  between  economic  agents  throughout  the  global 
economy.  Deregulation  has  followed  as  an  inevitable  consequence  of  competitive  pressures. 
Particularly in the Anglo-Saxon countries, labour and product market reforms enhanced this structural 
shift towards a global competitive trading and financial system. This increased flexibility in factor and 
goods  movements  coupled  with  large  scale  technological  innovations  led  to  a  boost  in  productivity 
which is the ultimate underlying force of potential trend growth. 
Though the long-term effects of these structural adjustments on the real economy are complex, there 
is  no  doubt  they  have  unleashed  a  powerful  dampening  effect  on  prices  in  many  sectors  of  the 
economy. Most of you who are present here today are actively engaged in running companies in a 
global competitive environment. You need no sophisticated economic analysis to tell you that when 
exposed to fierce global competition, monopoly rents and pricing power decline and prices therefore 
come under downward pressure. 
Switzerland: one Country – two Economies 
4. 
As a small open economy, Switzerland is greatly affected by global cyclical let alone global structural 
developments. Unfortunately, over the last twenty years, our economy only partly subjected itself to 
the global market place. It has therefore developed along diverging paths. 
Our export sector has been fully exposed to the competitive forces of global economic and financial 
integration. Many of you represent this sector. To remain competitive in the global market place, you 
have had to innovate your production processes in a continuous attempt to increase your productivity. 
In light of Switzerland’s large current account surplus (50 billion CHF or 12% of GDP in 2002), you 
have  been  additionally  challenged  by  a  real  exchange  rate  which,  over  the  last  ten  years,  has  on 
average appreciated by 0.6%.8 For the most part, the Swiss export sector has risen to that challenge.  
By contrast, the domestically oriented sectors of the Swiss economy have to a large extent remained 
sheltered from the competitive forces of an increasingly open global economy by an intricate web of 
regulatory measures which have prevented the product market from functioning according to market 
principles.  Examples  are  numerous:  The  electricity  market  remains  regionally  monopolized.  As  a 
result, Swiss enterprises must bear higher electricity costs than their international competitors. In the 
telecommunication market, the achieved results in the deregulated part of the sector have not been 
matched  on  the  still  monopolized  last  mile.  In  the  pharmaceutical  and  in  the  automotive  sectors, 
parallel  imports  are  still  impeded  by  patent  law  or  tacit  collusion  rendered  possible  by  weak 
international cartel laws. 
The  detrimental  effects  of  this  economic  bifurcation  are  clearly  reflected  in  Switzerland’s  economic 
statistics.  As  one  would  suspect,  prices  in  the  domestic  sector  are  being  kept  artificially  high,  thus 
undermining competitiveness. An analysis of longer-term price series demonstrates the diverging path 
of  prices  between  the  export-  and  the  domestic-oriented  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  export  price 
deflator rose much less than did the GDP deflator. (see annex for graph 2) 
A similar picture emerges on the productivity side. While the export sector has continuously managed 
to achieve high productivity growth rates, productivity has lagged behind dramatically in the domestic 
sector  of  the  economy.  Since  the  domestic  sector  continues  to  represent  the  bulk  of  the  Swiss 
economy  (approximately  60%  of  GDP),  the  poor  performance  of  the  domestically  oriented  sectors 
undermines  the  growth  potential  of  the  Swiss  economy.9  In  light  of  the  rapidly  deteriorating 
                                                      
7   There are numerous useful definitions of globalization. Here I make reference to the one used by Ngaire Woods, ed. (2000): 
“The Political Economy of Globalization”, New York: St. Martin’s Press. 
8   As a percentage of GDP, Switzerland’s current account surplus is exceeded only by that of Singapore. Switzerland holds 
net foreign assets of about 135% of GDP which is unmatched in the world. The biggest part of the Swiss current account 
surplus is therefore derived from the interest earned on these assets (36 billion CHF vs. a surplus of 25 billion CHF from 
services and a 4.5 billion surplus from trade in 2002).  
9   GDP  growth  in  Switzerland  is  underestimated  by  the  official  statistics  because  these  do  not  fully  take  into  account  the 
improvement  of  the  terms  of  trade  that  are  regularly  realised  by  the  tradable  sector  (see  Ulrich  Kohli  (2002): 
“Veränderungen der Terms of Trade und reales BIP” (Terms-of-Trade Changes and Real GDP: Evidence from Switzerland 
(with English summary), Schweizerische Nationalbank Quartalsheft, June, pp. 54-63. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 3
demographics and the pressure this will inevitably exert on our social services and programs, such a 
shortfall in growth can have debilitating longer-term consequences. (see annex for graph 3) 
With  the  post-bubble  collapse  in  the  equity  markets,  a  heated  political  debate  has  emerged  in 
Switzerland  as well as  in many  other countries  about  the sustainability  of  our  retirement and social 
welfare programs. Ideas, concepts and frameworks are being discussed by politicians and frequently 
commented upon by the media. The fact that these difficult long-term problems which lie at the heart 
of  our  social  contract  are  being  openly  debated  is  a  welcome  development.    However,  short  of 
reneging on promises that are deeply embedded in our cultural and social fabric, the most meaningful 
way  to  address  these  problems  in  the  decades  to  come  is  to  invigorate  our  economic  growth 
performance.  
The challenge for our politicians is a formidable one. The political interests that defend the legislative 
hurdles which distort the domestic sector of our economy and thus undermine our growth potential are 
deeply  entrenched.  Never  does  this  become  more  obvious  than  during  a  parliamentary  electoral 
campaign. Admittedly, painful short-term adjustment problems might emerge once the reform process 
is initiated. Accelerating productivity growth rates can – in the short term – lead to a further reduction 
in employment as uncompetitive industries are compelled to restructure. In the longer-term, however, 
a rise in productivity is unquestionably beneficial. Ultimately, it will lead to higher growth rates. As the 
time bomb of demographics continues to tick, it will become increasingly obvious that this process is 
not a luxury our society can contemplate. It is a necessity! 
Monetary Implications of Globalization 
5. 
Let me now return to monetary policy. I have attempted to sketch out how after the “Great Inflation of 
the 1970s”, global financial and economic integration boosted competition, raised productivity growth 
rates and ultimately helped bring about an extraordinary reduction in global inflation and along with it a 
reduction in output volatility.  As I have mentioned earlier, there is no doubt that good central banking 
itself has made an important contribution. But ultimately central banks have also benefited from the 
process.  With  inflation  receding,  many  central  banks  have  been  able  to  focus  increasingly  on  what 
typically constitutes a subordinate element of their legislative mandate: stabilization of output. In other 
words, a structural decline in the rate of inflation has increased the margins of manoeuvre for central 
banks. This does not alter the fact that central banks have no ability to fine-tune the real economy. 
Moreover, an important body of academic literature suggests that monetary policy has also become 
more effective as markets shed regulatory impediments.10  Monetary policy is therefore not only one of 
the forces behind the dramatic decline of inflation since the early 1980s. Perhaps more importantly, it 
has been one of the main beneficiaries of the globalization process.  
This insight has tremendous significance for Switzerland where, as I have attempted to show, much of 
the non-tradable sector of our economy remains tied up in a structural straight jacket. Eliminating this 
straight  jacket  or  at  least  unbuttoning  it  would  have  wide-ranging  positive  effects  on  the  Swiss 
economy. If our legislative authorities rise to that challenge, they are likely to replicate the competition-
boosting effect that the forces of globalization have exerted on the external sector in the domestically 
oriented  sectors  of  our  economy.  Higher  productivity  growth  rates  would  ultimately  lead  to  higher 
growth rates and thus reverse a worrying trend of declining relative growth dynamics in Switzerland in 
comparison with other OECD countries.11 
Such  productivity  driven  growth  dynamics  should  lead  to  lower prices  across  a  sizeable part  of  our 
economy.  Obviously,  this  statement  needs  to  be  qualified.  he  Swiss  economy  will  always  remain 
vulnerable  to  developments  abroad.  A  significant  demand  or  supply  shock  to  the  global  economy 
could reverse the beneficial impact on domestic prices of further domestic liberalization. For example, 
widespread  protectionist  measures  rolling  back  the  achievements  of  globalization  or  widespread 
geopolitical  conflict  and  uncertainty  would  certainly  threaten  the  broad  achievements  with  regard  to 
price  stability.  Nonetheless,  breaking  up  the  rigidities  impeding  competition  in  the  domestically 
oriented  sectors  of  our  economy  has  every  chance  of  rendering  monetary  policy  not  only  more 
                                                      
10   Alan Blinder (1998): “Central Banking in Theory and Practice”. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
11   For a detailed analysis see Aymo Brunetti (2003): „Hat die Schweiz ein langfristiges Wachstumsproblem?” Neue Zürcher 
Zeitung, 31.5./1.6.2003, p.29. 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2003
effective  but  also  more  flexible  in  its  ability  to  focus  its  efforts  beyond  the  primary  mandate  of 
maintaining price stability.  
Economic and Monetary Policy Outlook 
6.  
Let me now turn to a brief assessment of current economic conditions in the United States as well as 
here  in  Switzerland  and  conclude  with  a  few  comments  regarding  the  outlook  for  Swiss  monetary 
policy. 
Recent U.S. economic data confirms that GDP growth has accelerated rapidly in the second half of 
2003.  Third  quarter  U.S.  GDP  growth  will  be  close  to  6%.  For  the  fourth  quarter,  most  market 
participants expect GDP growth to slow to a still robust 4%. This would imply a U.S. growth rate of 
approximately  3.5%  for  2003.  Substantial  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  as  well  as  strengthening 
financial conditions has supported the growth dynamic in the second half of 2003 in the United States. 
Expectations of moderating growth going forward are linked to the fact that stimulus from fiscal policy 
is  set  to  shrink.  The  contribution  to  consumer  spending  from  this  year’s  tax  cuts  is  set  to  decline 
gradually during 2004. In addition, further substantial increases in the defence budget are unlikely in 
the coming year, thus dampening the relative contribution to GDP from defence spending during 2004. 
The  most  worrying  missing  component  of  the  U.S.  recovery  has  been  the  absence  of  job  creation 
which has led many market participants and media representatives to make reference to a “jobless 
recovery”, or even a “jobloss recovery”. With the September employment report which was released 
last  week,  we  now  have  at  least  some  evidence  that  labor  markets  in  the  U.S.  are  improving 
somewhat. Provided these numbers get confirmed in the months to come, it would add weight to the 
hypothesis  that  early  at  cyclical  turning  points,  official  payroll  numbers  underestimate  the  actual 
number  of  jobs  created.  At  such  times,  the  household  survey  statistics  might  be  a  more  accurate 
gauge of labour market conditions.12 At least for now, the latest employment data has strengthened 
market expectations of a sustained recovery. 
On the business spending side, we have also seen some encouraging signs of a pick up in spending 
on  capital  equipment  though  it  would  appear  that,  so  far,  much  of  this  demand  is  for  replacement 
purposes rather than expansion. However, business inventories in the United States have fallen to low 
levels. Rising inventories should therefore contribute to production increases in the months to come.  
Without  confirmation  that  a  pick  up  in  inventory  spending  and  an  expansion  of  the  labour  force 
complete the traditional pattern of a recovery cycle, market concerns about the sustainability of the 
U.S. expansion are bound to persist. Moreover, financial markets will continue to follow carefully the 
growing twin deficit in the U.S. and the potential risk it represents to global exchange rate stability. 
Finally, persistently high oil prices may add another element of caution with regard to the sustainability 
of the currently impressive growth dynamic in the United States. 
On  the  monetary  side,  Federal  Reserve  officials  have  repeatedly  pointed  out  that  despite  firm 
consumer growth and gradually firming spending, there remains much slack in the U.S. economy. As it 
stated  in  its  release  of  September  16,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  therefore  believes  that 
pricing power and increases in core consumer prices remain muted. Or, as Federal Reserve Governor 
Don  Kohn  stated  a  few  days  ago,  “it  will  be  a  while  before  we  can  be  sure  that  a  self-sustaining 
expansion  is  underway  of  sufficient  strength  and  persistence  to  put  the  economy  back  on  a  path 
toward full employment.”13 
Switzerland  will  undoubtedly  benefit  from  the  improved  outlook  in  the  United  States.  Unfortunately, 
apart  from  the  lack  of  internal  growth  dynamic  I  discussed  previously,  Switzerland’s  growth 
prospective  is  further  curtailed  by  economic  developments  in  the  rest  of  Europe  where  there  is 
currently little evidence of a robust and sustainable upswing in economic activity. This is reflected in 
the  fact  that  despite  more  favourable  exchange  rate  conditions,  Swiss  exports  during  the  second 
quarter declined again. While consumer spending had a stabilizing effect, investment also continued 
to decline.  
                                                      
12   Ex post, this phenomenon can be observed empirically for the recessions of the 1990s. 
13  Don Kohn (The Federal Reserve Board): “Productivity and Monetary Policy”. September 24, 2003.  
BIS Review 44/2003 
 5
While  the  Swiss  economy  therefore  remains  weak,  it  is  set  to  strengthen  somewhat  into  the  fourth 
quarter of 2003 and the first quarter of 2004. Improved corporate expectations, a pick up in residential 
construction and strengthened financial conditions suggest that the trough of this cycle was reached 
during the second quarter of 2003. Provided the growth momentum in the U.S. sustains itself, exports 
should rise gradually, followed by an increase in equipment investment. Given considerable margin of 
slack in resource utilization, an improvement in the labour market can only be expected in the course 
of 2004. 
As  we  have  indicated  in  our  quarterly  monetary  policy  assessment  on  September  18,  the  Swiss 
National  Bank  will  continue  to  support  the  economy  by  conducting  an  accommodating  monetary 
policy. Low interest rates – we continue to target our 3-month libor rate at 0.25% - are designed to 
keep  Swiss  franc  investments  unattractive.    Despite  a  rapid  expansion  in  our  monetary  aggregates 
which we monitor closely, price stability is currently not threatened. 
A  rapid  expansion  of  monetary  aggregates  does  not  automatically  lead  to  higher  inflation.  In 
Switzerland, commentators often compare the current environment to the one in 1988, when money 
supply expansion rates were similar to what we observe today and inflation eventually rose to 6% by 
1991.  While  understandable,  the  comparison  is  flawed.  For  one  thing,  current  interest  rates  are 
significantly lower than they were at the time, thus reducing the opportunity cost of holding money to 
virtually zero. More importantly, the monetary expansion between 1986 and 1988 occurred against the 
backdrop  of  an  unemployment  rate  of  around  1%.  A  careful  examination  of  the  data  of  that  period 
reveals that the margins of slack in resource utilization were rapidly declining at the time. Moreover, 
credit  expanded  dramatically  during  the  late  1980s,  thus  providing  a  direct  channel  for  the  excess 
liquidity to find its way into excess demand.  
The  current  economic  environment  is  a  different  one.  Still  adjusting  from  a  historically  unique 
speculative  financial  bubble,  we  currently  observe  an  unemployment  rate  of  close  to  4%  which 
markets  expect  to  rise  further  in  the  months  to  come.  In  addition,  virtually  any  measure  of  slack  in 
resource utilization suggests that our current output gap is somewhere between 1.5% and 3%, thus 
indicating that it would take at least a year of significant above-trend growth before a balance would be 
reached between aggregate demand and potential supply.  
In conclusion, let me repeat what we have said after our last quarterly monetary policy assessment. In 
light  of  the  underlying  weakness  of  economic  conditions  in  Switzerland,  the  risks  pertaining  to  the 
sustainability  of  the  welcome  upswing  in  the  United  States  and  the  benign  global  and  domestic 
inflation  outlook,  we  conduct  our  monetary  policy  with  the  aim  of  preventing  a  premature  shift  to  a 
more  restrictive  monetary  policy  stance  which  could  endanger  the  fragile  upswing  underway  in 
Switzerland.  Given  the  openness  of  our  economy,  exchange  rate  developments  greatly  affect 
monetary  conditions  in  Switzerland.  It  therefore  follows  that  our  commitment  to  an  expansionary 
monetary  policy  includes  a  firm  commitment  to  fight  against  an  unwelcome  tightening  of  monetary 
conditions in the event of a marked appreciation of the Swiss franc. 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2003
   ANNEX 
Graph 1 
Global Price Development 
Consumer prices, unadjusted, change in % versus previous year 
World 
Japan 
USA 
Switzerland 
Germany 
[%] 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
-5 
1957 
1967 
1977 
1987 
1997 
Source: Datastream.
Standard Deviation of Four-Quarter Growth or Real GDP per Capita 
Table 1 
1960-1983 1984-2002
 
2.7 
USA 
1.7 
2.5 
Germany 
1.5 
Japan 
3.7 
2.2 
United Kingdom 2.4 
1.7 
Source : Stock and Watson, 2003 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 7
Graph 2 
Swiss Price Deflators 
GDP deflator 
Export price deflator 
220 
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
1973 
1978 
1983 
1988
1993
1998 
2003
Graph 3 
Labor Productivity 1870 - 1998 
GDP per hour worked (in 1990 international USD per hour) 
35 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
1870 
Switzerland 
USA 
Germany 
Western Europe 
(12) 
1913
1950
1973
1990
1998
Source: A. Maddison (2001): "The World Economy - A Millenial Perspective". Paris: OECD.
BIS Review 44/2003
  8 
 