Toshihiko Fukui: Achieving sustainable growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  luncheon  for  the  EU 
Ambassadors, Tokyo, 28 November 2003. 
 Today,  I  will  talk  about  Japan's  economic  outlook  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  pursuit  of 
sustainable growth.  
Japan's economy is starting to recover gradually.  Exports and production are increasing. Corporate 
profits  are  rising,  and  business  fixed  investment  is  staging  a  modest  recovery.  The  majority  of  the 
Bank of Japan's Policy Board members forecast real GDP growth of around two and a half percent in 
both fiscal 2003 and 2004.  
Behind Japan's nascent economic recovery is the synchronized recovery of the world economy. The 
US  economy  is  clearly  on  the  rebound,  European  economies  are  showing  signs  of  a  moderate 
recovery,  and  closer  to  home,  East  Asian  economies  have  regained  their  high  growth  paths  after 
quickly overcoming the adverse impact of SARS.  
Increasing interdependence between the United States, East Asian countries and Japan is one of the 
keys to achieving sustainable growth in Japan. For example, Japanese firms strategically incorporate 
China  not  only  as  a  low-cost  production  center but also as a  potentially  huge  consumer market  for 
goods and services. This is underscored by the increasing amount of both exports to and imports from 
China. We also observe an increasingly important mechanism whereby, for example, a recovery in the 
US economy stimulates East Asian economies, and this in turn has a positive impact on Japan.  
Looking  at  the  domestic  front,  steady  progress  has  been  made  in  solving  structural  problems.  The 
debt to sales ratio for all industries has declined from its peak in 1993. The employment and income 
situation  has  somewhat  improved  recently.  Corporate  profits  have  increased  largely  as  a  result  of 
firms' restructuring efforts. This has led to a recovery in business fixed investment.  
While economic activity is improving, mild deflation is expected to continue. Indeed, the most recent 
figure for the Bank of Japan's Policy Board members' forecast of the Consumer Price Index excluding 
volatile food prices, which we generally refer to as the “core CPI,” is slightly negative, between minus 
0.2 and minus 0.5 percent for fiscal 2004.  
The  combination  of  economic  recovery  and  continuing  deflation  suggests  a  number  of  underlying 
problems, which may have some policy implications.  
First, the output gap remains large. Since real GDP growth in both fiscal 2003 and 2004 will be slightly 
above potential growth, the output gap will be reduced only marginally.  
Second, inflation has been declining globally. This is due mainly to the successful conduct of monetary 
policy worldwide and the increasing penetration of emerging countries into market economies. Firms 
have not regained pricing power in the market. Therefore, there is a strong possibility that inflation will 
stay at a relatively low level, while the growth rate will increase.  
Third, Japan's economy is still suffering from structural problems such as excess debt, excess labor, 
and  financial  system  fragility.  Because  of  these  structural  problems,  cyclical  recoveries  at  large 
manufacturers are not able to generate strong positive spillover effects for non-manufacturers, small to 
medium-sized companies, or households.  
To return to a sustainable growth path and overcome deflation, Japan must thus solve its structural 
problems and enhance the growth prospects of both firms and households. In Japan, as in Europe, 
structural reform to ensure the more efficient use of capital and labor is urgently called for.  
Despite the recent progress, we should not be complacent about the need for structural reform. The 
process of solving structural problems is still half-finished. For example, the debt to sales ratio for non-
manufacturing industries is still higher than it was before the bubble period. In addition, the sense that 
they  are  still  holding  excess  labor  remains  among  firms,  whether  in  manufacturing  or  non-
manufacturing, and whether large or small.  
Banks have also made progress in their restructuring. Large banks have reduced outstanding amounts 
of nonperforming loans and have increased provisioning. They have also reduced the risk pertaining 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 1
to stock prices by selling their shareholdings to the market as well as to the Bank of Japan under our 
stock purchasing scheme. Almost all banks have reduced their shareholdings to levels below their Tier 
1 capital.  
Banks' financial results turned out to be better than expected for the first half of the current business 
year ended in September. Because losses resulting from the disposal of nonperforming loans were 
smaller than operating profits, most banks posted profits. The average capital adequacy ratio for large 
banks was around 11 percent.  
Given the scheduled removal of blanket deposit insurance in the spring of 2005, time is running short 
for us to engage in the further restructuring of the financial system to restore the soundness of the 
banking  system.  Moreover,  the decline  in  bank  lending  illustrates  not only  that  demand  for loans  is 
weak but also that the risk-taking ability of banks has not recovered sufficiently.  
Under  such  circumstances,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  adopted  quantitative  easing  as  its  fundamental 
policy framework. And we have made our commitment to maintain the current quantitative easing, that 
is  to  maintain  zero  interest  rates,  until  the  core  CPI  shows  a  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  of  zero 
percent or above on a sustainable basis.  
Quantitative  easing  has  helped  to  maintain  financial  market  stability  and  to  make  the  environment 
surrounding  corporate  finance  more  accommodative,  thereby  underpinning  economic  activity. 
Concerns about a liquidity shortage in the money market have been almost dispelled, and short- to 
medium-term  interest  rates  have  been  low,  reflecting  the  Bank's  commitment  in  terms  of  policy 
duration.  
In  the  area  of  corporate  finance,  borrowing  rates  have  been  stable  at  low  levels.  Although  the 
outstanding amount of loans has been declining, the lending attitudes of banks as perceived by firms 
and the funding situations of firms themselves have been improving. During 1997 and 1998 amid the 
currency  crises  in  Asia  and  Russia,  the  failures  of  several  large  Japanese  financial  institutions 
triggered a credit crunch. Since then, however, firms have not experienced such hardships, thanks to 
the provision of ample liquidity by the Bank and the strengthening of the safety nets.  
Under  quantitative  easing,  the  Bank  has  raised  the  target  for  the  outstanding  balance  of  current 
accounts three times this year, resulting in a total increase of 10 trillion yen. In April and May, the Bank 
raised the target in response to downside risks, including the negative effect of SARS and the decline 
in stock prices. In October, the Bank raised the upper limit of the target. This was intended to give the 
Bank more flexibility in providing liquidity through its money market operations. Unlike earlier increases 
in the target, the objective of the increase in October was not to deal with downside risks, but rather to 
reinforce the recent momentum for recovery.  
In  my  view,  two  things  are  important  to  strengthen  the  framework  of  quantitative  easing.  One  is  to 
clarify our commitment to maintain the quantitative easing policy, thereby enhancing the transparency 
and  increasing  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  The  other  is  to  strengthen  the  transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy in the area of corporate finance.  
In October, with a view to enhancing the transparency of monetary policy, we decided to clarify our 
commitment  to  maintain  the  quantitative  easing  policy.  We  also  decided  to  improve  the  way  we 
communicate to the market our thinking on the economic outlook.  
In terms of our commitment, we specified two conditions for terminating quantitative easing. First, the 
most recently published year-on-year rate of increase in the core CPI must register zero percent or 
above, and such a tendency must be confirmed over a period of a few months. Second, we need to be 
convinced that the future year-on-year rate of increase in the core CPI will not fall below zero percent. 
To be more specific, the majority of Policy Board members must forecast that the rate of increase in 
the core CPI will be above zero percent during the forecasting period.  
While these two conditions are necessary conditions, there might be cases in which even though the 
above  conditions  have  been  met,  the  Bank  might  still  deem  it  appropriate  to  continue  quantitative 
easing.  
As a way to improve our communication with the market, we have introduced the following measures 
with  particular  emphasis  on  the  timing  and  frequency  of  communication  in  conjunction  with  the 
clarification  of  our  commitment.  We  decided  to  release  an  interim  assessment  of  the  state  of  the 
economy  and  prices  in  January  and  July.  Previously,  the  Bank  released  its  view  of  the  “standard 
scenario” for the economy after reviewing the outlook and risk assessment of the economy and prices 
twice a year, in April and October. Now, in addition to these, the Bank will discuss possible deviations 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2003
from this standard scenario at Monetary Policy meetings and report the outcome of its discussion in 
the January and July monthly reports. The Bank also decided to change the schedule for publishing its 
monthly report as well as to hold the Governor's press conference on the same day as the Monetary 
Policy meetings.  
We hope that the clear and concrete commitment to continue quantitative easing will help the effects 
of  monetary  easing  to  permeate  the  economy  more  efficiently.  We  believe  this  will  contribute  to 
strengthening the foundation for a more sustainable economic recovery.  
Some argue that such clarification of the Bank's commitment may impair the flexibility with which it is 
able  to  conduct  future  monetary  policy.  For  example,  if  market  participants  consider  the  Bank's 
commitment to be too inflationary, this will cause the yield curve to steepen. It reflects not only the 
eventual  increase  in  future  short-term  interest  rates,  but  also  the  greater  risk  premium  attached  to 
concerns that a “too-easy” policy may be continued for “too long.”  
In this sense, the idea of policy commitment involves a delicate balancing act between securing the 
short-term economic recovery and achieving long-term sustainable growth. Considering that deflation, 
though mild, is expected to continue under zero interest rates, I believe an unusual policy commitment, 
which  is  linked  with  a  specific  and  observed  economic  indicator,  is  necessary  in  striking  the  best 
possible balance under the circumstances.  
To strengthen the policy commitment, I am well aware that there are those both at home and abroad 
who argue for adopting an inflation target or a numerical definition of price stability. In this regard, let 
me  reiterate  that  when  nominal  interest  rates  are  constrained  by  the  zero  bound  and  financial 
institutions  are  not  performing  their  intermediary  function  sufficiently,  we  cannot  expect  the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy to function properly. Under such circumstances, it is hard 
to  believe  that  the  adoption  of  inflation  targeting  would  increase  the  effectiveness  and  enhance 
transparency regarding the future conduct of monetary policy.  
I  believe  that  the  current  policy  commitment  is  most  effective  in  enhancing  the  transparency  of 
monetary policy and stabilizing the expectations in the market. It clarifies under what conditions and 
for how long the Bank intends to maintain the framework of its current quantitative easing policy.  
In  addition  to  enhancing  transparency,  we  need  to  strengthen  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy in the area of corporate finance. In this regard, the Bank has begun purchasing asset-
backed  securities  backed  by  private  sector  corporate  debt.  The  credit  markets  in  Japan  have 
traditionally been dominated by bank lending. However, given a situation in which banks' ability to take 
risks is constrained, we need to expand the markets for asset-backed securities and other such credit 
instruments, which are not susceptible to fluctuations in banks' capital levels. To date, the Bank has 
purchased about 200 billion yen of asset-backed securities and asset-backed commercial paper.  
We hope that our efforts will contribute to the further expansion of the asset-backed securities market 
by  raising  awareness  of  its  advantages  among  financial  institutions  and  investors  as  well  as 
encouraging  the  origination  of  asset-backed  securities  in  the  market.  Earlier  this  month,  the  Bank 
initiated  a  series  of  workshops  with  a  wide  range  of  market  participants  on  how  best  to  coordinate 
efforts to improve the markets for asset-backed securities and other similar credit instruments.  
Our current framework for quantitative easing coupled with measures to strengthen the transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy  will  improve  the  financial  environment  within  which  firms  and  banks 
engage  with  the  structural  problems.  It  will  thus  facilitate  the  Japanese  economy's  return  to  a 
sustainable growth path and also bolster the efforts to overcome deflation. Since the strategy of the 
Bank of Japan relies on the efforts of the private sector, this policy may take time to pay off, but it is 
the most effective way of tackling the roots of the structural problems.  
In  closing,  I  express  my  sincere  hope  that  the  current  momentum  for  recovery  in  both  Europe  and 
Japan will be successfully translated into sustainable economic growth.  
BIS Review 55/2003 
 3
