David Dodge: Past adjustments and future trends in the Canadian economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  London  Chamber  of 
Commerce, London, Ontario, 8 December 2003. 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I’m happy to have this opportunity to visit the Forest City and 
to finally honour your long-standing invitation to address you. 
When  giving  a  speech  near  the  end  of  a  year,  it  is  common  practice  to  look  back  over  the  past 
12 months, consider what we have learned from the events and experiences of the year, and think a 
bit about what might lie ahead. I became Governor of the Bank of Canada in 2001 and, since that 
time, I have found myself saying at the end of each year, “Well, we won’t see another year like that 
again.” In 2001, we saw the bursting of the tech bubble and the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the United 
States. Last year, we had the fallout from Enron and other examples of corporate malfeasance, as well 
as the growing threat of war in the Middle East. And our currency dropped to an all-time low against 
the U.S. dollar. 
Not to be outdone, 2003 has also had more than its share of momentous events that had an impact on 
the Canadian economy. The list seems almost Biblical: war, pestilence, in the form of SARS and mad-
cow disease, fires, floods, a hurricane, and a power outage. This year also brought another type of 
shock to keep Canadians preoccupied, and that is the sharp rise of our currency in foreign exchange 
markets. The Canadian dollar has jumped from under 64 cents U.S. at the start of the year to over 
76 cents at the end of last week - an unprecedented movement. 
The Bank of Canada has closely followed the economic effects of all these events, including the rapid 
movement of the Canadian dollar. But to better understand what has happened in the economy over 
the past year or so, I will place my comments in the context of longer-term economic trends.  
The Adjustments of the 1990s 
Let me start by recalling the state of our economy as the 1990s began. Although inflation had come 
down from the very high levels seen in the early 1980s, it was still quite high by today’s standards. 
Several  approaches  had  been  tried  to  bring  about  an  environment  of  low,  stable,  and  predictable 
inflation. These included wage and price controls and the targeting of the money supply. But none of 
these methods provided a suitable medium-term anchor for inflation expectations. This made it difficult 
for  individuals  and  businesses  to  form  long-range  plans  with  any  degree  of  certainty.  On  the  fiscal 
side,  the  picture  was  pretty  grim  at  the  start  of  the  1990s  and  getting  worse.  Public  sector  deficits 
would eventually peak at around 8 per cent of Canada’s GDP, and public debt levels were continuing 
to mount. Clearly, the situation was not sustainable. Adjustments were urgently needed. 
The first of these adjustments came in 1991, when the Bank and the Government of Canada agreed 
to  adopt  a  series  of  explicit  inflation-control  targets.  The  agreement  called  for  an  inflation 
target-defined in terms of the annual rate of increase of the consumer price index - that descended 
gradually  to  2  per  cent,  the  midpoint  of  a  1  to  3  per  cent  range.  That  initial  agreement  has  been 
extended three times, with the latest agreement covering the period to the end of 2006. In each case, 
the midpoint of the inflation-control target range has been kept at 2 per cent.  
This framework has worked well - better than might have been expected. By January 1992, inflation 
was  already close  to  2 per  cent,  and  from  the  end of  1994  to  today,  inflation  has averaged  almost 
exactly 2 per cent. Moreover, not only has inflation fallen, it has become more stable. Indeed, the trend 
of inflation - as measured by what we call core inflation - has stayed within the target range almost 
continuously for the past 10 years.  
Just as importantly, we found that, after a few years of inflation targeting, the inflation expectations of 
Canadians fell into line with the 2 per cent target. And expectations have remained close to the target 
in recent years. 
The point of all this is that we have been successful in using monetary policy to create an economic 
environment of low, stable, and predictable inflation. With a credible monetary policy, the whole nature 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 1
of the inflation process has changed. Inflation itself has become more stable and, in turn, this has led 
to a more stable and better-functioning economy. 
The second big adjustment began in earnest around the middle of the 1990s. As I said before, at that 
time, Canada was facing an unsustainable fiscal situation. Compounding this immediate fiscal problem 
were  the  looming  challenges  posed  by  our  aging  population.  Spending  had  to  be  put  on  a  viable 
long-term course, and the ratio of public debt to GDP on a steady downward track. 
By  the  middle  of  the  decade,  governments  -  federal  and  provincial  -  had  begun  to  take  the  painful 
steps  to  balance  their  books  and  reduce  their  debt  burdens.  It  did  not  take  long  for  the  benefits  of 
those tough decisions to materialize. In most jurisdictions, the vicious circle of rising deficits and debts 
became a virtuous circle of balanced budgets and falling debt burdens. This fiscal adjustment helped 
Canada’s  economic  policy  credibility  and  reduced  the  risk  premium  that  investors  demanded  on 
Canadian  government  bonds.  Not  only  did  lower  interest  rates  reduce  debt-servicing  costs,  they 
stimulated economic growth, which brought in more revenues for governments.  
The  federal  government  recently  announced  a  sixth  consecutive  surplus  in  its  budget.  Our  public 
pension plans are once again on a sound footing. The federal debt-to-GDP ratio has fallen to about 
44 per cent, from close to 70 per cent at its peak. The ratio of total government liabilities to GDP has 
declined  from  a  peak  of  about  100 per cent  to  about  80 per cent,  according  to  the  OECD.  And 
Canada’s Triple-A credit rating has been restored.  
I  don’t  mean  to  suggest  that  inflation  targeting  and  fiscal  adjustments  were  the  only  factors  behind 
Canada’s overall improved economic performance. Of equal importance was the difficult restructuring 
that had to be done in the wake of free-trade agreements in the 1990s. Businesses and employees 
made some difficult adjustments. None of this was easy, but it did leave Canada’s economy in a better 
position to grow sustainably and to handle economic shocks. Our economic record over the past few 
years, even in the face of all the events I have mentioned, is testament to that. 
Now, let me talk about the role of the Canadian dollar in this long adjustment process. On a day-to-day 
basis, there are a number of factors that can drive movements in the value of the Canadian dollar in 
foreign exchange markets. But my intention is to stick to a discussion of long-term trends. From this 
perspective, there were really two major factors at work on the currency in the 1990s. Governments 
were  cutting  spending  to  address  their  fiscal  problems,  and  that  led  to  a  reduction  in  domestic 
demand.  On  top  of  this,  commodity  prices  were  down  sharply  in  the  second  half  of  the  decade. 
Historically, there has been a fairly strong correlation between the prices of non-energy commodities 
and the external value of the Canadian dollar. 
In the face of these two factors, Canada’s floating exchange rate did its job as a “shock absorber” for 
the  economy.  How?  Given  the  tight  fiscal  policy  of  the  time,  the  lower  dollar  -  in  the  context  of  an 
easing in monetary policy - played an appropriate role in encouraging foreign demand for Canadian 
products at a time when domestic demand was weak.  
Further,  while  the  lower  currency  cushioned  the  shock  of  falling  commodity  prices  on  resource 
producers,  it  also  boosted  the  profitability  of  other  sectors  that  were  able  to  expand  in  the wake  of 
free-trade agreements and strong foreign demand. This helped to facilitate the transfer of resources 
within the economy from sectors that were shrinking to those that were growing.  
The depreciating Canadian dollar of the 1990s also changed the relative price of labour and capital. At 
the time, there was a fair bit of excess labour in the economy, because of the structural adjustments 
that were taking place. The lower dollar raised the cost of machinery and equipment relative to labour. 
And  that  made  it  easier  for  some  of  the  labour  that  was  released  by  the  shrinking  sectors  of  the 
economy to be absorbed by those that were growing. 
Future Trends in the Economy 
That’s a quick look back at the 1990s. So what can we expect in the future? What are the major issues 
that we will have to grapple with in the coming decades? What adjustments will be needed?  
I don’t have a crystal ball, but a couple of issues seem fairly clear to me. As I already mentioned, the 
first important issue is demographics. The Canadian economy must prepare for the retirement of the 
baby boomers. Under current projections, Canada’s working-age population - those 15 to 64 years of 
age - will start to decline in about 15 years.  
2 
 BIS Review 56/2003
Given this demographic outlook, there are two points to be made. The first is that we need to continue 
to lower our ratio of public debt to GDP. This will help to ensure that Canada will be able to support its 
growing elderly population.  
The second point is that we will need to make adjustments to help us deal with a labour force that will 
soon  be  shrinking  in  relative  terms  and,  ultimately,  in  absolute  terms  as  well.  What  kinds  of 
adjustments? We will need to make sure that the older segment of the working-age population is not 
discouraged from participating in the labour force. But more importantly, we need to raise productivity 
if Canadians are to continue to enjoy rising incomes. 
It  will  not  be  easy  to  get  those  productivity  gains.  We  will  need  to  see  greater  investment  in  new, 
improved machinery and equipment. We will need to see more and better application of information 
and communications technology. We will need to ensure that our workers have the skills and receive 
the training they require to take advantage of productivity-enhancing technology. And we will need to 
improve business organization and practices, to fully exploit the potential of new technologies, and to 
minimize any barriers to their application in the workplace.  
Raising productivity will also require a major effort to ensure that our microeconomic policies facilitate 
innovation and higher productivity in both the private and public sectors in Canada.  
In thinking about our macroeconomic policies, we can’t assume that all the shocks are behind us. We 
have seen the buildup of economic imbalances recently, with large current account surpluses in Asia 
and a large current account deficit in the United States. And fiscal imbalances are growing in Europe 
and the United States.  
So how can the Bank of Canada help to prepare for the challenges ahead? Most importantly, we must 
stick  with  the  monetary  policy  framework  that  we  built  in  the  1990s.  That  means  keeping  our 
commitment to low, stable, and predictable inflation. And it means that our floating exchange rate will 
continue to be an important part of our monetary policy framework. This framework will continue to 
help the economy adjust to changing economic circumstances, both at home and abroad.  
Of course, exchange rates don’t always move as smoothly as desired or expected. Still, let me repeat 
what  I  have  said  many  times  before:  having  a  floating  exchange  rate  to  facilitate  economic 
adjustments is by far the best option for the Canadian economy.  
Recent Economic Developments 
Let me now turn to the current economic situation, starting with the outlook for inflation. As we noted in 
our October Monetary Policy Report, we expect that Canada’s inflation rate will fall over the next few 
months. The core rate of inflation - a measure that removes the eight most volatile components of the 
consumer price index - will likely move down close to the bottom of our 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control 
range early next year, before starting to move back up towards 2 per cent.  
On  the  Bank’s  latest  fixed  announcement  date  last  week,  we  decided  to  leave  our  key  policy  rate 
unchanged.  In  doing  so,  we  noted  a  few  developments  that  have  altered  our  outlook  since  we 
published the Monetary Policy Report. Let me review some of them.  
At the end of November, Statistics Canada released its national accounts data for the third quarter. 
These data showed that Canada’s economy had grown at an annualized rate of just 1.1 per cent in the 
third quarter, a rate that was well below expectations. What’s more, there were downward revisions to 
growth in previous quarters. This meant that, at the end of the third quarter, there was more excess 
capacity in the Canadian economy than we had anticipated. 
In  the  Monetary  Policy  Report,  we  said  that  we  expected  the  economy  to  close  its  output  gap  and 
return  to  its  level  of  full  capacity  by  early  2005.  Closing  the  output  gap  over  that  period  would  be 
consistent with inflation returning to the 2 per cent target by mid-2005. But because we now know that 
the output gap is larger than we had expected in October, we also know that the economy will have to 
grow at a faster rate during the fourth quarter and through 2004 to close that output gap by early 2005.  
While growth earlier this year was disappointing, we are now seeing a number of encouraging signs 
suggesting that stronger growth will resume, beginning in the current quarter. I will mention three of 
those signs. First, while the overall growth rate in the third quarter was just 1.1 per cent, it should be 
noted that this figure was depressed because businesses met demand in large part from inventories. 
Final  domestic  demand  grew  quite  strongly  -  by  close  to  6  per  cent  -  thanks  to  healthy  household 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 3
spending  and  rising  business  investment.  This  investment  bodes  well  for  higher  future  production. 
And, with continuing employment growth, we expect household spending to remain robust.  
Second,  the  reduction  in  inventory  investment  is  probably  over.  While  this  adjustment  depressed 
growth  in  the  third  quarter,  it  should  not  do  so  in  the  fourth  quarter.  In  fact,  the  completion  of  the 
inventory correction should contribute to growth in the fourth quarter. 
Third, Canada’s export sector should receive a boost from rising foreign demand, in particular, from 
the United States. Remember that the U.S. economy grew at an annualized rate of about 8 per cent in 
the third quarter, and Canadian exporters should see some benefit from this and from the continuing 
strong growth expected in the U.S. economy over the months ahead. Rising non-energy commodity 
prices should also be a boost to the economy. 
All  told,  the  Canadian  economy  should  be  poised  for  solid  growth  ahead,  beginning  in  the  fourth 
quarter.  We  would  expect  economic  growth  in  this  quarter  to  be  well  above  4  per  cent  on  an 
annualized basis. 
However - and let me stress this - the effect of the recent sharp appreciation of the Canadian dollar is 
a major uncertainty at this time. It is not clear to what extent the increase in foreign demand I have just 
mentioned will be offset by the effects of a stronger currency. Nor can we be sure that there is enough 
monetary  stimulus  in  the  economy  to  support  the  increases  in  household  spending  and  business 
investment that would be required to return the economy to full capacity by early 2005. 
Some important economic data are expected between now and our next fixed announcement date, on 
20 January. These should give us a better sense of how Canada’s export sector is doing, and how 
household spending went over the holiday season. We will be closely watching all the data ahead for 
evidence that the economy is growing at a rate solidly above the growth of potential.  
Conclusion 
This past year, like the two years before it, was full of “interesting” economic challenges for Canada 
and the world. It is tempting to hope that next year will be somewhat less “interesting” and bring fewer 
challenges. But regardless of what next year brings, what is critical is that we keep our eyes on the 
longer-term horizon and focus on the challenges ahead. These challenges include adapting to shifting 
demographics, raising productivity, and getting our microeconomic policy framework right. At the Bank 
of  Canada,  we  remain  committed  to  the  sound  monetary  policy  framework  that  will  help  us  rise  to 
tomorrow’s challenges. And that’s good news for all of us, no matter what the coming years may bring. 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2003
