David Dodge: Economic and financial trends in Canada 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 22 October 2003. 
 Today, we released our October Monetary Policy Report. The Report reviews economic and financial 
trends in the context of Canada’s inflation-control strategy. 
Since our April Report, the Canadian economy has been hit by a number of unusual shocks: SARS, 
BSE, the Ontario electricity blackout, and the severe forest fires in British Columbia. Inflation has also 
fallen  faster  and  further  than  expected.  This  drop  in  core  inflation  reflected  several  unforeseen 
developments. These included a broad-based weakness in the prices of goods, substantial reductions 
in the prices of tourism-related services because of SARS, and a slightly faster easing of pressures 
from  auto  insurance  premiums.  The  substantial  fall  in  the  value  of  the  U.S.  dollar  added  to  the 
weakness  in  goods  prices.  We  now  estimate  that  there  is  more  slack  in  the  economy  than  was 
projected in April. 
The prospects for near-term growth in the global economy have improved since April, and geopolitical 
uncertainty has continued to decrease. The near-term outlook for the U.S. economy is much improved. 
The economy in the euro area is still weak, but prospects for Asia look bright, led by China and India. 
The Japanese economy is performing better than anticipated. 
We expect growth in the Canadian economy to strengthen during the fourth quarter and through 2004. 
On  balance,  the  expansion  should  be  above  the  rate  of  potential  growth,  relying  primarily  on  solid 
household spending and increased business investment. Stronger growth abroad should boost foreign 
demand for Canadian products, but this will be dampened by the higher value of the Canadian dollar. 
Growth is expected to average a little over 3 per cent in the second half of 2003 and 3 1/4 per cent in 
2004. With growth above potential, the slack in the economy should be absorbed by early 2005. 
We expect core inflation to average just over 1.5 per cent for the rest of 2003, and to fall to just above 
1 per cent in early 2004, as the effects of earlier increases in auto insurance premiums dissipate. Core 
inflation should return to 2 per cent by mid-2005, as economic slack is taken up. Total CPI inflation will 
continue to be importantly affected by swings in the price of crude oil. If prices ease to US$ 27 per 
barrel next year, total CPI inflation would likely fall below core inflation in 2004. 
However,  there  are  significant  risks  to  this  economic  outlook.  These  risks  relate  to  the  timing  and 
magnitude  of  global  demand,  price,  and  exchange  rate  adjustments  to  economic  imbalances.  In 
particular, there is uncertainty both about the likely changes in key global exchange rates and their 
effect  on  the  Canadian  economy.  There  is  also  uncertainty  about  the  sustainability  of  U.S.  growth 
beyond mid-2004. 
We continue to assess the implications of all these developments - both past and future - for output 
and inflation in Canada, and what this means for monetary policy. 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 1
