Seung Park : Nepalese economic development in the light of Korea’s 
experience 
Keynote speech by Dr Seung Park, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the workshop on “Managing 
Non-Performing Asset” hosted by Nepal Rastra Bank, Kathmandu, 12 November 2003. 
 Opening remarks 
Let me begin by expressing my deep thanks to Dr. Tilak Rawal, Governor of Nepal Rastra Bank, and 
to all persons concerned for having invited me to address this workshop. 
Nepal  is  well  known  to  Koreans  as  a  country  of  splendid  natural  beauty,  largely  made  up  by  the 
Himalayas, which include the world’s highest peaks such as Mount Everest. 
I  am  aware  that  nowadays  the  Nepalese  people  are  trying  to  achieve  a  dramatic  economic  leap 
forward. They look to Korea as a country that transformed itself from ‘The Land of Morning Calm’ to a 
dynamic  industrial  nation,  now  the  world’s  12th  largest  economy  in  GDP  terms.  In  this  context,  I 
believe, Nepal Rastra Bank has invited specialists from the Financial Supervisory Commission and the 
Korean Asset Management Corporation and myself to today’s workshop. 
As Governor of the Bank of Korea and scholar of economic development theory, I would like to share 
my  thoughts  with  you  about  the  economic  development  of  Nepal  in  the  light  of  our  experiences  in 
Korea. 
Korea’s experience in economic development 
Korea’s past history had involved a constant struggle against poverty. In Korea, mountains make up 
some 70% of the total land area - not so very different from Nepal. Korean people lived out their lives 
on this narrow cultivable land for a long time. We could not escape from the enduring state of extreme 
poverty because of a lack of natural resources, perennial floods and droughts, and so on. 
However, during a period of less than half a century, Korea’s story has changed from one of poverty to 
one of economic success. Per capita income, no more than 80 dollars in 1960, reached 10 thousand 
dollars  last  year.  In  the  course  of  this  change,  Korea  has  transformed  itself  from  a  closed  farming 
country  to  an  open  industrial  nation.  It  now  exports  many  high-tech  IT  products  such  as  semi-
conductors, communication devices, computers, and LCDs. 
In the 1960s, the early stage of economic development, we mainly produced labor-intensive goods for 
export. Korea had been unable to accumulate capital and obtain the raw materials needed, let alone 
the technology. Worse still, the domestic market was limited. The only domestically available resource 
was a good-quality labor force. 
In this situation, we brought in foreign capital and built factories with it. We also imported raw materials 
and technology. Low-waged domestic labor, our only resource, was recruited by these factories that 
manufactured  light  industries  products.  These  were  then  exported  and  the  foreign  currency  earned 
was  reinvested  in  domestic  industry.  With  the  repetition  of  this  cycle,  a  snowball  effect  started  to 
operate and this accelerated as time went by. As a result, most of the problems of extreme poverty 
had been solved by the late 1970s. 
Subsequently, economic development led by labor-intensive light industries began to reach its limits. 
We,  therefore,  started  to  build  up  heavy  industries  on  a  full  scale,  such  as  steel,  petro-chemicals, 
automobiles, and shipbuilding. This policy obtained excellent results and Korea was able to become a 
member of the OECD, the so-called rich countries’ club in 1996. 
Meanwhile, the growth environment had changed greatly. We had moved from a low-waged to a high-
waged, from a government-driven to a market-centered environment, and from closed protectionism to 
openness  and  competition.  The  Korean  economy,  however,  failed  to  adapt  promptly  to  these 
environmental changes and consequently suffered a foreign currency crisis in 1997. 
However,  Koreans  were  never  wholly  downhearted  because  of  this  crisis.  In  some  way,  it  was  an 
opportunity  to  solve  the  accumulated  structural  problems.  Taking  the  suffering  in  their  strides,  both 
BIS Review 49/2003 
 1
government  and  people  supported  bold  structural  reforms  covering  all  aspects  of  society  including 
firms, financial facilities, public services, and labor market. 
In consequence, Korea was able to overcome the foreign currency crisis earlier than expected and 
was held up as the model pupil of the IMF’s structural adjustment program. In the course of this drive, 
Korea  acquired  a  new  economic  structure,  capable  of  responding  flexibly  to  the  changing  growth 
environment. 
Necessities for economic development 
Korean economic development was even termed a miracle by some because it was achieved within a 
very short period. Many underdeveloped countries, in particular, have pondered over its main driving 
forces. 
It  is  often  said  that  there  are  certain  prior  necessities  such  as  an  abundance  of  either  natural 
resources or capital, and wide markets, without which economic development seems unlikely. There 
are,  nevertheless,  quite  a  few  examples  of  successful  economic  development  being  accomplished 
without these advantages. 
As well as Korea, Singapore, Hongkong, and Taiwan all achieved brilliant economic development in 
spite of their unfavorable starting conditions. The question of whether a certain economy develops is 
determined  more  by  how  its  government  and  people  act,  than  by  its  physical  endowment.  In  this 
context, I think three factors are essential for the progress of the Nepalese economy. 
First of all, it is vital that there should be a firm will for economic development and the resolution to 
carry it out. The Nobel laureate Arthur Lewis pointed to “the will to economize” as the most important 
motivation  for  economic  growth.  No  matter  how  great  a  country’s natural  resources,  no  matter  how 
wide its markets, without a strong will to develop and back-breaking efforts, economic development 
remains a distant prospect. 
Through 
the  nationwide  Saemaeul  movement,  or  “new  village”  movement,  Korean  people 
strengthened  their  resolution  for  a  better  life  and  their  self-confidence  through  a  ‘Can-do-spirit’. 
Everyone  worked  hard.  Preparing  for  the  future,  they  became  accustomed  to  habits  of  thrift  and 
saving, and were able to accumulate capital. 
Nepal, like Korea in the early stage of development, suffers from a lack of capital. However, where the 
government  and  people  share  a  firm  will  for  development  and  a  spirit  of  self-sacrifice  in  enduring 
today’s hardship for tomorrow’s prosperity, there is already a store of mental capital that compensates 
for the lack of physical capital. 
Secondly, Nepal should make good use of the given economic environment and, especially, maximize 
the benefits flowing from the progress in the openness of the world economy. Thanks to the tidal wave 
of  openness,  huge  amounts  of  capital  now  move  across  borders  and  multinational  enterprises  are 
transferring  production  facilities  to  more  advantageous  regions.  This  means  that  if  investment 
conditions are suitable, there should not be too much difficulty in raising the needed capital. 
Accordingly, I think it is reasonable for Nepal to adopt a development strategy similar to that of Korea 
in  the  past.  This  involves  importing  capital  and  technology  from  abroad  while  utilizing  the  relatively 
cheap and abundant human resources to the utmost. For this, Nepal should improve the institutional 
infrastructure  and  conditions  steadily  so  as  to  attract  greater  capital  inflow  from  foreign  financial 
institutions and more foreign direct investments. In addition, in order to overcome the weakness of its 
narrow market, Nepal should constantly expand its foreign trade. 
Lastly, I think that the roles of the government and the central bank are also important. One of the 
factors impeding economic development in underdeveloped countries is the weakness of the market 
mechanism. Therefore, in the early stage of development, it is important for the government to allocate 
the limited resources in an efficient manner with a well-prepared plan. That is to say, it is necessary for 
the government to act as ‘a visible hand’, complementing ‘the invisible hand’ of the market. 
In this way in Korea, the government set up economic development plans, and presented its vision to 
the  people.  In  the  course  of  economic  development,  it  induced  foreign  capital  inflows  and  boosted 
exports by providing financial support and tax incentives. Nepal also has limited resources and, so far, 
the  market  mechanism  has  not  been  working  to  the  full.  Thus,  it  is  preferable  for  the  Nepalese 
government to complement the function of the market. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2003
There  is,  at  the  same  time,  concern  over  the  worsening  of  inflationary  pressures  and  the  current 
account  position  in  a  rapid  drive  for  development.  If  such  internal  and  external  disequilibria  are 
deepened, sustainable economic development is unlikely. Therefore, the central bank should devote 
intensive efforts to achieving price stability. From this point of view, it is of great importance to secure 
the central bank’s independence. To put it briefly, while the government strives to increase production 
and investment, the central bank should conduct monetary policy consistently to avoid erosion of the 
basis for price stability. 
The direction of economic development in Nepal 
Admittedly  Nepal  faces  a  number  of  particular  problems  in  economic  development.  Its  landlocked 
situation hampers trade and there are some weaknesses in terms of capital and technology. 
However,  we  should  never  underestimate  Nepal’s  inherent  resources.  Besides  low-waged  labor, 
Nepal has a vast potential for hydro-electric power from its rushing waters, so Nepal can acquire the 
energy  essential  for  industrial  development  with  relative  ease.  In  addition,  Nepal  is  blessed  with  a 
magnificent environment with the Himalayas forming the “Roof of the World”. This means there is a 
tremendous potential for the growth of the tourist industry. Besides this, it borders China and India, 
which are the largest and most rapidly growing markets in the world. 
Therefore, Nepal’s future looks very promising, provided the government and people can unite in their 
determination for betterment and pursue a plan for economic development in line with the changing 
global environment. 
In  particular,  Nepal,  like  Korea  before,  will  be  able  to  grow  within  a  short  period  by  exploiting  the 
advantage  of  imitation  as  a  follower,  which  was  emphasized  by  economichistorian  Alexander 
Gerschenkron. 
This is termed as “the relative advantage of backwardness”. The idea is that late developers can save 
time and costs by learning from the pioneer’s experience and following in their footsteps where they 
took  the  right  path.  In  addition,  because  followers  leapfrog  some  steps  in  the  course  of  economic 
development, they can achieve compressed growth and develop faster than the vanguard. 
In this respect, as Korea is presently ahead of Nepal in economic development, I think that we are in a 
fortunate position to give a lot of help. If you wish, the Bank of Korea will be happy to further expand 
our cooperation and friendship with the Nepal Rastra Bank. 
Closing remarks 
Thanks to advances in IT technology and transport, Nepal and Korea are now closer together than 
before. Many Korean trekkers visit Nepal every year and thousands of Nepalese are working in Korea. 
Besides this, nowadays, pashimina shawls woven in Nepal are becoming very popular in Korea. 
It  is  my  profound  hope  that  this  workshop  will  offer  a  useful  opportunity  to  deepen  still  further  the 
excellent  relationship  between  Nepal  and  Korea  and  to  help  Nepal’s  economic  development  and 
financial reform. 
Thank you for your listening so attentively. 
BIS Review 49/2003 
 3
