Niklaus Blattner: The task of overseeing payment and securities settlement 
systems 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 12 December 2003. 
 With the revised National Bank Law, the National Bank receives an explicit mandate to contribute to 
the stability of the financial system. This is, in particular, laid down specifically in the Law in the task of 
overseeing payment and securities settlement systems. 
themselves 
its  markets  and 
institutions  prove 
tasks  efficiently  and 
Why does the National Bank oversee payment and securities settlement systems? 
By  overseeing  payment  and  securities  settlement  systems,  the  National  Bank  is  supporting  the 
security and efficiency of financial market infrastructures in Switzerland. In doing so, it is helping to 
ensure the stability of the financial system as a whole. This stability is essential to successful monetary 
policy in particular, and to the economic efficiency of Switzerland in general. 
The importance of a market economy’s financial system derives from the function that it fulfils. The 
financial  system  is  responsible  for  the  allocation  of  financial  resources  and  risks,  as  well  as 
intermediation  between  savers  and  investors.  A  financial  system  can  be  described  as  stable  if  it 
performs 
to  be 
these 
shock-resistant. 
Another part of a stable financial system are secure financial market infrastructures. These include, 
specifically,  payment  systems  and  systems  for  the  clearing  and  settlement  of  financial  instruments 
(securities settlement systems). 
Deficient payment and securities settlement systems might potentially trigger a crisis in the system. An 
operational or technical system failure can delay transaction settlement so severely - or even prevent it 
for such a long period - that widespread credit or liquidity problems among financial institutions result. 
In  particularly  serious  cases,  the  financial  institutions  concerned,  and  perhaps  even  the  financial 
markets, are no longer able to perform their role in the economy or can do so to only a limited extent. 
Yet on the other hand, payment and securities settlement systems also play a major part in preventing 
the transfer of payment or delivery problems from one participant to the others. Such difficulties might 
also trigger a chain reaction which could jeopardise the entire system. This makes the architecture of 
payment  and  securities  settlement  systems  all  the  more  important,  because  it  determines  their 
capacity to limit the transfer of weaknesses. 
Secure and efficient financial market infrastructures are especially important to the Swiss economy, 
which  has  a  large  financial  sector  and  generates  significant  payment  flows.  Their  significance  is 
illustrated by the relevant figures: every day, sums amounting to around 180 billion Swiss francs pass 
between financial institutions via Swiss Interbank Clearing System (SIC), Switzerland’s most important 
payment system. With a system of this scale it is easy to imagine that problems with the clearing or 
settlement of transactions might jeopardise the stability of the financial system as a whole. 
I would like here to outline how the Swiss National Bank can help to ensure more efficient and more 
reliable  financial  market  infrastructures  through  its  oversight  of  payment  and  securities  settlement 
systems. I would, however, like to make one key point right away: state intervention in, or regulation 
of, financial market infrastructures is justified only if it must be assumed that the private sector will not 
necessarily perform these functions of its own accord in a manner that is best for the economy. 
In  reality,  when  designing  a  system  its  operators  and  participants  will  probably  consider  the  direct 
costs  that  they  would  bear  themselves  in  the  event  of  a  system  failure  or  the  withdrawal  of  a 
participant.  However,  the  remaining  costs  that  are  not  borne  directly  by  the  parties  involved  in  the 
event of a system crisis tend to be forgotten in management calculations. It cannot be ruled out, then, 
that operators and participants take less account of the security of a system than would be necessary 
from the perspective of the broader economy. It is a classic problem of market failure. The sense and 
purpose of overseeing payment and securities settlement systems is to give due consideration to the 
externalities  that  would  be  neglected  by  the  private  sector  and  to  ensure  that  financial  market 
infrastructures provide the optimum degree of reliability from the point of view of the national economy. 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 1
The oversight of payment and securities settlement systems in practice 
In future, the National Bank will be taking a risk-oriented approach, i.e. we will deploy our resources in 
those  specific  areas  in  which  the  risks  are  particularly  high.  The  National  Bank  Law  stipulates  a 
three-tier  oversight  process.  The  first  tier  is  an  obligation  on  the  part  of  operators  of  payment  and 
securities settlement systems to provide statistical information. The National Bank will use the data it 
collects  to  gain  an  overview  of  the  breadth  and  importance  of  the  systems  and  instruments  for  the 
clearing  and  settlement  of  payments  and  securities  trades  that  are  available  in  Switzerland.  The 
second  tier  is  a  more  wide-ranging  disclosure  obligation  that  is  imposed  upon  the  operators  of 
securities settlement systems and those payment systems which process payments in excess of 25 
billion Swiss francs a year. With payment systems of this size and larger, the National Bank will look in 
greater detail into the extent to which they might jeopardise the stability of the financial system. Finally, 
the  National  Bank  Law  provides  for  powers  on  the  part  of  the  National  Bank  to  impose  minimum 
requirements on systemically important financial market infrastructures as a third tier of oversight. 
Detailed implementation provisions for oversight will be laid down in an ordinance to be issued by the 
National  Bank.  In  early  November  2003,  the  National  Bank  submitted  a  consultation  draft  of  this 
ordinance to interested parties. The draft itself can be found on our website. 
I would now like briefly to address three central points connected with oversight: which systems should 
be  overseen  by  the  National  Bank?  What  minimum  requirements  should  the  operators  of  these 
systems  fulfil?  And  finally:  how  will  collaboration  with  other  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  - 
especially the Swiss Federal Banking Commission (FBC) - be structured? 
Oversight  focuses  on  systems  which  might  constitute  a  threat  to  the  stability  of  the  Swiss  financial 
system. The question of the systems to which this applies cannot be answered in precise terms. The 
ordinance lists a number of criteria that we will consider when assessing the systemic importance of 
an  infrastructure.  In  addition  to  the  type,  number  and  monetary volume  of  the  transactions  that  are 
cleared or settled via a system, the outcome of the assessment will depend, for example, on the other 
financial  market  infrastructures  with  which  a  system  is  linked,  and  whether  or  not  the  clearing  and 
settlement of transactions can be diverted temporarily to another system in the event of a failure in the 
first system. The latter option alleviates the problem somewhat. Given these and other criteria, it can 
be  assumed  that  the  group  of  systems  overseen  by  the  National  Bank  will  be  composed  first  and 
foremost of those payment and securities settlement systems that are part of what is known as the 
Swiss  value  chain.  These  are  the  interbank  payment  system  Swiss  Interbank  Clearing  (SIC),  the 
SECOM securities settlement system and x-clear, the central counterparty. In addition, however, the 
multi-currency payment system Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS), which is used to settle foreign 
exchange  transactions,  may  also  be  classified  as  systemically  important.  Closer  investigation  will 
reveal whether or not this group will be expanded to include yet more systems, such as that operated 
by Postfinance. 
The  National  Bank’s  main  points  of  reference  in  respect  of  the  minimum  requirements  that  the 
operators  of  these  systems  must  fulfil  are  two  internationally  recognised  standards:  the  “Core 
Principles  for  Systemically  Important  Payment  Systems”  and  the  “Recommendations  for  Securities 
Settlement Systems”. 
Like the two standards just mentioned, the National Bank’s minimum requirements are target-oriented 
i.e. the system operator in question is largely free to determine how it will achieve the required state of 
affairs.  The  minimum  requirements  are  aimed  at  two  aspects  of  the  reliability  of  payment  and 
securities settlement systems in particular. The first of these relates to the technical and operational 
security of a system. The system itself may not be the cause of a crisis. Specific emphasis is placed 
on a lasting guarantee of virtually uninterrupted system availability. The regular review and testing of 
emergency  plans  and  procedures  is  part  of  this.  However,  the  minimum  standards  also  call  for 
measures to protect the integrity and confidentiality of data as well as the traceability of transactions. 
The second aspect of the minimum requirements concerns risk management and the architecture of 
payment and securities settlement systems, i.e. the rules and procedures by which transactions are 
cleared or settled. Structures must be in place to prevent weaknesses in the financial system, such as 
payment or delivery difficulties on the part of a system participant, spreading in an uncontrolled fashion 
to other participants. In this context, the focus is, for example, on requirements relating to the payment 
instruments  used,  the  irrevocability  of  transactions  that  have  already  been  settled  (finality),  and  on 
instruments and procedures to limit credit and liquidity risks. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2003
Collaboration with other authorities 
The National Bank is not the only institution which actively endeavours to secure the stability of the 
financial  system.  There  is  also  contact  with  other  authorities.  One  of  these  points  of  contact  arises 
from the fact that, for example, the operator of SECOM (SIS Sega Intersettle AG) holds a bank licence 
and  is  therefore  subject  to  supervision  by  the  FBC.  The  FBC  will  still  be  the  regulatory  body 
responsible  for  the  institution  itself,  while  the  National  Bank  will  handle  the  oversight  of  the  system 
operated by this institution. A parallel situation exists in the case of x-clear, which is operated by SIS 
x-clear AG - also regulated, as a bank, by the FBC. The FBC and the National Bank coordinate their 
activities and avoid overlaps. 
A further point of contact with other authorities exists in the case of financial market infrastructures that 
are  of  systemic  importance  to  Switzerland  but  are  operated  abroad  and  thus  cannot  be  overseen 
directly  by  the  National  Bank.  From  the  present  perspective  this  applies  in  particular  to  the  foreign 
exchange  settlement  system  CLS.  Here  too,  close  collaboration  between  the  primary  supervisory 
authority,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  the  National  Bank  and  the  other  central  banks 
involved is essential. 
In addition, the National Bank is considering cooperating with private sector auditors. In the same way 
as  the  FBC,  which  works  with  private-sector  auditors  in  conducting  its  supervisory  activities,  the 
National  Bank  intends  to  use  a  dual  system  in  which  certain  examinations  may  be  carried  out  by 
private auditing companies. There is a particular need for such an approach in those areas in which 
very specific specialist knowledge is required, such as in the assessment of information security. 
Concluding remarks 
Two  further  points  in  conclusion:  firstly,  it  must  be  emphasised  that  the  oversight  of  payment  and 
securities settlement systems is a new task for the National Bank only where securities settlement is 
concerned. As the bank of banks, it already helps to shape financial market infrastructures and limit 
the systemic risks inherent in them. In both segments, however, the new Law gives the National Bank 
a more forceful range of instruments that will allow it to act more effectively and more transparently. 
Secondly, it would be wrong to assume that the explicit mandating of the National Bank to oversee 
payment  and  securities  settlement  systems  is  in  response  to  any  fundamental  concerns  about  the 
reliability of Switzerland’s financial market infrastructures. On the contrary - we believe that the Swiss 
financial  centre  has  infrastructures  that  function  better  than  most  and  come  out  very  well  in  an 
international comparison of security and efficiency. By overseeing payment and securities settlement 
systems, the National Bank is helping to ensure that it will remain so in the future. 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 3
