Alan Bollard: Investing in a low inflation world 
Address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Auckland Club and 
the MBA Business Meeting, Auckland, 14 October 2003. 
 The theme of my speech today is "investing in a world of low inflation". New Zealand has succeeded in 
achieving  a  low  inflation  rate  and  keeping  it  stable  for  more  than  a  decade  now.  The  average  CPI 
inflation rate since 1992 has been just 2 per cent per annum, as against an average of 12 per cent per 
annum in the 1970s and 1980s.  
  I  have  chosen  my  topic  because  I  fear  that,  currently,  too  many  New  Zealanders  are  taking  higher 
risks  than  they  realise  in  their  investment  and  borrowing  strategies,  because  they  don't  understand 
that investing in a low inflation environment may be quite different from investing in the high inflation 
environment of earlier decades. 
Some of these risks arise due to the mix of assets New Zealanders are investing in. I suspect that too 
many households may be over-exposed to real estate investment, and that too many are becoming 
increasingly exposed  to relatively  high  risk  financial  investments,  without  fully  appreciating  the  risks 
involved.  Also,  there  are  some  risks  relating  to  the  extent  of  borrowing  being  undertaken  by 
households, which has left many households with very high levels of debt. 
Before  getting  into  these  issues,  let  me  briefly  say  why  I  think  this  topic  is  important,  and  why  the 
Reserve Bank takes a close interest in the issue of saving and investment. 
Households making well-informed saving and investment decisions not only make themselves better 
off, but also contribute to the stability of the financial system and growth across the economy. 
Of course, at any point in time, not all New Zealand households are in a position to save and invest, 
and not all savers can afford anything other than a house as their investment. Currently, about one 
third  of  households  own  their  house  mortgage-free,  putting  them  in  a  good  financial  position  to 
consider a range of investments. A further third live in a house they own, but with a mortgage, and for 
these households a strategy of reducing the mortgage as quickly as possible may make a lot of sense. 
The remaining third live in rented accommodation, and some of these households may have a strategy 
of saving to buy their own home. 
However, for households in any of these categories, if their financial position and scope to invest in a 
range of assets improves, important decisions about investment strategy arise. Those strategies often 
involve  investing  greater  proportions  of  funds  in  financial  investments,  as  opposed  to  housing, 
increasing the need to be well-informed about the risks involved. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 1
Clearly, unsound investment and borrowing decisions can have severe consequences for individuals 
and families. Households with high levels of debt and exposure to investments that are riskier than 
they appreciate could potentially face painful problems. Some may find that the rate of return on their 
investments  is  considerably  less  than  they  had  thought  it  might  be,  or  even  that  their  investments 
make a severe loss. Some may find that the debt they have accumulated takes a lot longer to pay off 
than  they  had  expected  -  and  indeed  considerably  longer  than  it  would  have  in  the  years  of  high 
inflation. Some households may find, as a combination of all these things, that they are not well placed 
to cope with the "rainy days" that occur from time to time, such as higher interest rates, a recession, or 
a loss of employment. 
Here, the data on household balance sheets in New Zealand tell an interesting, but not a comforting, 
story. Households have been borrowing heavily over the last 10 years or so - as nominal interest rates 
have halved and finance has become easier to obtain - and household debt compared to income is 
now at the highest levels on record. Debt now stands at about 130 per cent of income, as against just 
65 per cent in 1990.  
As I noted already, about half of New Zealand's homeowners have fully paid off their mortgage and 
have  little  other  debt.  Mortgage  debt  is  concentrated  within  the  25  to  45  age  bracket,  with  some 
homeowners in this category carrying high levels of debt for a lengthy period of time. Such households 
now  may  be  much  less  well  placed  to  cope  with  the  unexpected  than  others  in  their  position  once 
were. 
The  high  level  of  borrowing  by  New  Zealand  households  is  also  reflected  in  data  on  household 
leverage - that is, the ratio of household debt to the value of the house. The leverage ratio has drifted 
upwards in the last 20 years or so, from 15 to 20 per cent in the mid 1980s to around 30 per cent 
today. Australia and the US have seen similar trends.  
 2 
 BIS Review 44/2003
 Finally, as far as the numbers go, the debt servicing burden of households (including those owning 
rental property) has been broadly constant over the last 10 years at around 10 per cent of household 
income. However, this has been in an environment of falling nominal interest rates. Nominal interest 
rates  are  now  at  historically  low  levels.  An  important  question  to  ponder,  therefore,  is  how  would 
households  cope  with  an  increase  in  interest  rates,  now  that  average  debt-to-income  levels  have 
essentially doubled. Interest rates have been relatively stable in recent years, but there will inevitably 
be times when pressures on inflation will require interest rates to rise.  
Why is the Reserve Bank interested in this? 
Obviously, individuals and families may find themselves in difficulties as a result of poor investment 
and  borrowing  decisions.  My  concern  is  not  only  about  that,  but  also  about  the  wider  economic 
implications of any such difficulties. 
The financial health of households is important for the stability of the New Zealand financial system 
and the New Zealand economy. Households that borrow do so almost entirely from banks, and lending 
to households makes up about 40 per cent of total bank lending. Therefore, the ability of households 
to  service  their  debts  is  crucially  important  to  the  health  and  soundness  of  banks  and  the  broader 
financial system.  
As  well  as  influencing  the  banking  system,  household  investing  and  borrowing  behaviour  affects 
financial stability in New Zealand through the country's external financing. Household borrowing that is 
not  funded  by  domestic  savings  must  be  financed  offshore.  Partly  as  a  result  of  strong  household 
borrowing over many years, New Zealand has a very high ratio of net external financing relative to our 
GDP  -  indeed,  one  of  the  highest  ratios  of  any  advanced  economy.  Currently,  New  Zealand's  net 
financing  from  offshore  stands  at  about  90  per  cent  of  GDP,  compared  with  just  60  per  cent  for 
Australia, 25 per cent for the United States and 15 per cent for Canada.  
BIS Review 44/2003 
 3
  New Zealand's high dependence on external financing creates a risk that foreign lenders may at some 
time become more reluctant to increase their exposure to New Zealand. This would raise the premium 
we would have to pay in order to maintain access to offshore funding. Foreign lenders may even seek 
to  withdraw  their  existing  funds  in  New  Zealand,  especially  if  perceptions  about  the  New  Zealand 
economy,  rightly  or  wrongly,  take  a  turn  for  the  worse.  A  sudden  reduction  in  foreign  lenders' 
willingness  to  continue  to  fund  New  Zealand  borrowing  would  force  the  New  Zealand  economy 
through a sharp and painful adjustment - possibly including a drop in the exchange rate, a jump in 
interest rates and gyrations in economic activity. If too extreme, the strain of these adjustments could 
undermine  the  proper  functioning  of  the  financial  system,  which  would  worsen  the  economic 
disruption.  
I should say at this point that, as far as we can tell, the system remains well placed to weather most 
plausible  scenarios.  Asset  quality,  capitalisation,  risk  management  capacity  and  the  state  of  parent 
banks are all strong. New Zealand is comfortably servicing its external debt, supported by a healthy 
economic growth rate and a robust capacity to earn foreign exchange. Hedges are in place to reduce 
the  impact  of  exchange  rate  movements  on  New  Zealand's  external  obligations.  But  this  healthy 
situation notwithstanding, we would of course be remiss if we did not continue to watch developments 
closely for signs of financial vulnerability. 
Lastly, we are interested in investment and borrowing behaviour because it affects economic growth. 
New Zealand's growth in the past has probably been lower than it could have been, partly reflecting 
poor savings and investment. The high and variable inflation environment prevailing in the 1970s and 
1980s was no doubt one of the main factors hindering effective saving and investment, by making it 
difficult for investors to discern well-performing from poorly-performing investments.  
Low and stable inflation now obviously helps, but the fact remains that the quality of our investment 
decisions  is  crucial  for  our  future  economic  growth.  Wise  investment  increases  productivity  and  the 
economy's  real  rate  of  return,  producing  better  growth  and  higher  standards  of  living.  And  wise 
investment, in turn, means individual investors exercising good judgement and effective scrutiny when 
making their personal investment decisions. 
So, with an eye on sparing households unnecessary grief, mitigating risk to the financial system, and 
maximising economic potential, how should we invest in a world of low inflation? 
Let us start with the simple idea that the objective of investment is to maximise the expected rate of 
return for a given level of risk, over a particular period of time. Risk is the potential variability of the 
investment's return, including, in the extreme, the possibility that the investment might lose some or all 
of its value. For example, the investment might go bust, it might be difficult to realise the value of the 
investment  when  needed  or  required,  and  economic  factors  such  as  exchange  rate  or  interest  rate 
movements might cause the value of the investment to fluctuate. 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2003
It is a fact of life that investments with higher promised rates of return generally carry higher levels of 
risk. This rule applies right across the spectrum of different investments - from low-risk propositions 
such as bank deposits and government bonds, through to higher-risk ones such as corporate bonds, 
subordinated notes, real estate and equities. 
The second important idea is that, when looking at the return on an investment, one should distinguish 
between the nominal return and the real return. The nominal return is the return received in cash flow 
and  in  capital  gain  before  taking  into  account  general  price  inflation,  while  the  real  return  is  the 
nominal return less the general inflation rate over the life of the investment. For any given level of risk, 
the  higher  or  lower  the  inflation  rate,  the  higher  or  lower  the  promised  nominal  return,  generally 
speaking.  But  it  is  the  real  return  that  investors  need  to  focus  on  -  for  it  is  the  real  return  that 
determines whether the investor has gained or lost in making the investment. In today's low inflation 
environment,  investors  need  to  remember  that  an  investment's  apparently  low  nominal  return  may 
represent in fact quite a worthwhile real return.  
The  drivers  of  real  returns  vary  depending  on  the  type  of  investment,  but  ultimately  come  down  to 
certain basic fundamentals, such as growth in the economy and in particular industries, market shares, 
and  company  productivity.  And,  of  course,  all  of  these  factors  also  affect  the  risk  attaching  to  the 
investment.  
How does low inflation fit into this?  
Take real estate. New Zealanders have a fondness for investing in housing, currently holding around 
half their assets in that form. Most of this is owner-occupied housing, but an increasing proportion is 
investment in rental housing. New Zealanders are investing in rental housing to a significantly greater 
extent than in earlier years, with the proportion of private rental housing having risen from less than a 
fifth of total private urban dwellings in 1991 to around a quarter in 2001. I suspect it has risen further 
since then. 
In  the  1970s  and  1980s,  when  inflation  was  well  into  the  double  digits,  house  prices  generally 
increased  at  a  brisk  pace  in  nominal  terms,  though  with  considerable  volatility.  In  real  or  inflation-
adjusted  terms,  however,  house  prices  were  even  more  volatile  and  there  were  significant  periods 
when house prices fell in real terms, as in the middle of the 1970s and late 1980s. For much of the 
1970s and 1980s, housing was not a particularly attractive investment, unless of course one bought 
and sold astutely, getting timing right, taking advantage of trends in particular locations, and reading 
demand and supply with good foresight.  
As a matter of arithmetic, not everyone can outperform all the time. For every buyer there is a seller, 
and had investors looked at the real return achieved on average across the whole market, they might 
have felt that their exposure to housing was excessive through the 1970s and 1980s. 
Since the early 1990s, house prices have generally outpaced the inflation rate - that is, they have risen 
in real terms. That is especially the case in the last year or two, during which we have seen a dramatic 
 BIS Review 44/2003 
 5
increase in real estate prices in many areas throughout the country - arguably too much so. And this 
reflects the inherent volatility of real estate prices, whether in housing, farm land, commercial property 
or industrial property. Investors need to be mindful that the laws of gravity apply not only to Newton's 
apple  -  they  also  apply  to  asset  prices,  including  house  prices.  In  real  estate,  the  "laws  of  gravity" 
relate to things like population, income, household formation and the earning potential of the asset. 
And this is where the low inflation environment matters for those who borrow to invest in real estate. In 
the 1970s and 1980s, there were sharp falls in real terms in house prices and other property prices - 
typically immediately following a period of dramatic increases - but it was comparatively rare for prices 
to fall in nominal terms. This meant that if someone were forced to sell in a downturn, the value of the 
house would probably still be above the value of the debt on the house. Inflation would have shielded 
the investor from insolvency, at least in that respect.  
In contrast, in a world of low inflation, fluctuations in house prices can result not only in falls in real 
terms, but also falls in nominal terms. The risk for investors who borrow almost all of a house's sale 
price is that the value of the house could fall below the debt they owe. That is probably fine, as long as 
the investor can continue to service his or her debt. But it could cause real problems in the event that 
the debt can no longer be serviced - such as when interest rates rise sharply, or incomes fall. In that 
situation,  if  the  investor  is  not  covered  by  mortgage  protection  insurance  and  is  forced  to  sell  the 
property during a downturn, his or her insolvency on paper might become very real indeed.  
In view of the increase in household debt in the last 10 years or so, the increasing tendency for people 
to own a house for investment purposes, and to enter that investment very highly geared, it is possible 
that some households are now quite vulnerable. 
That vulnerability is also related to the effect that low inflation has nowadays on the funding side of the 
household  balance  sheet.  In  the  days  of  high  inflation,  most  New  Zealanders  could  rely  on  their 
nominal incomes also inflating quite rapidly. This meant that, even with the high nominal interest rates 
prevailing  at  the  time,  households  that  borrowed  on  debt-servicing  terms  at  the  limit  of  affordability 
would find their debt-servicing burdens becoming more comfortable, and the real value of their debts 
declining, fairly rapidly. 
This is not the case today. Low inflation means that nominal incomes are rising much more slowly than 
in earlier years. As a result, the burden of debt servicing lasts for longer, and the real value of debt is 
eroded  less  rapidly.  The  period  of  vulnerability  associated  with  debt-servicing  being  just  affordable 
now lasts considerably longer.  
Some home owners and investors are well aware of the compounding impact of high debt levels on 
adverse events such as loss of employment or income. They adjust their investment and borrowing 
behaviour  accordingly.  However,  I  think  there  remain  many  in  this  country  -  and  indeed  in  other 
countries  like  ours  -  whose  behaviour  suggests  that  they  might  not  understand  the  risks  they  are 
taking.  
Leaving real estate aside now, what other investments are available, and how does low inflation affect 
the  equation?  After  bank  deposits,  probably  the  most  commonly  understood  financial  security  is 
equities. History shows that equities can deliver a superior long-term rate of return, but also that equity 
returns over short periods of time can fluctuate quite a bit. New Zealand investors tend to know this, 
having suffered in the 1987 crash, and have been rather cautious ever since. This caution and the 
small  size  of  the  domestic  market,  which  limits  local  options,  have  contributed  to  New  Zealand 
households not building up financial assets to the same extent as has happened in the US. However, 
it has also meant that New Zealand household balance sheets did not take such a hit from the tech-
wreck and post-9/11 downturns in the markets.  
Investors  in  equities  should  be  in  for  the  long  haul,  to  allow  time  to  smooth  out  the  inevitable 
fluctuations in share prices that occur from year to year. Also, because you can never be sure about 
any  particular  company,  industry  or  region,  if  you  are  buying  shares  you  should  spread  your 
investments across a diversified range of equities. 
What  about  interest-bearing  securities?  One  of  the  consequences  of  reducing  inflation  to  low  and 
stable levels is that nominal interest rates on all types of these instruments have fallen substantially. 
As an example, the average 90 day interest rate in the 1970s was just over 10 per cent, and in the 
1980s was around 17 per cent. In the 1990s, the rate fell to 8 per cent, and today stands at a little over 
5 per cent - the lowest in many years. Interest rates on other instruments have fallen similarly. 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2003
In real terms, of course, interest rates have not fallen anywhere near as substantially over the years, 
and remain attractive for investors, particularly relative to the real interest rates available in many other 
countries. Indeed, the real interest rate on interest-bearing securities today is considerably higher than 
was typical during the high-inflation times in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Taking tax into account 
widens  the  gap  even  further,  because  tax  rates  are  applied  to  nominal,  rather  than  real,  interest 
income. 
 Investors in interest-bearing securities are thus better off now than they once were. But people who 
rely  heavily  on  interest-bearing  securities  for  their  incomes  have  nevertheless  seen  a  fall  in  their 
incomes, in nominal terms. I fear that this reduction in nominal income, coupled perhaps with "money 
illusion"  -  that  is,  thinking  in  nominal  rather  than  real  terms  -  may  be  encouraging  some  New 
Zealanders  to  invest  in  higher  yielding  securities,  in  order  to  reduce  the  short-term  impact  on  their 
cash flow position. 
In  this drive  to  achieve higher  rates  of  return, some  investors may  be  taking  higher  risks  than  they 
appreciate - especially if they think in terms of the nominal interest rates that they used to receive in 
earlier years. For example, just a dozen years ago, low-risk securities regularly offered double-digit 
interest rates. Today, an equivalent low-risk security might only yield 5 or 6 per cent, or even less. To 
invest in securities offering the same nominal yields as were once available, investors now have to 
accept considerably greater risk. 
Perhaps  reflecting  this  behaviour,  deposits  outside  of  the  banking  sector  are  growing  quite  rapidly. 
There  are  also  reports  of  growing  retail  investment  in  higher-risk  types  of  securities  such  as 
subordinated notes, capital notes, asset-backed securities, and interests in apartment buildings. These 
and  other  kinds  of  more  complex  investment  products  typically  offer  high  yields,  but  that  usually 
reflects  higher  levels  of  risk.  For  example,  it  may  be  that  the  investment  ranks  behind  other  debt 
obligations of the borrower, exposing the investor to a greater risk of loss if the borrower defaults. In 
other cases, the yield being offered may be linked to the performance of particular underlying asset 
markets, which may themselves be quite volatile. 
There  is,  of  course,  nothing  inherently  wrong  with  investors  taking  greater  risk.  For  their  own 
protection, however, they should be fully aware of the risks they are taking, rather than simply thinking 
in terms of the nominal interest rate offered. 
Given all this, what should a wise investor do?  
First of all, seek advice! This applies especially if an investment product looks complicated. There are 
many sources of information to assist in making investment decisions, including material published by 
public agencies such as the Office of the Retirement Commissioner, and by reputable members of the 
savings and investment industry. There is also the advice of professional experts. Naturally, the quality 
of advice is only as good as the quality of the person giving it, so if an investor chooses to use an 
investment adviser, the investor would be wise to check the adviser's qualifications and accreditation, 
experience, track record and independence.  
BIS Review 44/2003 
 7
Checking the provenance of investment products and firms is all the more important in New Zealand 
because regulation of financial investments here is not highly paternalistic. The general approach of 
the Reserve Bank Act for bank deposits, of the Securities Act for financial securities, and of legislation 
for other forms of investment is to promote the proper functioning of the financial system as a whole, 
and not the performance or soundness of particular institutions. Laws relating to the financial system 
set extensive and tough disclosure requirements, so that individual investors can judge for themselves 
the risks and returns they are facing and make decisions accordingly. As noted earlier, low and stable 
inflation supports their ability to do this. 
Investors not prepared to be intensively involved in the day-to-day management of their investments 
have the option of engaging a professional to manage directly their financial affairs. There are many 
professional  investment  management  services  available.  Although  some  professional  service 
arrangements are pitched at those with sizeable sums to invest, there are also management services 
for  those  making  smaller  investments.  Finally,  managed-fund  products  such  as  unit  trusts  offer  the 
smaller investor a combination of reduced risk through diversification, and the portfolio-management 
services of an investment professional. 
Vigilant  and  open-eyed  investment  strategies  benefit  not  only  investors.  Households  making  well-
informed  investment  and  borrowing  decisions  are  better  able  to  cope  with  rainy  days,  and  better 
prepared for their retirement years. Soundness in the household sector undergirds the stability of the 
financial system, and of the economy as a whole. Finally, intelligent scrutiny of investment proposals, 
including the creditworthiness of financial companies, crucially helps weed out poor performers and 
improve good performers, promoting effective resource allocation and growth across the economy. 
For all these reasons, it is important that investors take all the steps they can to better understand the 
nature  of  the  risks  attached  to  their  investment  and  borrowing  decisions.  This  includes  thinking  in 
terms  of  real  rates  of  return,  rather  than  nominal  rates.  If  we  -  each  of  us  -  can  learn  to  become 
smarter and better informed, we will all be better off, individually and as a nation. 
8 
 BIS Review 44/2003
