   Vahur Kraft: The euro in Estonia - the agenda and practical aspects 
Speech  by  Mr  Vahur  Kraft,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Estonia  (Eesti  Pank),  at  the  international 
conference 
future(cid:148),  Tallinn, 
30 September 2003. 
-  French-German  experience  and  Estonia 
(cid:147)Euro  currency 
 Introduction  
I. 
Based on the requests addressed to Eesti Pank information service we can say that there is a most 
encouraging - if somewhat surprising interest in Estonian national euro-coins among the general public 
- although these coins do not exist as yet. Some people are convinced that we have the euro coins 
already; the others would like to register in order to be the first to receive the new coins. 
But  every  coin  has  two  sides  -  and  in  this  case  it  means  that  a  very  significant  percentage  of  the 
Estonian population are not at all eager to take leave of the Estonian kroon and replace  it  with the 
euro. They would like the central bank to proceed slowly. 
That puts the central bank into the unusual position of arguing for speed and decisive action instead of 
a  conservative  approach  while  the  public  is  still  somewhat  confused  by  the  recent  results  of  the 
Swedish euro referendum. The Swedes would have liked, perhaps, to be a bit more papal than the 
pope - and they certainly have achievements to be proud of. But for Estonia - and with a long-term 
view in mind - proceeding rapidly and adopting the euro as soon as feasible would be the best. There 
are some very good arguments for that. 
Economy 
II. 
The  best  argument  lies  in  the  Estonian  economy.  Regardless  of  the  lingering  global  uncertainties, 
economic  growth  in  Estonia  has  been  strong  -  5.8%  in  2002.  That  means  a  growth  figure 
approximately 4% higher than that of the euro area. It could even be said that during the last two years 
Estonian economy has had to face something akin to a positive external shock as the EU membership 
became more and more of a certainty and the risk margins correspondingly lower. And there was also 
a parallel negative economic shock - the continuing weakness of external markets. All that has meant 
certain  advantages  -  for  instance,  lower  interest  rates  and  significant  inflows  of  foreign  direct 
investment, but there are also certain risks involved.  
Estonia’s high economic growth of the last year and a half is mainly based on high domestic demand. 
High domestic demand, a continuously strong inflow of foreign investments and a lower than expected 
export growth have resulted in a significantly high current account deficit - an estimated 14% or more 
of the GDP by end-2003.  
Of course, it could be argued that the present external imbalance is, to a certain extent, ’an attendant 
phenomenon  of  success’.  FDI  inflows  having  been  strong  through  the  entire  transition  period, 
reinvested  earnings  and  dividend  payments  have  become  increasingly  important  among  the  factors 
determining the current account balance in Estonia. The current account figures for the second quarter 
of this year offer a good illustration for this phenomenon - the primary current account deficit was 7% 
of the GDP - more than 6 pp below the actual deficit. At the present time foreign investors are taking 
into account the perspective of Estonia’s EU membership within the near future, the optimistic growth 
forecasts  and  continuing  increase  of  living  standards.  Due  to  favourable  financing  conditions,  total 
investment activity has recently been the highest since the beginning of the transition period - during 
the first quarter of 2003  investments together  with stock building accounted for 38% of the GDP  in 
Estonia.  At  the  same  time,  a  number  of  small  and  medium-size  enterprises  are  bringing  their 
production plants in line with EU requirements. And of course, borrowing at the present low interest 
rates is very attractive to private individuals.  
But despite all the exceptional one-off factors behind the present high external deficit figures, we must 
not  close  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  the  level  IS  high.  And  reducing  the  imbalances  -  with  all  the 
attendant stress on increased public and private savings - is presently one of the main priorities for 
Estonia. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 It  must  be  stressed,  in  this  context,  however,  that  one  indicator  taken  alone  -  even  if  it  were  an 
indication of possibly unfavourable developments - would not give an adequate picture of the relative 
health of an economy. That is certainly true of Estonia where the level of wages, inflation figures and 
the  changes  in  productivity  would  indicate  that  economic  stability  is  not  affected  as  seriously  as 
indicated by the current account figures taken alone. For instance, the CPI growth in Estonia and in 
the euro area was almost equal in the first half of 2003. According to the present estimates, Estonian 
CPI growth will remain at 1.5% in 2003. It could be said that recent inflation developments have been 
most  encouraging.  Although  some  temporary  effects  and  weak  external  pressures  have  recently 
helped  to  ease  the  inflation  pressures,  the  role  of  the  domestic  factors  contributing  to  a  steady 
disinflation process should not be underestimated.  
But at the same time it should not be forgotten that a gradual increase of price level is an inevitable 
result of real convergence under a fixed rate of exchange. It is a well-established fact that the income 
and  price  level  of  a  given  country  are  positively  related.  Thus,  we  believe  that  a  small  difference 
between  Estonia’s  and  Euro  Area  inflation  would  be  natural  taking  into  account  the  ongoing  real 
convergence and the related productivity improvements.  
There  have  been  no  significant  changes  in  the  average  wages  and  productivity  figures  (in  QI  the 
estimated real growth of productivity was 4.7%). The cumulative productivity growth in Estonia relative 
to the weighted average productivity growth of its main trading partners has clearly outpaced the real 
exchange  rate  appreciation.  Over  the  last  6  years  the  cumulative  productivity  growth  in  Estonia, 
relative to its main trading partners, has amounted to 25 per cent. The corresponding CPI-based real 
exchange rate appreciation amounts to 22 per cent. 
The  share  of  current  and  future  EU  member  states  in  Estonian  exports  is  about  80%.  By  now, 
Estonian  economy  is  strongly  integrated  into  the  European  economic  area.  Can  we  say  that  the 
restructuring of our economy has been completed?  
On the way to Europe 
III. 
What are the challenges ahead? For Estonia, like for all new member states, the only possible way to 
join the euro system is to do it in full compliance with the letter and spirit of the EU Treaty. Speaking 
about the present accession countries as a group, it can be said that the key challenge of the policy 
maker  is  similar  everywhere  -  to  foster  real  convergence  and  at  the  same  time  maintain 
macroeconomic stability. But although the underlying processes are the same for all, earlier national 
economic policy choices - and also the size of the country in question - play a very significant role. 
Thus, the optimal approach to euro area membership can in no case be a uniform one suitable for one 
and everybody.  
ERM  II  provides,  in  principle,  a  much-needed  buffer  zone  before  a  country’s  EMU  entry.  However, 
there are obvious risks involved. It is of paramount importance that the decision on ERM II entry be 
taken only  when macroeconomic fundamentals provide for a realistic deadline for the entry  into the 
euro system in, say, two or three years’ time.  
Still, there are some really good arguments for as rapid a possible EMU accession... For an accession 
country,  it  is  important  that  the  experience  of  past  enlargements  has  shown  -  high  rates  of  real 
convergence can be achieved in connection with the EU accession. There are several explanations for 
this  phenomenon,  including  full  integration  into  the  single  market,  reduction  of  various  political  and 
economic risks etc. Adopting the euro can support economic integration through a higher correlation in 
economic cycles - as well as lower transaction costs and lower risk premiums. 
It is also clear that EMU participation reduces monetary uncertainty. For instance, had it not been for 
the EMU, European financial markets could probably have been much more turbulent during the Asian 
and Russian crises and the recent slowdown of the global economy. For an accession country, a rapid 
ERM-EMU accession could mean a further rise in its international credibility - take, for example, the 
developments in Greece who clearly benefited from ERM2 credibility in 1999, after the Asian crisis.  
In  case  of  Estonia,  our  earlier  policy  choices  have  resulted  in  an  environment  characterized  by  the 
openness  of  the  economy  -  export  and  import  reaching  179-180%  of  the  GDP,  by  a  stable  fixed-
exchange-rate, by a long tradition of balanced fiscal stance and rapid integration with the European 
markets - all of them features favourable to a relatively rapid real convergence. We could even say 
that the convergence that presently takes place in our real economy takes place in a de facto EMU 
environment. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
   According to an analysis recently conducted by the ECB, the correlation of manufacturing industries’ 
business cycles between Estonia and the five larger EMU member countries is even higher than that 
for some of the present member countries, the correlation of overall economic cycles is slightly lower - 
but that is due to the more rapid economic growth in Estonia compared to the euro area. 
But there is one more important aspect I would like to stress in this context - and that is the crucial role 
of the financial system in real convergence under a currency board based fixed exchange rate regime. 
It is fair to say that Estonian banking system is presently strong, well capitalized and liquid. The banks’ 
forced  reliance  on  their  own  capital  and  liquidity  has  had  a  direct  impact  on  the  market  structure. 
Strategic foreign ownership - mostly by Scandinavian financial groups - has provided Estonian banks 
with both strong capitalization and transfer of international best practices. At the present time Estonian 
banking sector is responsible for a significant share of the profits of their owners. Profitability means 
effectiveness at least comparable to the financial sectors of our neighbouring EU member countries - 
and  a  somewhat  greater  flexibility  of  production  factors,  especially  the  flexibility  of  labour  markets. 
Profitability also means a relatively rapid adoption of new technologies. For example, the number of 
card payments per capita in Estonia should be roughly equal to the respective German figures while 
the  share  of  internet  banking  customers  is  somewhat  higher  (and  the  list  of  internet-based  bank 
services somewhat more exhaustive) in Estonia.  
Estonia would like to be one of the first new members of the club - we would like to become a member 
of  the  euro  area  at  the  earliest  possible  moment.  That  would  mean  joining  the  ERM2  as  soon  as 
possible,  with  the  present  EUR/EEK  exchange  rate  and  the  currency  board  arrangement  in  place. 
Provided nothing adverse happens, Estonia might be in a position to submit its application for ERM2 
membership as early as mid-2004. It should, perhaps, also be mentioned that at the present moment, 
Estonia is in a relatively advantageous position among the candidate countries as to its ability to meet 
the Maastricht criteria and other important requirements.  
Comparing the level on nominal convergence among the present accession countries to the respective 
levels in some of the former accession countries five years prior to their EMU accession, it is evident 
that there should be no serious concerns as to most of the present accession countries’ ability to fulfil 
the  nominal  criteria  over  the  mid-term  But  Estonia’s  choice  of  a  currency  board  based  monetary 
regime holds some inherent advantages in this respect. Fiscal balance is a very important prerequisite 
for a smoothly operating and effective currency board arrangement, and that has had a strong impact 
on Estonian fiscal policies. The main goal of Estonian fiscal policy is balancing the budget over the 
cycle  and  absorbing  the  possible  fluctuations  in  the  private  sector  savings  rate.  We  believe  that  a 
balanced  fiscal  stance  together  with  strong  financial  system  is  also  the  most  efficient  way  to  avoid 
short-term speculative capital inflows within the context of EU accession. At this point, we expect no 
great difficulties in meeting the sovereign debt and budget deficit criteria.  
In that sense - Estonia, most likely, would be technically ready for joining the euro area even as early 
as  2006.  The  biggest  challenge  for  the  public  sector,  in  that  context,  would  be  to  avoid  a  lax 
macroeconomic  policy  mix  that  would  over-stimulate  domestic  demand  and  result  in  significant  real 
appreciation.  
And of course - there is really a huge amount of technical preparations that must be completed before 
joining the euro area. We have drawn our plans and the work has been going on for some time. In 
some cases we can take advantage of our still-remembered experience of the 1992 monetary reform. 
In other cases, like some settlement-systems-related issues, we must wait for European institutions to 
make up their minds about the details. There is no doubt, however that technical preparation would 
not slow us down. 
In conclusion  
IV.  
Speaking about future developments in Estonia in the light of the challenges shortly discussed above, 
it is good to bear in mind that policy efforts are necessary also after becoming part of the EU and the 
EMU. Fulfilling the Maastricht criteria and being ’admitted to the club’ cannot be seen as ’the ultimate 
achievement’.  For  instance,  the  recent  achievements  of  the  economies  of  our  Nordic  neighbours 
compared  to  the  developments  in  a  wider  Europe  should  make  us  very  aware  that  there  are  real 
advantages in fulfilling the Stability and Growth Pact.  
I am convinced that EU membership will be beneficial to Estonia. But I am also very sure that Estonia 
has something to offer to the EU in its turn - some experience on handling issues pertaining to the 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 3
 flexibility and mobility of production factors, for example. It is important that Estonia, like every other 
future EU member state, offer its contribution towards the common goal.  
4 
 BIS Review 42/2003
