   Toshihiko Fukui: An overview of Japan’s economy and financial system 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders in Sendai, 1 October 2003.  
The  speech  was  delivered  by  Kazumasa  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  on  behalf  of  the 
Governor.  
 Current State of the Japanese Economy and Developments in Financial Markets 
I. 
Let me begin by discussing the world economy.  
The U.S. economy has spurred a moderate recovery supported by personal consumption. Recovery is 
beginning to spread to orders received by manufacturers and capital spending with the rise in world 
demand for IT-related products. The large-scale tax cuts are beginning to have a positive impact on 
personal consumption. Growth seems increasingly likely to start accelerating, while pressure on labor 
adjustment remains. Economic activity in East Asia is also heading for recovery. In China, the adverse 
effects arising from severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) have virtually ended, and exports of 
the NIEs and ASEAN are expected to increase with the worldwide recovery in IT-related demand. In 
Europe, there are signs of improvement in corporate sentiment, although the impetus for recovery is 
not yet evident.  
The above assessment of the global economy was endorsed at the G-7 meeting last month in Dubai.  
Turning to the domestic arena, capital spending is recovering gradually as corporate profits increase. 
Largely thanks to this recovery, real GDP posted an annualized growth rate of 3.9 percent in the April-
June quarter, far exceeding market expectations. The Tankan survey released on October 1 shows 
that  the  capital  spending  plans  of  large  manufacturers  for  fiscal  2003  are  expected  to  increase  11 
percent  on  a  year-on-year  basis,  and  that  of  all  enterprises  is  slightly  larger  than  the  figure  in  the 
previous year. Thus, the recovery of capital spending is expected to become more certain.  
Personal  consumption  has  been  weak  recently  due  partly  to  the  cold  summer.  However,  signs  of 
favorable change are emerging on the employment and income front.  
Although  overall  economic  activity  remains  virtually  flat,  signs  of  recovery  are  gradually  being 
observed.  The  likelihood  seems  to  be  increasing  that,  with  the  recovery  of  exports  and  capital 
spending leading to an increase in production and corporate profits, the Japanese economy will return 
to a self-sustained, though moderate, recovery path.  
According to the Tankan survey released on October 1, corporate sentiment is generally improving, as 
is shown by the fact that the judgment of business conditions by large manufacturers has turned to 
"favorable"  for  the  first  time  since  December  2000.  This  result  is  more  or  less  in  line  with  the 
assessment of Japan’s economy that I have just described.  
It  should  be  noted  that  there  still  remain  persistent  structural  adjustment  pressures  stemming  from 
excess debt and labor. Therefore, the extent and strength of the likely recovery permeating through 
the economy are uncertain, and must continue to be monitored carefully.  
In the stock market, the Nikkei 225 Stock Average is moving above the 10,000 yen level, about 30 
percent above the recent bottom in the spring, although the market is slightly bearish recently due to 
the appreciation of the yen. We consider that such movements reflect the signs of recovery that I have 
just described.  
Yields  on  10-year  Japanese  government  bonds  have  risen  significantly  above  their  June  levels  of 
below 0.5 percent.  
Long-term interest rates reflect market participants’ prospects of the economy. Thus, higher long-term 
interest rates after June are basically the reflection of improved prospects. Such observation can be 
reinforced by the simultaneous rise in long-term interest rates and stock prices.  
Markets respond to various factors, and thus they are subject to overshooting in the short term. For 
example, some point out that the recent volatile movement of long-term interest rates was partly due 
to the speculation over the Bank’s monetary policy. In this regard, let me reiterate that the Bank has 
made a firm commitment to maintaining the current policy of quantitative easing until the year-on-year 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 increase in the consumer price index (CPI) becomes stably zero or above. This is a clear and specific 
commitment based on the published monthly data of the CPI, not its forecast. Once the significance of 
this commitment is fully digested in the market, I believe it will contribute greatly to market stability. Let 
me reassure you that the Bank continues with this commitment, and communicates its policy stance to 
the market as and when necessary. 
The yen has been appreciating since around the time of the G-7 meeting last month. It appears that 
such movement has been affected partly by misinterpretations by market participants regarding the G-
7 statement. There is no change in the view held by the finance ministers and central bank governors 
of  the  G-7  countries  that  exchange  rates  should  move  in  a  stable  manner  reflecting  economic 
fundamentals, and that the G-7 countries will cooperate as appropriate if there is excessive short-term 
volatility in the foreign exchange market.  
It is extremely important for the recovery of Japan’s economy that the yen moves in a stable manner. 
The Bank will continue to closely monitor the exchange rate and its effect on the economy as well as 
long-term interest rates and stock prices.  
Conduct of Monetary Policy 
II. 
The  Bank  has  been  striving,  and  will  continue  to  strive,  to  maintain  financial  market  stability  and 
ensure  economic  recovery  by  flexibly  providing  ample  liquidity  under  the  quantitative  easing 
framework.  
It is also important to strengthen the transmission mechanism of monetary policy so that the effect of 
monetary easing permeates through the economy. In this regard, the Bank has recently started the 
outright  purchase  of  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs)  and  has  been  preparing  the  acceptance  of 
syndicated loans as collateral in its monetary operations.  
Although it is unprecedented for the central bank to purchase ABSs in that it directly accepts the credit 
risk pertaining to private-sector debt, the Bank decided on this measure so that the effects of monetary 
easing would permeate through the economy. It will continue to support, in cooperation with market 
participants, the development of the ABS market, which has large potential to become a new channel 
of financial intermediation.  
The syndicated loan market has been expanding steadily in Japan. We hope that, prompted in part by 
the  acceptance  of  such  loans  by  the  Bank  as  collateral,  the  market  will  expand  further,  and  will 
contribute to facilitating corporate finance.  
Revitalization of the Corporate Sector and Regional Economies 
III. 
For  the  sustainable  recovery  of  Japan’s  economy,  a  self-sustained  growth  mechanism-whereby 
revitalization of the corporate sector increases the income and consumption of the household sector, 
which in turn leads to further revitalization of the corporate sector-must operate in the economy.  
In  this  regard,  companies  must  enhance  their  competitiveness  by  creating  high-value-added  goods 
and services under the global competition.  
This viewpoint is equally important in the development of regional economies. We should recognize 
that there is a limit to the conventional approach such as public works spending in developing regional 
economies.  Companies  in  regional  economies  must  also  enhance  their  ability  to  create  high-value-
added goods and services from a global viewpoint.  
In this regard, let me offer two observations.  
First, we should view the expansion of other Asian economies, including China, favorably as a new 
market opening, not as a threat.  
Second,  there  exists  large  potential  demand  for  medical  care  and  welfare  services  as  well  as 
environment-related  business,  given 
importance  of 
environmental issues.  
the  aging  population  and 
the  growing 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
   Financial System 
IV. 
Although the Japanese financial system still faces many difficult problems, we are beginning to see the 
result of the efforts to date toward overcoming the nonperforming-loan (NPL) problem and restoring 
the soundness of the financial system. Let me mention four points in this regard.  
First, adequate provisioning and write-offs based on appropriate assessment of the economic value of 
NPLs are extremely important in maintaining the financial soundness of banks. In the financial results 
of all banks for fiscal 2002, substantial losses were posted for the second consecutive year. While this 
underlines the severe predicament of the financial system, it also illustrates the result of the efforts, by 
major banks in particular, to reduce their NPLs and strengthen their provisioning.  
Second, it has become commonly recognized that corporate revitalization is an integral part of dealing 
with the NPL problem. For example, the Industrial Revitalization Corporation of Japan (IRCJ), which 
began  operations  in  May  this  year,  has  decided  to  work  on  six  companies  to  date  through  the 
purchase of their debt from non-main banks. Since the debt purchase by the IRCJ will be terminated at 
the  end  of  March  2005,  we  hope  that  the  IRCJ  will  be  used  actively  for  the  remaining  rather  short 
operating period. It is vital for the management of both companies and banks to become aware of the 
urgency  of  corporate  revitalization  through  the  effective  dialogue,  and  act  with  speed  and 
decisiveness.  
Third, it is desirable to reduce the risk associated with stock price fluctuations in banks’ shareholdings 
for financial system stability. At the same time, unwinding cross-shareholdings is also desirable from 
the  viewpoint  of  strengthening  corporate  governance.  Considerable  progress  has  been  made  in 
reducing  banks’  exposure  to  stock  price  fluctuation  risk.  So  far,  the  Bank  has  purchased  a  total  of 
some 1.8 trillion yen worth of shares from banks. It recently decided to extend the purchase period for 
an  additional  year  since  some  banks’  shareholdings  still  exceed  their  core  capital,  and  there  is 
demand for this stock purchase operation.  
Lastly, banks should strengthen their profitability. The ultimate purpose of restoring the soundness of 
the financial system is to enable banks to fully perform their financial intermediation function, thereby 
providing support for sustainable growth. To this end, banks need adequate profitability and sufficient 
capital  bases.  The  management  of  banks  must  select  and  concentrate  various  resources  in  key 
strategic areas. In this process, it should be kept in mind that banking is a service industry and banks 
should  pay  close  attention  to  the  needs  of  customers.  We  are  beginning  to  see  some  movements 
toward this direction, and we hope that they will prevail.  
Before  closing,  let  me  briefly  touch  on  the  outlook  for  the  financial  system.  The  removal  of  the  full 
protection of deposits in settlement accounts, scheduled in April 2005, should not be perceived simply 
as a change in the type of coverage of deposit insurance. It should be regarded as the termination of 
special protection that has been provided as a temporary buffer to avoid potential confusion. It should 
be  recognized  as  a  turning  point  for  the  reform  of  banks’  management,  which  is  free  from  the 
protection  of  the  government.  In  this  regard,  banks  must  have  clear  business  strategies  for 
strengthening their profitability.  
At the same time, banks must have capital bases that are sufficient relative to the risks associated with 
their new business model. If banks find their capital bases insufficient, they need to take measures to 
boost their capital. Given the limited time remaining until the removal of blanket deposit insurance, I 
think  it  is  desirable  to  establish  a  new  framework  for  injecting  public  funds  into  banks  as  the  "last 
instance  of  public  support"  in  the  event  that  they  cannot  raise  sufficient  capital  in  the  market.  The 
establishment of such a framework will facilitate the process of restoring the soundness and effective 
functioning of the financial system.  
BIS Review 42/2003 
 3
