Lars Nyberg: Developments in the property market 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Stock  market  day,  Malmö, 
18 October 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
At the Lisbon summit in March 2000 the EU’s heads of state and government decided to initiate an 
ambitious reform agenda that would extend over the entire decade. The goal was for the European 
economies to become “the most competitive and dynamic knowledgebased economies in the world by 
2010”. Today, I intend to reflect upon what has happened with economic reforms in the light of the 
Lisbon agenda, both in Sweden and in the euro area in general. 
But first allow me to thank you for your invitation to speak here today. As I’m sure you all know, the 
Riksbank  attaches  great  importance  to  participating  at  various  events  and  speaking  on  issues  of 
significance for monetary policy and financial stability. This is perhaps most true of issues regarding 
the current stance of monetary policy, of which we were informed a short time ago in conjunction with 
the Inflation Report that we published last Thursday and which resulted in the decision to leave the 
repo  rate  unchanged  at  2.75  per  cent.  The  interest  rate  decisions  in  particular  usually  attract  great 
interest from the public and the media, which the Riksbank of course finds very gratifying. The task of 
explaining monetary policy and the risks to Swedish inflation prospects one to two years ahead is an 
important  aspect  of  our  operations  and  in  some  ways  is  a  precondition  for  our  ability  to  attain  our 
objective of maintaining price stability in the Swedish economy. Similarly, we publish regular reports 
that comment on stability issues in the Swedish financial system so as to ensure a safe and efficient 
payment system. 
But  sometimes  the  Riksbank  also  needs  to  look  beyond  the  current  monetary  policy  situation  or 
conditions in the country’s banks and comment on issues of a longer-term nature. Here, the Bank may 
give its views on the labour market, on competition in trade and industry or on the long-term conditions 
for  growth  in  the  Swedish  economy.  In  light  of  this,  the  issues  relating  to  the  Lisbon  agenda  are 
something the Riksbank has been following with great interest. 
Potential growth plays a key role for monetary policy 
Long-term potential growth in particular also plays an important role in the Riksbank’s monetary policy 
assessment.  Economic  growth  essentially  depends  on  two  factors  -  how  much  we  work  and  how 
productive we  are.  Thus,  in  somewhat  simplified  terms, we could  say  that  it is  efficiency gains  and 
growth  in  the  working  population  that  enables  us  to  increase consumption.  This  is what  we  usually 
refer  to  as  the  potential  growth  rate,  that  is,  the  rate  at  which  the  economy  can  generate  new 
economic resources without giving rise to shortages or surpluses. 
In  the  short  term,  however,  an  economy  can  grow  at  a  different  rate  than  its  potential.  If  growth 
surpasses the potential rate, demand will gradually exceed supply. This creates upward pressure on 
prices,  mainly  because  wages  rise  quicker.  In  order  to  compensate  themselves  for  these  wage 
increases, firms are forced to raise prices. Consequently inflation rises, which also erodes the value of 
recent wage increases. In the worst-case scenario, this results in a wage-price spiral, which greatly 
undermines the conditions for favourable growth in the real economy. 
It is then that the Riksbank is forced to intervene and raise interest rates. But another implication is 
that the higher the underlying potential growth rate, the less probable it is that bottlenecks and price 
pressures will arise in the economy, and the more probable it is that the Riksbank can refrain from 
intervening.  This  is  why  long-term  potential  growth  is  so  important  for  all  monetary  policy 
assessments. 
The Lisbon agenda entails greater reform pressure 
So what does the Lisbon agenda entail? And what kind of reforms need to be implemented to raise 
long-term potential growth? 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 1
According  to  the  agreement  of  the  heads  of  state  and  government  during  the  Lisbon  summit,  the 
reforms should, for instance, aim to increase employment in the European Union to at least 70 per 
cent  of  the  economically  active  population,  and  should  lead  to  a  potential  growth  rate  approaching 
3 per cent. These are significant challenges, considering that the current employment rate averages 
around 64 per cent and the potential growth rate is close to 2 per cent. Furthermore, during the past 
two years employment growth has stagnated, and several economies are experiencing zero growth or 
even recession. 
For  Sweden,  the  outlook  is  somewhat  better.  Growth  has  been  comparatively  favourable  in  recent 
years, despite the considerable international slowdown. However, employment growth has also been 
weak here, and recently we have even witnessed a decline in employment. The employment rate in 
Sweden  nevertheless  exceeds  the  established  target  already,  as  just  over  77  per  cent  of  the 
economically active population are employed in some way. That is not to say that Sweden can feel 
comfortable  about  its  present  situation.  The  Swedish  figures  conceal  large,  increasing  numbers  on 
sick leave, falling mean working time and total unemployment - open and hidden - of well above 6 per 
cent. So creating opportunities to raise employment is a key question for Sweden as well. 
But it is not only in the labour market where the EU Member States need to take action to attain the 
goal of the Lisbon agenda. When the World Economic Forum last reviewed how the Lisbon strategy 
has been implemented, it was found that Europe was lagging behind the US in a number of areas. 
The biggest differences were in areas such as enterprise environment, network industries, innovation, 
research and development, and financial services. Moreover, in its latest review of the Lisbon strategy, 
the European Commission underlined research and development as a shortcoming, but also pointed 
to  insufficient  confidence  in  social  security  systems  and  a  lack  of  efficient  markets  in  primarily 
transport, energy and financial services. 
Here  I  would  like  to  focus  on  three  areas  that  I  believe  are  important  for  both  increasing  potential 
growth and improving the competitiveness and dynamism of the European economies. The first is to 
consolidate public pension systems so that they can withstand the demands of an ageing population. 
The  second  is  to  overhaul  the  structure  of  tax  and  benefit  systems  in  order  to  minimise  their 
distortional effects on the labour supply. Last, but not least, we need to reform the functioning of the 
financial markets so as to increase efficiency and thereby also the willingness to invest. 
The economic crisis gave Sweden a better starting position 
With  regard  to  Sweden,  much  has  already  happened  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  Swedish 
economy  and  increase  potential  growth.  This  has  helped  Sweden  to  come  further  than  many  other 
euro area countries in terms of living up to the Lisbon strategy. However, some of this has been due to 
economic developments as opposed to a political will to change. 
For  example,  the  economic  crisis  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  resulted  in  the  winding  up  of 
low-productivity  operations,  thus  increasing  labour  productivity.  During  the  same  period,  Swedish 
economic  policy  was  changed  with  a  view  to  laying  the  foundations  for  longer-term,  sustainable 
economic growth. A new regulatory framework was adopted for fiscal policy, including an expenditure 
ceiling  and  a  surplus  target,  while  the  focus  of  monetary  policy  was  aimed  at  keeping  inflation  in 
check.  This  increased  stability  and  made  policy  more  predictable,  thus  boosting  the  willingness  to 
invest. The tax and social security systems were also reformed, not least by reorganising the pension 
system. 
Sweden’s  entry  into  the  EU’s  common  market  together  with  deregulation  in  a  number  of  important 
markets gave rise to increased competition and greater demands on businesses to use their resources 
more efficiently. It is likely that the faster growth experienced by the private sector compared to the 
public sector, as well as advances in IT during the latter stages of the 1990s, also contributed to higher 
potential growth. 
Reforms behind favourable growth in the labour market 
If  we  compare  the  situation  in  the  Swedish  labour  market  to  that  of  the  euro  area,  we  can  see  a 
number  of  differences.  Sweden  was  among  the  first  in  some  areas  to  initiate  reforms  that  helped 
improve the functioning of the economy. Deregulation carried out in the 1980s and at the beginning of 
the 1990s was partly the reason that Sweden performed relatively well after the crisis years.  
2 
 BIS Review 45/2003
One  such  deregulation  was  an  easing  in  working-hour  legislation,  which,  for  example,  has  made  it 
possible  to  shop  more  or  less  round  the  clock  in  Stockholm  today.  It  is  only  recently  that  this  has 
started  to  catch  on  in  the  euro  area.  For  instance,  as  late  as  last  summer  it  became  possible  in 
Germany to shop after 6 p.m. on weekdays and on Saturday afternoons. However, it is still almost 
impossible to find a shopping centre in Berlin or Frankfurt that is open on Sundays, a day that ought to 
be  very  suitable  for  retail  trade  since  customers  are  usually  not  at  work  then.  So  a  continued 
modernisation  of  working-hour  laws  could  contribute  to  further  improving  efficiency  in  the  German 
economy. 
Another area is the costs associated with downsizing. European firms are in many cases obliged to 
pay for laid-off employees a long time after their employment has finished. This may make the labour 
market  less efficient  in  downturns,  as  firms  often try  to  retain  existing  staff  instead  of  implementing 
costly cutbacks. The situation can become particularly serious if the downturn turns out be longer or 
deeper  than  firms  initially  fear,  since  cutbacks  during  the  economic  downturn  risk  aggravating  the 
decline. In this respect, the euro area and Sweden are at a disadvantage compared with the UK and 
the US, where the labour market responds much quicker to changes in economic conditions. 
Labour  market  legislation  can  therefore  also  be  significant  for  the  economic  cycle.  Firms  that  are 
forced to retain a larger workforce than they have use for during a downturn will not be as financially 
well  prepared  to  meet  a  future  upswing.  We can see  signs  today  of  how  this  is  having  an adverse 
effect on the European economic recovery. Firms in the US and the UK cut the size of their workforces 
at an early stage and adapted their operations to demand, whereas European firms waited until the 
last minute to carry out the necessary cutbacks. While profits and the future outlook have now turned 
around more and more clearly in the US corporate sector, the immediate future continues to appear 
gloomy for European firms, which have seen their competitiveness deteriorate during the slowdown. 
So in this respect labour market legislation can be a hindrance to high long-term growth. Furthermore, 
it  is  likely  that  legislation  sometimes  contributes  to  amplifying  cyclical  fluctuations  rather  than 
smoothing them, since productivity and profits in the corporate sector can easily become procyclical. 
There  are  indications  that  this  has  been  the  case  during  the  most  recent  economic  slowdown,  as 
productivity has fallen sharply in the euro area at the same time as it, if anything, has tended to rise in 
the US. This also suggests that the US economy will normally emerge from slowdowns quicker than 
the euro area. 
Sweden among the first to have a sustainable pension system 
Another  area  in  which  Sweden  has  led  the  way  is  in  pension  reforms.  The  ATP  reform  in  1960 
included buffers for the government finances. On the other hand, the reform was partly based on the 
assumption  of  continued  robust  growth  and  an  average  life  expectancy  of  around  70  years.  As  we 
know, the 1970s and 1980s can be viewed as wasted years in growth terms. Average life expectancy 
continued to rise sharply over the period, however. When it then became increasingly obvious during 
the 1990s that the ATP system was also going to be under-financed, a number of years of political 
debate passed before a majority of the Swedish parliament could agree on a new pension system that 
would be sustainable in the long term. With the implementation of the premium-reserve pension reform 
of 1998, a system was created that indeed is not guaranteed to result in high pensions for pension 
savers, but that at least will enable the public finances to bear the costs as an increasing number of 
people retire. 
However,  Sweden  is  not  the  only  country  to  be  facing  a  difficult  demographic  challenge,  quite  the 
reverse. In the euro area, some countries will have a considerably larger frequency of retirement in the 
coming  decades,  which  means  that  in  30  years  there  will  be  twice  the  number  of  pensioners  per 
worker compared with today. Nevertheless, until recently pension reforms in most euro area countries 
have been conspicuous by their absence. In addition, the majority of these countries have only used a 
system  whereby  current  pensioners  are  paid  directly  by  current  workers,  and  no  funds  have  been 
reserved. The fact that this is unsustainable in the long run has been obvious for a long period. Yet, it 
has  been  politically  impossible  to  bring  about  the  kind  of  reforms  that  we  in  Sweden  succeeded  in 
introducing through political accord. 
The financing of the state pension systems are of vital importance for the taxpayers’ confidence in the 
economy. If we have learned anything from recent economic developments, it is that households and 
firms  have  become  better  and  better  at  putting  things  in  context,  and  to  change  their  behaviour 
accordingly.  When  forward-looking  taxpayers  have  realised  the  obvious  -  that  the  pension  systems 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 3
sooner  or  later  must  be  overhauled  -  it  has  also  affected  their  behaviour.  Because  in  the  end,  the 
taxpayers have to foot the bill when the systems are underfinanced - either by way of higher pension 
charges or lower benefits. Irrespective of which, uncertainty results in households preferring to save a 
little  extra  rather  than  consume.  This  could  also  be  one  explanation  to  why  saving  in  many  central 
European countries has remained at a comparatively high level. 
It is therefore pleasing that steps have now been taken in the three largest euro area economies to 
reform their pension systems. Even if these reforms are insufficient to secure the government finances 
in the long term, they are important stepping stones towards healthier economic growth. 
Tax and benefit systems a key question for the labour supply 
Income  tax  and  benefit  systems  are  also  important  for  long-term  potential  growth  in  a  country, 
particularly in countries with a high tax burden. It is indeed not possible to establish with certainty that 
a  high  tax  burden  in  itself  would  constitute  a  limitation  to  growth  in  the  long  term.  Studies  by 
organisations such as the OECD and the IMF point to a clearer connection between long-term growth 
and the structure of tax and benefit systems than any direct relationship between the tax burden and 
potential growth. 
However, this is an area to which Sweden by virtue of its high taxes must pay continued attention. 
Economic policy must be focused on finding ways to reduce the distortional effects of the tax system, 
not least as regards people’s willingness to work. High marginal taxes can reduce the motivation to 
work,  thus  hampering  the  economy’s  potential  growth.  This  applies  particularly  when  the  benefit 
systems are linked to income. At an individual level, this could mean that someone who is offered a 
job and at the same time must pay higher tax and receive lower benefits may come to the conclusion 
that it is more rewarding to remain outside the labour market. This dampens the labour supply and 
thereby  also  the  economy’s  long-term  potential  growth.  Growth  issues  and  particularly  the  labour 
supply now appear to be increasingly in the spotlight, which is positive provided that it also lays the 
foundation for further reform. 
Having said that, it is pleasing to note that several reforms have been introduced recently with a view 
to decreasing the distortional effects of the tax system, in particular among low-income groups. This 
applies  perhaps  primarily  to  the  steps  that  have  been  taken  to  abolish  individual  social  security 
contributions,  thus  reducing  marginal  taxes  among  low-  and  medium-income  groups  and  raising 
thresholds  for  state  income  tax.  Changes  in  childcare  fees,  for  instance,  have  also  lessened  the 
distortional effects for people who receive increases in income, which is also positive for the labour 
supply. 
But  Sweden  is  not  alone  in  introducing  reforms  in  this  field.  As  regards  low-income  groups  several 
European countries are now making a concerted effort to reduce marginal taxes and change benefit 
systems  with  a  view  to  increasing  the willingness  to  work.  Germany  has  decided  to  lower marginal 
taxes  for  low-income  groups  to  15  per  cent,  and  for  high-income  groups  marginal  taxes  are  to  be 
lowered  to  below  50  per  cent.  At  the  same  time,  more  stringent  rules  are  being  introduced  for 
unemployment insurance. Similar tax reforms have been implemented or will soon be implemented in 
France,  Spain,  the  Netherlands  and  Belgium.  The  risk  is  therefore  that  the  gap  between  Swedish 
income taxes and those on the Continent will widen over the coming years. 
The financial markets an important reform area 
An  often  overlooked  area  when  it  comes  to  structural  reforms  is  the  financial  markets.  An  efficient 
financial  system  can  raise  potential  growth  markedly.  This  area  has  also  become  increasingly 
important  for  long-term  growth  as  technological  advances  have  made  it  possible  to  quickly  obtain 
information  about  global  developments  and  to  rapidly  transfer  capital  between  different  countries. 
Countries that are able to attract capital can thereby attain financing at a lower cost, which also boosts 
investment in these countries. The US is one example of a country that despite weak domestic saving 
attracts capital from abroad, thus helping to hold up investment. In turn, investment in new technology 
forms the basis for productivity growth, thereby making it important for potential growth. 
The structure of the tax system is also of significance in this area. Swedish taxes on capital are not 
appreciably higher than the EU average. Their distribution is distorted, however, with high wealth tax 
and  capital  gains  taxes  for  individuals,  and  low  taxes  for  institutional  and  foreign  investors.  This 
distorted  distribution  of  the  tax  burden  may  come  to  play  a  more  important  role  for  Sweden’s 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2003
attractiveness,  in  terms  of  how  both  Swedish  and  international  investors  decide  to  allocate  their 
investments between Sweden and abroad. 
As regards the functioning of the financial markets, the unfortunate truth is that this is also a neglected 
area in many countries on the Continent. In some respects Sweden has progressed further than the 
euro  area  countries  in  terms  of  improving  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  After  the  period  of 
deregulation in the 1980s the progress of the Swedish financial market has been well in line with what 
has happened in the Anglo-Saxon economies in the US and UK. As a result, the equity market has 
become more important as a source of financing and firms have become less dependent on banks. 
Meanwhile, banks have focused to a greater degree on providing credit and financing opportunities to 
individuals. Thanks to deregulation, more Swedes have been able to borrow at a reasonable rate of 
interest,  making  it  possible  for  a  larger  number  of  people  to  own  their  own  homes  and  to  better 
distribute  their  consumption  over  their  lives.  In  this  respect  developments  in  Sweden  have  largely 
followed those in the US and the UK. 
Of  course  such  deregulation  -  or  rather  reregulation  -  is  not  problem-free.  The  fact  that  a  greater 
number have the opportunity to borrow also implies increased risks in the financial system. But in the 
absence of risks, growth opportunities also decrease. The important thing therefore is that the risks 
can  be  managed  in  the  event  of  a  crisis,  which,  for  instance,  requires  strong  consumer  protection. 
Here Sweden has also been at the fore by being the first to publish regular stability reports for the 
financial sector, with a view to avoiding any reoccurrence of a systemic collapse similar to that at the 
beginning of the 1990s. 
There are now signs on the Continent that the pace of financial market reform has increased. This is 
partly because the EU Member States, as a part of the Lisbon strategy, have agreed to implement the 
Financial Services Action Plan. Only last week new steps were taken to harmonise securities trading 
between the EU Member States through the signing of the Investment Services Directive. This affords 
both private investors and institutions greater opportunities to trade on exchanges other than those in 
their own country. Although Sweden in this regard would have liked to go a step further towards full 
deregulation  of  the  financial  marketplaces,  it  must  nevertheless  be  seen  as  a  step  towards  freer 
securities trading in the EU. 
In addition to developments at the EU level, national reforms are also under way in several countries. 
In Germany the efficiency of the banking system is being improved considerably now that the state 
guarantees are being abolished. Similar measures should also be taken promptly in the other major 
euro  area  countries,  so  that  they  can  also  capitalise  on  the  advantages  of  a  deregulated  financial 
market.  But  these  are  tough  reforms  that  require  that  special  interest  groups  do  not  exercise  their 
influence.  When  there  are  politicians  on  the  boards  of  some  of  Europe’s  banks,  there  is  reason  to 
suspect that decisions are sometimes made on grounds that are not entirely related to business. As 
long as this uncertainty remains, it will contribute to the euro area’s financial markets often being a 
secondhand choice for international investors. 
Furthermore, there is still much to be done in terms of competition. The majority of countries in the 
euro  area  are  burdened  with  overcrowded  bank  markets  that  have  many  inefficient  local  branches. 
However,  the  existence  of  some  2,400  banks  in  Germany  should  not  be  taken  as  a  sign  of  stiff 
competition,  but  rather  the  opposite.  Overcrowding  is  at  least  as  ominous  an  indication  that  the 
operations  are  not  been  run  in  a  business-like  manner.  It  is  in  no  way  justifiable  to  allow  bank 
customers or taxpayers to pay for either exorbitant profits or inefficient operations, which is happening 
in many countries in the euro area. 
There is no doubt that we in Sweden can also do more to promote competition in the financial market, 
not least when it comes to banking activities aimed at private customers and small firms. The largest 
market players continue to enjoy a high level of market concentration. However, the establishment of a 
number  of  new  niche  banks  in  the  past  few  years  and  the  recently  raging  price  war  on  credit  for 
tenant-owned  apartments  show  that  deregulation  gradually  leads  to  increased  competition  and 
consequently to lower prices for consumers. 
Continued reforms necessary 
To sum up, we have reason to be proud of the reforms introduced in Sweden over the last decade. 
They  have  resulted  in  Sweden  today  having  a  higher  growth  potential  than  several  of  the  large 
economies on mainland Europe. At the same time, we cannot settle for what we have done so far. 
Sweden  must  continue  to  remain  a  step  ahead  on  the  reform  agenda  that  the  EU  Member  States 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 5
decided  upon  in  Lisbon  in  2000  and  which  aims  to  make  the  euro  area  “the  most  competitive  and 
dynamic knowledge-based  economy  in  the world  by  2010”. Reforms  are  under  way  in a  number  of 
countries  in  the  euro  area  and  will  in  the  long  run  make  the  euro  area  countries  more  attractive  to 
international investors. The objective must therefore be to constantly try to find new ways of raising 
growth  without  jeopardising  economic  stability.  This  also  entails  a  continued  challenge  for  the 
Riksbank  to  regularly  analyse  the  Swedish  economy’s  growth  potential  so  that  monetary  policy  will 
also continue to be well balanced in the future. 
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS Review 45/2003
