 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance - dynamic industry in a rapidly changing 
global environment 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  2nd 
International Islamic Finance Conference, Dubai, UAE, 22 September 2003. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirrahim  
(cid:147)The Islamic financial industry is ascending to prominence in an environment that is highly competitive 
and constantly subject to the forces of change. The industry has made significant progress, with the 
essential fundamentals underpinning financial infrastructure to support its sound expansion in place. 
The  challenge  before  us  is  to  bring  the  industry  to  its  next  stage  of  development  and  reinforce  the 
robustness of the industry in a more challenging environment. Of importance is the need to evolve the 
strategies  that  need  to  be  adopted  to  build  key  strengths  and  enhance  institutional  capacity  in  the 
industry.  Indeed,  collaborative  efforts  need  to  be  intensified  on  the  global  front  and  integration 
accelerated.  As  the  decade  unfolds,  insha-Allah,  the  Islamic  financial  industry  will  evolve  into  an 
increasingly dynamic and vibrant industry(cid:148)  
It  is  my  honour  and  pleasure  to  be  here  today  at  this  Second  International  Islamic  Finance 
Conference, organised by the Islamic Development Bank and the General Council of Islamic Banks 
and Financial Institutions.  
Globalization  and  financial  liberalization  have  brought  profound  changes  to  our  domestic  and 
international financial landscape. These changes have been accompanied by an accelerating pace of 
financial  liberalisation,  driven  by  advances  in  technology.  The  advancements  in  information  and 
communication technology have removed barriers in the market place.  
Against this backdrop, Islamic banking and finance, which is still at its infancy, needs to be ahead of 
these developments in order to remain a viable and competitive form of financial intermediation. The 
challenge,  therefore,  in  the  Islamic  banking  industry,  is  to  evolve  the  development  of  an  Islamic 
financial system, one which is dynamic, responsive and sustainable.  
The development of an Islamic financial system, indeed would include the respective sets of the key 
components comprising the Islamic banking industry, the Islamic money and capital markets, and the 
takaful market, given the strong linkages, inter-dependence and synergies among these components 
in  the  system.  In  addition,  the  development  of  the  non-bank  financial  intermediaries  such  as 
development  financial  institutions,  savings  institutions  and  housing  credit  institutions  need  to  be 
developed  to  meet  customer  demands.  These  specialised  institutions  are  important  in  meeting  the 
requirements of the economy which are not met by the nascent Islamic banking institutions. Although 
the Islamic banking industry may be the core to an efficient Islamic financial system, it would need to 
have in place the supporting financial infrastructure. Of importance is the Islamic money market. Given 
the different needs of individual economies, the development of the structure of the Islamic financial 
system needs to include, at the early stage, the development of the Islamic capital market to provide 
an  alternative  source  of  financing,  as  well  as  to  create  broader  and  diverse  Islamic  financial 
instruments for investors. Complementing these three components is Islamic insurance or takaful, that 
provides  the necessary risk protection to its  policy  holders and to serve  as an efficient mobiliser of 
long-term funds.  
The spectrum of participants and the diversity of instruments are among the key attributes in creating 
the enabling environment for a dynamic Islamic financial system. This has been the approach adopted 
by Malaysia at the very onset of our journey in the development of a comprehensive Islamic financial 
system  that  is  sustainable  and  progressive.  In  the  initial  stage  during  the  early  years  of  the 
development  of  the  Islamic  financial  system,  the  focus  of  attention  was  on  the  development  of  the 
Islamic banking system and to expand the number of players and the volume of banking activity. This 
has  increased  significantly  when  the  dual  banking  system  was  introduced.  This  was  subsequently 
expanded to the specialised non-bank institutions, including the development financial institutions, and 
the savings banks and housing credit institutions, where Islamic financial products and services are 
being  offered.  The  other  core  components  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  comprised  the  Islamic 
money market, the Islamic capital market and the takaful market. Today, the Islamic money market 
has become an integral part of the Islamic financial system, with transactions of more than RM2 billion 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 1
 a  day  and  a  broad  spectrum  of  instruments,  among  which  included  the  Government  Investment 
Issues, Bank Negara Negotiable Notes, Islamic accepted bills and the Islamic private debt securities. 
New ancillary players such as money brokers have facilitated the development of this market.  
Islamic  finance  as  a  sustainable  intermediation  process  in  this  more  challenging  environment  has 
been characterised by powerful forces of change that have brought significant implications on both the 
domestic and global financial systems, and marked by turbulent financial conditions. This requires the 
development  of  robust  and  resilient  financial  institutions.  Institutional  capacity  enhancement  is  a 
central strategy towards this objective. This requires having a high calibre workforce and management 
teams  with  the  required  expertise,  leveraging  on  the  technology,  strengthening  research  and 
development, and instituting risk management systems. A structured consumer education programme 
has increased awareness of the Islamic financial system and the advances it offers.  
The Islamic capital market essentially comprises the equity market and the debt market. Phenomenal 
growth  has  been  recorded  in  both  these  markets.  In  the  debt  market,  the  outstanding  Islamic  debt 
securities  as  at-end  June  2003  were  45.5%  or  RM68.2  billion  of  the  total  outstanding  private  debt 
securities.  In  2002,  the  new  issuance  of  Islamic  debt  securities  surpassed  the  conventional  private 
debt securities amounting to RM13.8 billion. It is interesting to note that one-third of the issues have 
been  by  multinationals.  In  the  equity  market,  more  than  80%  of  the  counters  in  the  Kuala  Lumpur 
Stock Exchange are Shariah-compliant. The takaful market has also shown impressive growth and the 
four  takaful  companies  now  offers  a  broad  range  of  products  in  both  family  and  general  business 
which is comparable to the conventional counterparts.  
The Islamic financial system that has developed in Malaysia over the last two decades has emerged 
as a comprehensive Islamic financial system that operates in parallel with, and is able to compete on 
an  even  keel  with  the  more  entrenched  conventional  financial  system.  The  development  of  Islamic 
finance as an important niche activity in Malaysia(cid:146)s International Offshore Financial Centre in Labuan 
also complements the development of the domestic Islamic financial market.  
To ensure the sound and stable development of the Islamic financial industry, it needs to be supported 
by a strong regulatory and supervisory framework. This is to ensure that the operations of the Islamic 
financial  institutions  are  sound  and  not  a  source  of  vulnerability  to  the  banking  system.  To  a  large 
extent,  it  has  been  governed  by  a  regulatory  framework  that  has  been  reinforced  by  the  Shariah 
framework and the Islamic accounting standards.  
The challenges facing the Islamic financial industry can be expected to be much more complex and 
demanding.  This  is  because  the  regulatory  framework  in  the  Islamic  financial  industry  needs  to 
address  the  unique  characteristics  and  attributes  associated  with  Islamic  banking  operations  and 
Islamic  financial  instruments.  The  complexities  of  the  respective  risks  in  the  Islamic  financial 
instruments  need  to  be  fully  explored  and  quantified  to  provide  for  their  effective  assessment  and 
management. With the advent of Basel II that advocates a higher degree of risk-focused regulatory 
approach would require the Islamic financial institutions to identify and (cid:147)unbundle(cid:148) the risks inherent in 
Islamic financial instruments. The players in the Islamic financial industry must therefore, have in place 
robust risk management practices and system.  
In this regard, the establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board has been timely. The IFSB 
has  the  important  mandate  of  developing  the  prudential  standards  in  accordance  with  the  unique 
features of the Islamic financial institutions. Given that the IFSB and the existing standard setting body 
embraced common objectives, l do not see any difficulty in integrating the international standards with 
the Islamic prudential standards. This will contribute towards the development of a robust and resilient 
Islamic  financial  system  that  can  effectively  preserve  financial  stability  and  contribute  to  balanced 
growth and development.  This will also facilitate the  integration of the Islamic financial system as a 
viable component of the global financial system.  
Over the years, the Islamic financial industry has adopted the adaptation approach in the formulation 
of  Islamic  financial  products  and  services.  Although  there  are  Islamic  financial  instruments  that  are 
distinct from the conventional financial instruments, the numbers are still few. In most instances, the 
Islamic financial  products  are  repackaged  along  the  features  of  the  conventional  financial  products, 
while eliminating the elements that are not in-compliance with the Shariah. While this adaptation can 
continue, the downside risk is that Islamic financial instruments will always have to (cid:147)catch-up(cid:148) with the 
pace  of  product  development  in  the  conventional  system.  Efforts  should  therefore  be  intensified  to 
develop new financial products that embodied the virtues of Islamic banking. This would evolve Islamic 
financial instruments into distinct, innovative and cutting-edge products. Innovative instruments such 
as the sukuk have attracted interest from both the Islamic and conventional markets.  
2 
 BIS Review 43/2003
 One of the central issues towards developing a dynamic Islamic financial industry is the Shariah. The 
Shariah should always be viewed as an enabler to innovation and creativity, rather than a constraint. 
On  the  contrary,  innovation  and  creativity  is  strongly  advocated.  Efforts  therefore,  need  to  be 
enhanced to fully appreciate and maximise the true potential and wisdom of Shariah. Thus, there is a 
need for greater collaboration among the Shariah scholars, practitioners and researchers to undertake 
in-depth studies and research to originate products.  This would provide  the fundamental foundation 
towards developing a dynamic Islamic financial system.  
An  issue that needs to  be addressed  is the  development of a pool of intellectual capital for Islamic 
finance.  The  investment  in  adequate  expertise  for  the  development  of  Islamic  financial  instruments 
and services need to be made. In this regard, there is a need for Islamic financial players to intensify 
efforts  in  the  training  and  development  of  expertise  in  the  various  specialised  areas.  Such  Islamic 
financial  programmes  would  benefit 
from  a  comprehensive  approach,  encompassing  both 
conventional banking and Islamic banking, complemented with Shariah. The dynamism of the Islamic 
financial industry can only be demonstrated through a pool of talent that possesses convictions and 
expertise in Islamic finance.  
Our quest to create a dynamic Islamic financial system is to achieve the ultimate objective for Islamic 
finance that will contribute significantly toward the overall development of our economies, through the 
intermediation  process  to  facilitate  trade  and  investment.  Moving  forward,  it  is  the  ability  of  Islamic 
financial industry to build key strengths and enhance institutional capacity, intensify the collaborative 
efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of the Islamic financial infrastructure and the acceleration of its 
global integration that will provide the synergies and opportunities for the Islamic financial industry in 
the  face  of  this  more  challenging  environment.  In  doing  so,  Islamic  finance  can  evolve  into  an 
important component of the international financial system that can contribute to enhance prospects for 
balanced global growth and shared prosperity.  
BIS Review 43/2003 
 3
