Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and the outlook for the Norwegian economy 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the Mid-Norway 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Trondheim, 13 November 2003. 
The speech is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the monetary 
policy meeting on 29 October, Norges Bank’s Inflation Report 3/03, the Report on Monetary Policy 2003 - the first 
eight months and on previous speeches. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
The Charts in pdf can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 I would like to thank the Mid-Norway Chamber of Commerce and Industry for inviting me to speak to 
you today on monetary policy and the outlook for the Norwegian economy.  
The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is inflation of close to 2.5 per 
cent  over  time.  It  is  equally  important  to  avoid  an  inflation  rate  that  is  too  low  as  it  is  to  avoid  an 
inflation rate that is too high.  
The inflation target provides economic agents with an anchor for their decisions concerning saving, 
investment, budgets and wages. The inflation target also provides a framework for monetary policy’s 
contribution to stabilising output and employment. This intention is also expressed in the Regulation 
on Monetary Policy. Normally, Norges Bank sets the interest rate with a view to achieving inflation of 
2½ per cent at the two-year horizon. However, it would in general have been possible to attain the 
inflation  target  in  the  nearer  term  by  changing  the  interest  rate  more  rapidly  and  more  markedly. 
Hence, in Norges Bank’s conduct of monetary policy, emphasis is given to variability in both output 
and inflation. This is called flexible inflation targeting.  
The impact of monetary policy occurs with a lag. The current inflation rate does not therefore provide 
sufficient information to determine the level at which interest rates should be set now. Our analyses 
indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change will occur within two years.  
The choice of a two-year horizon is thus based on striking a balance between inflation stability and 
output stability and on a perception of how interest rates influence the path of inflation and output.  
Activity in the economy moves in waves. This variability can be described by developments in what is 
known  as  the  output  gap.  The  output  gap  shows  capacity  utilisation  in  the  mainland  economy 
measured as the difference between actual GDP and the level indicated by trend growth, estimated at 
2½ per cent in Norway. When the output gap is positive, the economy experiences an upturn, and a 
downturn  when  the  output  gap  is  negative.  The  output  gap  increases  in  value  in  an  upturn  and 
decreases in a downturn.  
For  the  Norwegian  economy,  the  1980s  was  a  period  of  relatively  wide  fluctuations  in  activity,  with 
periods  of  high  inflation.  At  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  the  Norwegian  economy  was  in  a  deep 
recession.  Production  was  far  below  capacity.  The  output  gap  was  negative.  When  growth  in  the 
economy picked up, capacity utilisation increased. Around 1996, there was full capacity utilisation, and 
the output gap, as we normally measure it, closed. The mid-1990s represents a period of stable and 
solid growth. In contrast to the situation in the two previous decades, inflation was low and stable.  
From the mid-1990s, the rise in labour costs and in prices for goods and services produced for the 
Norwegian market accelerated. The upturn peaked in 1997, with mainland GDP growth approaching 
five per cent. The economy then shifted from an upturn with high growth rates to an expansion with 
lower growth but low unemployment, labour shortages in many sectors and strong growth in labour 
costs.  
Since 1998, output growth has been low and the output gap has narrowed. Current capacity utilisation 
is on a par with the level prevailing in 1995-1997, before cost inflation accelerated. Growth stalled last 
winter and has been well below capacity in the first half of 2003. Growth is now picking up momentum, 
however.  
Inflation has slowed over the past 12 months and is now considerably below target. Annual CPI-ATE 
inflation was 0.8 per cent in October. Inflation in 2003 has also been lower than projected in the 2001 
and 2002 Inflation Reports.  
BIS Review 50/2003 
 1
An  account  of  the  reasons  for  the  deviation  from  the  inflation  target  is  included  in  Norges  Bank’s 
Report on Monetary Policy in 2003 - the first eight months.  
In the years 1998-2002, the Norwegian economy was characterised by substantial labour shortages 
and a considerably higher rise in labour costs than among its trading partners. Last year was the fifth 
consecutive year of very high annual growth. Wage growth was substantially higher than the level that 
over  time  is  consistent  with  the  inflation  target  and  with  normal  productivity  growth.  Pay  increases 
varied widely across the different groups. In Norges Bank’s view, there was therefore a substantial risk 
of  new  wage-wage  spirals.  Further  rounds  of  such  strong  wage  increases  might  have  led  to  a 
considerable decline in output and employment.  
Monetary  policy  was  therefore  tightened  by  an  interest  rate  increase  last  summer.  At  the  one-year 
horizon, the strong krone would push down inflation to below 2½ per cent, but the effects of strong 
wage growth would subsequently dominate.  
Last  year,  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  struck  a  balance  between  the  consideration  of  stable 
inflation developments in the short term and the consideration of stability in output and employment. It 
was expected that inflation would be low in 2003.  
However,  price  developments  are  uncertain  even  6  months  to  1  year  ahead.  There  was  thus  a 
possibility  that  inflation  could  fall  even  lower  than  projected,  and  be  more  than  1  percentage  point 
below target. Nevertheless, the deviation from the forecast is unusually large.  
This  is  an  indication  that  the  economy  was  exposed  to  sizeable  unexpected  disturbances.  The 
exchange  rate  appreciated  more  than  projected.  After  the  publication  of  Inflation  Report  3/02  in 
October last year, the krone appreciated further. This was related to unexpectedly weak developments 
in  the  global  economy  resulting  in  lower  interest  rates  abroad  and  a  wider  interest  rate  differential 
between Norway and other countries. Negative events such as the accounting scandals in large US 
companies, fears of terror and war in Iraq and the spread of SARS contributed to weak growth and low 
inflation in other countries. Developments in the international equity markets and the risk of higher oil 
prices also contributed to strengthening the krone.  
In addition, the Norwegian business sector has clearly felt the effects of the high Norwegian cost level 
and the strong krone in 2002. Growth in private consumption came to a temporary halt last winter as a 
result of high electricity prices and general uncertainty. This probably affected profit margins in retail 
trade,  particularly  for  durable  consumer  goods.  Public  entities  have  also  had  to  make  adjustments 
following last year’s wage settlement. Sluggish global and domestic growth has in turn had an impact 
on the Norwegian labour market.  
Inflation in 2003 has been pushed down by the fall in prices for imported consumer goods in particular. 
The low rise in imported price inflation is a consequence of the appreciation of the krone throughout 
2002 and low inflation abroad.  
The rise  in  prices  for domestically  produced  goods and services  has  also  gradually slowed.  This  is 
particularly the case for prices for domestically produced goods influenced by world market prices.  
The  fall  in  prices  for  imported  consumer  goods  is  not  solely  attributable  to  exchange  rate 
developments. Clothing prices have exhibited a falling trend over the past few years. In October 2003, 
clothing prices were 13.7 per cent lower than in the same month one year earlier, and almost 30 per 
cent  lower  than  in  1995.  In  addition  to  low  external  price  inflation  for  these  goods,  lower  tariffs  for 
clothing have translated into lower consumer prices. The removal of quota regulations has also led to 
a  shift  in  clothing  imports  away  from  high-cost  countries  to  countries  with  considerably  lower 
production costs.  
The  same  trend  has  been  observed  for  the  audiovisual  industry.  Since  the  mid-1990s,  prices  for 
audiovisual  equipment  have  fallen  markedly.  In  October,  prices  for  these  goods  were  8.5  per  cent 
lower  than  one  year  earlier.  International  producers  have  moved  production  to  low-cost  countries, 
allowing  them  to  reduce  prices  charged  to  Norwegian  importers.  In  addition,  new  technology  and 
intensified international competition have exerted downward pressure on prices.  
Global  economic  growth  has  been  considerably  weaker  than  expected.  Changes  in  the  economic 
outlook  are  clearly  reflected  in  interest  rate  expectations.  In  the  US,  these  expectations  have  been 
adjusted downwards considerably since summer 2002. At that time, market participants expected the 
key rate in the US to be increased to about 4 per cent towards the end of 2003. Now, interest rates are 
believed to have reached their lowest level and are expected to remain at 1 per cent until the end of 
2003, with only a gradual rise thereafter. Interest rates were also expected to increase markedly in 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2003
Europe in summer 2002. Instead, interest rates were also reduced here and expectations were revised 
downwards substantially.  
The  lower  projections  for  growth  reflect  the  effect  on  the  world  economy  of  a  number  of  negative 
shocks, such as the war in Iraq and the SARS outbreak. It may have taken longer than first expected 
to correct imbalances generated by overoptimism in sectors such as the IT industry. High oil prices 
may also have contributed to restraining growth.  
The combination of low international interest rates and weak cyclical developments contributed to high 
interest rate differentials against the krone and the strong exchange rate.  
Activity  in  the  global  economy  has  picked  up  from  the  low  level  prevailing  last  winter,  primarily 
reflecting high growth in the US and some Asian economies, including Japan. Recent statistics show 
that the annual rate of GDP growth in the US was 7.2 per cent in the third quarter of 2003. Strong 
growth in private consumption and a rise in business investment are evidence of a gradual and broad-
based upturn. Employment figures are also showing a positive trend and unemployment is falling.  
Following  the  meetings  of  the  Open  Market  Committee  in  August,  September  and  October,  the 
Federal Reserve stated that there is a risk of a further and undesirable fall in inflation, and that it was 
therefore  likely  that  short-term  interest  rates  in  the  US  will  remain  low  for  a  considerable  period. 
Interest rates in other countries are also likely to remain low.  
In the euro area, developments have been considerably weaker, even though there are now signs that 
the trough has been reached. Growth among Norway’s trading partners as a whole is expected to pick 
up over the next two years.  
The Reserve Bank of Australia and the Bank of England recently raised their key rates.  
The interest rate in Norway has been lowered substantially. The interest rate cuts must be seen in 
connection with the change in the inflation outlook, which has occurred as a result of weaker global 
economic developments and low international interest rates. The key rate has been reduced with a 
view to bringing inflation back to target at the two-year horizon. Moderate pay increases in this year’s 
wage settlements and prospects for wage growth falling to a more sustainable level for a prolonged 
period have been an important factor behind the considerable easing of monetary policy. An interest 
rate as low as 2½ per cent, however, largely reflects a long period of low interest rates abroad with 
little prospect of an increase in the near future in the largest economies. Weaker developments both 
abroad  and  at  home  have  had  an  impact  on  the  Norwegian  labour  market.  Unemployment  has 
increased.  
Decisions concerning saving and investment are affected by the real interest rate, that is the nominal 
rate minus expected inflation. The real interest rate is also low.  
An enterprise investing in productive capital will typically apply a longer perspective than a household 
buying  durable  consumer  goods.  Enterprises’  cost  estimates  will  be  based  on  the  interest  rate  and 
expected  inflation  in  the  long  term,  while  short-term  interest  rates  and  expectations  will  be  more 
important to households.  
Monetary policy influences inflation indirectly via domestic demand for goods and services and via its 
effect on the exchange rate. Because changes in the economy take time to feed through, monetary 
policy functions with a lag. It will therefore take time for all the effects of the substantial changes in the 
interest rate since December 2002 to come into evidence.  
When interest rates fall, consumption rises both because disposable income increases and because it 
is less profitable for households to save. Borrowing also becomes less costly, with an associated rise 
in investment. Higher demand leads to higher employment.  
Another  important  mechanism  is  that  lower  interest  rates  make  it  less  attractive  to  invest  in  NOK. 
Lower interest rates will therefore normally lead to lower capital inflows and a weaker krone. Imported 
goods thereby become more expensive and inflation can rise relatively rapidly. The time lag in product 
markets can, however, delay this effect somewhat, as was the case when the krone appreciated in 
2001 and 2002. In addition, a weaker krone increases activity, profitability and the capacity to pay in 
the Norwegian business sector.  
Higher demand and wage growth may lead to higher inflation through enterprises’ price-setting. In the 
long run, wages must be commensurate with the value added that is generated by workers. Real wage 
growth  is  thus  determined  over  time  by  developments  in  labour  productivity  in  all  sectors  of  the 
economy. With productivity growth at the historical level of about 2 per cent, wage growth of about 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 3
4½ per cent over time will be consistent with Norway’s inflation target of 2½ per cent. Wage growth 
that  is  lower  than  4½  per  cent  will  boost  employment  and  wage  growth  that  is  higher  will  reduce 
employment.  
Through  2003,  the  differential  between  Norwegian  and  foreign  interest  rates  has  narrowed 
considerably. This has also contributed to a substantial depreciation of the krone. The depreciation of 
the krone will make imported consumer goods more expensive, but will also improve competitiveness 
for Norwegian enterprises.  
Interest  rate  differentials  are  also  affected  by  cyclical  developments  abroad.  Subdued  economic 
growth internationally, high levels of activity and a sharp rise in labour costs in Norway resulted in a 
wide interest rate differential between Norway and its trading partners in 2001 and 2002. This made it 
profitable to invest in NOK, and the krone appreciated. The appreciation of the krone and high wage 
growth led to a considerable deterioration in the competitiveness of Norwegian enterprises - and made 
imported consumer goods cheaper.  
Norges  Bank  has  no  set  target  for  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate.  Developments  in  the  krone 
exchange  rate  are  nevertheless  important  in  interest  rate  setting.  The  response  to  a  change  in  the 
exchange  rate  will  depend  on  its  expected  impact  on  inflation.  This  requires  an  evaluation  of  the 
reasons for and the duration of the change. Short-term fluctuations in the krone exchange rate tend to 
have very limited effects on economic developments, while long-lasting changes can have an impact.  
High  wage  growth  over  several  years  has  eroded  the  competitiveness  of  the  Norwegian  business 
sector. Last year, the effects of high wage growth on export industries were amplified by the changes 
in  the  krone  exchange  rate.  The  krone  has  now  reverted  to  around  the  level  prevailing  in  the 
mid-1990s,  while  labour  costs  in  manufacturing  have  increased  by  almost  15  per  cent  more  than 
among our trading partners in the same period. The appreciation of the krone proved to be reversible, 
but the loss of competitiveness and jobs caused by relatively high domestic wage growth is difficult to 
recoup. A precondition for a considerable improvement in competitiveness is that real wage growth is 
lower  than  productivity  growth  in  the  business  sector  for  a  period.  Experience  shows  that  this  only 
occurs  in  periods  with  low  resource  utilisation.  This  is  also  an  indication  that  changes  in 
competitiveness  over  time  depend  on  real  economic  factors  and  aspects  of  wage  formation  and 
cannot be controlled by monetary policy.  
Household demand will probably be the most important driving force in the Norwegian economy in the 
period  ahead.  Private  consumption  has  a  considerable  impact  on  overall  demand  and  activity  and 
accounts for 60 per cent of mainland GDP.  
There  are  prospects  of  strong  growth  in  private  consumption.  The  interest  rate  reductions  are 
contributing  to  strong  growth  in  disposable  income.  When  households’  interest-bearing  debt  is 
substantially  larger  than  their  interest-bearing  assets,  a  fall  in  interest  rates  will  reduce  household 
interest expenses. The magnitude of this effect depends on the impact of the key rate on deposit and 
lending  rates  to  households  and  on  the  proportion  of  the  debt  that  is  tied  to  floating  rate  loan 
agreements. If we base our assumptions on Norges Bank’s figures for household net lending for 2002, 
interest expenses could be reduced by NOK 12-15 billion on an annual basis. This corresponds to a 
rise  in  disposable  income  of  just  below  2  per  cent.  Because  the  fall  in  interest  rates  has  occurred 
gradually through 2003, some of this effect will become evident in 2004 if interest rates remain low. 
Long-term interest rates are also historically low, enabling households to fix their borrowing rate for a 
few years at a level that is relatively low compared with the interest rate a few years ago.  
The  interest  rate  reductions  may  also  result  in  a  sharper  rise  in  house  prices,  leading  to  stronger 
growth  in  household  wealth.  Historically,  a  larger  share  of  household  income  has,  in  this  situation, 
been used for consumption.  
Lower real interest rates make it less profitable for households to invest in financial instruments and 
they will be more inclined to make purchases - for example of durable consumer goods - now, rather 
than wait until later. On the other hand, many households probably expect that the interest rate will not 
remain as low as it is now and will avoid allowing higher consumption to become entrenched. The fall 
in  interest  rates  may  provide  an  opportunity  for  households  with  large  loans  to  make  extra  debt 
repayments. We nonetheless expect a fall in the saving ratio.  
Lower interest rates may also increase the need for allocations to pension funds. Companies account 
for a substantial share of the allocations to pension funds, and their ability to pay will be reduced as a 
result.  
4 
 BIS Review 50/2003
In  light  of  these  prospects,  a  large  majority  of  households  have  a  positive  view  of  their  own  future 
financial  position.  According  to  TNS  Gallup’s  confidence  survey  for  Q3  2003,  confidence  in  the 
country’s economy has also improved considerably from a low level earlier this year.  
Companies  are  facing  a  different  situation,  however.  While  household  income  has  risen  sharply, 
earnings in the enterprise sector have been low with an associated low level of investment activity.  
The difference in credit growth between households and non-financial enterprises is a good illustration 
of Norway’s dual economy. Over the past few years, credit growth has been far higher for households 
than  for  enterprises.  The  level  of  household  credit  growth  has  remained  high  recently  in  spite  of 
increased  unemployment  and  a  downward  revision  of  the  prospects  for  economic  growth.  An 
important reason for this is the sharp rise in house prices in recent years. Low investment demand is 
reflected in credit to non-financial enterprises, which has declined to a very low level. Developments in 
prices for commercial property compared to house prices also indicate that the situation is better for 
households. The current level of vacancy in commercial premises is very high. Although lower interest 
rates will, in isolation, stimulate investment, a substantial share of the vacant premises will probably 
have to be filled before renewed growth can be expected.  
Developments  in  mainland  enterprises  have  been  characterised  by  low  output  growth,  falling 
investment and declining profitability in many industries. In order to boost returns on invested capital, 
enterprises have taken steps to reduce costs, primarily by reducing their workforce or relocating parts 
of their production abroad.  
There are some positive impulses, however. Interest rates are low, and equity prices have increased 
sharply since the trough in February 2003. The krone has depreciated and there are signs of a global 
upturn. Wage growth has moderated and cost inflation is likely to be lower than in the years from 1998 
to  2002.  Given  the  high  level  of  costs  and  excess  capacity  in  a  number  of  sectors,  we  expect, 
however, that it will take some time for employment and investment in the business sector to pick up. 
On balance, we expect investment by mainland enterprises to make only a marginal contribution to 
growth in the Norwegian economy in 2004. Renewed growth is not expected until 2005 and 2006.  
Investment in the petroleum sector, however, is expected to increase markedly both in 2003 and 2004. 
Even though the share of imports is high, these investments will contribute to holding up activity in oil-
related  industries.  The  current  low  level  of  exploration  activity  on  the  Norwegian  continental  shelf 
points to a relatively sharp fall in investment looking further ahead. Demand is also being sustained by 
investment to keep mature fields in operation and by the scrapping of old platforms.  
Another important factor influencing overall demand in the economy is fiscal policy. In recent years, 
expenditure growth in the government budget has increased at a faster pace than growth in mainland 
GDP. Nominal expenditure growth was particularly strong in 2002, but slowed markedly in 2003. In the 
central government budget for 2004, the Government proposes a 5.4 per cent increase in expenditure, 
or  slightly  more  than  estimated  trend growth  in  nominal  mainland  GDP.  The  level  of  taxes  remains 
virtually unchanged in real terms.  
Fiscal  policy  has  stimulated  economic  activity,  also  when  adjusted  for  cyclical  fluctuations.  This  is 
reflected  in  the  increase  in  the  structural,  non-oil  budget  deficit  since  2001.  The  Government  has 
included  a  further  increase  in  the  deficit,  measured  as  above,  in  the  National  Budget  for  2004. 
However, the budget balance figures are influenced by transactions that have little effect on demand. 
For  2003  and  2004  as  a whole,  fiscal policy  will  probably  generate  some  stimulus  to  activity  in  the 
Norwegian  economy.  As  cyclical  developments  will  probably  stabilise,  our  forecast  is  based  on  the 
technical  assumption  that  the  structural  deficit  will  not  increase  in  2005  and  2006.  This  would  also 
seem to be consistent with the practical application of the fiscal rule, cf. the discussion by the Ministry 
of Finance in the National Budget for 2004.  
According to the fiscal policy guideline, the use of petroleum revenues over the central government 
budget shall over time correspond to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. At 
the same time, fiscal policy shall contribute to smoothing fluctuations in output and employment. Since 
the introduction of the fiscal policy guideline in spring 2001, the scope for manoeuvre in fiscal policy 
has  been  reduced.  The  projection  for  the  Petroleum  Fund’s  expected  real  return  has  been  revised 
down substantially since the Revised National Budget for 2001.  
Wage growth in the years 1998-2003 indicates that the degree of labour shortages in all sectors of the 
labour market plays an important role in wage formation. The low pay increases in this year’s wage 
settlement may indicate that the social partners are placing more emphasis on the negative effects of 
large  pay  increases  on  future  developments  in  interest  rates,  the  krone  exchange  rate  and 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 5
employment. We expect that in the light of the experience gained in 2002, public entities will exercise 
more caution in future wage settlements. Expectations of moderate wage growth are supported by the 
labour market outlook.  
The  monetary  policy  easing  since  last  December  will  boost  demand,  primarily  through  private 
consumption and  gradually  through  business  investment.  The  increase  in  petroleum  investment  will 
also contribute to higher demand for Norwegian products and services. As global demand picks up 
and excess capacity in service industries is reduced, demand for labour may rise in other sectors of 
the economy. Unemployment is expected to edge down again.  
The aim of monetary policy in the period ahead is to achieve a higher level of inflation. The key rate 
has been reduced with a view to bringing inflation back to target at the two-year horizon. Analyses in 
the October Inflation Report indicate that inflation will move up and stabilise around the inflation target 
at the two-year horizon. The real economy is projected to be approximately in balance, with an output 
gap, as we measure it, that is slightly positive.  
The  analyses  are  based  on  the  technical  assumption  that  the  interest  rate  will  move  in  line  with 
expectations in financial and foreign exchange markets, implying that the interest rate will remain at 
the current level well into 2004. Thereafter, the interest rate in Norway is assumed to rise gradually in 
pace with interest rates in other countries. The forward exchange rate implies a moderate depreciation 
of the krone through the projection period. Such interest rate and exchange rate developments would 
be  consistent  with  the  monetary  policy  objective  and  would  probably  also  contribute  to  keeping 
inflation expectations at around 2½ per cent.  
Overall, growth in mainland GDP is projected at ¾ per cent in 2003. Growth was about zero in the first 
half of the year, but is projected to pick up in the latter half of the year and be high in 2004. Mainland 
GDP growth is projected at 3 per cent in 2004 and 2¾ per cent in 2005. In 2006, mainland output is 
expected to grow below but close to trend, which we estimate at 2½ per cent.  
As the fall in the krone exchange rate feeds through in the economy, inflation will gradually rise. As 
early as next year, inflation will probably be considerably higher than the current level.  
The inflation projections are uncertain. The uncertainty may be illustrated by intervals calculated on 
the basis of historical deviations in actual price developments in relation to projections. Inflation may 
move on a different path than projected for several reasons.  
The interest rate reductions and the fall in the krone exchange rate imply that inflation will gradually 
increase and will be considerably higher than the current level as early as next spring. After such a 
period of very low inflation as we have now witnessed, it is appropriate to be particularly vigilant in 
monetary policy in the event that inflation does not increase as projected.  
We have little experience concerning the effects of such considerable monetary policy easing as that 
seen over the past year. It is uncertain how economic agents will adapt to a real interest rate that is as 
low as it is now. Activity in the Norwegian economy may pick up more swiftly than expected. Excess 
capacity may be reduced more rapidly and unemployment may fall to a greater extent than we have 
projected. If new pressures arise in the Norwegian economy, inflation may be higher than projected.  
Growth  in  household  borrowing,  which  has  slowed  since  spring  2002,  may  accelerate  again.  A 
renewed rise in house prices and the debt burden may provide the basis for new imbalances in the 
economy. On the other hand, growth in corporate borrowing has remained very low.  
The  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  wage  growth  is  primarily  determined  by  overall 
conditions  in  the  labour  market.  It  cannot  be  ruled  out,  however,  that  profitability  in  internationally 
exposed industries will again play a more prominent role in wage formation than has been the case in 
recent  years.  Overall  wage  growth  may  then  be  lower  than  projected  and  provide  the  basis  for  an 
easing of monetary policy.  
The global economy appears to be vulnerable to new disturbances. Since summer 2002, international 
financial  market  developments  have  been  marked  by  increased  optimism  concerning  the  growth 
outlook.  Equity  prices  and  long-term  interest  rates  have  risen.  The  increase  has  been  uneven, 
however, and there have been wide fluctuations between major currencies. This may be a reflection of 
the uncertainty about the strength of the global economic recovery.  
Developments  in  the  krone  exchange  rate  represent  a  source  of  considerable  uncertainty.  The 
relationship between the krone exchange rate and the interest rate differential against other countries 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2003
is  not  necessarily  stable over  time.  Themes  in  international  financial  markets shift.  We  may  not  yet 
have seen the full effects of the interest rate reductions on the krone exchange rate.  
Even though Norges Bank is forward-looking in its conduct of monetary policy, thorough knowledge of 
the current economic situation is extremely important. An up-to-date and correct picture of the current 
situation is necessary to make accurate projections for the period ahead.  
In autumn 2002, Norges Bank established a regional network as a tool to gauge the level of activity in 
the Norwegian economy.  
Official  statistics  and  evaluations  of  developments  in  financial  markets  will  continue  to  be  the  main 
basis  for  our  assessments,  but  due  to  the  time  lag  and  revisions  of  such  statistics,  supplementary 
information is useful.  
The regional network provides up-to-date information on the state of the Norwegian economy. Regular 
communication  with  local  contacts  in  Norway’s  business  and  community  life  provides  us  with 
information  that  supplements  available  official  statistics.  It  also  provides  us  with  supplementary 
information about areas not covered by official statistical sources, and we learn which issues are of 
particular concern to enterprises.  
The network consists of companies, organisations and municipalities throughout Norway. In six rounds 
of  talks  each  year,  we  engage  in  discussions  with  business  and  community  leaders  on  financial 
developments in their enterprises and industries, with about 200 visits in each round. The selection of 
contacts represents the production side of the economy, both industry-wise and geographically. The 
network will comprise about 1000 contacts in the course of 2003, who will be contacted once or twice 
a year. Allforsk in Trondheim is responsible for the contact meetings in Central Norway.  
The  industry  structure  in  Central  Norway  is  not  substantially  different  from  the  rest  of  Norway.  The 
public  sector  and  some  private  service  segments  are  important  for  employment  in  Central  Norway. 
Primary industries are relatively more important in this part of the country.  
A large share of the workforce in Central Norway is employed in the public sector, in part because 
there is substantial research and development activity in this region. Focusing on knowledge is very 
important for the economy’s long-term production capacity, both for the nation and for the region. A 
study  from  Rogalandsforskning1  shows  that  there  are  more  newly  established  businesses  in  the 
Trondheim area than in any other urban centres in the country. The business sector in Trondheim is 
technologically highly advanced.  
Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  reports  firm  growth  in  the  retail  sector  and  the  household  service 
sector. Both manufacturing and corporate services report that the trough has been reached or passed. 
Activity in the construction industry has also stabilised and the number of new orders is edging up. 
There is considerable uncertainty about the strength and duration of the upturn.  
The decline in employment is slowing, but few in the public or private sector report plans to increase 
employment. The supply of qualified labour is still good and is increasing somewhat in all sectors.  
The regional network also reports that cost reductions in the business sector, especially in services, 
are now generating results in the form of improved profitability. The focus appears to have shifted to 
some extent from cost cutting to strategies for boosting income. Both the public and private sectors 
appear  to be  somewhat more positive  about  investment  plans, but  are  still not  signalling significant 
growth in investment over the next year.  
Lower interest rates have contributed to more positive expectations concerning future developments. 
Few  market  participants  believe  that  there  has  been  any  real  impact  yet,  but  many  expect  an 
improvement in the near future.  
Contacts in the regional network in Central Norway believe that a rise in retail trade and household 
services is contributing somewhat to growth in the region, as is the case in the rest of the country. 
Growth now appears to be strong enough to hold up the level of employment. Manufacturing output 
increased slightly in the previous quarter. There is continued growth in retail trade.  
                                                      
1  Gjelsvik,  M  and  T.  Høyvarde  Clausen.  (2003).  Verdiskapingsevnen  i  norske  storbyregioner.  Rapport  2003/144. 
Rogalandsforskning. 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 7
The  construction  industry  continues  to  report  some  growth  in  Central  Norway.  Increased  activity  in 
rural districts has reduced the previous differences between urban and rural areas. House sales are 
on the increase and there has been an appreciable rise in house prices. A rise in the number of new 
orders  in  manufacturing  and  the  construction  industry  is  generating  expectations  that  growth  will 
continue.  
Most  markets  report  intensified  competition.  This  is  partly  a  result  of  a  rise  in  imports  in  some 
industries and increased capacity in retail trade. Margins are being reduced.  
In Central Norway, as in the rest of the country, lower interest rates have contributed to more positive 
expectations concerning future developments.  
There are wide regional variations in unemployment. At the end of October, 3.9 per cent of the labour 
force  in  Central  Norway  was  registered  as  unemployed.  This  is  slightly  higher  than  the  national 
average of 3.8 per cent.  
All regions of the country have reported an increase in unemployment in the past year, although in 
Central Norway the increase has been relatively low. This is probably related to the industry structure 
with  a  relatively  high  share  of  employees  in  the  public  service  sector.  Reports  from  the  regional 
network indicate that employment in the public sector will remain more or less constant in the period 
ahead, while there are indications of growth in some private business sectors. The start-up of Rica 
Nidelven Hotel generated 100 new jobs but also keener competition in Trondheim’s hotel industry.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  this  snapshot  report  on  the  current  situation  in  this  part  of  the  country  and 
similar reports from the other regions provide information that is important to interest rate setting.  
Interest  rates  were  left  unchanged  at  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  meeting  on  29  October.  The 
sight deposit rate therefore remains at 2.5 per cent. According to Norges Bank’s assessment, with an 
interest rate of 2.5 per cent, the probability that inflation two years ahead will be higher than 2½ per 
cent is the same as the probability that it will be lower.  
By  using  a  time  horizon  of  two  years  when  we  set  interest  rates,  monetary  policy  contributes  to 
stabilising  output.  The  choice  of  this  horizon  prevents  monetary  policy  from  contributing  to 
unnecessary volatility in the economy.  
8 
 BIS Review 50/2003
