Nicholas C Garganas: Why is the role of the central bank important? 
Address by Mr Nicholas C Garganas, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the celebrations marking the 
75th anniversary of the Bank of Greece, Athens, 3 November 2003. 
 Your Excellency the President of the Hellenic Republic  
Mr. Prime Minister,  
Your Beatitude,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Allow me to thank you for having accepted our invitation to join us in today’s event. Let me also extend 
a  warm welcome  to Jean-Claude  Trichet,  who became  President  of  the  European Central Bank on 
November 1. This occasion marks Jean-Claude’s first official function outside of Frankfurt in his new 
position. Thank you for being with us today, Jean-Claude. We wish you every success in your new 
position.  
I also would like to extend a very warm welcome and a special thanks to my central bank colleagues 
from the European System of Central Banks as well as those from other parts of the world who have 
honored us with their presence for this celebration.  
This year we celebrate an important anniversary - the 75th year since the establishment of the Bank of 
Greece. During this period, the conventional wisdom about a central bank’s institutional role and about 
what a central bank can and should do has undergone enormous change. There has, however, been 
one constant underlying the responsibilities of a central bank - the importance of discharging these 
responsibilities to the health of the national economy.  
Why is the role of the central bank important? Because, an economy’s central bank is entrusted with 
safeguarding  the  value  of  the  economy’s  currency  and  with  ensuring  the  soundness  of  its  financial 
system. Safeguarding the value of the currency is not always an easy task. The correct answer to this 
challenge forms the basis of an efficiently running economy and of social cohesion. As John Maynard 
Keynes observed, “there is no subtler, no surer means of overturning the existing basis of society than 
to debauch the currency”.  
It would be comforting to find in the history of central banking a record of steady progress and orderly 
development from earliest antecedents to present knowledge. The facts, however, are different. The 
past 75 years have included remarkable achievements and some setbacks both globally and in the 
Greek  economy.  The  role  of  the  central  bank  in  an  economy’s  fortunes  -  and  misfortunes  -is  aptly 
demonstrated by the history of the Bank of Greece. During this sometimes turbulent period, the Bank 
of Greece demonstrated an ability to adapt to changing circumstances, often playing a leading role in 
providing solutions to the main economic problems of the day. Let me use the occasion of the Bank’s 
75th anniversary to elaborate briefly.  
Following  a  period  of  monetary  instability,  in  March  1927,  the  Greek  government  sought  the 
assistance of the League of Nations to improve the health of the economy, to secure monetary stability 
and to help the Greek banking system function better. Negotiations with the League followed and a 
stabilisation plan was hammered out. Among the terms of the so-called Geneva Protocol, signed in 
September  1927,  was  the  establishment  of  a  central  bank,  exclusively  responsible  for  issuing 
banknotes.  Until  that  time,  the  National  Bank  of  Greece,  a  private  institution,  had  the  privilege  of 
issuing  banknotes,  which  it  waived  in  favour  of  the  newly  established  central  bank.  The  Bank  of 
Greece  commenced  its  operations  in  May  1928.  The  two  main  tasks  assigned  to  the  Bank,  as 
specified in its Statute, were to ensure a stable currency and to regulate currency circulation. To this 
end, the Statute provided for the Bank to have reserve assets; it also set a strict limit on the financing 
of budgetary deficits by the central bank.  
The Bank of Greece could not have begun operating at a more difficult time. This was a time when the 
international monetary system was operating primarily under the gold-exchange standard. Effectively, 
the  gold  standard  aimed  at  securing  the  stability  of  a  currency  by  tying  money  supply  to  the  gold 
reserves of the central bank, thus leaving little room for conducting an independent monetary policy. 
The gold standard has been described as nailing the domestic economy to a “cross of gold”.  
BIS Review 48/2003 
 1
Today,  many  historians  blame  the  gold  standard  for  helping  precipitate  the  Great  Depression  that 
began in 1929. Regardless, the global stock market crash of 1929 and the ensuing global financial 
crisis of September 1931 saw many countries driven off the gold standard.  
The new international environment was hardly a favorable one for a fledging central bank. Concerned 
about the instability that might follow in the absence of the gold standard -and with the recent period of 
monetary instability entrenched in their memories - the Greek authorities attempted to maintain the link 
to gold. The drachma, however, came under heavy selling pressures, and, in April 1932, Greece had 
to leave the gold standard.  
Leaving  the  gold  standard  made  monetary  policy  a  matter  of  the  discretionary  judgement  of  the 
authorities at the Bank of Greece. The new monetary regime opened up the possibility of the Bank 
playing  a  more  active  role  in  domestic  economic  affairs.  The  Bank  was  no  longer  bound  by  the 
discipline imposed by the gold standard. However, in common with most other central banks at the 
time, it pursued monetary and credit policies geared toward safeguarding price stability and ensuring a 
sustainable  balance  of  payments;  after  all,  this  was  in  accordance  with  its  Statute.  In  addition,  the 
Bank sought to remedy the inefficiencies of under-developed money and capital markets by instituting 
measures to attract savings to the banking system and to improve credit allocation.  
In April 1941, the Axis Powers occupied Greece. For several years, London became the seat of both 
the  exiled  Greek  government  and  the  Bank  of  Greece,  with  the  Bank’s  gold  secretly  transferred  to 
South Africa. Within occupied Greece, the economic situation became increasingly grim and hundreds 
of thousands of Greeks died of hunger. The Axis powers forced the country to pay not only for the 
upkeep  of  the  occupying  troops,  but  also  for  their  military  operations  in  Southeastern  Europe.  The 
puppet regime established by the occupiers forced the Bank of Greece to resort to the printing press. 
As a result, the country was beset with hyperinflation; between April 1941 and October 1944, the cost 
of  living  rose  2.3  billion  times.  In  these  difficult  circumstances,  the  country’s  economic  system 
collapsed. To give another example of the magnitude of inflation during the occupation, let me mention 
that in November 1944, immediately after liberation, a so-called “new” drachma was introduced; it was 
set equal to 50 billion “old” drachmas!  
In March 1946, a stabilisation plan, which was part of the London Agreements, set up the Currency 
Committee,  which  was  to  become  responsible  for  monetary,  credit  and  exchange  rate  policies  for 
several decades. This Committee consisted of five members, including the Minister of Coordination, 
the Minister of Finance, and the Governor of the Bank of Greece. The Committee was given control 
over the issuance of money, and the authority to allocate credit among sectors and activities as well as 
to determine lending terms.  
After suffering through World War II and the civil war, the economy was in ruins. The hyperinflation 
produced  long-lasting  effects  on  attitudes,  and  savers  were  unwilling  to  deposit  their  funds  in  the 
banking  system.  To  help  attract  funds  back  to  the  banking  system,  the  central  bank  sought  to  re-
establish  price  stability.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  of  Greece  was  also  called  upon  to  support 
economic  reconstruction  and  to  help  lay  the  foundations  for  growth.  However,  circumstances  were 
difficult, since certain factors, including substantial expenditures on defense, social policy, and support 
of the agricultural sector, caused strong growth of the money supply. The Bank’s task was made even 
more difficult in view of the country’s underdeveloped financial markets. Yet, the Bank was successful 
in  conducting  a  tight  monetary  policy.  This,  together  with  the  decline  in  fiscal  deficits,  resulted  in 
inflation falling dramatically, from over 40 per cent in 1948 to 5 per cent in 1952. This created suitable 
conditions for a reform in exchange rate policy.  
In  April  1953  the  drachma  was  devalued  by  50  per  cent  against  the  US  dollar  and  then  joined  the 
Bretton Woods system of pegged exchange rates. In the following year, another “new” drachma was 
introduced and set equal to 1,000 “old” drachmas. Coupled with the nominal anchor provided by the 
Bretton-Woods system and tightened fiscal policy, the “new drachma” played a key role in reducing 
inflation expectations.  
During the next fifteen years real GDP growth averaged 7 per cent, one of the highest in the world. At 
the same time, average inflation in Greece was less than 2.5 per cent, confirming that strong long-term 
growth is not feasible without price stability. The Bank of Greece not only helped restore and maintain 
monetary stability, but its interest-rate policy was decisive in channeling private saving to the banking 
system.  
The nominal anchor of the Bretton Woods system proved unsustainable in the long term. Pressures to 
finance the Vietnam war led to an expansionary monetary policy in the United States and inflationary 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2003
pressures  spilled  over  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  This,  along  with  the  inherent  weaknesses  of  the 
arrangement,  proved  the  undoing  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system,  which  broke  down  in  March  1973. 
Once again, the lesson that there is a need to separate monetary policy from political influences had to 
be re-learned. The drachma’s link to the US dollar was maintained up to the spring of 1975.  
The decades of the 1970s and the 1980s were difficult ones for policy makers worldwide. Among other 
things,  they  had  to  deal  with  two  oil  price  shocks  in  1973-74  and  in  1978-79,  an  international  debt 
crisis in the early 1980s in Latin America and a global stock market crash in 1987. Particularly during 
the  1970s,  Keynesian  ideas,  which,  to  some  extent,  downplayed  the  connection  between monetary 
policy and inflation, were at their peak. In Greece, during the second half of the 1970s and the 1980s, 
the central bank conducted monetary policy under difficult circumstances, as the policy mix was often 
inappropriate.  Compounding  the  difficulty  of  the  Bank’s  task  was  the  fact  that  the  financial  system 
operated under a complex framework of rules and provisions, which proved not only ineffective, but 
also distorted credit allocation and limited the scope for conducting an effective monetary policy. The 
abolition of the Currency Committee in 1982 and the transfer to the Bank of Greece of its functions in 
the fields of monetary, credit and exchange-rate policies as well as banking supervision marked the 
beginning of a new era in the Bank’s history.  
With broader responsibilities, beginning in the mid-1980s and until the mid-1990s, the Bank of Greece 
undertook the leading role in the deregulation of the financial system. Financial liberalisation was a 
gradual  process,  however,  so  that  the  lifting  of  controls  could  take  place  in  tandem  with  the 
restructuring of the economy and thus avoid the potentially destabilising effects of abrupt and sharp 
reversals  of  international  capital  flows.  This  strategy  proved  wise;  in  the  1990s  many  Asian 
economies,  which  had  not  given  sufficient  consideration  to  sequencing,  were  exposed  to  severe 
financial crises.  
After financial liberalisation in Greece had been completed in the mid-1990s and up to entry into EMU 
and the adoption of the single monetary policy in January 2001, the Bank of Greece had at its disposal 
more effective and flexible market-oriented means of monetary control and was able to react quickly 
and effectively to changes in economic conditions.  
The  supervisory  functions  of  the  Bank  have  also  changed  considerably,  shifting  from  the  task  of 
ensuring  commercial  banks’  compliance  with  credit  and  exchange  controls  and  regulations,  to  the 
monitoring and the evaluation of bank asset quality, and the solvency and capital adequacy of these 
financial institutions.  
During  the  late  1980s  and  the  1990s,  a  substantial  shift  occurred  in  thinking  about  the  role  of  the 
central  bank in  the  economy.  Experience  of past  episodes of  hyperinflation  in  various countries, as 
well as of moderate inflation, exemplified in the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system, led to the 
finding that monetary policy is not necessarily independent of the government of the day. Sometimes 
central banks have to finance government spending and this results in higher inflation and, ultimately, 
lower growth. Thus, the views that the goal of monetary policy should be to provide price stability and 
that  the  central  bank  should  be  made  an  independent  institution  in  the  pursuit  of  this  goal  gained 
ground.  
These  ideas  underpinned  the  monetary  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  in  the  1990s  as  it  sought  to 
support  the  effort  to  satisfy  the  Maastricht  Treaty  criteria  and  to  join  the  euro  area  on  1st  January 
2001. The Bank’s ability to attain its goals was considerably improved by the abolition of the monetary 
financing of the fiscal deficit, mandated under the Maastricht Treaty, in 1994, and the law, enacted in 
1997, granting independence to the Bank of Greece with a mandate to achieve price stability.  
In an effort to bring down inflation, in the mid-1990s the Bank adopted a “hard-drachma policy”, under 
which the exchange rate was used as a nominal anchor. Real interest rates were kept at high levels to 
help  ensure  the  success  of  this  policy.  The  hard-drachma  policy  operated,  at  times,  under  difficult 
conditions,  yet  it  proved  highly  credible  and  immensely  successful.  Ironically,  the  source  of  the 
difficulty was related partly to the success of the policy. The policy’s credibility led to enormous inflows 
of foreign capital, complicating the conduct of monetary policy. The Bank was able to neutralise these 
inflows, absorbing excess liquidity and thus buying time for other policies to adjust. Within three years 
of  the  policy,  inflation  was  more  than  halved,  falling  to  under  5  per  cent,  while  economic  growth 
accelerated  sharply.  The  fiscal  consolidation  that  took  place  beginning  in  the  mid-1990s,  and 
moderation  in  wage  increases,  contributed  importantly  to  an  increasingly-sustainable  policy  mix, 
enhancing the credibility of monetary policy.  
BIS Review 48/2003 
 3
With the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis in late 1997, and its spread to other parts of the world, 
there were pressures on the drachma. The Bank of Greece initially raised interest rates to stem these 
pressures.  Then,  in  March  1998,  the  drachma  entered  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  of  the 
European Monetary System, so that it could satisfy a Maastricht criterion, and was devalued to help 
maintain  international  competitiveness.  Unlike  the  currency  devaluations  in  many  other  countries 
around  this  time,  the  drachma’s  devaluation  was  not  followed  by  the  aftershock  of  a  banking  and 
financial crisis. A well-supervised Greek banking sector, with adequate prudential regulations in place, 
limited  the  exposure  of  commercial  banks  to  foreign  currency  risk  and,  therefore,  safeguarded  the 
financial system.  
In  the  years  following  the  drachma’s  entry  into  the  ERM,  the  Bank  of  Greece  maintained  a  tight 
monetary policy so that the inflation criterion of the Maastricht Treaty could be satisfied. Fiscal policy 
continued to be tightened and wage restraint was maintained. With an ever-more-balanced policy mix, 
real economic growth accelerated. The rest, is history. On 1 January 2001, Greece became the 12th 
member of the euro area, where price stability is entrusted to the independent European Central Bank 
and the Eurosystem.  
The  Bank  of  Greece  is  now  part  of  a  larger  family,  the  Eurosystem,  and  continues  to  exercise 
extremely important functions. It is an integral part of the Eurosystem, which comprises the European 
Central Bank and the national central banks of the euro area. The Governor of the Bank participates in 
the ECB’s Governing Council, which, among other things, sets monetary policy for the euro area. The 
Bank is responsible for implementing monetary policy in Greece and ensuring the smooth operation of 
the payments system, which it runs and which is part of the EU’s Target System. The Bank also is in 
charge  of  supervising  the  banking  system  and  maintaining  financial  stability  With  the  opening  of 
financial borders in the euro area, these functions will take on added importance in the coming years.  
In carrying out its responsibilities successfully the Bank has benefited enormously, in the present and 
in the past, from an extremely well-trained and highly dedicated staff. In my view, this has been the 
key to its success.  
Such  has  been  the  journey  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  during  the  past  75  years.  As  you  can  see,  in 
common with  the experiences  of  other central banks,  the  journey  has not  been  without  bumps  and 
turns along the way. Yet, the history of the Bank demonstrates that the Bank has always fulfilled its 
obligations and, in so doing, it has earned the trust of the Greek citizens.  
In the early part of the last century, the famous Swedish economist, Knut Wicksell, said that “Monetary 
history  reveals  the  fact  that  folly  has  frequently  been  paramount;  for  it  describes  many  fateful 
mistakes. On the other hand, it would be too much to say that mankind has learned nothing from these 
mistakes”. I might add that in recent years we have learned a great deal from the mistakes of the past. 
As confirmed by the history of the Bank of Greece, the role of central banks, both institutionally and in 
actual  practice,  has  been  upgraded  in  such  a  way  that  it  contributes  to  the  improvement  of  living 
standards.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 48/2003
