Sir Andrew Large: Financial stability - maintaining confidence in a complex 
world 
Speech by Sir Andrew Large, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the City of London Central 
Banking Conference, National Liberal Club, London, 17 November 2003. 
 I am often asked what we mean by financial stability and what the Bank, or “the authorities” generally, 
are doing to maintain it. 
Let me start with the observation that maintaining financial stability is different in a number of important 
respects from conducting monetary policy. There is no quantified target; no foolproof way of deciding 
where  to  look  for  potential  threats;  and  no  fixed  timetable  for  policy  decisions.  Financial  stability  is 
altogether  less  tangible  and  more  elusive.  But  it  is  nevertheless  extremely  important  -  as  the 
substantial costs associated with financial instability demonstrate. 
The Bank of England has had an interest in financial stability for a very long time. But for most of that 
time its interest was implicit rather than explicit. In the more formal structure put in place in 1997, after 
the Bank was granted operational independence on monetary policy, our financial stability role was 
laid  down  in  a  published  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  HM  Treasury,  the  Bank  and  the 
FSA. Today I would like to make a few observations on some of the issues at the top of our current 
agenda. 
Financial  crises  are  nothing  new.  Indeed  the  Bank  has  been  handling  them  since  the  eighteenth 
century. Some are signalled well in advance. Others are more of a surprise, such as LTCM. What is 
certain is that financial crises can be very costly. For sovereign debt crises they can run to a loss of 
15-25% of GDP. For Chile in the early 1980’s they were closer to 40%. So the art of minimising the 
emergence  of  crises,  and  mitigating  their  effects  when  they  do  nevertheless  occur,  are  matters  of 
public importance. 
For us in London the challenge is particularly real. Our focus must clearly be on the stability of the UK 
financial  system.  But  markets  have  globalised;  and  they  have  also  become  more  complex.  With 
London a pre-eminent international financial centre, contagion from just about any significant financial 
crisis anywhere in the world has the potential to threaten financial stability here. 
In a broad sense, I like to think of financial stability in terms of maintaining confidence in the financial 
system.  Threats  to  that  stability  can  come  from  shocks  of  one  sort  or  another.  These  can  spread 
through contagion, so that liquidity or the honouring of contracts become questioned. And symptoms 
of financial instability can include volatile and unpredictable changes in prices. Preventing this from 
happening is the real challenge. 
So how do we fulfil our responsibility for the “overall stability of the financial system as a whole”? The 
Bank’s role is set out in the MoU. How do we approach the tasks of reducing the threat of crises and of 
coping  with  them  if  they  actually  occur?  We  have  a  three-pronged  approach:  surveillance, 
strengthening the financial infrastructure and, as a last resort, crisis management. 
We start with surveillance. We need to keep a watch on the institutions in the financial sector and their 
interactions,  both  amongst  themselves  and  with  lenders  and  borrowers  outside  the  financial  sector. 
The soundness of individual banks is a key area of the FSA’s activities. And we are in daily contact 
with them. Reassuringly at present this area of threat looks quite remote - in the UK itself at least. 
Supervision has come a long way in the past five to ten years as have the banks’ risk management 
systems. 
But nowadays financial crises do not necessarily just involve banks. There is an increasing overlap 
and interaction between banks and securities markets, and between both of them and the insurance 
sector. A problem in one can have a knock-on impact in the others. Most of these organisations are 
prudentially supervised by the FSA. But there are also organisations that are not supervised but which 
could  be  of  systemic  importance.  The  case  of  the  hedge  fund  LTCM  is  perhaps  the  most  notable 
example in recent times. And one to which I will return. 
But  it  is  not  just  the  wide  range  of  institutions  that  potentially  play  a  part  in  the  emergence  and 
propagation  of  financial  crises.  You  also  need  to  consider  the  wide  range  of  instruments.  Some  of 
them are extremely complex. Derivatives, structured products, and so on are now centre stage in all 
BIS Review 49/2003 
 1
areas of financial intermediation. We need to understand their implications and the threats they may 
pose  as  well  as  the  benefits  they  can  bring  and  we  have  accordingly  increased  our  emphasis  on 
market intelligence in this area. 
We  also  have  to  monitor  the  systems  which  underpin  the  functioning  of  markets,  notably  payment, 
clearing and settlement systems. CHAPS and BACS may be unknown acronyms to you. But they are 
the essential plumbing in handling UK cash payments. Without these systems the financial machinery 
as  a  whole  could  not  operate.  If  any  of  them  failed  to  perform  this  could  rapidly  lead  to  a  liquidity 
crunch.  So  we  need  to  understand  how  they  operate;  how  robust  they  are;  how  good  their  risk 
management processes are; and how effective their corporate governance is. The Bank has a specific 
oversight responsibility for UK payment systems. 
And beyond the payment and settlement systems we need to understand the financial infrastructure 
more generally. I don’t just mean physical infrastructure such as stock exchanges and other trading 
platforms.  I  mean  also  the  plethora  of  prudential,  accounting  and  legal  standards  and  conventions, 
such as the prudential capital rules as per the Basel II agenda; International Accounting Standards - 
due to be implemented in Europe in 2005; standards of good audit practice. I could go on. We need to 
consider  whether  people  have  confidence  in  the  standards  themselves,  and  are  they  fit  for  their 
purpose? And are the potential vulnerabilities of the networks they help to create properly understood 
and contained? 
Threats  can  emanate  from  many  areas:  and  you  can  see  we  could  keep  armies  of  people  active 
scanning the horizon in real-time. We have all heard about the butterfly’s wing-beat in Bali causing a 
hurricane in the Gulf of Mexico. And we all know that there are lots of butterflies! So we need to have 
some way of distinguishing between those threats which are of real significance and danger and those 
which are less pressing or more remote. What we do is to subject each of the potential threats that we 
can identify to regular scrutiny. So we prioritise the areas where we see real problems emerging, or 
weaknesses which make us think that the infrastructure could buckle under shocks. 
But it is not sufficient just to be aware of the threats; we need to take action to mitigate them. Our 
second  objective  is,  therefore,  to  do  what  we can  to  strengthen the  financial  infrastructure.  And we 
design deliverables - work programmes and projects - to address important emerging dangers. Each 
deliverable will imply a response of some type. 
Let me give you some recent examples of work we’ve been involved with. 
On  the  domestic  front,  we  gave  just  completed  a  programme  to  dematerialise  Money  Market 
Instruments.  These  are  now  integrated  into  the  main  CREST  settlement  system,  enhancing  market 
infrastructure and thereby reducing potential settlement risks. The settlement of transactions in these 
instruments can now occur with Delivery-Versus-Payment. 
Internationally, we have contributed expertise and advice to the standard setting process via bodies 
such as the Basle Committee and the International Accounting Standards Board. And we contribute 
actively  in  the  work  of  official  international  bodies  like  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  the  Group  of 
Twenty and the G10 central banks’ Committee on the Global Financial System. On a separate tack, 
we have also increased our focus on insurance, where the FSA is developing a prudential approach 
along  the  lines  of  Basel  II  for  insurance  companies.  We  recently  led  work  in  the  CGFS  to  better 
understand  techniques  of  credit  risk  transfer  and  their  implications  -  particularly  important  for 
reinsurance. We also wanted to obtain better data on who was shedding and who was taking on what 
risk. This should in due course allow more effective monitoring of the transfer and accumulation of risk. 
And earlier this year, I was myself heavily involved in drawing up the Group of Thirty study “Global 
Clearing  and  Settlement:  A  Plan  of  Action”.  It  detailed  20  recommendations  in  relation  to 
interoperability, risk management and governance that once implemented should improve efficiency 
and reduce risk in securities clearing and settlement. The task now is to get them implemented: and 
we are involved in that process too. 
So in these areas we try to help to influence standards that are being set at a global level. Standards 
which of course also bear directly on much UK-based activity. 
In  terms  of  improved  systems  to  enhance  risk  management  internationally,  the  Continuous  Linked 
Settlement Bank (CLS) was successfully established last autumn. It was an international response to a 
well recognised but partly unresolved risk: risk to foreign exchange settlement which goes back to the 
Herstatt crisis in 1974. CLS now settles FX transactions in eleven major currencies. And total daily 
values of transactions settled now exceed $1 trillion: a figure that is likely to grow further. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2003
These  are  examples  of  ex-ante  steps  to  reduce  both  the  emergence  of  threats  and  their  potential 
impact. But the third leg of our work is to consider what to do if there is a problem. What happens if a 
threat materialises? 
Firstly there is what I might call a “traditional” financial crisis involving one or more banks directly. All 
such crises ultimately manifest themselves in a shortage of liquidity, which can easily spill over from 
one bank to another. Clearly we need the market intelligence, expertise and operational experience to 
handle the liquidity aspects of such an event. 
Secondly,  there  is  the  possibility  of  what  I  would  call  an  LTCM  type  problem.  In  autumn  1998  the 
creditors  of  LTCM  -  mainly  banks  and  investment  banks  -  became  concerned  by  LTCM’s  financial 
position. The concern was partly that even though LTCM may have been short of bankruptcy, there 
could  be  attempts  by  its  creditors  to  reduce  their  exposures,  and  thereby  to  set  off  major  market 
disturbances.  A  crisis  was  narrowly  averted  when  the  counterparties  were  persuaded  to  purchase 
LTCM.  I  might  say  that  in  due  course  they  got  their  money  back:  which  only  goes  to  show  that  a 
liquidity crisis can arise even when the solvency position of the institution remains positive. 
Thirdly, we cannot ignore the threat of a “Major Operational Disruption” (MOD). What I mean by this is 
a  natural  disaster,  a  major  act  of  terrorism  like  9/11,  or  an  IT  catastrophe  such  as  we  sought  to 
mitigate in the Y2K preparations. Considerable time has been devoted to work in this area, on ex ante 
mitigants to provide predictability and help to enable the system to get back to work quickly. You need 
robust back-up sites, operating procedures, personnel regrouping plans and so much more. 
We are not on our own of course if a financial crisis does occur. Clearly we would work closely with 
FSA  and  the  Treasury  both  directly  and  through  the  Tripartite  Standing  Committee.  The  Standing 
Committee of representatives of the Bank, FSA and Treasury meets on a monthly basis and of course 
ad hoc. We discuss both individual cases of significance and specific threats which could be relevant 
to  financial  stability.  The  Committee  covers  surveillance,  strengthening  the  infrastructure  and  crisis 
management. For the latter, the objectives and roles of each party are outlined on the Financial Sector 
Continuity  Website.  The  Bank’s  roles  relate  to  ensuring  the  orderly  functioning  of  the  UK  markets, 
including the maintenance of adequate liquidity and the functioning of payment systems. So we would 
act  as  the  point  of  contact  on  operational  and  liquidity  issues  which  might  affect  participants. 
Meanwhile, the role of the FSA is naturally to monitor the health of the institutions which fall within its 
supervisory remit, and consequently any concerns or questions in this area will naturally be addressed 
to them. And the Treasury will ensure that Ministers are kept up to date so that government is able to 
act promptly. It also undertakes to ensure coherence between the financial sector and the operation of 
public sector continuity arrangements more generally. 
A  current  example  of  such  co-operation  between  the  three  authorities  and  the  private  sector  is  the 
Taskforce, on Major Operational Disruptions, of which I am the Chair. The Taskforce was asked by 
Treasury Ministers to assess whether we need more statutory powers in this field, and it so what they 
should be. Our findings will be published in the next few weeks: so please watch this space! 
I thought in closing that you might also be interested in a few observations on several issues which 
confront us today. These range from very high level issues such as leverage, to much more specific 
questions such as complex financial instruments. 
So firstly, leverage. Leverage is not itself a threat to financial stability: indeed banking practice relies 
on leverage. But leverage can become a vulnerability once it ceases to be sustainable. And here we 
need to assess the global picture at several levels: not just that of the UK. Firstly, we need to consider 
the sovereign level. Both in the developed and emerging worlds, government debt levels have risen to 
unusual heights. Second at the corporate level, where current levels of borrowing both to banks and 
through  securities  are  high.  And  thirdly  we  need  to  consider  household  debt.  You  have  only  got  to 
read the newspapers to know that in the UK the level of debt to income has risen significantly. In the 
USA it is even higher and other countries such as Australia and Holland, which are subject to a similar 
low interest rate environment, are seeing similar trends. 
The  question  is  just  what  are  the  vulnerabilities?  We  are  now  at  historically  low  rates  of  interest. 
Servicing high levels of debt seems quite realistic. But a variety of things could get people to behave 
differently. To save more, or to repay debt. This could come if they felt that interest rates might rise - 
and we did raise them modestly earlier this month. But it could also come for other reasons: a wish to 
save more for retirement for example. If a substantial change occurred it would, in the first instance, 
impact  on  monetary  policy  and  our  ability  to  meet  our  inflation  targets.  From  a  financial  stability 
perspective  too  however  we  would  clearly  need  to  follow  the  evolution  of  any  reactions  and  their 
BIS Review 49/2003 
 3
consequences very closely. In the first analysis there is comfort from the improved risk management 
and supervisory processes that have been developed over the past decade. But we need vigilance in 
terms of the possible knock-on implications for the financial systems. 
Moving  to  a  more  specific,  and  very  topical,  example  I  would  like  to  mention  complex  financial 
instruments. We have all read alarmist stories. But Alan Greenspan often makes the point that one 
may over estimate some of the risks and under estimate the benefits. Shocks such as the Asian crisis, 
LTCM, 9/11 have been successfully absorbed by the financial system. The fact is that they have not 
triggered  a  systemic  financial  crisis  and  the  instruments  themselves  contribute  to  flexibility  and 
resilience in the system. They enable financial institutions such as banks to transfer or diversify risk to 
a  wide  variety  of  participants  including  mutual  funds  and  insurance  companies,  and  hence  reduce 
concentration. My own view is that this may be true but equally we would be unwise to take too much 
comfort for granted. 
At  the  Bank,  we  certainly  feel  the  need  for  vigilance.  We  need  to  understand  the  implications  and 
threats of these instruments. We start by breaking down the whole area of complex instruments into a 
more granular form. We focus specifically on four key aspects. Firstly there is the question of opacity 
and data. It is very hard to know both where risks have been transferred from and who is now on the 
receiving end. A dilemma of today’s world is that despite attempts to improve transparency the new 
instruments  themselves can  actually  make  it  more  opaque.  Secondly  there are  questions  of  pricing 
and valuation. Accounting standards have a vital role to play here. Meaningful disclosure requires a 
common approach to valuation of contracts across the whole financial sector and the achievement of 
standardised accounting requirements. 
Thirdly there is the importance of risk management processes within firms. Do firms understand the 
implications of the use of models in controlling their risk? And fourthly there is the area of legal risk. 
Will untested contracts “close out”, particularly in adversarial circumstances? If not this would be an 
area that could lead to liquidity concerns. 
Then of course there is Basel II: an essential ingredient in the prudential standards being developed to 
strengthen the supervisory architecture. Today’s near final accord might not be ideal - and it is more 
complex than we wanted. But it is a great advance on the status quo in terms of aligning capital to 
actual risk; and over time it can be improved. It is important to meet the 2006 implementation deadline 
and for agreement on the framework itself to be reached next year. Banks have invested much in their 
implementation systems already and delay would set back progress and add to costs. Clearly both the 
EU and the US need to go through a domestic rule making process but surely this can be fitted within 
the timetable. By 2006 planning for Basel II will in fact have taken 8 years! 
Finally,  an  issue  with  which  you  are  I  expect  all  familiar  -  the  EU  Financial  Services  Action  Plan.  I 
would like to echo the views expressed recently by Callum McCarthy, in his speech to the European 
Policy Forum. The FSAP is an important initiative  aimed to create a single market, and it promises 
many  benefits.  But  the  implementation  of  such  changes  over  a  short  period  of  time  raises  some 
concerns; and while considerable progress has been made in addressing the 42 Directives under the 
FSAP umbrella there is still much to be done. Over the next few years we need to implement fourteen 
significant  EU  legislative  measures,  including  for  example  the  International  Accounting  Standards 
Regulation - the importance of which I highlighted earlier, as well as the new capital adequacy regime. 
We need to achieve so much so quickly, that there is a danger that people will take their eye off the 
ball. This is relevant not just to the authorities but also the firms and institutions who need to introduce 
new systems and new procedures. All this needs to take place in parallel in the course of the normal 
business  day.  And  in  doing  so  we  need  to  ensure  that  the  changes  which  are  being  introduced  to 
enhance the EU financial sector do not themselves threaten the stability of that system. 
I have this morning traversed a broad territory. Firstly, what is financial stability? Secondly, how do we 
at  the  Bank  of  England  fulfil  our  role  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  financial  system?  And  finally, 
highlighting some of the key areas that are currently active on our agenda. As you see, we have to 
extract from the global canvas the issues that pose the greatest threats and to then focus on them. 
International cooperation is the key to this, and events such as today’s conference with its range of 
distinguished speakers and attendees from across the globe can only help this process. 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2003
