Nout Wellink: The Nederlandsche Bank in the media - thorough openness? 
Address  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements,  for  the  conference  of  the  Association  of  Editors-in-chief,  The  Hague, 
30 October 2003. 
 In the novel “Being There” by Jerzy Kozinsky, Chauncey Gardener is an unworldly gardener who is 
rather simple-minded. For many years he tended an old man’s garden, completely isolated from the 
outside world. When the old man dies, he leaves the garden for the first time in his life. By chance, he 
meets the American president, who asks his opinion on the economic recession. Chauncey doesn’t 
understand and talks about his garden in reply: “In a garden, growth has its season. There are spring 
and summer, but there are also fall and winter. And then spring and summer again. As long as the 
roots are not severed, all is well and all will be well.” The President is so impressed by this unintended 
metaphor that he uses it in a speech. The illiterate Chauncey thus becomes a celebrity. The media 
seek his opinion on all kinds of subjects, and his pronouncements are seen as words of great wisdom.  
Chauncey’s  statements  went  down  so  well  because  he  unwittingly  increased  confidence  in  the 
economy.  Confidence  is  essential  for  the  functioning  of  our  economy.  Confidence  in  price  stability 
ensures, for example, that incomes policy is not distorted by high inflation expectations. And thanks to 
confidence in the euro, you could go out and buy an expensive banker’s pinstripe suit - if you wanted 
to, that is - and pay with a wad of paper which cost only a few cents to produce. Promoting confidence 
may well be the core task of a central bank: confidence in the value of the currency and the stability of 
the  financial  system.  Unlike  Chauncey  however,  we  back  up  our  pronouncements  with  economic 
analyses. But we learn from Chauncey that communication is important too. And that’s what I want to 
discuss  today.  I’ll  start  by  showing  just  how  much  the  work  of  a  central  bank  is  influenced  by 
communication and will then look at the relationship between the Nederlandsche Bank and the Dutch 
media. I’ll conclude with the Bank’s image in the press. 
Influence of communication on monetary policy  
For a central bank, communication goes beyond hiring a press officer. Communication touches on one 
of a central banks core tasks: implementing monetary policy. We obviously communicate about our 
other tasks too, such as the payments system and supervision, but in no other area is communication 
such an integral part of our objective. Short-term interest rates (money market rates) are controlled via 
monetary policy, but the economy is influenced largely through capital market rates. Capital market 
rates not only depend on prevailing money market rates, but also on expected future money market 
rates.  So  what  is  important  for  monetary  policy  is  that  a  central  bank  can  influence  expected  key 
interest  rates.  This  calls  for  an  open,  transparent  communication  with  the  financial  markets. 
Transparency enhances the effectivity of monetary policy since it provides more insight as to the way 
that  a  central  bank  interprets  economic  developments,  and  why  it  reaches  certain  decisions. 
Transparency  hence  makes  for  less  “noise  on  the  line”  between  the  central  bank  and  financial 
markets. 
Moreover, an independent central bank in a democratic system of government also has an obligation 
to observe transparency. I’m inclined to say that the more independent you are, the more transparent 
you  should  be.  Monetary  decisions  have  an  effect  on  economic  development.  In  addition,  inflation 
reduces the value of assets and the purchasing power of income. Monetary policy therefore influences 
people’s prosperity. Unlike decisions on, say, the budget, monetary decisions are taken independently 
of democratically elected politicians. This independence enhances the credibility of a central bank. But 
precisely  because  of  its  independence,  a  central  bank  must  account  for  its  decisions.  However, 
transparency is not an aim in itself, but belongs to the set of instruments needed to realise the central 
bank’s objective.  
The importance of transparency is also acknowledged by the European Central Bank. Duisenberg - 
and as of the day after tomorrow, Trichet - holds a press conference once a month during which he 
responds  to  journalists’  questions.  No  other  large  central  bank  dares  to  do  the  same.  The  ECB 
President also speaks to the European Parliament four times a year. In addition, the ECB has a clear 
objective, namely price stability. This long-term objective of the ECB is clearer than that of the Fed, 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 1
which  must  seek  a  balance  between  price  stability  and  economic  growth.  Citizens  and  financial 
markets  can  be  confident  that  the  ECB  will  keep  inflation  low.  And  they  do  have  that  confidence, 
judging by the low inflation expectations that emerge in surveys and are reflected in the price of some 
financial instruments.  
Nonetheless, the ECB is regularly reproached in the media for a lack of transparency. The European 
Parliament, for example, recently called on the ECB, in announcing a decision on interests rates, to 
make public the minutes of the relevant meeting and the distribution of votes. I am not certain whether 
this  information  would  actually  enhance  transparency.  Minutes  can  also  lead  to  misunderstandings, 
because the weight given to different arguments is not always clear. Besides, there is a danger that 
Member  States  would  check  out  the  consequences  for  their  own  country  of  their  central  bank 
President’s stance. That is not the intention, since all members of the ECB Council decide for the euro 
area as a whole. Integral publication of the minutes could also change the nature of the discussions. 
Nonetheless,  we  take  the  criticism  seriously  and  regularly  explore  possibilities  for  improving 
communication, one result being a clarification of our monetary approach in May of this year.  
Communication not only influences policy, but also the policymakers. Central bankers are continuously 
subject to media attention. They can hence explain decisions and strengthen the confidence of market 
parties.  But  they  also  need  to  watch  their  step,  because  statements  are  sometimes  interpreted  like 
those  of  the  Delphi  Oracle.  In  other  words,  people  hear  what  they  want  to  hear.  It  is  completely 
understandable  that  journalists  enjoy  analysing  the  decision-making  in  the  ECB  Council.  But  as  a 
central banker, you must always be aware of how far these interpretations can go. The press likes to 
divide the members of the ECB Council into hawks and doves. And I once mentioned in an interview 
that  structural  reforms  would  lead  to  lower  inflation,  theoretically  giving  scope  for  interest-rate 
reductions. The next day’s headline in the Financieele Dagblad was: “Wellink: interest-rate reduction in 
return for structural reforms”. That is obviously not what I meant, but it shows that a slight remark can 
sometimes have major consequences.  
Nederlandsche Bank’s relationship with the media 
This brings me to the relationship between DNB and the media. The traditional image of central banks 
as ivory towers is outdated. The Bank has regular contacts with the media, and the days when it only 
communicated through publications such as annual and quarterly reports are long gone. Over the past 
year,  members  of  the  Bank’s  Governing  Board  gave  more  than  50  speeches,  and  as  many  as 
150 interviews  and  television  appearances.  In  addition,  during  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  a 
documentary maker from the Dutch broadcasting company VPRO extensively filmed routine activities 
within the bank - even the Governing Board at lunch. Our basic premise in these media contacts is 
complete openness. Obviously, there are limits, for example that we are - rightfully - prohibited by law 
from publishing information on individual banks. We are even relatively open on this point, witness an 
information  session  for  journalists  about  the  obligation  of  secrecy.  Though  I  must  admit  that  the 
session was off-the-record. In brief, we aim to inform the public in the most honest and open manner. 
That’s why our information officials are always ready to answer questions. But you won’t find any spin-
doctors such as Alistair Campbell, and leaks to the press are absolutely out of the question.  
The best example of the importance of the media is the introduction of the euro. For the Bank, this was 
not just a major logistical operation; informing the public was at least as important for the success of 
the  euro  conversion.  The  Bank  made  a  concerted  effort  to  provide  information,  for  example  on  the 
security features of the banknotes and the exchange of old guilders. My firm impression is that the 
media  also  felt  directly  responsible  for  the  provision  of  (critical)  information.  Our  contacts  with  the 
media during that period were very intensive, since we wanted to reach as many people as possible 
within a short time. The Bank even used channels which we otherwise rarely encounter, the highlight 
being my own appearance in the women’s weekly magazine Libelle. At that point I could deliver the 
factual message off by heart, but the interest in the colour of my jacket came as a surprise.  
Following the euro introduction the Bank was subject to some criticism in the press, notably in respect 
of  the  possible  inflationary  effects.  The  idea  quickly  took  hold  that  the  euro  had  made  life  more 
expensive. Some 90% of the Dutch population were convinced of this in July last year, according to a 
Bank survey. Estimated inflation was then as much as twice as high as actual inflation. In itself, this 
perceived inflation is understandable. People had to become familiar with the new currency and the 
new  prices,  while  strong  economic  growth  had  driven  up  Dutch  inflation.  Moreover,  price  increases 
were  highest  in  the  most  visible  sectors,  such  as  catering  and  retail.  Unfortunately,  the  impression 
arose that the Bank had deliberately underestimated the price-raising effects of the euro. That is not 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2003
correct:  as  early  as  June  2001  we  estimated  that  the  inflationary  effects  could  amount  to  between 
0.2 and  0.7  percentage  point.  The  corresponding  increase  in  retail  prices  (the  effect  on  daily 
purchases)  amounts  on  average  to  between  0.5 and  1.8%.  Initially,  we  thought  that  the  inflationary 
effects would end up at the lower end of this range, and that is what we made public. This may have 
been a little premature, because, with hindsight, the inflationary effects appear to be closer to the top 
end. In my view, the provision of information on this point could have been better. 
Besides a source of news, the Bank is of course a consumer of economic news in the Dutch press. I 
find the quality of financial and economic reporting quite sound. Dutch journalists are generally well-
informed and are able to put news items quickly into context. The latter helps us to fine-tune our own 
analysis.  It  is  good  to  know  how  others  interpret  economic  and  social  developments,  such  as  the 
consequences of austerity measures for society. But one is obviously extra critical when it comes to 
one’s own profession, so I do have some comments. Compared to the British, American and German 
press,  economic  reporting  is  less  in-depth.  Newspapers  such  as  the  Wall  Street  Journal,  Financial 
Times  or  Frankfurter  Allgemeine  more  often  succeed  in  bringing  analyses  that  give  a  surprising 
perspective  or  new  insight.  The  Dutch  press  could  also  be  a  little  more  critical  in  the  field  of 
economics.  I  don’t  wish  to  directly  oppose  a  recent  statement  by  my  fellow  supervisor  Docters  van 
Leeuwen, as to the reversal of the burden of proof, but if I had been a journalist, I would have gone a 
little  further  than  simply  reporting  this  standpoint.  Just  as  an  independent  parliamentary  press  is 
essential  for  the  functioning  of  a  democracy,  an  independent  economic  press  is  essential  for  the 
functioning of a capitalist society. Scandals surrounding Lernout & Hauspie in Belgium or Baan and 
Ahold in the Netherlands came to light mainly thanks to the Anglo-Saxon press, and not the Dutch. In 
the small Dutch market there is obviously less time and manpower available for economic analyses or 
investigative journalism. But the press does indeed have a curious and critical attitude in other areas. 
So some improvements may be possible.  
A comparison with the Anglo-Saxon press also reveals some positive aspects. I think the Dutch press 
is  generally  neutral  and  balanced.  Some  English  newspapers,  say,  take  a  consistently  anti-EMU 
approach, in which the Stability Pact and the ECB’s monetary strategy always have to take the rap. 
Fortunately, you encounter that kind of prejudice far less in the Netherlands. This objectivity also holds 
true  for  more  complex  and  politically  sensitive  issues.  That  struck  me  in  the  reports  on  the  new 
distribution of votes following the accession of the new EU Member States to EMU. And on looking at 
a completely different section of the British press (the tabloids), then I appreciate the Dutch media’s 
total lack of interest in my private life.  
DNB’s image in the Dutch press 
So  the  Bank  has  an  opinion  about  you,  but  we  are  also  curious  about  your  opinion  of  us.  To 
communicate well, it is important to know how our message comes across. Another factor is that the 
role of the Nederlandsche Bank has been changed by EMU. We are no longer the guardian of the 
guilder, but the co-guardian of the euro, in line with the deliberately chosen federal structure of the 
European System of Central Banks. In addition, we supervise banks and - following the merger with 
the  PVK  -  also  the  pensions  and  insurance  sector.  We  also  advise  the  government  on  numerous 
issues.  
The  Bank  commissioned  a  survey  of  its  image  among  Dutch  journalists.  The  results  were  not 
disappointing, but our efforts leave room for improvement. A surprising amount of journalists find that 
the Bank has a clear profile. Many mentioned our role as supervisor and the merger with the PVK. I 
also found it surprising that most people ascribe a wide role to the Bank, seeing it as an “important 
knowledge institute”, which “presents its opinion in many areas” and as a “cautious, critical observer of 
economic developments”. Critical notes were sounded too, of course. Many journalists have the idea 
that  our  set  of  tasks  has  been  reduced,  judging  by  statements  such  as  that  we  are  a  “branch  of 
Frankfurt”, “dull, without a clear function” and even “a 19th century phenomenon”. These comments 
are tough, but, as I see it, show that we still have much to explain. We are all too well aware that we 
need  to  adapt  to  a  changing  environment.  For  one,  we  are  now  in  the  process  of  a  far-reaching 
reorganisation  and  merger.  The  positive  reactions  show  that  we  are  on  the  right  path.  I’d  like  to 
mention one other outcome from the survey. Some journalists found that the Bank had become more 
open and more approachable in recent years. Moreover, the Bank still has plenty of credibility. Words 
such as trustworthiness, soundness and independence clearly resonate in our image.  
BIS Review 50/2003 
 3
The Dutch and European economy 
A speech for the Dutch media would of course not be complete without some news, but the news I had 
has been somewhat overtaken by the publication of the latest Commission forecasts for the European 
and  Dutch  economy.  Our  open  economy  has  suffered  considerably  from  the  recent  worldwide 
economic downturn. We are also contending with the after-effects of the boom in the late 1990s which 
eroded our competitiveness. This was a contributory factor in the abrupt reversal in Dutch growth from 
well above the EMU average to the lowest in the euro area. But there is light at the end of the tunnel. 
The American economy is clearly picking up. The crucial question now is whether the euro area, and 
the Netherlands in particular, can benefit from this revival. Owing to the poor growth figures in the first 
two quarters, the Netherlands will this year see a significant economic contraction. Growth is expected 
to be more negative than our last projection of –0.4% in the June Quarterly Bulletin, and will hence be 
closer to –1% than–0.5% over the whole year. According to the latest DNB projections, next year’s 
growth will barely exceed 0.5%. Despite these setbacks, the nadir of the recession is now behind us. 
Producer confidence has now reached its highest level this year, having shown an increase for four 
months in a row, while industrial order books and capacity utilization have slightly expanded. Although 
2004  will  still  be  a  year  of  adjustment,  solid  foundations  will  be  laid  for  a  sustainable  economy 
recovery.  Wage  moderation  and  cost-reductions  will  restore  corporate  sector  competitiveness, 
renewing  growth  in  business  investment  for  the  first  time  in  four  years.  Thanks  to  this  and  other 
factors, growth in 2005 will return to its potential, a potential that will in due course benefit from the 
range of structural measures now in the pipeline. Despite the hesitant start, the economy will hence 
eventually gain full speed.  
Whereas  the  economic  signals  are  green,  all  warning  lights  in  the  budgetary  area  in  Europe  are 
flashing bright red. Three countries have already crashed the red light, with a deficit exceeding the 3% 
ceiling under the Maastricht Treaty. France will do this next year for the third year in succession, and 
should hence be penalised. The penalty for France could reach 0.3% of GDP, representing more than 
EUR 4 billion. However, this fine need only be paid if France fails to narrow its deficit to below the 3% 
ceiling within two years. So France would have to break the rules until end-2006. Until that time, the 
amount of EUR 4 billion merely takes the form of an interest-free deposit, meaning that France only 
forfeits the interest on that sum. At an interest rate of 5%, that is equivalent to around EUR 200 million 
a year. Having driven through a red light, France should not look for excuses but should simply accept 
the  penalty.  Why  should  Italian  farmers  pay  a  total  of  around  EUR  1  billion  in  European  fines  (for 
exceeding the milk quota), and a government that pays no heed to the rules be spared?  
I hope that I have given you enough material for further discussion. But I can’t say for certain since, as 
the  story  of  Chauncey  illustrates,  messages  can  sometimes  come  across  very  differently  than 
intended.  
4 
 BIS Review 50/2003
