Mervyn King: Stocktake of the UK economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  East  Midlands  Development 
Agency/Bank of England Dinner, Leicester, 14 October 2003. 
 The Bank of England is back in Leicester. Between 1844 and 1872 there was a branch of the Bank of 
England  in  Leicester,  located  in  Gallowtree  Gate.  Sadly  it  operated  at  a  loss,  in  part  because  the 
Agent lived in style driving about town in a carriage and pair with two men in livery, and the branch 
was closed. Only six years ago did we re-establish our links with the City through the creation of a new 
Agency in the East Midlands. The purpose of that Agency - staffed by four members of the Bank who 
work in rather less style than their predecessors - is to listen to you and other businesses about what 
is happening on the ground. 
The  reports  of  our  Agents  around  the  country  are  crucial  to  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee.  The 
information we receive from you, and our other eight thousand business contacts around the country, 
are key pieces in the large jigsaw puzzle of the UK economy that we assemble each month in order to 
see the big picture. 
Some  of  the  statistical  fog  hanging  over  the  British  economy  lifted  a  week  or  so  ago  with  the 
publication of a new picture of demand and output over a number of years. The official statisticians 
have  redrawn  the  profile  of  growth  in  different  sectors  of  the  economy.  In  particular,  the  data  for 
spending and output in the first half of this year now appear more consistent. But October is often a 
month  in  which  fog  turns  into  storms.  So  it  is  worth  asking  whether  the  remaining  statistical  fog 
enveloping  the  UK  economy  foreshadows  stormy  economic  weather  ahead.  After  a  decade  of 
unparalleled stability of both growth and inflation, it is time to take stock. 
For much of the 60 years since the end of the Second World War, Britain experienced a succession of 
economic cycles - variously described as stop-go or boom-bust. On average these were larger than 
the fluctuations experienced by other major industrial economies. Not only was our growth rate lower, 
it was also more variable. But the past decade has seen a remarkable shift of fortunes. In the 10 years 
from  the  second  quarter  of  1992,  the  average  annual  growth  rate  of  GDP  was  2.9%,  above  the 
post-war average of 2.5%. Following the adoption of an inflation target in late 1992, inflation averaged 
2.5%,  the  lowest  for  a  generation,  and  never  deviated  more  than  one  percentage  point  from  that 
average. Unemployment fell from almost 10% to around 3% on the claimant count, its lowest level for 
almost  three  decades,  and  has  now  been  virtually  unchanged  for  twenty  months,  by  far  its  longest 
period of stability. The terms of trade moved in Britain’s favour, raising our national standard of living. 
And output has risen in every single quarter since the middle of 1992, something that is true of no 
other G7 economy. 
Why were the 1990s so successful? And can that success continue? Four features of our economy lie 
behind this improved performance. First, the new monetary framework - based on an explicit target for 
inflation,  a  high  degree  of  transparency,  and,  since  1997,  independence  of  the  Bank  of  England  - 
made it clear to everyone that monetary policy was, and would continue to be, targeted on maintaining 
low  and stable  inflation.  Second,  a substantial  fiscal  consolidation  turned  a deficit  of  8%  of  GDP  in 
1993 into a sustainable position for the public finances based on a set of clear rules for government 
debt.  Third,  a  continuing  programme  of  supply-side  reforms,  over  a  period  of  20  years,  made  it 
possible to reduce unemployment without generating higher inflation. Fourth, although the unexpected 
twists and turns of the world economy did pose real challenges to monetary policy, especially in the 
latter half of the decade, those shocks tended to average out over time rather than cumulate in either 
an upward or downward spiral. In other words, the economic surprises alternated between good one 
year and bad the next, rather than adding up to “one damn thing after another”. In that sense, Lady 
Luck smiled on us. 
Of course, we were not alone in enjoying the 1990s. In the United States growth was so rapid that at 
least  two  authors  wrote  books  entitled  “The  Roaring  Nineties”  and  another  chose  the  title  “The 
Fabulous Decade”. In contrast, continental Europe experienced slow growth and heart-searching over 
structural reforms. As with much else, our economic performance lay somewhere between the excited 
exuberance  of  the  United  States  and  the  relative  disappointment  of  continental  Europe.  So  the  UK 
experienced  a  non-inflationary  consistently  expansionary  -  or  “nice”  -  decade;  a  decade  in  which 
growth was a little above trend, unemployment fell steadily, and, supported by the improved terms of 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 1
trade, real take-home pay rose without adding to employers’ costs, thus allowing consumption to grow 
at above trend rates without putting upward pressure on inflation. 
Will the next ten years be as nice? That is unlikely. The terms of trade will probably not rise as much in 
future as they have in recent years - about 10% since 1996 when sterling started to appreciate - not 
least because sterling’s effective exchange rate has fallen by around 7% since the turn of the year. 
Moreover, there is no longer the margin of spare capacity that has provided a buffer for policy over 
much of the past decade. So when shocks, as they will, hit our economy it is almost inevitable that 
there will be somewhat greater volatility of both output and inflation than the remarkable stability to 
which we have become used in recent years. 
But the case for realism about what we should expect is not a case for pessimism; rather the opposite. 
The macroeconomic framework in this country is sound and proven. And the real benefit from Britain’s 
new-found position of macroeconomic stability is that it provides an opportunity to improve our supply 
performance  -  to  boost  productivity,  education  and  enterprise  in  order  to  generate  the  resources 
needed to raise living standards. Such improvements are, in the long run, both more important and 
more glamorous than the rather dull and repetitive role of the Bank of England in trying to maintain 
macroeconomic stability. The Bank of England is only the referee; you are the players. 
Unlike countries such as the United States, which has witnessed a significant and seemingly durable 
rise in productivity growth, in Britain the underlying rate of increase of output produced for each hour 
worked  has  remained  broadly  stable.  We  can  take  some  comfort  from  the  latest  revisions  to  the 
National Accounts which show that productivity growth was not as depressed as previously thought, 
but it still remains close to its long-run trend of around 2% a year, insufficient to close the productivity 
gap between ourselves and our major competitors. 
Of  course  the  Bank  of  England  has  to  look  to  improve  the  quality  and  professionalism  of  its  own 
activities.  And,  together  with  the  Court  of  the  Bank,  the  new  executive  team  is  exploring  ways  to 
enhance  the  effectiveness  of  our  operations.  Improving  our  market  intelligence,  refocusing  our 
financial stability role, and making central services more professional, are examples of ways in which 
the  Bank  aims,  in  all  its  activities,  to  pursue  standards  of  excellence,  as  it  has  in  monetary  policy. 
There  is  one  additional  area  where  change  could  prove  beneficial.  After  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  decides  on  the  level  of  interest  rates,  that  decision  must  be  implemented  in  the  money 
markets.  The  Bank  will  be  carrying  out  a  review  of  its  money  market  operations  with  a  view  to 
improving and simplifying them, and reducing overnight volatility in those markets. The Bank’s Markets 
Director, Paul Tucker, will be consulting the market shortly. 
For the United Kingdom as a whole, pressing on with reforms to raise productivity is essential to future 
prosperity. The strategy which the MPC has pursued in recent years - stimulating domestic demand to 
compensate  for weak external demand in  the  face  of  a strong  exchange  rate - carries  the  risk  that 
there could be a sharp correction to the level of consumer spending at some point in the future. That 
risk is exacerbated by the continued strength of the housing market and associated borrowing that we 
have seen in recent weeks. It is possible that such weakness of domestic demand might be offset by 
an improvement in productivity, although as yet few signs of that are observable. 
Three  lessons  from  past  monetary  policy  experience  are  relevant  to  the  present  position.  First, 
monetary policy can target only the aggregate price level. And inflation expectations are now firmly 
anchored on the inflation target. But the risk of a correction to consumer spending derives from the 
possibility of sharp movements in relative prices, particularly of assets. Expectations of the key relative 
prices  within the  economy,  such  as asset  prices  and  the  exchange  rate,  are  volatile  and  difficult  to 
measure, and changes in them are often desirable signals to producers and consumers alike. So it 
would be a mistake to target those relative prices. But understanding how they affect the expectations 
and spending decisions of the players in the economy is an essential part of monetary policy. 
Second, it is easier to measure the money value of spending and output in the economy than to split it 
into estimates of “real” output, on the one hand, and price indices, on the other. That is why the latest 
data  revisions  have  altered  the  picture  of  real  growth  over  recent  years,  leaving  estimated  money 
spending  and  output  broadly  unchanged.  In  such  circumstances  it  is  sensible  to  focus  on  money 
spending. Indeed, the success of the new monetary framework can be seen in the stability not just of 
retail price inflation but also of the growth rate of domestic demand in money terms. Over the past few 
years the annualised growth rate of nominal domestic demand has remained in the range of 4½% to 
5½%, a much greater degree of stability than experienced for many decades. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2003
Third,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  anticipate  the  future  path  of  interest  rates.  That  is  because  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  sets  rates  in  response  to  news  in  the  economy,  and  that  news  is 
inherently difficult to forecast. Each month the Committee makes a careful assessment of the outlook 
for inflation, and it is that which will guide our decisions on the appropriate level of interest rates. It is 
over 3 1/2 years since interest rates were last raised - the longest such period since Bank Rate was 
held  constant  at  2%  through  the  1940s.  At  some  point  reducing  the  present  degree  of  monetary 
stimulus will be necessary in order to keep inflation on track to meet the target. The timing of any such 
decision will reflect our judgment of the outlook for inflation. Listening to our business contacts and 
learning from our visits around the UK is an important input into that judgment. 
To retain the unrivalled degree of stability that we achieved during the “nice” decade will be an even 
more  difficult  challenge  for  the  future.  The  present  monetary  and  fiscal  frameworks  provide  a 
seaworthy policy vessel, but, as all sailors know, fog, especially statistical fog, can be dangerous. So 
we must hope that Lady Luck will continue to smile on us. 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 3
