Lee Hsien Loong: Seizing the opportunities 
Address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore, at the MAS Staff Seminar, Singapore, 18 November 2003. 
 Introduction 
I. 
We  held  our  last  Staff  Seminar  in  October  2002  against  a  backdrop  of  weak  global  economic 
conditions and uncertainties in the Middle East. We anticipated then that MAS would have to manage 
within a riskier environment. And this turned out to be so. For us in Asia, the Iraq war and the SARS 
outbreak weakened business and consumer spending, and caused a major setback to the recovery of 
the  regional  economies.  However,  with  the  easing  of  geopolitical  tensions  and  the  containment  of 
SARS, sentiments have rebounded and the outlook has brightened. We should now actively prepare 
ourselves to ride on the recovery and seize the opportunities that are emerging. 
Economic and financial landscape 
II. 
In the third quarter this year, the US economy expanded at a brisk annualized 7.2%, buoyed by rising 
productivity,  strong  investment  and  consumption.  Economists  are  generally  upbeat  about  US 
prospects for 2004. But they are concerned that in the longer term the US may not be able to drive the 
global economy, because of its large twin deficits, record household debt, and low personal savings. 
Europe is just starting to recover from two years of very weak growth. The Japanese economy has 
been surprisingly robust and the market is becoming more optimistic not just at the cyclical pickup, but 
also  at  better  prospects  for  structural  improvements.  Asia  is  improving  too,  supported  by  easy 
monetary and fiscal policies and the more favourable outlook in the developed economies. Asian stock 
markets have been buoyant, and Asian merger and acquisition activities are on the rise. Investors are 
regaining  interest  in  the region,  as shown  by strong  capital  inflows,  particularly  into  equity  markets. 
Growth is picking up. SARS failed to dent China’s growth, which is expected to reach 8% this year. 
South-east Asia is also looking up, especially Thailand which is expected to register 6% GDP growth 
this year.1 Malaysia has also recently projected its GDP to grow by 6% per annum for the next two 
years.2 
The IMF believes that the world economy has turned the corner. Economic activity is expected to pick 
up strongly over the next 12 months, growing 3.2% next year, up from this year’s 2.3%.3 Likewise, the 
World  Bank expects  the East  Asian economies  to expand  by  6.1%  this  year  and  by  a  more robust 
6.7% next year.4 
III.  
Singapore’s economic and financial landscape 
Singapore’s economic and financial outlook 
In Singapore, following a dismal second quarter because of SARS, the economy rebounded strongly 
in the third quarter, posting a reassuring 17% quarter on quarter growth. With the improvement in the 
external environment, the outlook has improved considerably in the last quarter. We now expect the 
economy to grow between 0.5-1% this year. But we believe that in the short-term recovery will still be 
less vigorous, compared to previous cycles. This reflects the continuing restructuring in the Singapore 
economy,  particularly  in  low-end  manufacturing.  However,  both  the  manufacturing  and  services 
sectors appear poised to ride the recovery and next year we expect GDP growth to pick up to 3-5%. 
                                                      
1  Source: Asian Development Bank. 
2  The Business Times, 30 Oct 2003 “KL’s growth will average 6% in 2004-05: Mahathir”. 
3  The Business Times, 24 Oct 2003 “Global economy bouncing back, says IMF”. 
4  The Business Times, 5 Sep 2003 “East Asia will be fastest with 6.1% growth in 2003”. 
In  the  financial  services  sector,  stock  market  activity  reached  record  levels,  with  fund  management 
and corporate finance activity also growing strongly. Following several negative quarters, the financial 
sector  started  growing  again  in  the  second  and  third  quarters.  As  a  result,  growth  in  the  first  three 
quarters of this year averaged about 2.5%. The sector should register moderate growth for the rest of 
the year, and strengthen further into 2004. 
Prospects for Singapore’s financial centre 
What does the improved economic and financial outlook mean for Singapore’s financial sector? Back 
in 1998, when the Financial Sector Review Group was developing strategies for growing the financial 
sector, we thought that Singapore could become an international financial centre for certain activities, 
like London. For example, we were already the fourth largest FX centre in the world. We wanted to 
build on our strengths as a money market and treasury centre to become the debt hub for Asia. At the 
same time, in other respects we hoped to emulate Zurich. We could become the premier international 
asset  management  centre  for  Asia.  After  all,  our  well-respected  regulatory,  legal  and  accounting 
systems and stable socio-economic conditions had already made Singapore a location of choice for 
private wealth. 
After five years of promotion and development, we have achieved some encouraging results. The debt 
market has grown more than 3-fold since 1998. We have attracted some foreign issuers, and our own 
corporates have tapped international markets from here. However, we remain largely a market with 
domestic  focus.  We  therefore  need  to  do  more  to  make  our  markets  deeper,  more  liquid  and 
internationally established. 
The prospects are good. Asian countries are now cooperating more closely to develop domestic bond 
markets. As corporates in our region expand their businesses to take advantage of the recovery, they 
will need more funding. We also see a clear trend towards more derivative products being structured 
here as investors look for better yields or protection. All these factors will help us to continue to grow 
our debt markets in size and sophistication as a major debt hub. 
In the equity market, the global trend five years ago seemed to be towards cross-border alliances and 
linkages. This has generally not worked out, except to a limited extent in Europe. Indeed, the last few 
years have been very difficult for stock markets world-wide. However, this year things seem to have 
turned. In Singapore, stock market activity reached record levels in recent months. Activity should stay 
strong, because of portfolio inflows in anticipation of the economic pickup next year. The increase in 
interest in the SGX and in listings on the exchange, from companies having substantial operations in 
China  has  been  encouraging.  There  is  also  a  new  interest  among  regional  exchanges  to  explore 
alliances with each other. 
We have maintained our position as a leading global FX centre, and this has opened up opportunities 
that were less apparent in 1998. One area is commodities trading. Financial institutions are now also 
major commodities players, with more financial products being structured based on commodity prices 
as the underlying risk. These structuring and trading teams are usually in the same business units as 
the FX experts, a number of whom are based in Singapore. 
In investment banking, for some time all the interest seemed concentrated in North East Asia. South 
Korea had recovered from the Asian financial crisis faster than the rest, and China was creating great 
excitement. However, strong investor interest in recent deals in Southeast Asia indicates a revival of 
regional M&A activity. Many Singapore firms have interest in expanding overseas, possibly through an 
acquisition strategy. With the economic recovery firms are likely to increase their capital expenditure, 
while countries will invest more in infrastructure and other big-ticket projects. This should foster further 
pickup in the syndicated loan market and Asian Dollar Market. 
One  particularly  successful  area  is  wealth  management,  and  its  prospects  remain  good.  In  fund 
management, global mandates are now increasingly being managed out of Singapore. The industry is 
also expanding in breadth and depth. Beyond marketing and portfolio management, fund management 
firms  are  also  locating  regional  functions  such  as  trading,  risk  management  and  research  in 
Singapore. More hedge funds are also setting up here, adding to the industry’s diversity. 
Private banking should continue its sterling performance, as Asia-Pacific is the fastest growing region 
for  private  banking  in  the  world.  According  to  Merrill  Lynch,  Asia-Pacific  high  net-worth  individual 
wealth jumped 11% last year, supported by high savings rates and robust GDP growth in key regional 
economies such as China, South Korea and Australia. This figure could be an underestimate, given 
the low penetration of high net worth individuals in Asia by private banks. Bankers managing private 
wealth  will  be  attracted  to  locations  which  enjoy  political  and  social  stability  and  possess  well-
respected  regulatory,  legal  and  accounting  systems.  Singapore  has  all  these  attributes  and  is  well 
placed to become a premier centre for private banking business in Asia. 
Reputable  and  well  regulated  regimes  like  Singapore  can  provide  a  location of  choice  for  investors 
and financial intermediaries alike, especially with the renewed emphasis on corporate governance and 
integrity after the excesses of the dotcom era. We can exploit this advantage to become a regional risk 
mitigation centre, for instance in the areas of clearing & settling OTC and exchange-traded products. 
The current outsourcing and off-shoring trend would also present opportunities for us. One estimate is 
that  two  million  jobs  would  be  created  in  lower-cost  locations  like  India  and  China  over  the  next 
5 years.  While  we  cannot  compete  with  India  and  China  on  cost,  we  can  compete  for  processing 
activities  which  are  mission  critical  and  of  higher  value-added.  In  the  past  year,  major  financial 
institutions have relocated higher-end middle and back-office operations here. These institutions take 
the  view  that  Singapore’s  developed  infrastructure,  reliability,  and  skilled  manpower  make  us  more 
suitable for these time-sensitive and mission-critical functions. 
In the banking sector, we have gone from 7 local banks to 3 over the last 5 years. Singapore banks 
have  grown  larger  and  stronger,  and  they  are  continuing  to  build  up  their  regional  footprints.  As  a 
regulator, MAS is happy that they have made progress strengthening management teams and building 
up risk management systems. Last year, one rating agency even ranked Singapore banks as being 
among the strongest not only in Asia but in the whole world.5 
However,  by  international  standards,  the  three  local  banking  groups  are  still  rather  small,  despite 
having made some regional acquisitions and undergone domestic consolidation. The largest of them, 
DBS  Group,  ranks only  96th  in  the  world  in  terms of  assets.  The  banks  are also  mainly  Singapore 
banks, rather than regional players with strong presence in several countries. Possibilities for domestic 
growth are limited, other than by further consolidation. But countries in the region like India and Korea 
are opening up their financial sectors to foreign participation, and other regional and global players are 
starting to explore these opportunities. The local banks would be conscious of these industry trends. 
Does  size  matter  to  the  local  banks?  There  are  differing  views.  One  view  is  that  it  does,  because 
economy of scale is increasingly important. The pursuit of size in the global financial industry has been 
underway  for  several  years,  and  despite  some  less-than-successful  mergers  overseas,  is  still 
on-going. The most recent merger between Bank of America and FleetBoston Financial would create 
the  second  largest  US  bank  with  total  assets  of  nearly  US$1  trillion  and  operations  across 
34 countries. 
In this view, size also enables a bank to diversify across geography and products, which gives it a 
much stronger base. This is the way the industry is moving. If Singapore banks do not make it to be 
significant regional players, at least, then they risk being marginalised, and perhaps eventually being 
absorbed by other players. 
However,  there  are  others  who  maintain  the  contrary  view.  They  hold  that  size  is  not  essential  for 
banking or financial industry success. There exist successful smaller players who excel in particular 
markets or specialised areas of expertise, and Singapore banks can be among these. Furthermore, 
banks can only expand as fast as they can grow their business or assimilate new acquisitions. Over-
rapid expansion can result in weaknesses and mistakes, and turn a small but strong operation into a 
large but vulnerable one. 
It  is  up  to  the  Singapore  banks  and  their  shareholders  to  consider  these  opposing  arguments  and 
continually  reassess  their  strategies.  They  will  need  to  decide  whether  they  need  further  scale  to 
compete effectively, and if so whether it should be achieved through consolidation at home, expansion 
and acquisition abroad, or a combination of both. MAS cannot make this judgment for them, though 
the  continued  strength  of  our  banking  system  depends  on  their  making  the  right  judgment  call. 
Whatever the outcome, we need a core of strong local banks, as the stability of our financial system 
hinges on that. 
Overall, the prospects for our financial centre look good. Last year, employment fell slightly because of 
mergers,  consolidation  and  the  general  economic weakness,  but  the  worst  seems  to  be behind us. 
More jobs are being created by the new activities that are being attracted here and by expansion in 
                                                      
5 
FitchRatings, The Singapore Banking System, 19 Apr 2002. 
established  areas  like  wealth  management.  The  financial  sector  will  continue  to  be  an  important 
contributor to economic growth. 
Progress review of MAS’ 2003 business priorities 
IV.  
Let us now briefly review how well MAS has achieved its business priorities over the past year before 
we focus on what we must do to grasp the opportunities arising from the financial services upturn. 
Managing within a riskier environment 
First,  managing  within  a  riskier  environment.  The  financial  industry  is  ever-changing  -  risk 
management  practices  are  constantly  being  tested  and  challenged  by  new  business  models  and 
financial  products.  The  impact  of  these  innovations  on  the  safety  and  soundness  of  financial 
institutions,  and  on  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  is  not  always  obvious.  Regulators  must 
continually seek to identify and manage new and evolving risks, without inhibiting the creativity and 
dynamism of the markets. 
As we continued to shift from one-size-fits-all to risk-focused supervision, we modified, adapted and 
updated specific supervisory practices and methodologies in line with industry developments. In the 
last  year,  we  have  taken  steps  to  more  clearly  define  (1)  the  objectives  or  desired  outcomes  of 
supervision, (2) the functions MAS performs directly or facilitates indirectly to achieve these outcomes, 
and  (3)  the  principles  that  guide  our  supervisory  approach.  This  will  help  us  to  steer  through  the 
environment of continuous change and greater uncertainty. We intend to publish the framework of our 
ideas on these issues. 
In  all  areas  of  supervision,  we  continue  to  build  up  our  institutional  knowledge.  This  includes 
understanding  the  key  risk  areas  of  individual  institutions,  and  how  they  manage  risks.  We  keep 
asking this fundamental question: What could go wrong with each institution that we supervise? Then 
we allocate appropriate supervisory resources, depending on the probability and potential impact of 
different mishaps. 
We  are  also  making  progress  implementing  risk-based  capital  requirements.  The  risk-based  capital 
requirements for SGX member companies have taken effect in October. The models for insurers have 
been rigorously tested and will be implemented next year. In banking, where international risk-based 
capital standards already exist, MAS is working with local banks to prepare for Basel II. We are not 
going  to  prescribe  the  approaches  for  our  banks  to  adopt,  but  we  have  encouraged  them  to  put  in 
place the more advanced risk management practices that would enable them to move to the internal 
ratings-based  approaches  if  they  chose  to  do  so.  To  enhance  risk  management  capabilities  in 
institutions, we have also issued comprehensive guidelines on international best practices. 
We  have  recently  completed  the  IMF/World  Bank’s  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  (FSAP). 
According to the preliminary findings, the assessors have concluded that Singapore’s financial sector 
is robust with few short-term vulnerabilities. While we can take heart from the positive FSAP findings, 
we must not be complacent. We must remain vigilant to ensure continued confidence in our financial 
system. 
Strengthening partnership with industry 
Second, strengthening partnership with the industry. MAS has collaborated with the industry in several 
areas.  We  have  embarked  on  a  joint  initiative  with  SGX  to  cultivate  a  stronger  research-oriented 
environment  in  the  stock-broking  industry.  We  have  also  partnered  banks  to  establish  a  cheque 
truncation  system,  and  to  include  the  Singapore  Dollar  as  one  of  11  global  currencies  in  CLS 
(Continuous  Linked  Settlement).  The  participation  in  CLS  eliminates  FX  settlement  risk,  and  further 
consolidates Singapore’s position as a leading FX trading centre and a key node in the global financial 
system. 
Last year we formally adopted a policy of extensively consulting industry on new regulatory changes. 
Since January 2003, we have issued 17 consultation papers. The feedback from industry both here 
and abroad, has been useful in helping us formulate these changes. 
Deepening talent pool 
Third, deepening Singapore’s talent pool. As we move towards providing higher value-added services, 
we will face more intense competition for talent. We need to deepen our talent pool by training the 
local workforce whilst stepping up efforts to attract foreign talent with the requisite specialist skills. 
The  industry  needs  professionals  with  market  experience  and  skills  to  deal  with  the  increasingly 
complex and volatile financial markets. To meet this demand, we need to enhance our training and 
development  initiatives.  Besides  co-funding  financial  skills  training  under  the  Financial  Sector 
Development Fund, we are actively promoting Singapore as a financial training hub. Discussions are 
now on-going with the newly established Wealth Management Institute and INSEAD as well as major 
institutions to develop corporate training centres and corporate universities. 
We would also like to build up Singapore’s financial research capabilities with an Asian and emerging 
market focus. We are currently exploring the possibility of establishing a financial research institute, in 
partnership with established financial research institutes worldwide. 
Enhancing market discipline 
To  enhance  market  discipline,  we  have  facilitated  the  establishment  of  industry-sponsored  but 
independently-run  complaints-handling  processes  and  mechanisms  for  customers  to  settle  disputes 
with banks and insurers. The banking industry now has a Consumer Mediation Unit and the insurance 
industry the Insurance Disputes Resolution Organisation (IDRO). Presently, we are working with the 
securities industry to study the feasibility of an industry-based dispute resolution scheme for the capital 
markets. 
Together  with  other  government  agencies,  we  launched  a  national  financial  education  programme 
“MoneySENSE”, aimed at improving the basic financial literacy of consumers. The “For the Consumer” 
portal  on  MAS’  website  provides  a  one-stop  access  to  financial  education  materials,  including 
consumer guides. 
MAS workplan for 2004 
V. 
The  past  year  has  been  a  challenging  one  on  many  fronts,  but  MAS  has  made  good  progress  in 
meeting  its  business  priorities.  With  the  global  and  regional  economic  recovery,  many  new 
opportunities will emerge. To capitalise on these opportunities, we have identified three key thrusts for 
our 2004 workplan. 
Enhancing our competitive operating environment 
The first thrust is to enhance our competitive operating environment. We aim to do so in the following 
areas. 
We  will  enhance  the  transparency  of  supervisory  initiatives  and  policies.  To  improve  financial 
institutions’  understanding  of  their  statutory  responsibilities,  MAS  will  articulate  more  explicitly  and 
systematically the intent of significant changes in legislation and regulation. We also intend to share 
best practices for compliance. 
We will also be reviewing our process for conducting monetary policy in light of the ongoing structural 
changes  in  the  economy.  We will be  looking  at  how  we  make decisions,  how  we  communicate  the 
Monetary  Policy  Statement,  how  we  implement  the  policy,  as  well  as  studying  the  transmission 
mechanism through which the exchange rate affects the real economy. 
Next, we will seek a judicious cost-benefit balance in our regulatory and supervisory work. MAS will 
not  compromise  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual  institutions  or  systemic  stability.  But  it  will 
strive  to  supervise  institutions  without  placing  unnecessary  regulatory  burdens  on  well-managed 
individual  institutions  or  inhibiting  the  innovation  and  dynamism  of  the  financial  sector.  Compliance 
costs of supervisory actions will be commensurate with the risks posed by the individual institutions. 
We will seek consistency in applying equivalent prudential and market conduct standards to financial 
institutions conducting similar business activities that are subject to the same risks. Harmonising and 
integrating regulations and supervisory practices across financial activities will reduce opportunities for 
regulatory arbitrage. 
Working towards more win-win outcomes for Singapore and the region 
Second, we must work towards more win-win outcomes for Singapore and the region. 
The growth and development of Singapore depends on the health of the world economy, and the well-
being of our neighbours and trading partners. As a hub and gateway in this region, Singapore benefits 
if the region is competitive and attractive to investors and new businesses. Southeast Asia must work 
together  to  make  itself  more  attractive,  especially  with  new  opportunities  and  competition  arising  in 
North East Asia. Last month, ASEAN leaders agreed in Bali to build an ASEAN Economic Community 
by 2020 - a single market and production base with free flow of goods, services, investments, capital 
and skilled labour. 
Asian  countries  need  to  foster  closer  cooperation  and  integration  between  financial  systems  and 
markets in the region. This will facilitate the financing, and payment and settlement of intra-regional 
trade. It will also improve the working of capital markets, so that the businesses can raise the capital 
they  need  more  conveniently  and  at  lower  cost.  Asian  countries  are  now  making  greater  efforts  in 
regional financial cooperation. When these succeed, they will hopefully spur countries to go further. 
They  recently  launched  a  USD  Asian  Bond  Fund.  Although  this  did  not  lead  to  any  big  bang,  it 
underscored the interest among Asian economies to develop their capital markets. In consultation with 
the private sector, regional central banks are now working on a local currency ABF. 
As a financial centre, Singapore is well placed to seize opportunities as regional markets integrate. We 
will pursue a two-pronged strategy. 
First,  we will actively  participate  in regional  initiatives  with  the  objective  of  making  Singapore  a  key 
“interchange” in regional financial flows. Within ASEAN and ASEAN+3, Singapore is leading initiatives 
to  strengthen  capital  market  capacity-building  efforts  and  foster  greater  cross-border  collaboration 
among  regional  capital  markets.  We  are  advocating  the  adoption  of  international  capital  market 
standards and practices in ASEAN as an essential market foundation. 
We are realistic that the regional market will take some time to develop and accept that we cannot 
force the pace. But we need to stay engaged and strengthen our linkages with the major economies 
and emerging regions, to offer high value-added activities and secure our place as a key node in the 
region.  On  our  own,  we  are  already  working  to  establish  exchange  linkages  with  major  markets  to 
enlarge market coverage out of Singapore. 
Second,  we  will  work  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  new  FTAs  currently  being  negotiated  to  create 
greater financial flows into Singapore, and to enable our financial institutions to access these markets. 
In our Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA) with India, we are exploring closer 
integration of our financial markets. Both countries stand to benefit if our financial sector players can 
operate seamlessly between the two markets. While there are many regulatory and other issues to be 
addressed, we see this as a unique opportunity for both India and Singapore. 
Empowering consumers to achieve fair dealing 
Third,  we  must  empower  consumers  to  achieve  fair  dealing.  This  will  help  us  to  develop  a  more 
informed and savvy consumer market, which is necessary to grow a vibrant financial sector. 
With liberalisation, there are now more channels for savings that entice investors with higher yields, 
such as bonds, equities, unit trusts, hedge funds, and insurance and annuity products. These products 
also  carry  higher  risk.  Has  consumer  sophistication  risen  in  line  with  the  complexity  of  financial 
products?  As  consumers  seize  new  investment  opportunities,  how  far  should  MAS  safeguard  their 
interests? 
MAS  no  longer  practises  merit-based  regulation  of  products.  It  is  neither  feasible  nor  desirable  for 
MAS to prescribe what consumers can or cannot invest in, how these products should be priced, or 
what terms and conditions should govern transactions. This would inhibit business enterprise, restrict 
consumer  choice,  and  raise  compliance  costs.  MAS  cannot  intervene  in  commercial  disputes  with 
individual institutions or arbitrate on contractual matters. Therefore, in 1997, we stated the rule should 
be “Caveat Emptor” - let the buyer beware, and watch out for his own interests. 
However,  we  have  not  left  consumers  entirely  alone  to  fend  for  themselves.  There  may  be  an 
imbalance of power between consumers and financial institutions. Consumers may lack information 
and resources to participate confidently and knowledgeably in the marketplace. Thus, MAS has helped 
to  empower  consumers  and  to  promote  fair  dealing  by  establishing  a  regulatory  framework  for 
increased information disclosure and sound market and business conduct standards. This regulatory 
regime requires offerors of investments to provide full, timely, accurate and meaningful disclosure of 
information  to  consumers,  on  a  continuous  basis.  The  intent  is  for  consumers  to  make  their  own 
informed decisions. One objective of the “Money-SENSE” financial education programme is to equip 
consumers with the skills and tools to evaluate financial products, judge the risks involved and take 
responsibility for their actions. 
To  address  the  issue  of  mis-selling  and  misrepresentation  by  financial  intermediaries,  MAS  has 
facilitated  the  setting  up  of  affordable  and  efficient  channels  for  aggrieved  consumers  to  seek 
recourse. This is necessary if market discipline is to work, and consumers are to receive fair dealing. 
With these channels in place, we aim to develop consumer self-reliance. Let me now illustrate these 
principles with two examples. 
My  first  example  is  the  AIA  Critical  Year  issue.  This  was  a  commercial  dispute  between  AIA  and 
policyholders,  which  had  to  be  resolved  bilaterally  between  them,  whether  through  negotiations, 
industry-based dispute resolution mechanisms or the courts as a last resort. MAS could not intervene. 
But MAS had a responsibility to ensure that policyholders had full information of what AIA was offering 
them, what this was worth, and what other alternatives they had. MAS also had a strong interest in 
seeing IDRO, the industry based dispute resolution mechanism, work. 
Thus  what  MAS  did  was  to  ensure  that  information  was  disseminated  promptly,  accurately  and 
adequately, so that policyholders could make a considered decision. We issued a policyholders’ guide 
to  help  affected  policyholders  understand  their  own  policies  and  the  options  available  to  them.  AIA 
was asked to issue a public statement to explain fully and clearly its support package and adjudication 
process. 
MAS also made it clear to the industry that if any dispute arose over the jurisdiction or authority of 
IDRO, it would have had to contemplate introducing statutory and regulatory mechanisms for dispute 
resolution.  Full  disclosure  and  working  dispute  resolution  mechanisms  are  preconditions  for  a 
disclosure-based regime and self-reliance to work. 
The  AIA  dispute  simmered  for  many  months.  Eventually  AIA  responded  to  the  concerns  of 
policyholders, including those raised by CASE on their behalf, by revising and substantially improving 
its offer. As this offer addressed many of the earlier concerns, MAS welcomed it publicly. This is one 
instructive  example  of  how  consumer  or  investor  bodies,  such  as  CASE,  can  play  a  useful  role 
bringing together and articulating the common concerns of consumers. 
The  second  example  is  structured  deposits.  Structured  deposits  have  become  a  popular  new 
investment  instrument  providing  the  chance  of  higher  returns  than  conventional  fixed  deposits,  in 
exchange for the risk of lower returns if the bet turns out wrong. However, the calculation of returns 
and risks on such products may be complex. The average retail investor may not understand what the 
outcome depends on, much less judge the odds of things working out in his favour. Investors may also 
be misled by the assumption that, being deposits, such products are very safe. 
Nevertheless, MAS has not prohibited such structured deposits, because that would restrict investor 
choices  and  would  benefit  neither  the  industry  nor  the  consumers.  But  under  our  disclosure-based 
philosophy,  it  is  important  that  consumers  understand  exactly  what  they  are  buying.  So  MAS  has 
proposed  guidelines  for  full  and  meaningful  disclosure  of  the  risks  involved,  including  reasonable 
illustrations  of  potential  benefits,  and  clear  explanations  of  any  limits  on  returns.  We  have  also 
required banks distributing such products to treat these as investment products rather than deposits 
which can be sold over-the-counter by bank tellers. These guidelines are currently under consultation. 
MAS will monitor how the market develops to see if further action is required. Going forward, we will 
produce educational materials to help consumers understand these products better. 
VI.  Conclusion 
We stand on the threshold of a cyclical economic recovery amid profound structural changes to the 
global  economy.  For  the  first  time,  emerging  economic  powers,  China  and  India,  are  thrusting 
themselves into the global economy. They are forcing a major reordering of the economic landscape, 
whether  in  terms  of  new  competition  for  investments  and  exports,  or  new  markets  for  products. 
Despite all the problems and complexities that Asia faces, this is the most dynamic region in the world. 
We need to continue to restructure the Singapore economy and move up the value chain of economic 
activities.  Singapore  will  continue  its  role  as  an  important  financial  centre  despite  the  changing 
environment  and  challenges  posed  by  China  and  India,  and  must  find  ways  to  benefit  from  these 
developments.  Financial  services  will  continue  to  be  an  area  in  which  we  have  a  competitive 
advantage. 
The economic recovery presents great growth potential. We need to position ourselves to capitalise on 
the opportunities. Market players must seek out and seize the business opportunities as they arise. 
They must continually reassess their strategies to remain competitive in this changing world, and more 
importantly, implement the good strategies vigorously to create new opportunities for themselves. 
MAS  will  continue  to  ensure  the  integrity  of  the  financial  sector,  so  that  Singapore  remains  an 
attractive  regional  hub  for  financial  sector  activities.  It  will  also  adapt  and  respond  to  market 
developments to facilitate a more competitive operating environment. Together, MAS and the financial 
industry  will  navigate  the  winds  of  economic  change  and  strengthen  our  position  as  a  premier 
international financial centre. 
