Joseph Yam: Mortgage-backed securities programme in Hong Kong    
Speech  by  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the  signing 
ceremony of the Bauhinia MBS Programme of the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation Limited, Hong 
Kong, 30 October 2003.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, let me first offer a very warm welcome to all of you to this signing ceremony to 
mark the successful conclusion of the second series of mortgage-backed securities issued under the 
Bauhinia MBS Programme of the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation. The issue size this time is HK$3 
billion. It is the largest residential MBS issue in Hong Kong, so far. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as you are aware, the HKMC is committed to developing a deep and liquid 
MBS  market  in  Hong  Kong  as  an  effective  means  for  enhancing  the  availability  of  competitive 
mortgage finance in Hong Kong for homebuyers. The success of this initiative will also benefit both the 
financial market and the future development of the HKMC as a major financial institution. 
For the financial market, MBS provide an efficient channel for long-term funds from the capital market 
to supplement bank financing of long-term mortgage loans. They also help banks to better manage the 
liquidity and maturity mismatch risks inherent in their mortgage business. Development of an active 
MBS market will broaden the product range of the financial market and further develop Hong Kong’s 
role as an international financial centre. 
For the HKMC, MBS provide an important source of funding and an effective tool for managing the 
risks of its fast-expanding mortgage portfolio. In a short span of six years, the Corporation’s mortgage 
pool has increased to over HK$32 billion, which is funded by debts of a similar amount. Momentum is 
expected to pick up further with the planned acquisition of between HK$16 billion and HK$20 billion of 
mortgage  portfolios  before  the  end  of  2004.  The  proceeds  from  issuance  of  MBS  help  relieve  the 
funding pressure of the mortgage purchase programme. The securitisation process also enables the 
Corporation to reduce the Prime-HIBOR basis risk and the refinancing risk of its mortgage portfolio. 
There are in fact two MBS programmes that have been developed by the HKMC. We made a modest 
start  in  October  1999  with  the  launch  of  the  Guaranteed  Mortgage-Backed  Pass-Through 
Securitisation Programme. There were a total of eight series of MBS issued under that Programme, 
with  an  aggregate  amount  of  about  HK$2.8  billion.  The  back-to-back  structure  of  the  MBS  issued 
allows the participating banks to keep a substantial portion of the cash flow from the mortgage pools, 
while reducing the credit risk and capital cost through the HKMC’s guarantee of the securities. It also 
provides  them  with  the  option  at  any  time  to  off-load  part  or  all  of  an  issue  to  suit  their  liquidity  or 
trading objectives. 
Meanwhile, it became clear to us that the standardisation of mortgage origination documents would 
facilitate  the  securitisation  of  mortgages  more  efficiently,  by  removing  the  need  for  due  diligence 
review  of  documentation  by  credit  rating  agencies  and  investors.  The  HKMC  therefore  spent 
considerable  efforts  in  promoting  such  standardisation.  With  the  generous  support  of  the  legal 
fraternity and the banking industry, the HKMC introduced, in July 2001, the Model Mortgage Deed and 
the Model Deed of Guarantee and Indemnity. Fourteen major mortgage lenders have since adopted 
these model documents. Further standardisation of mortgage origination documents is in progress. 
It was against this background that the HKMC found it able to embark on another MBS programme - 
the Bauhinia MBS Programme. The first series of MBS under that programme was issued in March 
2002  and  amounted  to HK$2  billion.  The  paper  issued  was in  the  form  of  bonds  that  investors  are 
familiar, with a secondary market of considerable liquidity. Great care has been taken to design the 
Programme in such a way as to provide a convenient, flexible and cost-efficient platform for the issue 
of MBS. Benefiting from the standardisation of product structure and legal documentation, the lead-
time  for  arranging  an  issue  has  been  shortened  substantially,  from  six  to  nine  months  for  a  stand-
alone issue, to a few weeks under the Bauhinia MBS Programme. 
The current issue of HK$3 billion of MBS is the second series under the Bauhinia MBS Programme. 
We are grateful and greatly encouraged by the enthusiastic response of the underwriting banks and 
investors. The amount of HK$3 billion has been fully subscribed by a diversified group of investors. 
They include not only banks, but also institutional investors and fund managers. The participation of 
these latter groups is especially welcome as a sign of the potential breath of the investor base for good 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 1
quality  Hong  Kong  dollar  debt  securities.  The  opportunity  has  been  taken  to  offer  more  choices  to 
investors. These are explained in the technical note attached to the press release. The CEO of HKMC 
will be happy to explain these to you and answer any questions that you may have, later in the press 
briefing. 
What I would like to do here in conclusion is to thank HSBC, the Lead Manager of this MBS issue for 
marketing  it  so  effectively.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  Senior Co-lead  Managers,  Bank of  China, 
Bank  of  Communications,  Bank  of  East  Asia,  International  Bank  of  Asia,  Mitsubishi  Securities  (HK) 
and Co-lead Manager, BNP Paribas for their staunch support. The HKMC team has enjoyed working 
with  all  of  you  towards  this  successful  result,  and  we  look  forward  to  your  continuing  active 
participation in future HKMC issues. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2003
