European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 4 December 
2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today's meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB. 
Following a comprehensive economic and monetary analysis, we concluded that the monetary policy 
stance remains appropriate to preserve price stability over the medium term. Accordingly, we left the 
key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged  at  their  low  levels.  While  annual  inflation  rates  are  likely  to 
fluctuate around 2% over the coming months, a gradual and limited decline should take place later on. 
We  also  noted  that  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  has  started  and  that  confidence  has 
strengthened  further.  We  will  continue  to  carefully  monitor  all  developments  that  might  affect  our 
medium-term assessment of risks to price stability. 
We also discussed the potential implications of the deeply regrettable developments at the ECOFIN 
Council meeting on 25 November. As we already stressed in our statement on the same day, these 
developments  risk  undermining  the  credibility  of  the  institutional  framework  and  the  confidence  in 
sound  public  finances  of  Member  States  across  the  euro  area.  Let  me  add  that  a  credible  fiscal 
framework is key not only to stability but also to growth, and is a precondition for low risk premia in 
financial markets to be preserved.  
I shall now explain our assessment in more detail. 
In the context of our economic analysis, the latest data releases confirmed that economic activity in 
the euro area has picked up. Real GDP growth in the third quarter reflects the strong momentum of 
the world economy, which we assume will continue next year.  
We expect that domestic demand will start improving. Private consumption should be supported by 
positive terms-of-trade effects due to the past appreciation of the euro. With the usual lag, it should 
also  profit  from  an  increase  in  employment  growth.  Business  investment  is  expected  to  recover 
gradually,  mainly  helped  by  an  expansion  of  external  demand,  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  and 
generally favourable financing conditions. Moreover, it should increasingly benefit from the adjustment 
efforts of the corporate sector to enhance productivity and profitability.  
Taken together, we look forward to a gradual recovery in euro area economic growth over the next 
quarters, leading to a broader and stronger upswing in the course of next year and the year after. The 
risks to this scenario appear to be balanced. Over a longer horizon, we remain concerned about the 
sustainability of global economic growth being undermined by external imbalances in some parts of 
the world economy.  
Concerning  prices,  the  latest  information  is  in  line with  earlier  expectations.  According  to  Eurostat's 
flash  estimate,  annual  HICP  inflation  was  2.2%  in  November,  following  a  rate  of  2.0%  in  October. 
Similar rates have prevailed for most of this year and this inertia of inflation rates at around 2% is likely 
to continue in the coming months. Due to adverse food price developments, the evolution of oil prices 
and  planned  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices,  inflation  rates  will  fall  neither  as 
quickly nor as strongly as was expected earlier in the year.  
However,  when  assessing  price  trends  over  the  medium  term,  a  number  of  factors  should  dampen 
inflationary pressures. First, given the past appreciation of the euro, import prices should contribute to 
this  effect.  Second,  domestic  cost  pressures  should  remain  moderate.  In  particular,  wage  growth 
should  be  contained  in  the  context  of  a  recovery  which,  for  the  time  being,  is  expected  to  remain 
gradual.  Provided  that  wage  moderation  can  be  preserved,  which  is  indispensable  for  fostering 
employment, a cyclical recovery in productivity tends to dampen growth in unit labour costs, which has 
thus far been relatively high when judged against the weakness of the economy.  
Overall,  these  views  are  also  reflected  in  recently  released  forecasts  and  seem  to  be  in  line  with 
survey data and financial market expectations. Accordingly, there is a rather broad consensus on the 
main  scenario.  At  the  same  time,  this  outlook  for  price  stability  is  conditional  on  quite  a  number  of 
assumptions, such as those on global developments, oil prices, exchange rates, wage developments 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 1
and fiscal measures. Therefore, elements of risk to the outlook for price stability need to be kept in 
mind. In this respect, we noted that financial market indicators for inflation expectations have shown 
some upward momentum over recent months. While technical factors might also have played a role in 
the  movement  of  these  indicators, and  other  indicators  have  remained  broadly  unchanged, inflation 
expectations warrant close monitoring. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, M3 growth has been very strong over the past two years, reflecting 
portfolio shifts, precautionary savings and the low level of interest rates. The low level of interest rates 
has  also  supported  the  growth  of  credit  demand.  In  our  assessment,  the  accumulation  of  excess 
liquidity is not of concern for price stability at the current juncture, given that, for the time being, the 
economic  recovery  is  only  gradual.  However,  should  high  excess  liquidity  continue  to  prevail  once 
there is a significant strengthening of economic activity, it could lead to inflationary pressures in the 
medium term. We will therefore continue to carefully examine monetary developments. 
In  summary,  the  economic  analysis  indicates  that  the  main  scenario  for  price  developments  in  the 
medium term continues to be in line with our definition of price stability. This picture is confirmed by 
cross-checking with the monetary analysis.  
Turning  to  fiscal  policies,  I  have  already  mentioned  that  we  expressed  deep  regret  following  the 
ECOFIN  Council  meeting  on  25  November.  Furthermore,  we  stressed  our  support  of  the 
Commission's views on the ECOFIN Council's Conclusions. We also took note of the commitments 
made  by  France  and  Germany  to  correct  their  excessive  deficits  as  rapidly  as  possible  and  at  the 
latest by 2005. Moreover, we noted that the ECOFIN Council stands ready to take a decision under 
Article 104(9), on the basis of the Commission recommendation, should the two governments fail to 
act in accordance with their own commitments. We strongly urge the governments concerned to live 
up to their responsibilities. Confidence in the soundness of public finances is essential for sustainable 
growth in consumption and investment. 
The overall fiscal framework of the Stability and Growth Pact remains of central importance and should 
be  fully  respected.  The  same  applies  to  the  requirement  to  avoid  excessive  deficits,  laid  down  in 
Article 104 of the Treaty, and to the reference values of 3% and 60% for the deficit and debt-to-GDP 
ratios respectively, specified in the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure annexed to the Treaty. 
These are the foundations for trust and confidence in EMU.  
Trust  and  confidence  are  also  crucial  in  the  context  of  structural  reform.  Enhancing  the 
competitiveness of the euro area, in particular in labour and product markets, increasing the efficiency 
of  the  tax  systems  and  ensuring  the  sustainability  of  social  security  schemes  all  foster  a  better 
allocation and utilisation of capital and human resources. There is no doubt that measures in these 
respects improve the growth perspectives of the euro area. However, in order to foster confidence in 
the shorter term, convincing assurance must be given that these challenges are indeed being tackled 
in a decisive manner and that clear action is being taken. While some progress has been made, the 
Governing  Council  strongly  encourages  governments  to  accelerate  the  implementation  of  structural 
reforms and also calls upon social partners to fully commit themselves to the objective of making the 
euro area a more dynamic and innovative economy.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2003
