Toshihiko Fukui: Recent economic and financial developments in Japan 
Speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  in  Fukuoka, 
8 December 2003. 
 The current economic situation and the route to sustainable growth  
I.  
Largely in line with the standard scenario in the Outlook and Risk Assessment of the Economy and 
Prices  published  at  the  end  of  October,  Japan’s  economy  is  starting  to  recover  gradually,  after  a 
period of generally flat economic activity that lasted up until around summer. With corporate earnings 
improving,  business  fixed  investment  continues  its  gradual  recovery.  Against  the  backdrop  of  an 
improvement in overseas economies, exports, which had been flat until summer, have started to turn 
upward. Production, whose recovery had been somewhat delayed due to the unusually cool summer, 
is starting to increase recently.  
The  fact  that  the  rise  in  exports  and  business  fixed  investment  has  led  to  a  recovery  in  production 
suggests that cyclical momentum for a recovery is kicking in, and that the Japanese economy is at last 
settling onto a recovery path.  
From the second half of fiscal 2003 through fiscal 2004, a moderate recovery is expected to continue. 
Exports and production are likely to continue increasing against the background of high growth in the 
United States and Asia, particularly in China, with a recovery in global demand for IT-related goods. In 
Europe,  it  is  becoming  more  apparent  that  the  economy  has  bottomed  out.  There  is  a  greater 
probability  that  these  increases  in  exports  and  production  will  promote  further  business  fixed 
investment along with the improvement in corporate earnings.  
The  pace  of  the  recovery  will  most  likely  be  contained  to  a  moderate  clip,  considering  ongoing 
structural  adjustment  pressures  as  well  as  not  so  favorable  prospects  for  employment  and  income. 
The corporate sector, especially non-manufacturing, is still suffering from excess debt. With no clear 
signs  of  improvement  in  employment  and  income,  personal  consumption  is  expected  to  continue 
following a generally flat trend. It will be quite some time before we can eliminate the word “moderate” 
from the description of the current recovery.  
After decreasing constantly for five and a half years, the consumer price index excluding fresh food, 
which we refer to as the core CPI, increased by 0.1 percent year-on-year in October. This was partly 
due to a hike in rice prices caused by the unusually cool summer, in addition to factors such as the 
rise in medical treatment costs and the tobacco tax.  
Although the core CPI may fluctuate due to temporary factors, its underlying trend is expected to be 
for a slight decline during the rest of fiscal 2003 and throughout fiscal 2004 since aggregate demand is 
projected to remain short of potential supply capacity.  
Naturally,  this  standard  scenario  entails  various  uncertainties,  or  what  we  term  risk  factors.  Among 
them, we pay particular attention to the global demand for IT-related goods, the U.S. economy, the 
domestic  financial  system,  and  financial  market  developments.  These  risk  factors  may  cause  the 
Japanese  economy  to  deviate  from  the  standard  scenario  laid  out  in  the  Outlook  and  Risk 
Assessment, either upward or downward.  
To  overcome  deflation  and  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path,  a  cyclical  recovery  alone  is  not 
sufficient. Structural problems must be dealt with, and expectations of higher growth must be formed. 
We need to address excess debt in the corporate sector and weakness in the financial system. We 
need to raise expectations of growth among firms and households, who seek for new value added, so 
that these may be translated into brisker spending.  
In the corporate sector, steady efforts have been made, stretching over more than 10 years, to solve 
problems  such  as  excess  debt  and  labor.  In  fact,  large  manufacturers  have  largely  succeeded  in 
eradicating these excesses. As break-even points have been lowered, the ratio of current profits to 
sales for such firms has improved to its highest level since the bursting of the bubble.  
Some  manufacturers  are  aggressively  pursuing  improvements  in  productivity  by  investing  in  newly 
growing businesses and constructing a more efficient international division of labor. Spread of such 
movements  throughout  the  corporate  sector,  including  to  non-manufacturers  and  to  small  and 
BIS Review 57/2003 
 1
medium-sized  firms,  is  one  of  the  key  factors  to  enhancing  expectations  of  growth  generally  and 
reinvigorating Japan’s economy.  
Conduct of monetary policy  
II. 
The Bank of Japan is continuing to provide ample liquidity, targeting an outstanding balance of current 
account deposits at the Bank under its quantitative easing policy. Since the beginning of the year, the 
target has been significantly raised twice, in April and May, in light of risk factors such as the war in 
Iraq and severe acute respiratory syndrome.  
Furthermore, in October, the Bank raised the upper limit of the range for the target balance of current 
account deposits. This was intended to reinforce the nascent recovery by enhancing the flexibility of 
money  market  operations  when  providing  liquidity  to  the  market.  With  the  economy  in  an  incipient 
recovery phase with its concomitant uncertainties, there is the potential for subtle fluctuations in the 
expectations of market participants and changes in funding needs. The Bank has sought to respond 
flexibly  in  its  market  operations  to  any possible  changes  of  these  sorts,  so  that  it  can  reinforce  the 
current stirrings of recovery.  
The outstanding balance of current account deposits now stands around 30 trillion yen, having risen 
from  around  20  trillion  yen  at  the  beginning  of  the  year.  The  Bank  conducts  market  operations 
centering on this balance by carefully monitoring daily market conditions.  
In order to help the effects of monetary easing through the provision of ample liquidity to permeate the 
whole economy, the Bank is taking measures to strengthen the transmission mechanism of monetary 
policy  in  corporate  finance.  In  August,  the  Bank  began  the  purchase  of  asset-backed  securities 
collateralized by assets mainly related to small and medium-sized firms. The Bank recently decided to 
accept syndicated loans as eligible collateral.  
In addition to their immediate monetary policy implications, these measures will also contribute, over 
the long run, to establishing a new shape for corporate finance, better compatible with Japan’s future 
economy.  We  hope  that  our  initiatives  will  act  as  a  trigger,  spurring  the  private  sector  to  explore 
various new market-based funding channels to supplement the traditional bank lending channel.  
Enhancing transparency in the conduct of monetary policy  
III.  
There  are  two  points  that  are  of  pivotal  importance  when  conducting  monetary  policy.  One  is  to 
implement  effective  policy  in  a  timely  manner.  The  other  is  to  provide  the  public  with  a  lucid 
explanation  and  promote  their  understanding  of  the  Bank’s  evaluation  of  economic  and  price 
developments as well as the thinking upon which it bases its policy decisions.  
The new Bank of Japan Law stipulates that the Bank, which has been given independence to conduct 
monetary policy at it own discretion, must make efforts to be more accountable for its decision. We 
think  that  the  greater  the  public  understanding  of  the  thinking  behind  monetary  policy,  the  more 
effective that monetary policy will be.  
Bearing  these  points  in  mind,  the  Bank  made  two  major  decisions  to  enhance  the  transparency  of 
monetary policy at the Monetary Policy Meeting in October.  
First, measures were taken to provide the public with a lucid explanation of the Bank’s evaluation of 
economic  and  price  developments  in  a  timely  manner.  In  addition  to  the  semiannual  report  on  the 
Outlook and Risk Assessment of the Economy and Prices in April and October, the Bank decided to 
carry  out  interim  assessments  of  economic  and  price  developments  in  January  and  July,  and  to 
release  the  result  of  its  discussions  accordingly.  These  interim  assessments  are  designed  to 
investigate  possible  deviations  of  economic  and  price  developments  from  the  standard  scenario 
presented in the Outlook and Risk Assessment three months before.  
Second,  the  Bank  published  a  more  detailed  description  of  its  commitment  to  maintaining  the 
quantitative easing policy. The Bank had already committed to maintaining the current policy until the 
core  CPI  registers  a  stable  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  of  zero  percent  or  above.  In  October,  it 
decided  to  clarify  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  “registers  stably  a  zero  percent  or  an  increase 
year-on-year” in a more concrete manner.  
Specifically, quantitative easing will be continued until the following two conditions are met.  
2 
 BIS Review 57/2003
First, not only must the most recently published core CPI register a year-on-year rate of increase of 
zero percent or above, but this tendency must be confirmed over a few months.  
Second, the year-on-year rate of increase in the prospective core CPI must not be expected to register 
zero  percent  or  below.  In  other  words,  the  majority  of  Policy  Board  members  need  to  make  the 
forecast that the core CPI will register a year-on-year rate of increase greater than zero percent during 
the forecasting period. This forecasting period is roughly a year starting from April in the April Outlook 
and Risk Assessment, and roughly a year and a half, which is the second half of the current financial 
year starting from October and the whole of the next financial year ending in March, in the October 
Outlook and Risk Assessment.  
The  above  two  conditions  are  necessary  conditions.  However,  we  have  also  announced  that  there 
may  be  cases  when  the  Bank  will  judge  it  appropriate  to  continue  with  quantitative  easing  even  if 
these conditions are fulfilled.  
Since  its  announcement,  we  have  received  a  few  questions  about  this  detailed  description  of  the 
commitment. Let me answer two major questions.  
The  first  question  is  why  the  Bank  does  not  carry  out  interim  assessments  of  economic  and  price 
developments  every  month.  Since  the  economy  is  changing  constantly,  perhaps,  theoretically 
speaking, we should carry out the interim assessments every month, or even every week.  
Against this theoretical possibility, we judge it appropriate that the Outlook and Risk Assessment and 
interim  assessments  should  be  released  roughly  every  three  months  in  light  of  their  objective  to 
present a basic view of how the economy will develop over a reasonable period of time. We cannot 
revise  the  basic  view  about  the  economy  and  prices  in  an  appropriate  manner  without  sufficient 
accumulation of critical data. Also we may confuse the market if we release assessments based on 
insufficient data or if we change our assessments too frequently. Actually, many central banks abroad 
release their monetary policy reports or inflation reports every three months.  
This  does  not,  of  course,  imply  that  the  Bank  will  make  policy  changes  only  every  three  months. 
Although conducting the basic evaluation roughly every three months, we need to closely examine the 
ever-changing  state  of  the  economy  and  prices  and  to  carefully  deliberate  on  the  need  for  policy 
changes at every Monetary Policy Meeting. As has always been the case, if the need arises, the Bank 
will adjust its policy in a timely and appropriate manner, regardless of the frequency and timing of the 
release of the Outlook and Risk Assessment and interim assessments.  
The  second  question  concerns  the  risk  that  more  detailed  description  of  the  commitment  to 
maintaining the quantitative easing policy may affect the Bank’s ability to conduct monetary policy in a 
flexible  and  timely  manner  in  future.  It  may  be natural  to  ask  this  question, because  it  is  extremely 
unusual for a central bank to link its future policy conduct to a particular economic indicator, such as 
the core CPI in the case of Japan.  
While paying due attention to this kind of risk, we have come to the conclusion that, with a number of 
obstacles still confronting Japan’s economy as it seeks to overcome deflation and settle onto a more 
solid recovery path, such a detailed description of the commitment is necessary at the current time. 
This detailed description is a manifestation of our strong determination regarding the future conduct of 
monetary policy.  
Current state of the financial system  
IV. 
On the whole, the current state of the financial system in Japan remains severe. It should be noted, 
however,  that  at  some  financial  institutions,  especially  major  banks,  efforts  to  improve  financial 
conditions have gradually begun to bear fruit.  
For  the  financial  year  ending  in  September,  profitability  improved  significantly  at  all  major  banks, 
except  for  Resona  Group,  which  received  an  injection  of  public  funds.  This  was  mostly  thanks  to 
successful  reductions  by  all  major  banks  of  losses  from  nonperforming  loan  disposals,  on  a 
year-on-year basis at the end of September 2003. These reductions were partly due to large capital 
increases and higher provisioning in the previous financial year ending in March 2003. After registering 
a record high at the end of March 2002, the amount outstanding of nonperforming loans continued to 
decrease as progress was made in the removal of nonperforming loans from balance sheets.  
BIS Review 57/2003 
 3
Major  banks improved  stability  of  their  profitability  by  reducing  their  shareholdings,  which  had  been 
blamed  for  large  fluctuations  in  profits.  In  fact,  banks’  shareholdings  had  decreased  to  levels  well 
below Tier 1 capital at the end of September.  
To  strengthen  profitability,  major  banks  made  efforts  in  cutting  costs  and  increasing  fee  incomes. 
These efforts have gradually begun to be reflected in their financial results.  
Moving on to conditions surrounding regional financial institutions, let me first touch on the recent case 
of Ashikaga Bank. Last month, Ashikaga Bank informed the government that it had negative net worth 
at the end of September, and that there was a risk of suspending repayment of deposits. Considering 
the significant financial role played by Ashikaga Bank in the region, including Tochigi Prefecture, the 
government  judged  that  a  serious  disruption  of  the  financial  system  in  the  region  might  occur  if  no 
measures were taken. The Prime Minister summoned the Financial System Management Council, of 
which I am a member, and decided upon the temporary nationalization of Ashikaga Bank, pursuant to 
Article 102 of the Deposit Insurance Law at the end of last month.  
As  a  temporarily  nationalized  bank,  Ashikaga  Bank  will  continue  normal  operations,  and  all  of  the 
bank’s  obligations,  including  deposits  and  interbank  borrowings,  will  be  met  smoothly.  A  new 
management  team  will  carry  out  appropriate  business  operations,  while  seeking  to  transfer  its 
business to an assuming financial institution as soon as possible. As part of this process, the Bank of 
Japan will provide liquidity, including the extension of special loans pursuant to Article 38 of the Bank 
of Japan Law if necessary.  
Fortunately, at present, no other regional financial institution faces conditions of comparable severity. 
In fact, financial statement at the end of September 2003 showed improvements at more than a few 
regional financial institutions as losses from the disposal of nonperforming loans were reduced.  
Regional financial institutions, however, seem to lag behind major banks in addressing tasks, such as 
appropriately evaluating the economic value of nonperforming loans, making provisions accordingly, 
and  working  toward  corporate  revitalization.  While  land  prices  continue  to  decline,  small  and 
medium-sized  nonmanufacturing  firms,  which  dominate  regional  economies,  find  their  business 
recovering  only  too  gradually.  In  these  difficult  circumstances,  it  is  increasingly  hoped  that  regional 
financial institutions will play an active role. We at the Bank will do as much as we can to support their 
efforts in this regard, through supervision and other means, whenever the occasion presents itself.  
Issues for 2004  
V. 
2004 is the final year of preparation for the removal of blanket protection of demand deposits in April 
2005.  This  removal,  in  my  view,  should  not  be  perceived  simply  as  an  adjustment  of  the  extent  to 
which  deposit  insurance  protection  is  applicable.  Rather,  it  should  be  recognized  as  the  last  hurdle 
before the management of financial institutions becomes truly independent from regulatory authorities.  
At  the  end  of  March  2005,  major  banks  are  expected  to  reduce  their  nonperforming  loan  ratios  to 
about half autumn 2002 levels. At the same time, the Industrial Revitalization Corporation of Japan will 
cease its purchase of loan assets. From April 2005, fixed asset impairment accounting rules will be 
introduced.  
Firms continue to strengthen their business structures and competitiveness. Initiatives based on the 
private sector’s creativity and vitality will be the driving force for Japan to achieve steady economic 
growth under global competition.  
Together  with  firms,  financial  institutions  also  play  an  important  role  in  supporting  the  Japanese 
economy.  Dynamic  expansion  of  the  economy  will  not  be  possible  if  financial  institutions  remain 
dependent  on  regulatory  authorities  and  generous  safety  nets.  Not  only  firms  but  also  financial 
institutions will be confronted with frequent new entries to and withdrawals from the market, as well as 
consolidation and reorganization in their respective industries. This makes it all the more critical for 
financial institutions to demonstrate their firm intention to stand on their own feet, and enhance their 
credibility in the market.  
In this regard, let me point out some of the major tasks to be addressed in 2004. In order to achieve 
reform  of  the  economic  structure  and  a  sound  financial  system  more  rapidly,  financial  institutions, 
especially major banks, must work harder with firms to revitalize the corporate sector, while expediting 
the disposal of nonperforming loans. It is true that some financial institutions have already established 
subsidiaries specializing in corporate revitalization. Further efforts, however, are still required in areas 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2003
such as the more effective use of the Industrial Revitalization Corporation of Japan and the Resolution 
and Collection Corporation.  
In  corporate  revitalization,  regional  financial  institutions  basically  face  the  same  problems  as  major 
banks. There are more than a few borrower firms with competitive technology and expertise, which 
find it difficult to improve profitability because of the financial legacy of past borrowing. For this reason, 
the strategically important issues that many regional financial institutions address include the provision 
of  detailed  consultation  services  to  borrower  firms,  the  extension  of  greater  assistance  to  borrower 
firms, and the prompt realization of business revival. We hope that their efforts will bear fruit.  
Financial institutions also have an important role to play in helping the corporate sector to develop the 
new businesses that will underpin Japan’s future economy, while at the same time supporting ailing 
business  firms.  Regional  financial  institutions  in  particular  are  expected  to  play  an  active  role  in 
generating new businesses in their region. We observe the first shoots of new regional businesses in a 
variety  of  areas:  biotechnology  and  other  advanced  technologies,  new  industrial  clusters  linked  to 
recycling  and  other  environment-related  technologies,  as  well  as  regional  city  revival,  sightseeing, 
medical care, and nursing services.  
To  strengthen  such  trends,  regional  financial  institutions  are  expected  to  play  a  new  role  in  their 
regions.  In  this  regard,  the  thinking  behind  their  business  decision-making  in  the  past  needs  to  be 
radically overhauled. For example, decisions about whether or not to assume particular risks should 
be based on a close examination of the nature of projects at hand rather than depending unduly on 
traditional collateral or guarantee-based methods. They should also raise their levels of expertise at 
providing advisory services relating to the smooth management of projects. This in turn will lead to the 
revitalization of regional financial institutions themselves.  
Once the blanket protection of demand deposits is removed, financial institutions will no longer be able 
to  count  on  support  from  the  authorities.  In  principle,  they  will  have  to  rely  entirely  on  their  own 
intellectual resources and creativity in dealing with the tasks facing them, including the nonperforming 
loan problem.  
It  is  conceivable,  however,  that  there  may  be  financial  institutions,  which  are  keen  to  rebuild  their 
financial base, but which may not be able to strengthen their capital positions within the limited time 
frame without outside assistance. To deal with this possibility, injections of public funds which may be 
executed without reference to systemic risk should be considered apart from the measure stipulated in 
Article 102 of the Deposit Insurance Law.  
I am aware of a variety of learned opinions calling for caution in establishing another system of capital 
injections.  Bearing  these  opinions  in  mind,  I  hope  that  we  will  somehow  manage  to  find  a  way  to 
design an appropriate new framework - one that will function as the last public support to the efforts of 
the private sector.  
In closing, let me reiterate our determination to support the efforts of the private sector and to exert 
ourselves to the full to achieve sustainable growth.  
BIS Review 57/2003 
 5
