Ben S Bernanke: Long-term fiscal challenges and the economy 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  the  Budget,  US  House  of  Representatives,  Washington  DC, 
28 February 2007. 
 Chairman Spratt, Representative Ryan, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here 
to offer my views on the federal budget and related issues. At the outset, I should underscore that I 
speak only for myself and not necessarily for my colleagues at the Federal Reserve.  
My testimony will focus on the long-term budget outlook and will draw on the most recent set of long-
term budget projections from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), issued in December 2005. The 
CBO  constructed  its  projections  based  on  the  assumptions  that  real  gross domestic product  (GDP) 
would rise about 3-1/2 percent per year in 2005 and 2006 and at a rate of 2.9 per cent per annum from 
2007 through 2015. The growth projections through 2015 were in turn based on the assumptions that 
trend labor force growth will average 0.8 percent per year and that trend labor productivity growth in 
the  nonfarm  business  sector  will  average  2.4  percent  per  year.  The  CBO  has  since  updated  those 
assumptions for the purposes of other analyses, but the revisions were not large enough to materially 
alter the broad contours of the fiscal outlook.1 As for the longer-term outlook, the CBO assumed that 
the growth rate of real GDP will average about 2 percent per year starting around 2020. While such 
projections  are  subject  to  considerable  uncertainty,  the  CBO's  assumptions  provide  a  sensible  and 
useful starting point for assessing the budget situation over the longer run.  
Before  discussing  that  longer-run  outlook,  I  will  comment  on  recent  budget  developments.  As  you 
know, the deficit in the unified federal budget declined for a second year in fiscal year 2006, falling to 
$248 billion from $318 billion in fiscal 2005. So far in fiscal 2007, solid growth in receipts, especially in 
collections of personal and corporate income taxes, has held the deficit somewhat below year-earlier 
levels.  Of  course,  a  good  deal  of  uncertainty  still  surrounds  the  budget  outcome  for  the  year  as  a 
whole.  Federal  government  outlays  in  fiscal  2006  were  20.3  percent  of  nominal  gross  domestic 
product (GDP), receipts were 18.4 percent of GDP, and the deficit (equal to the difference of the two) 
was 1.9 percent of GDP. These percentages are close to their averages since 1960. The on-budget 
deficit, which differs from the unified budget deficit primarily in excluding receipts and payments of the 
Social Security system, was $434 billion, or 3.3 percent of GDP, in fiscal 2006.2 As of the end of fiscal 
2006, federal government debt held by the public, which includes holdings by the Federal Reserve but 
excludes  those  by  the  Social  Security  and  other  trust  funds,  amounted  to  37  percent  of  one  year's 
GDP.  
Official projections suggest that the unified budget deficit may stabilize or moderate further over the 
next few years. Unfortunately, we are experiencing what seems likely to be the calm before the storm. 
In particular, spending on entitlement programs will begin to climb quickly during the next decade. In 
fiscal 2006, federal spending for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid together totaled about 40 
percent of federal expenditures, or 8-1/2 percent of GDP.3 In the medium-term projections released by 
the CBO in January, these outlays increase to 10-3/4 percent of GDP by 2017, an increase of about 2 
percentage  points  of  GDP  in  little  more  than  a  decade,  and  they  will  likely  continue  to  rise  sharply 
relative to GDP in the years after that. As I will discuss, these rising entitlement obligations will put 
enormous pressure on the federal budget in coming years.  
The  large  projected  increases  in  future  entitlement  spending  have  two  principal  sources.  First,  like 
many  other  industrial  countries,  the  United  States  has  entered  what  is  likely  to  be  a  long  period  of 
                                                      
1   According to the latest estimates of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), real GDP growth was 3.2 percent in 2005 and 
3.4 percent in 2006, both figures stated on an annual-average basis. The figure for 2006 is the BEA's "advance" estimate; a 
revised estimate is scheduled for release today. 
2   Excluding the operations of both Social Security and Medicare Part A, the budget deficit in fiscal year 2006 was $459 billion, 
or  3.5  percent  of  GDP.  Like  Social  Security,  Medicare  Part  A  pays  benefits  out  of,  and  receives  a  dedicated  stream  of 
revenues into, a trust fund. 
3   Net of Medicare premiums paid by beneficiaries and amounts paid by states from savings on Medicaid prescription drug 
costs, these outlays were equal to 8 percent of GDP. 
BIS Review 19/2007 
 1
demographic transition, the result both of the reduction in fertility that followed the post-World War II 
baby boom and of ongoing increases in life expectancy. Longer life expectancies are certainly to be 
welcomed. But they are likely to lead to longer periods of retirement in the future, even as the growth 
rate of the workforce declines. As a consequence of the demographic trends, the number of people of 
retirement  age  will  grow  relative  both  to  the  population  as  a  whole  and  to  the  number  of  potential 
workers. Currently, people 65 years and older make up about 12 percent of the U.S. population, and 
there are about five people between the ages of 20 and 64 for each person 65 and older. According to 
the  intermediate  projections  of  the  Social  Security  Trustees,  in  2030  Americans  65  and  older  will 
constitute about 19 percent of the U.S. population, and the ratio of those between the ages of 20 and 
64 to those 65 and older will have fallen to about 3.  
Although  the  retirement  of  the  baby  boomers  will  be  an  important  milestone  in  the  demographic 
transition – the oldest baby boomers will be eligible for Social Security benefits starting next year – the 
change in the nation's demographic structure is not just a temporary phenomenon related to the large 
relative  size  of  the  baby-boom  generation.  Rather,  if  the  U.S.  fertility  rate  remains  close  to  current 
levels and life expectancies continue to rise, as demographers generally expect, the U.S. population 
will continue to grow older, even after the baby-boom generation has passed from the scene. If current 
law  is  maintained,  that  aging  of  the  U.S.  population  will  lead  to  sustained  increases  in  federal 
entitlement spending on programs that benefit older Americans, such as Social Security and Medicare.  
The second cause of rising entitlement spending is the expected continued increase in medical costs 
per beneficiary. Projections of future medical costs are fraught with uncertainty, but history suggests 
that – without significant changes in policy – these costs are likely to continue to rise more quickly than 
incomes,  at  least  for  the  foreseeable  future.  Together  with  the  aging  of  the  population,  ongoing 
increases in medical costs will lead to a rapid expansion of Medicare and Medicaid expenditures.  
Long-range projections prepared by the CBO vividly portray the potential effects on the budget of an 
aging population and rapidly rising health care costs. The CBO has developed projections for a variety 
of alternative scenarios, based on different assumptions about the evolution of spending and taxes. 
The  scenarios  produce  a  wide  range  of  possible  budget  outcomes,  reflecting  the  substantial 
uncertainty  that  attends  long-range  budget  projections.4  However,  the  outcomes  that  appear  most 
likely, in the absence of policy changes, involve rising budget deficits and increases in the amount of 
federal debt outstanding to unprecedented levels. For example, one plausible scenario is based on the 
assumptions  that  (1)  federal  retirement  and  health  spending  will  follow  the  CBO's  intermediate 
projection;  (2)  defense  spending  will  drift  down  over  time  as  a  percentage  of  GDP;  (3)  other  non-
interest spending will grow roughly in line with GDP; and (4) federal revenues will remain close to their 
historical share of GDP – that is, about where they are today.5 Under these assumptions, the CBO 
calculates that, by 2030, the federal budget deficit will approach 9 percent of GDP – more than four 
times greater as a share of GDP than the deficit in fiscal year 2006.  
A  particularly  worrisome  aspect  of  this  projection  and  similar  ones  is  the  implied  evolution  of  the 
national debt and the associated interest payments to government bondholders. Minor details aside, 
the federal debt held by the public increases each year by the amount of that year's unified deficit. 
Consequently,  scenarios  that  project  large  deficits  also  project  rapid  growth  in  the  outstanding 
government debt. The higher levels of debt in turn imply increased expenditures on interest payments 
to bondholders, which exacerbate the deficit problem still further. Thus, a vicious cycle may develop in 
which  large  deficits  lead  to  rapid  growth  in  debt  and  interest  payments,  which  in  turn  adds  to 
subsequent deficits. According to the CBO projection that I have been discussing, interest payments 
on the government's debt will reach 4-1/2 percent of GDP in 2030, nearly three times their current size 
relative  to  national  output.  Under  this  scenario,  the  ratio  of  federal  debt  held  by  the  public  to  GDP 
would  climb  from  37  percent  currently  to  roughly  100  percent  in  2030  and  would  continue  to  grow 
                                                      
4   For example, in 2030, five of the six scenarios imply deficits ranging from 1-1/2 percent of GDP to nearly 14 percent of GDP; 
a sixth scenario is capable of producing a surplus, but it relies on the confluence of a very favorable set of assumptions. 
5   For  more  information  about  this  scenario,  see  the  description  of  Scenario  2  in  Congressional  Budget  Office  (2005),  The 
Long-Term  Budget  Outlook,  December, 
48-49,  www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/69xx/doc6982/12-15-
LongTermOutlook.pdf  (1.0  MB  PDF).  Consistent  with  the  assumptions  used  by  the  Medicare  trustees,  the  CBO's 
intermediate projections for Medicare and Medicaid are based on the assumption that, over the long run, per beneficiary 
health expenditures  will increase at a rate that is 1 percentage point per  year greater than the growth rate  of per capita 
GDP. Over the past twenty-five years, however, per beneficiary Medicare spending has actually exceeded per capita GDP 
growth by about 2-1/2 percentage points per year. Thus, a significant slowing in the growth of medical costs per beneficiary 
will be needed to keep expenditures close to those projected in this scenario. 
5-13 
and 
pp. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2007
exponentially  after  that.  The  only  time  in  U.S.  history  that  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  has  been  in  the 
neighborhood of 100 percent was during World War II. People at that time understood the situation to 
be temporary and expected deficits and the debt-to-GDP ratio to fall rapidly after the war, as in fact 
they did. In contrast, under the scenario I have been discussing, the debt-to-GDP ratio would rise far 
into the future at an accelerating rate. Ultimately, this expansion of debt would spark a fiscal crisis, 
which could be addressed only by very sharp spending cuts or tax increases, or both.6  
The CBO projections, by design, ignore the adverse effects that such high deficits would likely have on 
economic growth. But if government debt and deficits were actually to grow at the pace envisioned by 
the  CBO's  scenario,  the  effects  on  the  U.S.  economy  would  be  severe.  High  rates  of  government 
borrowing  would  drain  funds  away  from  private  capital  formation  and  thus  slow  the  growth  of  real 
incomes and living standards over time. Some fraction of the additional debt would likely be financed 
abroad, which would lessen the negative influence on domestic investment; however, the necessity of 
paying  interest  on  the  foreign-held  debt  would  leave  a  smaller  portion  of  our  nation's  future  output 
available for domestic consumption. Moreover, uncertainty about the ultimate resolution of the fiscal 
imbalances  would  reduce  the  confidence  of  consumers,  businesses,  and  investors  in  the  U.S. 
economy, with adverse implications for investment and growth.  
To some extent, strong economic growth can help to mitigate budgetary pressures, and all else being 
equal, fiscal policies that are supportive of growth would be beneficial. Unfortunately, economic growth 
alone  is  unlikely  to  solve  the  nation's  impending  fiscal  problems.  Economic  growth  leads  to  higher 
wages  and  profits  and  thus  increases  tax  receipts,  but  higher  wages  also  imply  increased  Social 
Security  benefits,  as  those  benefits  are  tied  to  wages.  Higher  incomes  also  tend  to  increase  the 
demand  for  medical  services  so  that,  indirectly,  higher  incomes  may  also  increase  federal  health 
expenditures. Increased rates of immigration could raise growth by raising the growth rate of the labor 
force. However, economists who have looked at the issue have found that even a doubling in the rate 
of immigration to the United States, from about 1 million to 2 million immigrants per year, would not 
significantly reduce the federal government's fiscal imbalance.7  
The  prospect  of  growing  fiscal  imbalances  and  their  economic  consequences  also  raises  essential 
questions of intergenerational fairness.8 As I have noted, because of increasing life expectancy and 
the decline in fertility, the number of retirees that each worker will have to support in the future – either 
directly or indirectly through taxes paid to support government programs – will rise significantly. To the 
extent  that  federal  budgetary  policies  inhibit  capital  formation  and  increase  our  net  liabilities  to 
foreigners,  future  generations  of  Americans  will  bear  a  growing  burden  of  the  debt  and  experience 
slower growth in per-capita incomes than would otherwise have been the case.  
An important element in ensuring that we leave behind a stronger economy than we inherited, as did 
virtually all previous generations in this country, will be to move over time toward fiscal policies that are 
sustainable, efficient, and equitable across generations. Policies that promote private as well as public 
saving  would  also  help  us  leave  a  more  productive  economy  to  our  children  and  grandchildren.  In 
addition, we should explore ways to make the labor market as accommodating as possible to older 
people who wish to continue working, as many will as longevity increases and health improves.  
Addressing  the  country's  fiscal  problems  will  take  persistence  and  a  willingness  to  make  difficult 
choices. In the end, the fundamental decision that the Congress, the Administration, and the American 
people  must  confront  is  how  large  a  share  of  the  nation's  economic  resources  to  devote  to  federal 
government programs, including transfer programs such as Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. 
Crucially, whatever size of government is chosen, tax rates must ultimately be set at a level sufficient 
to achieve an appropriate balance of spending and revenues in the long run. Thus, members of the 
                                                      
6   To give a sense of the magnitudes involved, suppose – for the sake of illustration only – that the deficit projected for 2030 in 
the  CBO  scenario  were  to  be  eliminated  entirely  in  that  year,  half  through  reductions  in  discretionary  spending  and  half 
through increases in non-payroll taxes. (Of course, in reality the fiscal adjustment would likely not occur in one year, but this 
hypothetical  example  is  useful  for  showing  the  magnitude  of  the  problem.)  This  fiscal  adjustment  would  involve  a  cut  in 
discretionary spending (including defense) of nearly 80 percent (relative to its baseline level) and a rise in non-payroll taxes 
of  more  than  35  percent.  The  need  for  such  painful  measures  could  be  diminished  by  beginning  the  process  of  fiscal 
adjustment much earlier, thereby avoiding some of the buildup in outstanding debt and the associated interest burden. 
7   CBO (2005), The Long-Term Budget Outlook, p. 3. 
8  
I discussed this issue in Ben S. Bernanke (2006), "The Coming Demographic Transition: Will We Treat Future Generations 
Fairly?", 
4, 
www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2006/20061004/default.htm. 
Club,  Washington,  October 
the  Washington 
Economic 
delivered 
speech 
before 
BIS Review 19/2007 
 3
Congress who put special emphasis on keeping tax rates low must accept that low tax rates can be 
sustained  only  if  outlays,  including  those  on  entitlements,  are  kept  low  as  well.  Likewise,  members 
who  favor  a  more  expansive  role  of  the  government,  including  relatively  more-generous  benefits 
payments, must recognize the burden imposed by the additional taxes needed to pay for the higher 
spending, a burden that includes not only the resources transferred from the private sector but also 
any adverse economic incentives associated with higher tax rates.  
Achieving fiscal sustainability will require sustained efforts and attention over many years. As an aid in 
charting the way forward, the Congress may find it useful to set some benchmarks against which to 
gauge progress toward key budgetary objectives. Because no single statistic fully describes the fiscal 
situation,  the  most  effective  approach  would  likely  involve  monitoring  a  number  of  fiscal  indicators, 
each of which captures a different aspect of the budget and its economic impact. The unified budget 
deficit, projected forward a certain number of years, is an important measure that is already included in 
the congressional budgeting process. However, the unified budget deficit does not fully capture the 
fiscal situation and its effect on the economy, for at least two reasons.  
First, the budget deficit by itself does not measure the quantity of resources that the government is 
taking from the private sector. An economy in which the government budget is balanced but in which 
government spending equals 20 percent of GDP is very different from one in which the government's 
budget is balanced but its spending is 40 percent of GDP, as the latter economy has both higher tax 
rates  and  a  greater  role  for  the  government.  Monitoring  current  and  prospective  levels  of  total 
government  outlays  relative  to  GDP  or  a  similar  indicator  would  help  the  Congress  ensure  that  the 
overall  size  of  the  government  relative  to  the  economy  is  consistent  with  members'  views  and 
preferences.  
Second, the annual budget deficit reflects only near-term financing needs and does not capture long-
term fiscal imbalances. As the most difficult long-term budgetary issues are associated with the growth 
of  entitlement  spending,  a  comprehensive  approach  to  budgeting  would  include  close  attention  to 
measures of the long-term solvency of entitlement programs, such as long-horizon present values of 
unfunded liabilities for Social Security and Medicare.  
To summarize, because of demographic changes and rising medical costs, federal expenditures for 
entitlement  programs  are  projected  to  rise  sharply  over  the  next  few  decades.  Dealing  with  the 
resulting fiscal strains will pose difficult choices for the Congress, the Administration, and the American 
people.  However,  if  early  and  meaningful  action  is  not  taken,  the  U.S.  economy  could  be  seriously 
weakened, with future generations bearing much of the cost. The decisions the Congress will face will 
not be easy or simple, but the benefits of placing the budget on a path that is both sustainable and 
meets the nation's long-run needs would be substantial.  
Thank you again for allowing me to comment on these important issues. I would be glad to take your 
questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2007
