Philipp Hildebrand: Current state of the financial system in Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 14 June 2007. 
 I would like to use today’s publication of our Financial Stability Report as an opportunity to share some 
thoughts with you on the current situation of the financial system. I will start with the most important 
message – the Swiss banking sector and the financial system in general are in very good shape at the 
moment. Based on our analysis, the outlook for the future is also essentially positive. 
As stated in our report, the favourable situation in the Swiss banking sector comes as no real surprise. 
Developments in the economy and the financial markets in recent years have been very positive, both 
in  Switzerland  and  abroad.  Although  economic  growth  has  been  strong,  it  has  had  practically  no 
impact  on  inflation  to  date.  The  credit  standing  of  borrowers  remained  high.  In  addition,  despite 
repeated, significant short-term price corrections – as was the case last week – the stock markets rose 
sharply overall in an environment of low volatility. 
How can these positive developments be explained? And are there any risks involved – in particular 
for the stability of the Swiss financial sector? 
The  good  performance  is  not  solely  attributable  to  the  favourable  economic  situation.  Structural 
aspects have also played a role. With that I mean first and foremost the increased level of efficiency 
that has been achieved in the financial system in the past few years. This rise in efficiency can be 
ascribed  to  the  innovativeness  of  financial  markets.  New  financial  instruments,  such  as  credit 
derivatives, enable banks to separate their credit risk and transfer it either completely or partially. This 
facilitates a better distribution of credit risk in the financial system and means that the risk is borne by 
those who want to and are able to bear it. 
The  improved  efficiency  has  resulted  in  a  reduction  in  the  financing  costs  of  companies  and 
households. Lower financing costs help the economy and stock markets to achieve greater growth. 
The  increased  efficiency  also  appears  to  have  improved  the  ability  of  global  financial  markets  to 
absorb shocks. The downgrading of General Motors’ credit rating in 2005, for instance, or the major 
losses  suffered  by  the  hedge  fund  Amaranth  last  year  had  no  lasting  impact  on  stock  and  credit 
markets. 
All in all, global financial markets are currently better able to absorb shocks, at least small to medium-
sized ones. Accordingly, serious turbulence in the financial system seems less likely today. From a 
financial stability perspective, this is a positive development indeed. 
However,  the  greater  the  stability  of  the  financial  markets,  the  greater  the  risk  appetite  of  market 
participants tends to be. This in turn can increase the likelihood of a crisis and, in the event of one 
occurring, the extent of the damage. The greater concentration and interconnectedness in the global 
financial system may also have increased the magnitude of a potential crisis. 
The greater risk tolerance of market players is ultimately a logical consequence of the exceptionally 
long and stable period of calm in the financial markets. Market participants have had no reason of late 
to  keep  their  risk-taking  in  check.  Basically,  anyone  who  held  back  felt  they  were  missing  the 
opportunity  to  generate  high  returns.  Even  the  short-term  corrections  in  the  financial  markets  in 
February of this year and May of the previous year did not result in a change of attitude in this regard. 
On the contrary, the low impact made by these corrections and the ability of the markets to absorb 
them may have served as a confirmation for those operating a high-risk strategy to continue, and as 
an indication for the more risk-averse to take greater risks. 
The risk appetite is also fairly high in the Swiss banking sector at present. In our Financial Stability 
Report,  we  indicate  for  instance  that  the  domestically  oriented  banks  –  Raiffeisen,  cantonal  and 
regional banks – are currently incurring a relatively high interest rate risk. At the same time, the big 
banks have also exhibited an increased risk tolerance in recent years. Although Credit Suisse Group’s 
overall  risk  has  declined  in  the  past  year,  following  the  sale  of  Winterthur,  both  big  banks  have 
significantly increased their risk-taking in the banking business; particularly their exposure in trading 
and in foreign lending business. As a result, their trading books have virtually doubled since 2003 and 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 1
are  now  clearly  in  excess  of  CHF  1,000  billion.  This  accounts  for  roughly  two-thirds  of  the  assets 
managed by the entire hedge fund industry. 
The  fact  that  market  participants  take  more risks  in  a  stable  environment  is  in  itself  not  a  problem. 
What is important is that they correctly assess their ability to bear risks and are able to handle poorer 
conditions.  Driving  120 km/h  along  an  empty  motorway  in good weather conditions  is  generally  not 
dangerous for an experienced driver. It is a different story, however, if visibility is poor and traffic is 
heavy. If the speed is not adjusted accordingly, the chances of having an accident increase. Driving 
fast  becomes  dangerous  if  the  speed  is  no  longer  in  line  with  the  driver’s  capability  and  external 
conditions. 
Using this analogy, how does the current situation in the global financial markets and Swiss banking 
sector compare? As already mentioned, the overall impression at the moment is that we are driving 
quite fast. Unlike on the motorway, however, there are three reasons why it is difficult to judge if the 
speed is too high or if the market participants would be able to slow down in time were conditions to 
deteriorate. 
Firstly, it is not clear just how fast the car is going, or rather, how much risk is being entered into. This 
not only applies to the less regulated players in the financial system, such as hedge funds, but also to 
a certain extent to banks. For instance, the rating agency Moody’s came to the conclusion in a report1 
published last year that banks generally do not disclose their risks sufficiently. In our Financial Stability 
Report, we also point out that it would be beneficial if Swiss banks were to provide more data in this 
regard. By providing more comprehensive data, banks would be helping investors and authorities to 
better assess the risks banks take. Banks should, for example, publish more results from their stress 
tests. Similar to crash tests, stress tests examine how severely the bank would be affected by a major 
crisis. 
Secondly, it is difficult to assess how the traffic would react in poor weather conditions. Even though 
the braking distance is relatively short on a dry surface, this is by no means a guarantee that the car 
will react in the same way on a wet or even icy road. A number of instruments currently in use in the 
financial system have not yet had to prove their worth in extreme stress situations. It is therefore not 
clear whether the risks for these new and complex products have been adequately assessed. These 
products are typically not assessed in a central market, but by using complex models. In other words, 
the analysis is not a mark-to-market one, but a mark-to-model one. The reliability of the mark-to-model 
approach, however, relies heavily on assumptions and on the availability of reliable data. Data on tail 
events (events that occur rarely, but have major repercussions) would be particularly beneficial for the 
calibration of models. There is, however, by definition hardly any data on such events. This begs the 
question as to whether the dangers associated with tail events are being correctly assessed using the 
available models, or whether model risks pose a problem. 
Thirdly, it is unclear whether the finance industry’s capital buffer – in the form of equity capital – is 
adequate to weather particularly bad storms. Like airbags in a car, equity capital is only rarely called 
into action. Yet, the more serious the accident, the more generously the bags should be filled with air. 
In the current economic environment, many market participants are highly leveraged, in other words, 
they have a low ratio of debt to equity capital. Low levels of equity capital can be compared to a thin 
airbag – they only protect against moderate shocks. It would only take a loss of 2–3% of the balance 
sheet total, for instance, for Swiss big banks to use up all their equity capital. Of course, a loss of this 
magnitude is highly unlikely. After all, the Swiss big banks are well-diversified, have sophisticated risk 
management models in place and have high risk-weighted capital ratios. This notwithstanding, such a 
loss cannot be ruled out. In fact, it represents a classic tail event: a loss of this kind is highly unlikely, 
yet would have dire consequences, particularly for the stability of the entire Swiss banking sector. In 
view of the aforementioned uncertainties in connection with risk assessment, would it not be justified 
to  aim  to  create  a  somewhat  more  “well-padded”  cushion  of  security,  even  if  equity  capital  –  like 
airbags – comes at a price? 
Finally, I would like to point out that central banks do not know better than banks or the market as to if 
and when and in what form a major crisis could hit the financial markets. In principle, we believe that 
the  likelihood  of  severe  disruptions  in  the  financial  system  has  actually  declined  as  a  result  of 
innovations in the financial markets. At the same time, the repercussions of a crisis – should one occur 
                                                      
1   Risk Disclosures of Banks and Securities Firms, Moody’s Investors Services, May 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2007
after all – could be particularly severe given the current situation. With this in mind, I feel it is important 
that  market  participants  –  including  the  Swiss  banks  –  should  increasingly  take  tail  events  into 
consideration in their assessments. Stress tests are especially suitable in this regard. In our Financial 
Stability Report, we also underline the importance of stress testing. This calls for an intensification of 
the  cooperation  between  the  authorities  and  the  big  banks  so  as  to  enhance  the  transparency  and 
comparability  when  evaluating  the  resilience  of  the  Swiss  big  banks.  Within  the  context  of  this 
cooperation,  it  should  also  be  ensured  that  the  cost/benefit  ratio  of  such  an  exercise  remains 
adequate. 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 3
