David Dodge: Bank of Canada’s views on the Canadain economy and its 
monetary policy objective 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, 1 May 2007.  
 Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. We appreciate the opportunity to meet 
with your committee, which we usually do twice a year, following the release of our Monetary Policy 
Report. We believe that these meetings help us to keep Members of Parliament and, through you, all 
Canadians, informed of the Bank's views on the economy and about the objective of monetary policy 
and the actions we take to achieve it. 
When Paul and I appeared before the Finance Committee last October, we noted then that the outlook 
for growth in the Canadian economy had been revised down slightly from earlier expectations. In our 
latest Monetary Policy Report, which we released last Thursday, we noted that Canada's economic 
growth did indeed slow, but recently, inflation has been higher than expected. After considering the full 
range  of  indicators,  the  Bank  now  judges  that  the  Canadian  economy  was  operating  just  above  its 
production capacity in the first quarter of this year.  
We expect that, over the projection horizon, domestic demand will continue to be the main driver of 
growth  in  Canada.  With  the  U.S.  slowdown  now  expected  to  be  somewhat  more  prolonged  than 
previously projected, net exports should exert a slightly greater drag on Canada's growth in 2007. The 
Canadian economy is now projected to grow by 2.2 per cent in 2007 and 2.7 per cent in both 2008 
and 2009. This would return the economy to its production capacity in the second half of 2007 and 
keep it there through 2008 and 2009.  
Core inflation should remain slightly above 2 per cent over the coming months, given pressures on 
capacity  and  the  impact  of  higher  core  food  prices.  But  with  the  economy  projected  to  return  to  its 
production capacity in the second half of this year and with further easing of pressures from housing 
prices, upward pressure on core inflation is expected to moderate, bringing the core inflation rate back 
to 2 per cent by the end of 2007.  
Total CPI inflation is projected to rise above the 2 per cent inflation target in the second half of this 
year, peaking below 3 per cent near the end of 2007 before returning to the target by mid-2008.  
We  at  the  Bank  continue  to  judge  that  the  risks  to  our  inflation  projection  are  roughly  balanced, 
although there is now a slight tilt to the upside.  
Last Tuesday, the Bank left its key policy rate unchanged at 4 1/4 per cent. The current level of the 
policy interest rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the 
medium term. 
Mr. Chairman, Paul and I will now be happy to answer your questions. 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 1
