Marion Williams: Fund management in the Caribbean – rapid growth and 
regulatory challenges 
Address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Caribbean 
Centre  for  Monetary  Studies  (CCMS)  11th  Annual  Policy  Level  Seminar,  Port-of-Spain, 
25 May 2007. 
 Mr.  Chairman,  Dr.  Ramsaran;  Minister  Sahadeo;  Governor  Ewart  Williams;  Deputy 
Governors; Mr. Kelvin Sargeant.  
I  wish  to  congratulate  the  Caribbean  Centre  for  Monetary  Studies  Centre  (CCMS)  on  the 
choice  of  the  theme  for  this  year’s  seminar.  The  CCMS  is  in  the  process  of  restructuring 
itself.  As  part  of  the  restructuring  it  is  intended  that  the  CCMS  spreads  the  scope  of  its 
coverage beyond central banks and commercial banks to include investment banks, mutual 
funds and securities companies, as well as insurance companies, some of which currently 
fall  under  the  jurisdiction  of  some  central  banks.  The  timing  of  this  seminar  is  also  in 
recognition  of  the  fact  that  an  increasing  proportion  of  funds  are  now  invested  under 
management.  
Regional issues 
Also, in the glare of globalisation and regionalisation the region is facing both old and new 
challenges, among them is the need to increase the ratio of our savings and investment in 
order to fund development.  
Some of the more pressing features and challenges include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Slow growth in some jurisdictions; 
Rising fiscal debt burdens; 
Sluggish and disproportionate job creation; 
Loss of economic and human capital/potential; 
Global  competition  from  new  economies  –  attacks  on  both  the  trade  and  service 
sectors; 
An  increasingly  ageing  population  -  a  threat  to  the  subsistence  of  national  social 
security systems.  
 These challenges, however, also offer opportunities. There can be positive outcomes if the 
correct procedures and frameworks are put in place and these challenges can also serve to 
harness fully the growth enhancing potential of the financial sector and enhance its role in 
the region’s development. 
With increasing assets under management, the investment industry faces several challenges 
that  must  be  addressed  to  ensure  that  the  interests  of  both  the  investors  and  the  asset 
managers are best served. In some jurisdictions growth of funds outside the banking system 
has been more rapid that the growth of deposits of commercial banks. This means that the 
funds management sector deserves increasing attention. 
In recent years, there has been an increase in investor interest and consequently, a rapid 
emergence  of  investment  products  being  offered  to  both  retail  and  institutional  investors. 
There has been a spurt in the growth of investment vehicles such as mutual funds, pension 
funds, unit trusts, insurance products and the introduction of principal protected and equity-
linked products. 
BIS Review 86/2007 
 1
This growth has been global and the Caribbean is beginning to share in this rapid expansion. 
It is being accompanied by greater integration of financial services world-wide. 
The benefits of an enhanced, integrated, financial services sector are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
These  developments  must  also  be  accompanied  by  appropriate  regulation.  We  must, 
however,  ensure  that  we  do  not  over-regulate  and  that  our  regulation  is  harmonised  and 
does not lead to regulatory arbitrage either between sectors or among countries within the 
region.  
increased efficiencies; 
better allocation of resources; 
reduced costs and increase returns for all market players; and  
a boost to capital formation; investment; economic growth. 
Harmonisation of regulation 
Given  the  current  state  of  the  financial  services  industry  in  general,  and  the  fund 
management industry in particular, the regulatory framework should be used as an enabler 
that assists in opening new markets, that increases choice and generates new opportunities. 
Creating the right regulatory framework is essential for the industry to succeed. The days of 
policy and regulatory barriers that have resulted in fragmented financial markets in the region 
are numbered. Good regulation is therefore vital for the region, as markets need sound and 
stable rules in order to develop.  
Initiatives  such  as  the  development  of  common  codes  of  conduct,  registration  procedures, 
fee disclosure (of fund-processing) or governance and compliance with standards, such as 
the GIPS standard can help regional markets to function with a greater level of transparency. 
The regional single market can also develop more effectively if actors understand the need 
for  cooperation  and  regulatory  convergence,  and  work  together  to  find  common  rules  and 
which are enforced by those who have agreed to them. Investors and market actors will feel 
more  confident  if  rules  are  clear  and  enforceable.  We  must,  however,  be  sensitive  to  the 
environment in which we operate in developing common rules, as we do not want to stymie a 
market which is just at take-off stage. Ensuring a level playing field is the key to the industry’s 
success.  However,  we  must  be  always  mindful  that  new  challenges  are  not  always  the 
purview of the regulatory agencies. A greater level of the burden should be placed on market 
forces and market actors. They too must be part of the process. 
Adequate staffing of regulation offices 
Regulators must keep abreast of all developments within their industry, not only as it relates 
to  new  and  emerging  instruments  but  focus  must  also  be  placed  on  industry  trends  and 
practices both regionally and globally. There must be information sharing so that all actors 
are knowledgeable of what is happening in the related jurisdictions. 
Timelines of inspections 
As assets under management increase, it is critical that inspections, both on site and offsite 
are performed on a timely basis to ensure that any breaches in regulations are addressed 
within a reasonable time-frame.  
Inspections  should  focus  on  entire  operations  of  the  fund  managers  with  emphasis  also 
placed  on  the  investment  managers,  investment  advisers  and  custodial  firms  with  whom 
business is conducted to ensure that exposure to reputational risk is also minimised.  
2 
 BIS Review 86/2007
New markets and products 
I wish to spend a moment on the growth of the funds market. Financial assets are probably 
the fastest growing assets in the world. Across the globe, there has been an expansion in the 
growth of cross-border funds within individual countries both in Latin America and the US. 
However,  efficient  coordination  needs  to  be  enhanced  in  order  to  be  able  to  exploit  the 
untapped  potential  of  the  relevant  markets  including  back  office  roles  and  clearing  and 
settlement  procedures.  What  is  needed  also,  is  a  more  liquid  pan-Caribbean  market  with 
lower  transactions  costs.  Cross-border  trading  remains  expensive,  sometimes  prohibitively 
so.  In  these  circumstances,  potential  investors  are  not  able  to  take  advantage  of  price 
differences  because  transactions  costs  wipe  out  potential  gains.  Also,  it  is  essential  that 
stakeholders  do  not  behave  in  a  way  that  undermines  the  development  of  deeper,  more 
liquid capital markets or undermines competition or the safety of systems. 
At the regional level, new distribution models offer investors greater access to a wider range 
of  products.  However,  this  can  lead  to  additional  players  in  the  financial  services  chain, 
blurring the responsibilities towards consumers. We must also closely monitor the risks and 
opportunities  of  new  investment  strategies  and  products  including  alternative  instruments 
and  the  hedge  fund  sector  that  may  be  part  of  the  development  strategies  of  the  market 
participants  and 
the  self-regulatory  organisations  (SROs).  Market  dissemination  of 
information and valuation of securities need to be regular, timely, accurate and independent 
and market education - a key aspect of market development - needs to be enhanced. A more 
sophisticated  and  educated  investor  base  can  serve  to  allay  market  disruption  and  the 
process can be cost effective. There may be a role here for greater collaboration within the 
University in developing this educational role. 
There is also a perception that the current regulatory framework needs to be revamped to be 
able to keep pace with financial innovation so that it does not impose restrictions on creative 
and  competitive  products.  We  need  to  ask  if  the  current  framework  encourages  the 
opportunities for product providers and for investors.  
There  will  be  instances  where  there  may  be  a  need  for  the  involvement  of  a  host  of 
regulators in the jurisdictions in order to clarify the boundaries and respective responsibilities 
of different actors within the services chain. There is also a need to develop viable common, 
cross-jurisdiction  operational  standards  and  procedures 
to  realise  market 
efficiencies. 
in  order 
Cash flow challenges  
With  the  growth  in  the  industry,  there  are  the  associated  large  inflows  of  cash  on  regular 
basis. Due to the relatively low level of investment management activity (IPO, new issuance) 
in  the  Caribbean,  the  supply  of  eligible  and  available  regional  investments  may  not  be 
sufficient to satisfy the demand of asset managers. This can result in some funds recording 
excessively high cash balances, which negatively impact on the performance of the portfolio. 
With  a  lack  of  investment  alternatives  for  savings  and  investment  catering  to  a  range  of 
investors,  there  may  be  an  increase  in  spending  by  market  participants  and  this  could  be 
inflationary. It is important, therefore, that we create vehicles to harness these funds. 
Valuation methods 
In the less-developed markets in the Caribbean, or where there are high levels of investment 
in  unlisted  securities,  the  valuation  of  the  holdings  in  the  portfolio  can  be  problematic. 
Mechanisms must be implemented so that in such cases, market values used for valuation 
can be independently verified, and the basis for the valuation known in advance. 
BIS Review 86/2007 
 3
Risk management 
As  there  is  no  derivatives  market  in  the  Caribbean,  another  challenge  faced  by  fund 
managers is the lack of risk management tools in the mitigation of foreign exchange, interest 
rate  and  market  risk  exposures.  As  the  securities  industry  develops,  some  consideration 
must be given to the development of tools, which can be made available to assist regional 
managers in the management of these risk exposures.  
Performance measurement and reporting 
The  comparability  of  portfolio  returns  across  similar  investment  strategies  of  managers 
should  be  subject  to  the  implementation  of  standardised  performance  measurement  and 
reporting standards. Currently, in the absence of such standards, fund managers have been 
disseminating  investment  returns  that  could  be  calculated  using  different  methodologies 
resulting in investment information that is not truly comparable.  
To  enhance  the  integrity  of  the  performance  reporting  and  calculation  of  returns  the 
implementation of the Global Investment Performance Standards becomes important.  
In  the  final analysis  the  growth  of  the  securities  market  and  the  development  of  the  funds 
sector  is  likely  to  continue  to  attract  increasing  interest  as  investors  search  for  diversified 
assets,  as  the  funds  sector  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  a  high  growth  sector.  We  must  be 
careful that nurture its development. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2007
