Shamshad Akhtar: Shariah compliant corporate governance 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Annual 
Corporate Governance Conference, Dubai, 27 November 2006. 
 The  Corporate  Governance  (CG)  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  (IFIs)  is  assuming  growing 
significance with the steep growth in Islamic Finance system both regionally and now globally. This 
industry  has  become  a  major  source  of  wealth  creation  and  financing  of  investment  projects  world 
wide and cumulative worth of its transactions are reaching a trillion dollar. IFIs provide a viable option 
to savers and investors who are inclined to deal with exclusively Islamic financial system given their 
religious and ideological stance.  
To the extent that an IFI is principally a company structure it ought to align, adopt and abide by the 
generic  global  corporate  governance  principles  and  models  including  the  OECD  principles  of 
Corporate Governance, originally issued in 19991 and other elaborate guidelines that have emerged 
internationally as well regionally. Islamic finance, however is a specialized industry which is based on 
Quran and  Sunnah.  It  offers  a distinct view  on  eligible  financial  transactions  and  implicitly brings  to 
forefront a rich and superior architecture and texture to the field of corporate governance. The driving 
force  of  corporate  governance  for  IFIs  on  one  hand  is  the  concept  of  justice,  moral  obligation, 
accountability,  and  equality  that  are  fundamental  to  Islamic  ideology  and  on  the  other  hand,  is  the 
nature  of  permissible  transactions  which  tend  to  have  different  risks  associated  with  it  than 
conventional banking business.  
Long  before  the  age  of  complex  legal  documentation  and  financial  revolution,  Islam  prescribed  the 
concept  of  writing  contracts  in  financial  transactions,  and  insisted  that  no  party  of  any  contract  or 
exchange should be exploited. This legacy provides IFIs the foundation of good corporate governance 
which  can  be  well  blended  and  integrated  and  would  reinforce  modern  principles  and  models  of 
corporate governance.  
The uniqueness of corporate governance for IFIs stems from two principle elements: (i) faith-based 
approach that mandates conduct of the business in accordance with Shariah principles; and (ii) profit-
motive  that  recognizes  business  and  investment  transactions  and  maximization  of  shareholder’s 
wealth etc. At times these elements could be perceived to be in conflict with each other and as such 
corporate  governance  framework  for  IFIs  has  to  treat  these  tensions  effectively,  while  providing  an 
enabling framework that allows ample opportunities of growth and strength of the system. 
At present Shariah Compliance standards vary across jurisdictions (see Attachment) since in absence 
of  a  well  conceptualized  framework,  countries  evolved  their  own framework  drawing  from  their  own 
needs  and  experiences.  At  the  same  time,  IFIs  encouraged  product  innovation  which  moves  away 
from fixed-interest (riba) loan transaction to promoting a contractual arrangement for profit-sharing in 
businesses.  The  inherent  risks  exposures  (legal,  credit,  market  etc)  in  financial  instruments  is  very 
different  from  risks  associated  with  loans.  An  appropriate  corporate  governance  framework  would 
need  to  recognize  these  elements  and  identify  risks  and  challenges  associated  with  the  different 
Islamic  contractual  arrangements  and  instruments.  IFIs  reputation  is  highly  dependent  on  the 
perception  of  customers  with  respect  to  Shariah  Compliance  and  issues  surrounding  investor’s 
protection given the traditional reliance on the deposit products etc.  
Key  challenges  that  Islamic  banks  face  need  to  be  tackled  effectively.  These  challenges  are  inter-
linked and mutually reinforcing and range from: 
Reputational risk arising out of any uncertainty on Shariah compliance. Success of an Islamic 
financial system is based on stakeholders believe that the system is Shariah Compliant. This single 
factor intensifies the role of good corporate governance to ensure that the faith of stakeholders is not 
compromised  and  the  system  sustains  and  grows  smoothly.  The  reputational  risk  factor  i.e.  loss  of 
                                                      
1   OECD  Principles  of  Corporate  Governance  2004;  Include  (i)  Ensuring  the  Basis  for  an  Effective  Corporate  Governance 
Framework, (ii) The Rights of Shareholders and Key Ownership Functions, (iii) The Equitable Treatment of Shareholders, 
(iv) The Role of Stakeholders in Corporate Governance, (v) Disclosure and Transparency, and (vi) The Responsibilities of 
the Board. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 1
faith has to be managed right from the inception of an IFI and the Shariah Advisor/Board are assigned 
to perform their duties.  
Commitment  of  dedicated,  qualified  directors  who  understand  and  can  assess  Shariah 
Compliance would facilitate effective oversight and protect the industry from overall reputation risks. 
Qualifications/experience  of  Shariah  advisors  is  the  key  to  judge  and  support  the  development  of 
Shariah compliant financial services. In absence of this, there is a risk that for short term profits/gains 
the shareholders/BOD may become willing to compromise on the Shariah principles. The presence of 
Shariah  literate  directors  would  discourage  precedence  of  profit  motive  over  Shariah  Compliance. 
From the regulatory point of view, the licensing stage is of particular importance whereby the licensing 
authority should demand a clear demonstration of sponsors’ commitment to Islamic banking. 
Demarcation  of  responsibility  and  accountability  between  Board,  Management  and  Shariah 
Advisor. Akin to the demarcation issue in a conventional bank between Board of Directors and the 
Management;  is  the  demarcation  essential  between  the  role  and  functions  of  Shariah  Advisor  or  a 
special Shariah Board (as the case may be) as distinct from the Management/BOD. Due to faith-based 
nature of the business, it is evident that the Shariah Advisor will review most aspect of the businesses 
but  the  involvement  could  vary  and  focused  on  approval  of  basic  structure  of  products  and  other 
special  activities  rather  than  interfering  in  day-to-day  operations  of  businesses.  Notwithstanding, 
Shariah Advisor has to be more mainstream than an advisor in a conventional bank. To perform their 
functions effectively, there is need to enhance the pool and capacities of Shariah scholars in financial 
business as currently the most experienced Shariah scholars are represented on Shariah Boards of 
different  institutions.  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  has  taken  a  lead  in  this  direction  by  requiring  that  the 
banks appoint one Shariah Scholar for a single bank only, according to the Fit and Proper Criteria, as 
a  result  of  which,  all  the  18  licensed  Islamic  banking  institutions  have  appointed  their  own  Shariah 
advisors  and  new  institutions  are  appointing  Shariah  advisors.  This  policy  also  ensures  full  time 
availability of these advisors to guide and monitor the banks on daily basis. 
Investment policy to comply with Shariah criteria. An IFI can not invest, whether through financing 
or share purchase, in the companies which are engaged in non-halal businesses. This adds a new 
dimension to corporate governance which the Board and the management of the IFIs have to fulfill. 
The  investment  policy,  which  has  to  be  consistent  with  Shariah,  is  a  part  of  the  encompassing 
corporate strategy to be approved by Board. 
Investors’  protection.  Under  the  principle  of  Mudaraba,  Investment  account  Holder  (IAH)  as 
Rabb-ul-Mal  bears  the  risk  of  capital  invested  by  the  IFI  as  Mudarib.  This  equates  the  IAHs’ 
investment risk with the shareholders of IFI who bears the risk of losing their capital as investors in the 
IFI. Given the IAH would be more risk averse than owners of IFIs, the supervisory authorities should 
play a role in protecting the interests of the IAH vis-à-vis the shareholders of IFIs with regard to their 
rights and safeguarding against commingling of funds and/or conflict of interest of shareholders.’ Way 
for central banks offering Deposit Insurance schemes would be to devise Shariah compliant-Deposit 
insurance schemes for depositors of IFIs to provide a safety net, while ensuring stability in the financial 
system.  
On the financing side, if the funds are invested on Musharaka or Mudaraba basis, the safety of the 
funds  invested  would  depend  on  the  governance  of  the  borrowing  enterprise.  The  IFIs  should  be 
expected  to  conduct  active  monitoring  of  enterprises  they  invest  in  under  Musharaka  or  Mudaraba. 
IFIs  relationship  with  such  enterprises  ought  to  be  of  long-term  nature  with  active  involvement  in 
governance  in  contrast  to  a  short-term,  transactional  relationship.  Among  others,  some  expertise 
about  business  of  such  enterprises  would  be  prerequisite  for  IFIs  for  them  to  assess  appropriately 
business risk and to effectively monitor their operations. 
Disclosure  and  transparency.  Transparency  and  disclosure  of  a  structure  of  product  and  its 
strengths  and  weaknesses  are  critical  and  IFIs  should  be  mandated  to  this  discipline.  IFIs  should 
further  conform  to  the  highest  international  standards  and  practices  for  financial  and  non-financial 
reporting  and  disclosure.  Moreover,  IFIs  should  be  transparent  in  the  adoption  and  application  of 
 
These should be made publicly available 
Shariah rules and principles issued by its Shariah scholars.
through  appropriate  channels.  In  line  with  the  IAHs’  rights  of  monitoring  the  performance  of  their 
investments,  they  should  be  entitled  to  be  informed  of  the  methods  of  profit  calculation,  asset 
allocation, investment strategies and mechanics of smoothing the returns (if any) in respect of their 
investment accounts.  
Corporate governance framework should ensure, in order to provide relevant information for investors’ 
decisions, that the disclosure is timely and accurate on all material matters, is in accordance with high 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2007
quality  standards  of  accounting  and  disclosure  and  the  audit  and  review  of  these  disclosures  by 
independent, competent and qualified auditors is carried out. The external auditors of Islamic financial 
institutions also need to develop expertise to conduct Shariah Compliance Audit and report on their 
findings to the Shareholders and general public. 
Harmonization of Shariah rulings. One of the issues faced by Islamic financial industry is lack of 
standardization  of  Shariah  rulings  within  the  same  jurisdictions  and  among  various  regions.  The 
diversity provided by different schools of thoughts on same issues at times creates confusion in the 
minds of general public, but if properly harmonized across the globe, can become a great strength for 
the Islamic financial services industry thereby providing different options suitable to the varying needs 
of customers. AAOIFI2 has taken a lead by preparing Shariah standards approved by 14 renowned 
Shariah  scholars  across  the  world.  Some  countries  have  recognized  these  standards  in  their 
regulatory framework, and adoption of these standards in other countries will pave the way not only for 
Shariah  compliance  but  also  product  innovation.  In  addition,  the  central  banks/regulatory  agencies 
monitoring the performance of Islamic financial institutions also need to establish their own Shariah 
Board  for  guiding  them  in  formulation  of  policies  and  rules  as  well  as  for  resolution  of  conflicting 
Shariah opinions.  
Vigilance and oversight of the supervisor. As in any conventional bank, the role of the supervisor is 
critical in ensuring smooth functioning of the institutions. The key element of Shariah supervision is 
existence of a mechanism that ensures that the Islamic financial system continues to remain viable 
and  growing  without  compromising  the  principles  of  Shariah.  This  leads  me  to  share  with  you  the 
experience of Pakistan in the area of Islamic banking. 
Managing corporate governance in Pakistan’s IFIs is critical given the surge in their assets from Rs6.9 
billion in CY02 to Rs100 billion by end October, 2006, growing at an average annual rate of above 300 
percent. Growth in assets was well supported by a sharp increase in deposit base; which increased 
from Rs5.0 billion in CY02 to Rs70.0 billion (annualized growth rate of over 85%) by the end October, 
2006. This rapid growth allowed IFIs to increase their share in the overall banking industry to around 
2.6 percent.3
Positioning itself effectively the State Bank of Pakistan has established a dedicated Islamic Banking 
Department  (IBD)  that  operates  in  close  coordination  with  Policy  and  Regulatory  Department  and 
Inspection and Supervision departments to facilitate IFIs development. The IBD coordinates with rest 
of  the  SBP  and  banking  industry  to  provide  valuable  regulatory  guidance  related  to  overall  Shariah 
Compliance and specific issues/ challenges being faced by the Islamic banks in Pakistan.  
Pakistan has adopted a three tiered, somewhat unique, Shariah Compliance Mechanism and process 
to ensure a deeper and extensive Shariah compliance supervision on an on-going basis. The Shariah 
supervision  mechanism  consists  of  three  basic  elements.  Shariah  Advisors  for  banks  undertaking 
Islamic Banking, a Shariah Compliance Inspection and a centralized Shariah Board for the country at 
SBP. 
The first is appointment of Shariah Advisors at each bank undertaking Islamic Banking operations. The 
fit and proper criteria of the Shariah Advisor are determined by SBP. This criterion is, apart from the 
usual aspects of integrity and honesty, based on a person’s qualifications both in terms of education 
and experience in understanding the Islamic financial transactions. Another importance aspect is the 
person’s qualifications and experience in issuing Fatwas relating to financial transactions. The fit and 
proper  criterion  determined  by  SBP  allows  for  inclusion  of  all  school  of  thoughts  and  also  includes 
scholars  that  have  experience  and  qualification  of  international  level.  These  Shariah  scholars  are 
chosen by the banks, approved by SBP and appointed by the banks to over see their Islamic banking 
operations. Therefore they serve as SBP’s eyes and ears at the operational level of Islamic Banking 
operations in the country.  
The  second  element  is  Shariah  Compliance  Inspection.  The  inspection  manual,  which  is  very 
comprehensive, was compiled by Ernst & Young out of Bahrain in collaboration with their affiliate in 
Pakistan.  The  Shariah  Compliance  Inspection  is  needed  to  ensure  that  specific  terms  of  Islamic 
contracts,  fatwa  on  the  transaction,  as  well  as  the  sequence  of  execution  of  the  agreement  are 
                                                      
2   Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions, headquartered in Bahrain. Its Shariah Board consists 
of 14 Shariah scholars across the world.  
3   Table is attached as annexure 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 3
conducted according to Shariah principles. We are in the initial stages of rolling out Islamic accounting 
based on AAOIFI standards and the Inspection is geared towards auditing the transactions according 
to these standards. Next year in addition to the normal SBP inspection, all banks conducting Islamic 
banking will also have to undergo the Shariah Compliance Inspection.  
The third element of our Shariah compliance Supervision is the all important Shariah Board. We have 
instituted  a  Shariah  Board4  at  SBP.  One  of  the  unique  features  of  the  Shariah  Board  is  the 
composition  of  its  membership;  because  the  board  includes  not  only  Shariah  Scholars,  but  also  a 
chartered accountant, lawyer, and central banker. We believe that Shariah is the pivot around which 
Islamic banking revolves but in addition there are other disciplines that are critical to the success of 
executing  the  Shariah  standards.  As  such  we  believe  that  all  such  critical  disciplines  must  be 
represented within the Shariah Board so that the rulings emerging out of the Shariah Board are not 
only 100% Shariah compliant but these are also compatible with the legal and financial infrastructure 
available to the Islamic banks. The Board is responsible to give ruling on any conflicts arising out of 
the Shariah Compliance Inspection. It is responsible to provide guidelines to SBP for Shariah aspects 
of regulations. It helps in product development and provides support for approving any new products 
developed by the commercial banks. This Board has been functional for almost three years now. The 
feedback from the industry and SBP experience with the Shariah Board has been excellent. In fact the 
Shariah  Board  has  played  a  key  role  in  ensuring  an  issueless  promotion  of  Islamic  banking  in  the 
country.  
All  three  elements  are  interactive,  and  together  form  the  comprehensive  Shariah  Compliance 
Supervision mechanism. Each element has been performing its role very effectively. We have been 
able  to  make  sure  that  the  whole  is  far  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  parts.  As  such  we  are  very 
confident that our Shariah Compliance Supervision is second to none and the mechanism we have put 
in  place  has worked  very well  and  will continue  to  do  so.  This can  serve  as  a  model  for  any  other 
Central Bank that may want to institute Shariah Compliant supervision in its jurisdiction. 
To  facilitate  the  growth  of  Islamic  banking  across  borders,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  need  for 
increasing  international  cooperation  between  supervisors  in  different  areas  including  Corporate 
Governance.  We  need  more  dialogue  between  supervisors  across  regions  for  mutual  learning  and 
evolution of international best practices. 
                                                      
4   Our Shariah Board has five members. The chairman is a Shariah scholar of outstanding repute, Dr. Mahmood Ghazi. We 
have one more Shariah scholar as a member. It is Dr. Imran Usmani, son of the most respectable Maulana Taqi Usmani. 
We have a lawyer member on our Board, very well versed in laws pertaining to Islamic financial transactions. We have the 
country’s most eminent Chartered Accountant as the fourth member of the Board. This gentleman also leads the committee 
of Institute of Chartered Accountants of Pakistan that is adapting the AAOFI accounting standards in the country. The fifth 
member  of the  Board is SBP’s Director of Islamic Banking Department,  who  represents the interests of both the Islamic 
commercial banks and the State Bank of Pakistan on the Board. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2007
ANNEXURE - Growth of Islamic banking in Pakistan 
Description 
Total Assets (Rs. in Bn) 
%age of Banking Industry 
Deposits (Rs. in Bn) 
%age of Banking Industry 
Financing. & Invest. (Rs. in Bn) 
%age of Banking Industry 
Full Fledge Islamic Banks 
Conventional  Banks  with  Islamic 
Banking Branches 
Total No. of Branches 
Dec.-03  Dec.-04  Dec.-05  Jun-06  Oct-06
100
2.6%
70
2.5%
61
2.1%
4
11
72 
2.1% 
50 
1.9% 
48 
1.8% 
2 
9 
87 
2.3% 
60 
2.1% 
58 
2.0% 
4 
11 
44
1.4%
30
1.2%
30
1.3%
2
7
13
0.5%
8
0.4%
10
0.5%
1
3
17
48
70 
100 
114
 
Note:   Two more full-fledge Islamic banks have been granted licenses, which have not started operations as yet.  
 
In addition, two more conventional banks have plans to open Islamic Banking Branches this year.  
BIS Review 6/2007 
 5
Country
 Islamic Banking Law
Shariah Compliance Framework –Country wise 
Shariah Committee 
At Central Bank at bank Level
 Fit & Proper 
Criteria for 
Shariah 
Advisor/ 
Committee
Shariah 
Compliance 
Inspection
Shariah Standards
Accounting 
Standard
Malaysia
Islamic Banking  Law 1983 Shariah Advisory 
Council
Shariah 
Committee 
Approval by 
BNM
Governance 
through Shariah 
Committee
All Products 
approved by SAC, 
Role of Shariah 
Committee defined 
by BNM
Accounting Standards 
developed by MASB
Bahrain
Regulations for Islamic 
Banks 
Indonesia
Laws for Islamic Banking 
Introduced in 1992 & 
Amended in 1999
Shariah 
Supervisory 
Committee
National Shariah 
Board
Shariah 
Supervisory 
Board
Shariah 
Supervisory 
Board
N.A
NSB approves 
appointment of 
SSB members
Iran
Usury free Banking Act 
1983
Council of 
Guardian
N.A
N.A
Brunei
Islamic Banking Act 
Cap.168
Shariah financial 
supervisory Board 
(SFSB)
Shariah 
Advisory Board
SFSB approves 
appointment of 
Shariah 
Advisory Board 
members
Internal and 
External Shariah 
Audit as per 
AAOIFI standards
Internal and 
External Shariah 
Audit
No
No
AAOIFI
AAOIFI
Fatwa on products 
issued by NSB
Guidelines provided 
by Council of 
Guardians 
SFSB Approves 
Islamic products 
introduced by 
Financial 
Institutions
AAOIFI
Not Known
Not Known
Pakistan
Banking Companies 
Ordinance, 1962 and 
Policies for Islamic 
Banking in 2001 & 2003
Shariah Board
Shariah 
Advisor 
Fit & Proper 
Criteria by SBP
Manual developed 
in 2004, now being 
implemented
Essentials for 
Islamic modes
AAOIFI standards are 
being adapted by a 
committee of ICAP
 BIS Review 6/2007
 6 
 