Hamad Al-Sayari: Islamic banking prudential standards 
Speech by His Excellency Hamad Al-Sayari, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, to the 
“Symposium on Islamic Banking Prudential Standards”, Institute of Banking, Riyadh, 15 January 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me a great pleasure to address this honorable and distinguished attendance at this important 
symposium on “Islamic Banking Prudential Standards” organized by the Institute of Banking (IOB) in 
cooperation with the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB). 
The  issue  of  Shari’a  (Islamic  Law)  compliant  banking  is  increasingly  drawing  attention  of  those 
concerned with financial stability, including international financial institutions such as the IMF, World 
Bank  (WB),  development  banks,  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  as  well  as  supervisory 
authorities  in  the  countries  where  Islamic  banks  operate.  This  is  the  result  of  rapid  growth  in  the 
volume and scope of Islamic services offered in many countries. Those entities have shown a great 
interest  in  the  growth  and  expansion  of  finance  business  compliant  with  the  principle  of  avoiding 
interest and its impact and implications with respect to world markets and the global economic system. 
Currently, Shari’a compliant banking transactions have spread in most countries of the world through 
banks  that  totally  comply  with  Shari’a  or  through  Shari’a  compliant  windows  offering  all  services, 
investment and commercial activities, leasing, investment funds and joint liability products. 
The Kingdom has been a forerunner country in supporting and encouraging Saudi banks to offer such 
products  required  by  the  Saudi  market.  All  Saudi  banks  now  provide  a  range  of  products  that  are 
compliant with Shari’a requirements and with financial engineering specifications of the highest levels 
under the supervision of well-reputed Shari’a committees and top class financial professionals. 
In  the  context  of  supporting  such  efforts,  SAMA’s  IOB  has  offered  many  programs,  courses  and 
symposia  in  the  area  of  developing,  marketing  and  supervising  Shari’a  compliant  products.  The 
number of bankers benefiting from those programs stood at 6,300 who participated in 374 programs 
during the last seven years. These endeavors have considerably helped in developing Islamic banking 
in Saudi Arabia without undermining compliance with Islamic Shari’a or the technical flexibility needed 
by an emerging and dynamic market. 
Dear Audience, 
It  is  very  important  to  mention  that  the  industry  of  Islamic  financial  services  should  be  completely 
integrated into the global financial markets while maintaining at the same time its distinguished nature 
and unique services. The industry should also be subject to the same level of supervisory control as 
other financial institutions. Any breach of standards, practices or application by Islamic banks will not 
only be an obstacle to their services and products, but it will also serve as a hindrance to accepting 
their  services  and  products  by  international  financial  markets.  Consolidating  a  bank’s  financial  data 
with those of all its subsidiaries and branches is another principle that must be applicable to all banks, 
and  such  principle  is  necessary  for  ensuring  consolidated  and  comprehensive  supervision  by  the 
supervisory authorities in the bank’s home country.  
Central banks' governors in Islamic countries, members of the Islamic Development Bank realized the 
importance of such consolidation 25 years ago when a technical committee was formed, including a 
number  of  governors  and  specialists,  of  which  I  was  honored  to  be  the  chairman,  to  consider  the 
needs of Shari'a compliant banking services. The most important recommendation was that Islamic 
banks  must  be  subject  to  the  same  supervisory  rules  and  requirements  as  those  that  govern 
conventional banks, with the necessary flexibility, taking into account their specific work methods and 
products so as not to isolate these banks from global financial markets. 
Encouraging  Islamic  banking  institutions  to  integrate  into  global  markets  will  push  them  forward  to 
compete  with  all  other  financial  institutions,  stimulating  them  to  innovate  to  meet  the  needs  of 
corporate  and  individual  customers,  expand  their  scope  and  base  of  work,  and  not  to  be  tied  to  a 
specified category of customers or specific markets. This will help them adapt with the requirements of 
the  global  financial  system,  provide  them  with  necessary  instruments,  helping  them  develop  and 
reinforce their structures, and facilitate their spread.  
BIS Review 14/2007 
 1
Dear Brothers 
Banking business, in all its types and forms, is not free from risks that pose a challenge to banks and 
supervisory authorities. In this context, Islamic banks, like their conventional counterparts, are financial 
institutions  providing  services  to  depositors  and  investors,  on  the  one  hand,  and  offer  financing  to 
companies, public sector and individuals, on the other. Therefore, they are subject to many risks that 
are similar to those confronted by conventional banks. In addition, Shari'a compliant banking has its 
own risks. In principle, there is a range of various activities through which Islamic banks can work in 
different ways that enable them to provide funds. These activities are adapted to meet the principles 
governing  Islamic  banking  business,  the  most  important  of  which  is  the  principle  of  risk  sharing. 
Therefore, there is an urgent need to identify, measure, manage, monitor and control such potential 
risks and mitigate them within the capacity and capital adequacy of the relevant bank. 
The most important challenges confronting Islamic banks are risks arising from financing formulas and 
Shari'a compliant banking, especially investment risks, method of applying "Basel II" proposals, capital 
market and financial derivatives risks. In addition, Islamic banks may bear a wide range of risks that 
differ, in nature, from those borne by commercial banks.  
In this connection, it is necessary to emphasize that the role entrusted to the supervisory authorities is 
to pursue a comprehensive control method based on risk assessment process and not to make any 
discrimination in a way that may suggest that Shari'a compliant banks are being rated differently or 
confronting larger risks. 
Corporate governance, risk management, transparency, disclosure, and internal control requirements 
in  Islamic  financial  services  industry  should  always  be  developed,  and  adjusted  to  meet  the  needs 
specified for Islamic banks, especially that an important part of the work of these banks is based on 
impression and reputation of the nature of their work. Therefore, these banks should be aware of the 
role entrusted to them, especially the ethical one. 
The nature of risks faced by Islamic banks may raise specific issues in terms of assets and inventory 
assessment, investment costs, regular income and recognition of losses, adequacy of guarantees and 
others. We must emphasize here the importance of continued development of mechanisms to cover 
such risks. This underlines the importance of integration into global financial markets, encouragement 
of  competition,  and  provision  of  a  proper  climate  for  on-going  innovation  so  that  Islamic  banks  can 
consolidate their positions in all markets and boost their ability to provide products for all segments of 
customers. 
On the other hand, a controversy is sometimes raised and comparisons are made between Islamic 
and conventional banks in terms of risk degree, exposure to insolvency, and the argument ensuing 
concerning capital adequacy. However, the important point is the awareness and understanding the 
nature of risks, development of mechanisms to cover such risks, and the ability to compete in markets 
and meet the needs of customers. Perhaps it is imperative here to emphasize that it is important for 
Islamic  banks  to  provide  all  information  about  their  activities  and  financial  statements  with  full 
transparency,  especially  that  they  bear  moral  responsibility.  This  would  enhance  their  credibility, 
contribute to their good reputation to be accepted on a broader range, and remove any false beliefs 
concerning their activities.  
Dear Brothers, 
A number of central banks and supervisory authorities have recognized the nature of risks confronted 
by  Islamic  banks  and  pursued  a  supervisory  approach  based  on  measurement  of  risks.  Thus,  they 
have developed appropriate mechanisms for banking supervision depending on the type of risks. They 
have  also  realized  the  need  for  international  cooperation  to  develop  standards  that  could  form  the 
basis of a strong structure for Islamic banking. 
The increasing global interest in Islamic banking, in recent years, is attributable to the rapid growth of 
this type of activity in terms of size, scope and significance both in Islamic countries and other parts of 
the world. Islamic banking has spread widely in more than twenty-five countries in Asia and Africa. It 
has  also  emerged  in  many  financial  centers  in  Europe  and  North  America  to  the  extent  that  major 
international  banks  and  specialized  financial  institutions  have  started  to  offer  Shari’a-compliant 
products  to meet  the needs of  a wide  spectrum of  customers  in  their  markets  and  those of  Islamic 
countries.  
Dear Brothers, 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2007
You all know the efforts made by Basel Committee to issue various standards governing conventional 
banking in the area of capital adequacy, corporate governance, and the principles of compliance, and 
others.  These  and  other  standards  have  helped  create  an  appropriate  environment  for  banking 
business which supports competition. 
On the other hand, a number of central banks in a number of Islamic countries, including SAMA, have 
established the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) to promote establishment and development of 
Shari’a compliant financial services industry, characterized by prudence and transparency, through the 
adoption  of  existing  or  new  international  standards  compatible  with  Islamic  banking  principles  and 
methods. 
Since its establishment in November 2002, the Board has made great efforts in issuing international 
standards governing Islamic banking business through a number of committees and work teams in the 
membership  of  which  SAMA  participates  effectively.  Such  standards  will  help  setting  up  a  strong 
structure to create robust banking entities able to compete in the international markets. The Board also 
makes great efforts in organizing conferences and workshops to promote awareness of the nature of 
Islamic banking. I can not, on this occasion, but thank the Board's members.  
Dear Audience  
Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency exerts persevering efforts to promote awareness and emphasize the 
importance  of  applying  international  standards  that  help  manage  risks,  enhance  competition  and 
create strong entities. Therefore, this symposium is the first of its kind on Islamic Financial Services 
Board's standards which complement the guidelines of Basel II. The symposium aims specifically at 
providing a clear understanding of Islamic Financial Services Board's standards with regard to capital 
adequacy,  risks  management  ,  supervisory  review  process  ,  corporate  governance  systems  , 
transparency  and  market  discipline  ,  which  constitute  fundamental  bases  to  ensure  soundness  and 
stability  of  Islamic  banking  services.  Therefore,  it  is  expected  that  this  symposium  will  facilitate  the 
application of these standards by all relevant parties.  
Finally, I would like to thank the Islamic Financial Services Board, especially its General Secretariat, 
Dr. Refa'at Ahmad Abdulkareem and his colleagues for their great efforts. I also would like to thank the 
colleagues in the Institute of Banking for organizing this symposium as a continuation of the Institute's 
efforts and role. I wish the symposium all success. 
Thank you for your listening.  
BIS Review 14/2007 
 3
