Jean-Claude Trichet: Charting a new global landscape – the growing impact of 
emerging markets on the world economy 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 75th anniversary of 
the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Ankara, 1 June 2007. 
 I.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Today is an important day. We are here to celebrate the 75th anniversary of the Central Bank of the 
Republic of Turkey. Let me congratulate you warmly on this occasion. But today is an important day for 
me too, as my institution, the European Central Bank, is also celebrating its birthday! Well, we are a bit 
younger…we are turning nine. This means that next year it will be our turn and pleasure to host events 
in  Frankfurt  to  mark  our  tenth  anniversary!  Perhaps  one  issue  of  common  interest  we  could  discuss 
today is how our two institutions may, in the words of Cicero, “support the burden of advancing age”!1 
But this is not the homework you had assigned me to do. I have come here today to talk about the world 
economy. We are all witnessing its rapid development, the profound changes it is undergoing. And one 
of  the  most  important  changes,  the  consequences  of  which  still  remain  to  be  understood  fully,  is  the 
growing role of emerging countries.  
This group of economies is not easy to define, I admit. The term “emerging countries” was coined by the 
World  Bank  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  but  it  only  started  to  become  popular  in  the  mid-
1990s.2  This  is  hardly  a  coincidence.  Following  the  debt  crises  of  the  1980s,  a  number  of  rapidly 
developing economies gained, or regained, access to international financial markets. These economies 
have liberalised their financial systems, at least in part, and have become broadly accessible to foreign 
investors.3 From a handful of such economies, in particular in East Asia, the circle has gradually grown 
to include several countries in Latin America, central and eastern Europe, the Middle East, as well as a 
few  countries  in  Africa.  Since  the  turn  of  the  millennium,  new  acronyms  have  appeared,  such  as 
“BRICs”, which refers to the largest emerging markets, to the economies that are expected to become 
the giants of the 21st century, such as Brazil, Russia, India and China.4
Turkey is, in turn, one of the most important emerging market countries as illustrated by its participation 
in  the  Group  of  Twenty.  Turkey  is  also  one  of  the  main  players  in  emerging  financial  markets.  For 
instance, its international debt is among the most liquid, accounting for as much as 10% of the emerging 
bond market.5 The strong capital inflows that Turkey has attracted over the past few years, some USD 
100 billion since the turn of the millennium, underline the interest of foreign investors in the economy’s 
record. 
When discussing emerging markets nowadays, it is an attempt to understand how the global economy is 
changing. Therefore, it is also an attempt to understand what the world will be like tomorrow. I would like 
to share some of my thoughts on these developments with you, with particular regard to three aspects: 
first,  the  weight  of  the  emerging  markets,  which  is  already  significant  and  is  likely  to  grow  further; 
second, the implications of the rise of the emerging markets for the world economy, some of which is 
already in evidence; and third, the implications of this rise for us, in the euro area. I shall now review 
these three aspects in turn, before drawing some conclusions on the governance of the global economy. 
                                                      
1   Cicero (106 B.C. - 43 B.C.), “On Old Age”, Harvard Classics, Vol. 9, Part 2, para. 2. 
2   The term was coined in 1981 by Antoine W. van Agtmael of the International Finance Corporation of the World Bank (see 
http://www.investopedia.com/articles/03/073003.asp). 
3   This definition draws from the IMF’s glossary of financial terms (http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/glossary/index.asp). 
4  
In this speech, emerging markets refer to a group of economies selected from the EU neighbouring regions, Latin America 
and  Asia,  in  line  with  the  article  entitled  “Financial  flows  to  emerging  market  economies:  changing  patterns  and  recent 
developments” published in the ECB’s Monthly  Bulletin of January 2005 (pp. 59-73). These economies comprise, on the 
European fringe, Russia and Turkey; in Latin America, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela; and in 
Asia,  China,  Hong  Kong  SAR,  India,  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Singapore,  South  Korea,  Taiwan  and  Thailand.  This  definition 
may be slightly modified depending on data availability, however. 
5   This figure corresponds to Turkey’s weight in April 2006 in JP Morgan’s EMBI+ index, a standard market benchmark. 
BIS Review 57/2007 
 1
Current and prospective weight of the emerging markets 
II.  
Consider  first  the  economic  weight  of  emerging  market  countries.  As  we  know,  it  is  significant, 
increasingly significant. These countries constitute over half of the world’s population, with China and 
India alone accounting for over one third. Due to the profound economic transformations ongoing, many 
of  these  economies  are  faced  with  rapid  urbanisation.  To  date,  seven  of  the  ten  largest  metropolitan 
areas  in  the  world  are  located  in  emerging  markets.  The  combined  population  of  three  of  these 
metropolitan  areas,  Mexico  City,  São  Paulo  and  Mumbai,  is  as  large  as  that  of  my  home  country, 
France. And we know that Istanbul ranks among the largest cities in the world, with a population of over 
11 million.  
The numbers are also increasingly impressive in terms of economic size. Emerging markets account for 
almost 40% of world GDP at purchasing power parity, and 20% at market value. And if these economies 
are already large, they are also growing rapidly, at about 7% per annum on average over the past five 
years. Turkey has been growing at a similarly rapid pace, while the most economically vigorous region 
of  the  world,  emerging  Asia,  has  been  growing  even  faster,  at  close  to  8%  per  annum.  This  makes 
emerging markets one of the main engines of world growth, with a contribution of over one half last year. 
Emerging countries’ citizens have reaped the benefits of such rapid development with higher standards 
of living. Over the last decade, GDP per capita has risen by 30% on average, to reach over USD 9,000. 
The  integration  of  emerging  economies  into  global markets of  goods  and  services has  been  similarly 
swift. If you look at the world exports of goods and services, the combined share of emerging markets 
doubled between the early 1990s and 2006, to reach roughly 30%.  
But  these  are  well-known  macroeconomic  facts.  Perhaps  even  more  striking  is  the  microeconomic 
evidence  of  the  economic  success  of  both  companies  and  individuals  in  emerging  markets,  which  is 
sometimes unprecedented in terms of rapidity. Let me give you a few examples. Four companies among 
the world’s 20 largest in terms of market value originate from emerging markets.6 Two oil and gas firms, 
one  Russian  and  one  Chinese,  rank  in  the  top  ten.  Moreover,  according  to  Forbes,  seven  of  the  20 
richest individuals in the world are from the emerging markets, with three from India alone.7 In 2005, 
there were more than 300,000 millionaires (measured in US dollars or in euro) in China. This seems to 
be already more than in Canada or in Australia.8 However, that is not to say that the challenges posed 
by income distribution are not among the highest priorities of most emerging market countries. As we 
know, eliminating poverty is on the top of the agenda for developing countries, in particular for Africa. 
If  the  present  looks  promising  for  emerging  market  economies,  their  potential  future  seems  even 
brighter.  What  do  the  available  projections  for  long-term  growth,  based  on  demographic  trends  and 
models of capital accumulation and productivity, tell us? The answer is no surprise: emerging markets 
are likely to become even weightier in the world economy tomorrow than they are today. Of course, any 
projection, even in the short term, is surrounded by uncertainty. Projections at very distant horizons are, 
therefore, somewhat speculative. Yet, they might capture possible secular developments. A number of 
studies  found  startling results regarding  the  growth  prospects of  emerging  markets.  According  to  one 
such study, Brazil, Russia, India and China could account for over half the size of today’s six largest 
economies  by  2025  and,  in  less  than  40  years,  they  could  be  larger.9  Other  studies  convey  similar 
messages,  notwithstanding  some  differences.10  Therefore,  the  developments  we  observe  today  are 
likely  to  be  the  precursor  of  a  profound  rebalancing  in  the  distribution  of  world  output  tomorrow.  Of 
course, it cannot be excluded that this process might well be “non-linear”, with episodes of discontinuity, 
perhaps also including financial crises somewhere down the line. Therefore, the current developments 
call for constant monitoring and cooperation in the international community. 
But let me also look at emerging markets from a different angle, an angle which is more uncommon for a 
central banker. These countries are not only growing in importance economically, but also culturally – a 
                                                      
6   See the list of Forbes’ Global 2000 (http://www.forbes.com/lists/2007/18/biz_07forbes2000_The-Global-2000_Rank.html). 
7   See the list of Forbes’ billionaires (http://www.forbes.com/lists/2007/10/07billionaires_The-Worlds-Billionaires_Rank.html). 
8   See Merrill Lynch and Capgemini, “World Wealth Report, 10th Anniversary”, 1996-2006. 
9   See  Wilson,  D.  and  R.  Purushothaman  “Dreaming  with  BRICs:  The  Path  to  2050”,  Global  Economics  Paper  No.  99, 
Goldman Sachs, 1 October 2003. 
10   See Hawksworth, J. “The world in 2005: How big will the major emerging market economies get and how can the OECD 
compete”,  Price  Waterhouse  Coopers,  March  2006;  Poncet,  S.  “The  long-term  growth  prospects  of  the  world  economy: 
horizon 2050”, CEPII Working Paper, No. 2006, 16 October 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2007
dimension  which  is,  for  sure,  interlinked  with  the  economic  one.  Take  film-making  as  an  example.  In 
2005, the largest world producer of films was India, with over 900 films, ahead of the European Union, 
with about 800, and the United States, with about 700.11 Other emerging markets, such as China and 
Russia, ranked among the top ten film producers. Turkey was within the top 20, with 27 films. Consider 
the internet as a second example. The internet plays a crucial role in making the world more global, and 
here  too  the  weight  of  emerging  markets  is  already  impressive.  There  are  already  around  16  million 
internet users in Turkey, corresponding to about one fifth of the population. Excluding Japan, Asia has 
the  highest  number  of  internet  users,  with  over  310  million  users,  ahead  of  North  America,  with  230 
million users.12 There are almost as many internet users in China and India (close to 180 million) as in 
the United States (some 200 million). Take finally the number of Nobel prizes awarded, which reward 
the highest achievements in science, literature and peace. Here again, emerging markets seem to be 
growing in importance. Back in the 1980s, 24 nationals from emerging market countries were awarded a 
Nobel prize. Within only six years of the new millennium, this figure is already almost as high (22). All in 
all, the growth in the economic weight of emerging economies and nations and the rise in their cultural 
importance are very much synchronised. 
The implications of the rise of the emerging markets for the world economy 
III.  
Consider  now  my  second  point:  the  implications  of  the  rise  of  the  emerging  markets  for  the  world 
economy.  Of  course,  this  impact  is  multifaceted.  It  spans  two  areas  of  immediate  interest  for  central 
bankers, namely global inflation and global capital flows. 
Take inflation first. The integration into the global economy of a massive pool of low-cost, skilled workers 
from emerging markets has tended to exert downward pressure on import prices of manufactured goods 
and  on  wage  demands  in  mature  economies.13  Indeed,  in  a  very  short  space  of  time,  the  available 
labour force in the global economy has doubled from 1.5 to 3 billion, reflecting the opening up of China, 
India and the former Soviet bloc.14 As a consequence, the price of a wide range of manufactured goods 
has  declined.  In  addition,  through  various  channels,  this  process  of  wage  moderation  and  reduced 
inflationary  pressure  in  the  manufacturing  sector  has  affected  wage  dynamics  also  in  the  services 
sector,  mainly  as  a  result  of  outsourcing.  Altogether,  these  effects  have  helped  dampen  inflationary 
pressures.  This  is  what  the  figures  seem  to  tell  us:  on  the  basis  of  a  simple  accounting  method,  the 
ECB’s staff estimated that the larger imports from low-cost countries had a dampening effect on overall 
euro  area  manufacturing  import  prices  of  around  two  percentage  points  per  annum,  on  average, 
between the mid-1990s and mid-2000s.15
Yet  there  are  other,  opposing  forces.  Certain  resources  have  become  relatively  scarcer  given  the 
increasing  demand  from  emerging  economies.  In  particular,  the  strong  growth  seen  in  some  of  the 
largest economies, notably China and India, has likely contributed to recent increases in the prices of 
energy and other commodities, as well as of food products. Accordingly, this may have been a source of 
upward  pressure  on  inflation  over  the  past  few  years.  Arguably,  it  is  difficult  to  make  an  exact 
assessment  of  this  contribution,  as  commodity  prices  are  also  affected  by  supply  conditions  and 
geopolitical factors. However, according to one study, the rapid growth in emerging countries and their 
increasing share in world trade and GDP may have contributed to an increase in oil prices by as much 
as 40%, and real metal prices by as much as 10% in the first five years of the new millennium.16 This 
illustrates  why  it  is  important  for  central  bankers  to  do  what  is  needed  to  avoid  what  are  known  as 
“second-round effects” and to anchor inflation expectations through forward-looking monetary policies.  
                                                      
11  See 
Audiovisual 
Observatory, 
(http://www.obs.coe.int/oea_publ/market/focus.html). 
European 
“World 
Film 
Market 
Trends 
 Focus 
2006” 
12   See Internet World Stats (http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm). 
13   On  this  issue,  see  also  the  speech  by  L.  Papademos  entitled  “Globalisation,  inflation,  imbalances  and  monetary  policy”, 
delivered in St. Louis on 25 May 2006. 
14   Freeman, R. (2006), “The Great doubling: The challenge of the new global labour market”, August 2006. 
15   See the box entitled “Effects of the rising trade integration of low-cost countries on euro area import prices”, ECB Monthly 
Bulletin, August 2006, pp. 56-57. 
16  See Pain, N., I. Koske and M. Sollie (2006), “Globalisation and inflation in the OECD Economies”, Economics Department 
Working Paper No. 524, OECD, Paris (November). 
BIS Review 57/2007 
 3
All  in  all,  it  is  difficult  to  measure  accurately  the  total  impact  of  emerging  markets  on  inflation.  For 
instance,  the  IMF’s  staff  has  estimated  that  globalisation,  through  its  direct  effects  on  non-oil  import 
prices,  has  reduced  inflation  by  a  quarter  of  a  percentage  point  per  year,  on  average,  in  mature 
economies.17 However, the overall impact is more difficult to estimate and disentangle from other factors 
that  reduce  inflation,  for  instance  the  increases  in  productivity  growth  and  the  stronger  credibility  of 
monetary policy. 
Take now international capital flows, the other dimension for which the growing role of emerging markets 
has  a  clear  global  effect.  Certain  emerging  markets,  notably  in  Asia  and  among  oil  exporters,  have 
become  the  “financiers  of  the  world”.  They  are  indeed  large  net  savers,  with  hefty  current  account 
surpluses,  in  the  order  of  USD  800  billion  last  year.  Interestingly,  the  net  capital  outflows  from  these 
emerging markets finance the deficits of a number of mature economies, the United States, in particular. 
Of course, many emerging economies remain external borrowers, Turkey being one of them. But for the 
first time in modern history, the “southern hemisphere” is overall financing the “northern hemisphere”: 
capital is flowing from the “poorer” economies to the “richer” economies. This looks abnormal both from 
an economic standpoint and from a moral standpoint:  according to standard economic theory, capital 
should flow in the opposite direction, i.e. from “richer” to “poorer” economies, where the expected rate of 
return of capital is higher; and it would be more appropriate for the wealthiest economies to save more 
and consume less, in proportion, than the poorest. There is much debate among economists as to how 
to explain this “paradox”, which is sometimes referred to in connection with the 1995 Nobel prize winner 
in economics, Robert Lucas.18 Of course, there are many factors to consider. One recent explanation is 
that  the  current  constellation  of  global  financial  flows  is  partly  due  to  the  still  “incomplete”  nature  of 
globalisation.19  Trade  integration  has  indeed  preceded  financial  integration,  particularly  in  emerging 
markets.  A  sound  and  deep  financial  system  cannot  be  created  overnight.  If  you  look  at  mature 
economies, even there financial technology and infrastructure have taken a very long time to develop so 
as to overcome thorny problems posed by information asymmetries.  
Now,  one  implication  of  the  absence  of  a  modern  financial  system  in  many  emerging  markets  is 
precisely that it helps explain the current “unorthodox’’ constellation of global financial flows. Since the 
locally underdeveloped financial systems are not sufficiently capable of channelling savings internally, 
this  gives  rise  to  net  capital  flows  from  emerging  to  mature  economies.  According  to  this  view,  an 
important factor in the adjustment of the existing global imbalances therefore resides in the deepening of 
financial systems in emerging markets.  
According  to  another  interpretation  of  the  “Lucas  paradox”,  which  would  certainly  complement  the 
previous  one,  the  majority  of  emerging  economies  are  still  taking  out  insurance  against  the  risk  of 
financial crisis of the type that they encountered over the past 25 years. During the Mexican crisis in 
1982, and the global crisis of sovereign emerging borrowers in Latin America, Africa, the Middle East 
and the Soviet Union in the 1980s and early 1990s, as well as the Asian crisis at the end of the 1990s, 
emerging  economies  were  exposed  to  sharp  and  abrupt  financial  crises  calling  for  challenging 
macroeconomic adjustments of their domestic policies. In the same period, the industrialised countries 
were  protected  from  any  such  domestic  crises.  Substantial  current  account  deficits  were  very  easily 
financed,  such  that  the  external  financial  constraint  did  not  materialise  in  those  economies  in  any 
significant fashion in the period under review. This may also help to explain why mature economies, as a 
whole, accept, ex ante, significant current account deficits whereas emerging economies, as a whole, 
envisage current account surpluses. Let me add that what holds true for the industrialised countries, as 
a whole, is not the case in the euro area, which is posting, by and large, a balanced current account.  
                                                      
17   See IMF, “Globalisation and inflation”, World Economic Outlook, April 2006, Washington D.C. 
18   See R. Lucas (1990), “Why doesn’t capital flow from rich to poor countries?” American Economic Review, 80, pp. 92-96. 
19  On this aspect, see Caballero, R. (2006), “On the macroeconomics of asset shortages”, NBER Working Paper Series, No. 
12753, December; Caballero, R., E. Farhi and P.-O. Gourinchas (2006), “An equilibrium model of “global imbalances” and 
low interest rates”, NBER Working Paper Series, No. 11996, January; Mendoza, E., V. Quadrini and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2007), 
“Financial integration, financial deepness and global imbalances”, NBER Working Paper Series, No. 12909, February. See 
also the speech by L. Bini Smaghi entitled “Global capital and national monetary policies” and delivered at the European 
Economic and Financial Centre in London on 18 January 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2007
Implications for the euro area 
IV.  
And now to my last point: what are the specific implications of the growing role of emerging markets for 
the euro area? The answer is clear, this is good news. For instance, strong growth in emerging markets 
increases  the  demand  for  those  goods  and  tradable  services  where  the  euro  area  has  comparative 
advantages. Emerging market competition also strengthens the incentives to reform our economies and 
make further progress in terms of structural reforms, which are, in any case, needed. 
The euro area has the potential to take advantage of the new opportunities. In trade terms, the euro 
area is actually more open than other major economies. Our exports and imports of goods and services 
account for around one fifth of GDP, more than in the United States or in Japan. The euro area is open 
to  the  emerging  markets.  Our  trade  relations  with  emerging  Asia,  Russia  as  well  as  with  central  and 
eastern  European  economies  have  strengthened  noticeably  over  time.  Taken  together,  the  share  of 
emerging markets in euro area trade has grown from about one third, when the euro was introduced in 
1999,  to  more  than  40%  today.  Trade  relations  with  Turkey  have  also  strengthened  over  time,  to 
surpass 2% of euro area trade in 2006. 
Perhaps  less  well  known  is  the  fact  that  the  euro  area  is  also  very  open  financially.  Consider  the 
international balance sheet of the euro area. Its assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents account for 
over  120%  and  130%  of  euro  area  GDP,  respectively.  This  is  more  than  in  other  large,  mature 
economies, such as the United States, where the corresponding figures are 90% and 110% of GDP. Not 
only  that:  we  are  becoming  increasingly  open.  Since  the euro was created,  in 1999,  the size  of euro 
area’s external assets and liabilities has grown by around 40 percentage points. And again, if I focus on 
emerging markets only, perhaps one of the most interesting developments in recent years is that the 
euro area has become an attractive destination for foreign direct investment from the largest of these 
economies, although starting from very low levels, of course. Indeed, between 1999 and 2005 the stock 
of  foreign  direct  investments  from  Brazil,  Russia,  India  and  China  in  the  euro  area  tripled,  to  reach 
around €12 billion. Again, this is good news, as these investments represent a new source of capital for 
the euro area.  
V.  
Conclusions 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The bottom line of my talk today is that emerging markets have become an increasingly larger player. 
This means that the rules of the game should develop accordingly. Given their growing importance in 
the world economy, emerging countries also have more responsibilities. Not only is the world economy 
changing, but also its governance should adapt. 
The creation of the Group of Twenty in 1999 was a milestone in this respect. Its aim is to give major 
emerging markets, such as Turkey, a significant role in the process of informal discussions ongoing in 
the international community. I have participated in the G20 meetings from the very beginning. I regard 
them  as  a  remarkable  forum  for  serious  dialogue  on  a  wide  range  of  highly  relevant  issues  such  as 
exchange  rate  regimes,  prudent  debt  management,  domestic  financial  deepening,  and  international 
codes  and  standards  to  prevent  and  resolve  financial  crises.  For  this  reason,  I  look  forward  to  the 
discussions at the G20 workshop on “Fiscal elements of growth and development” to be organised in 
early July in Istanbul. 
But I do see other examples of the growing role played by emerging markets in the governance of the 
international  monetary  and  financial  system.  The  G7  has  also  reached  out  to  a  growing  number  of 
systemically important countries. It has invited representatives from major emerging countries, including 
Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, to some of its meetings to exchange views on issues of 
relevance to global macroeconomic and financial stability. Useful initiatives have also been launched by 
the Bank for International Settlements as regards meetings at the Governors’ as well as experts’ level. 
Most  recently,  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  was  invited  to  the  Global 
Economy Meeting, the most important forum for central bankers in the world, which I have the privilege 
to  chair.  Last  but  not  least,  the  internal  governance  structure  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  is 
currently  under  review.  One  aim  of  the  reform  efforts  is  to  ensure  a  fair  and  adequate  voice  for  all 
members of the IMF by aligning the distribution of quotas with countries’ relative positions in the world 
economy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
BIS Review 57/2007 
 5
Today we are celebrating the 75th anniversary of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. I wonder 
what  the  world  economy  will  look  like  in  2073,  when  my  institution,  the  European  Central  Bank,  will 
celebrate  its  own  75th  anniversary.  Of  course,  it  is  nearly  impossible  to  tell.  There  is  one  certainty, 
however: the emerging markets of today will play a key role in shaping the future. 
Thank you very much. [Tesekür ederim] 
6 
 BIS Review 57/2007
