Christian Noyer: France’s banking industry in 2006 – key trends 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the French Banking 
Commission, at the presentation of the 2006 Annual Report of the French Banking Commission, Paris, 
29 June 2007. 
 Welcome to this press breakfast, organised for the release today of the 2006 Annual Report of the 
Commission  Bancaire.  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  key  trends  that  characterised  France's  banking 
industry in 2006, not just in terms of structure and performance but also the regulatory environment in 
which it operates. 
It is clear that the framework for financial activity and banking risk management has changed in recent 
months,  confirming  the  ever  more  urgent  need  for  new  methods  of  risk  assessment  and  for 
appropriate supervision that can react swiftly to these changes. 
In my view, several factors are important in this respect. 
First,  in  a  highly  international  context,  banks'  performances  are  increasingly  being  judged  from  the 
outside, especially by shareholders. Those judgements are sometimes so harsh that they can have a 
direct structural impact. Consequently, banks can no longer afford simply to post excellent results – as 
again was the case in 2006 for most major international banks, especially French banks. They must 
also make sure that the underlying quality of those results is sound. To do this, they must pay special 
attention to the way they manage risks internally and plan their strategic expansion, and to their capital 
adequacy policy. 
Second, the economic and financial context in which French banks are operating is also a source of 
risks. Indeed, lessons must be learned from the slowdown in the USA, amply illustrated by the housing 
downturn,  which  resulted  in  higher  risk  in  the  sub-prime  segments  of  the  retail  banking  market.  It 
should  also  be  acknowledged  that  financial  markets  could  become  more  unsettled.  If  higher  risk 
aversion were to encourage greater use of risk transfer products, this could drain liquidity from some 
markets  and  undermine  the  efficiency  of  banks'  management.  From  a  supervisory  perspective,  the 
problem is all the more acute since the growing reliance on credit risk transfer instruments tends to 
make it harder to assess the type and degree of risk that banks actually bear when, for example, they 
arrange complex transactions. 
Third,  the  regulatory  environment  for  French  banks  is  changing  radically  as  a  result  of  the  Basel  II 
accords. Banks that have adopted the advanced approaches to risk management must put models in 
place – usually as early as January 2008 – for the internal rating and assessment of credit risk, market 
risk  and  operational  risk.  On-site  inspection  teams  from  the  Commission  Bancaire  are  currently 
scrutinising these models. Their investigations show that, overall, large banking groups have taken the 
measure of this project early on, so as to be ready for the deadline of the 1st January 2008, even if 
some improvements need to be made in certain areas. Furthermore, most banks will have to meet the 
next  challenge  of  fine-tuning  their  risk  management  and  calculating  their  economic  capital  in  the 
coming months, pursuant to Pillar 2. 
In sum, these regulatory, economic and financial factors are prompting banks to change the way they 
manage  their  risks,  meaning  that  supervisors  must  be  more  flexible  and  more  watchful.  To  clarify 
these considerations, I would like briefly to address two issues: 
1. 
The  results  posted  by  French  banks  in  2006  are  good,  but  they  are  not  without 
vulnerabilities. 
French  banks  are  currently  in  the  final  straight  as  regards  the  implementation  of  the  new 
regulation.  As  the  banking  supervisor,  our  role  is  to  support  them  during  this  transitional 
period and to ensure together that the reforms are carried out properly. 
2. 
French banks’ 2006 results are good, but not without vulnerabilities 
Like the majority of leading European banks, French credit institutions reported good results for 2006, 
in line with the previous three years. For the three main banking groups under IFRS, the net banking 
income grew nearly 19 per cent, more than in 2005. In all, the aggregate net income of the French 
BIS Review 75/2007 
 1
banking  system,  under  French  GAAPS,  amounts  to  nearly  €40  billion.  This  reflects  a  substantial 
contribution from foreign subsidiaries and from non-banking business, especially insurance. Moreover, 
most large French banks made major acquisitions outside their home market in 2006, particularly in 
regions with strong growth potential. 
Retail banking is still the main source of profit for French banks, accounting for nearly 60 per cent of 
the largest groups' net banking income. That said, the domestic retail market began to decelerate in 
the last quarter of 2006 and the first quarter of 2007. The net interest margins of several major groups 
contracted, contributing to downward pressure on 2006 results. To an increasing extent, this margin 
squeeze is not being offset by the rise in outstanding loans, while fees and commission income has 
been growing less strongly than in recent years. The outlook for intermediation income in 2007 may be 
less positive given the persistently intense competition in the credit market and the possibility that the 
yield curve will remain either flat or shallow. Furthermore, we must learn a cautionary lesson from the 
increase in borrower default risk observed in the sub-prime segment of the US retail market. The risk 
may be less pronounced in continental Europe, but I would point out that margins on mortgage lending 
are  already  thin  and  that  there  is  a  trend  towards  longer  loan  maturities.  I  am  therefore  calling  on 
French banks to make sure that they closely monitor their borrower risk exposure. 
So far, the earnings slowdown in retail banking has been mitigated by good performances in corporate 
and  investment  banking,  private  banking,  and  personal  asset  management,  which  provided  new 
growth opportunities. Through mergers and acquisitions, including leveraged buy-outs (LBOs), banks 
were able to increase the proportion of income generated by non intermediation activities. 
The  recent  competitive  environment  has  actually  fostered  the  gradual  transformation  of  banking 
activities, with a greater emphasis on the "originate and distribute" business model. With this model, 
credit institutions arrange financings but quickly offload a substantial portion of their risks, for example 
through securitisation, and take payment – much more so than in the past – in the form of fees and 
commissions. 
But although activity in new products such as LBOs is helping to boost French banks' revenues and 
earnings, it is also a source of vulnerability. First, in terms of remuneration, fierce competition among 
credit institutions is not only exerting downward pressure on margins; it is encouraging "covenant-lite" 
deals – a worrying trend. These complex transactions are also beginning to generate new risks. On 
this point, there is a tendency towards longer underwriting periods, during which banks bear the bulk 
of the risk. Banks should also pay attention to the fact that counterparties such as hedge funds are 
becoming increasingly involved in this type of deals. 
Allow  me  two  brief  asides,  if  you  will.  First,  with  regard  to  LBOs,  let  me  refer  you  to  the  study 
appended to the Annual Report. On the topic of hedge funds, I would remind you that the Banque de 
France devoted a special issue of its financial stability review to this subject and that the Commission 
Bancaire pays close attention to banks' involvement with this type of counterparty. Let me also say 
that  we  now  comply  fully  with  the  recommendations  set  out  in  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  report 
commissioned by the G8 and published on the 19th May 2007. 
Getting back to the banking system, I believe that, in light of these developments, banks should adopt 
an appropriate scale of charges and, more importantly, stricter oversight procedures, in line with the 
rationale at the heart of Basel II approach. 
French banks are currently in the final straight as regards the implementation of the new 
regulation 
Basel II is playing a key role in moves to buttress risk management at credit institutions. The European 
Council and the Parliament adopted the Capital Requirements Directive on 14 June 2006, a crucial 
milestone in implementing the Basel II mechanism, established by the Basel Committee for Banking 
Supervision,  within  the  European  Union.  The  mechanism's  three  pillars  –  minimum  capital 
requirements,  supervisory  review,  and  market  discipline  –  form  a  prudential  framework  that  is  both 
more extensive and more sensitive to the risks actually incurred by credit institutions. Above all, Basel 
II  should  encourage  institutions  to  improve  their  internal  management  and  carefully  calibrate  their 
capital requirements. 
At  present,  we  are  concentrating  on  assessing  the  implementation  of  internal  ratings-based 
approaches  for  credit  risk  and  advanced  measurement  approaches  for  operational  risk.  The 
Commission Bancaire therefore undertook a series of on-site inspection missions in 2006 and 2007 to 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2007
evaluate the systems and models developed by French institutions. The missions were initiated after 
the  Commission's  General  Secretariat  had  received  the  findings  of  the  institutions'  "internal 
validations".  The  purpose  was  to  make  sure  that  institutions  were  in  compliance  with  the  minimum 
regulatory requirements and, more generally, to check the quality of their information systems and the 
conditions in which these mechanisms are used and controlled. 
These  inspections  revealed  that  institutions  had  indeed  already  made  extensive  achievements,  but 
also showed that some of them needed to make further progress on Pillar 1 of Basel II, especially with 
regard to: 
- 
the  collection  and  estimation  of  the  Basel  parameters,  particularly  probabilities  of  default 
(PD) and loss given default (LGD): on this point, it is important that banks should steadily 
upgrade again their historical data so as to cover full business cycles; 
permanent  control  and  validation  of  information  systems  and/or  models:  implementing 
thorough benchmarking and back-testing processes is crucial in this context. 
 With  regard  to  Pillar  2,  the  Commission  Bancaire  urges  banks  to  make  certain  that  their  Internal 
Capital Adequacy Assessment Processes capture risks which are covered incompletely or not at all by 
Pillar 1, especially concentration risk, liquidity risk and overall interest rate risk. In the months ahead, 
priority must be given to developing stress tests that are more comprehensive, i.e. that encompass the 
various risks (credit, market, etc.) and that aim for exhaustive coverage of risk exposure. 
Banks must also meet their transparency requirements under Pillar 3 (market discipline), for both the 
content  and  the  frequency  of  their  disclosures.  This  point  is  particularly  important  because  the 
Commission Bancaire's decision on whether to authorise the use of certain approaches may hinge on 
meeting these requirements, which, moreover, tie in with those in the new IFRS. 
It should be underlined that the Commission Bancaire carries out these activities in close cooperation 
with  other  European  oversight  authorities  as  a  member  of  the  Committee  of  European  Banking 
Supervisors (CEBS) whose objective is to achieve closer convergence of supervisors' regulations and 
practices. In this regard, CEBS has set up operational networks, known as supervisory colleges, for 
major cross-border banks. Composed of the home-country and host-country supervisors of Europe's 
largest  banking  groups,  these  networks  make  it  possible  to  find  pragmatic  solutions  to  the  main 
problems  encountered  when  implementing  Basel  II.  Likewise,  convergence  of  supervisory  practices 
must be also materialised by the filing of the first accounting and prudential reports in FINREP and 
COREP formats, respectively, which form a common framework for Europe. 
 Let  me  say  in  conclusion  that  over  the  past  year  the  French  banking  system  has  demonstrated  its 
ability  to  develop  new  activities  and  thus  find  the  fresh  sources  of  growth  needed  to  diversity  its 
revenues. But these positive results are not without certain vulnerabilities, given that margins are slim 
and some complex financings are exposed to both operational risk and model risk. 
It  is  therefore  necessary  to  ensure  that  banks’  balance  sheets  remain  robust.  To  achieve  this, 
naturally, pricing structures must correspond to actual risk exposure, and risk management techniques 
must be strengthened. But the level and quality of capital must also be appropriate. 
Accordingly, confronted with the spread of banking strategies that earn high returns but engender new 
risks, the Commission Bancaire is constantly on its  guard in order to preserve the current levels of 
resilience  and  performance  of  the  French  banking  system  as  a  whole.  The  Commission  Bancaire 
therefore intends to reinforce its action in order to improve the management and control of these risks, 
while stepping up its efforts to promote a common culture of supervision in a coherent framework at 
the European level. 
BIS Review 75/2007 
 3
