Vittorio Corbo: Monetary policy and international financial markets 
Presentation by Mr Vittorio Corbo, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, in the Conference 
“Economic  Projections  –  Chile:  Economic  Growth  with  Social  Inclusion”  organized  by  the 
Americas  Society/Council  of  the  Americas,  Amcham  Chile,  and  El  Mercurio  newspaper, 
Santiago, 28 August 2007. 
 First  and  foremost,  I  want  to  thank  the  Council  of  the  Americas,  Amcham  Chile,  and  El 
Mercurio newspaper for inviting me to participate in this event. I will begin my presentation by 
discussing  the  recent  performance  of  the  Chilean  economy,  to  then  address  the 
developments of world financial markets over the last weeks and close with a review of the 
way the monetary policy framework operates in Chile and what can be expected from it at a 
time like this. 
Performance of the Chilean economy 
After unexpected slowdown of the third quarter of last year, the Chilean economy resumed 
strong  expansion.  Annual  (year-on-year)  GDP  growth  was  6.1%  in  the  second  quarter, 
outperforming  the  first  quarter’s  5.8%  and  above  projections  in  the  latest  Monetary  Policy 
Report. This expansion has relied on good external conditions, a stronger fiscal impulse – 
associated  to  the  more  permanent  portion  of  the  copper  price  increase  –  and  favorable 
financial conditions that partly reflect an stimulating monetary policy.  
Regarding domestic demand, it is worth highlighting investment’s renewed dynamism, with 
annual growth rate of 13.9% in the second quarter of this year, in contrast with the meager 
2.6% of the second half of 2006. Such a strong figure is based on strong corporate profits, 
favorable  financing  conditions,  the  progressive  exhaustion  of  output  gaps  and  good 
prospects for growth. Private consumption remains robust, with annual growth in a range of 
6.5%-8% for several quarters already. Consumption rests on the sustained growth in salaried 
employment, a substantial drop in the unemployment rate and favorable financial conditions. 
This, despite higher energy prices and deteriorated consumer expectations.  
Exports of goods and services have also continued to gain strength, going from an annual 
average growth rate of 4.3% in the second half of 2006, to 9.4% the first quarter of this year, 
to 11.8% the second quarter. Among these, agricultural-forestry and manufacturing products 
stand out, with volumes growing around 10% annually in the first half this year (Figure 1)  
BIS Review 97/2007 
 1
Figure 1: Contribution to GDP growth 
(real annual change, percentage) 
 (*) Goods and service exports minus goods and service imports. 
Source: Central Bank of Chile. 
Renewed dynamism of output has come hand in hand with a remarkable improvement of the 
labor  market,  with  significant  job  creation  and  an  important  reduction  in  the  seasonally-
adjusted unemployment rate.  
The main news has come from the inflation side. In effect, in the past six months, the prices 
of  non-perishable  foods  (e.g.,  grains,  oils,  powdered  milk)  have  shown  sharp  rises.  More 
recently, there was another unexpected and unusually large rise in perishable foods, which 
was  weather  related  and  should  be  temporary,  together  with  increases  in  energy  prices 
rates, including liquid fuels and electricity. These factors combined have resulted in a large 
increase in the different measures of inflation, bringing CPI and CPIX1 (a measure of core 
inflation that excludes perishable foods, energy and regulated tariffs) annual change close to 
4%. By contrast, labor cost pressures and other inflation trend indicators are nearer to 3%. 
Similar  problems  (i.e.,  increased  inflation  due  to  sudden  rises  in  food  prices)  have  been 
recently suffered in such diverse countries as South Africa, Brazil, Colombia and China. It is 
interesting to note that a price measure that excludes foods and energy prices, similar to the 
CPI  core  inflation  calculation  applied  by  the  US,  shows  annual  change  below  2%  in  July 
(Figure 2). 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2007
Figure 2: CPI, CPIX1 and CPI inflation excluding food and energy 
(annual change, percent) 
 Note: In brackets participation in total CPI basket. 
Sources: Central Bank of Chile and National Statistics Bureau. 
This phenomenon is not new. Given the supply-side or specific price shocks, the 2000s have 
seen annual inflation drop below 2% and climb above 4% during temporary episodes. 
In  this  picture  of  higher  CPI  inflation  due  to  various  supply  shocks,  short-term  inflation 
expectations have increased substantially, but remain close to 3% for medium and long term. 
Because  monetary  policy  affects  inflation  with  lags  that  are  largely  unknown,  but  long  – 
usually  more  than  a  year  –  not  much  can  be  done  to  reverse  a  short-term  inflation  jump. 
Therefore,  the  Central  Bank  must  be  attentive  to  steer  monetary  policy  to  avoid  second-
round effects on other prices, wages, or private sector inflation expectations due to supply 
shocks, that could end up driving inflation persistently away from the 3% target. Of course it 
also  has  to  foresee  the  consequences  of  the  business  cycle  over  inflation.  It  also  The 
efficacy of this monetary policy over the 2000s is evident (Figure 3). 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 3
Figure 3: Deviation of inflation from its target 
Source: Central Bank of Chile. 
The international financial turmoil 
Regarding recent developments in world financial markets, the first thing to do is recognize 
that the adjustment they are undergoing is part of an overdue normalization process in credit 
risk spreads for a large variety of securities, and volatility levels of the riskier assets prices 
(Figure  4).  In  fact,  for  some  time  our  Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy  reports  have 
stated  that  a  correction  in  risk  premiums  and  an  increase  in  market  volatility  were  to  be 
expected,  because  the  good  conditions  would  not  last  indefinitely,  in  particular  given  the 
monetary policy normalization period in the main economies that was already prolonging for 
some  years.  It  is  very  likely  that  today  we  are  witnessing  precisely  that  correction  in  risk 
valuation and volatility.  
Figure 4: Sovereign risk premiums and volatility 
(basis points) 
 
(1) Risk premium on developed market corporate bonds with less than investment grade risk ratings (CCC to BB), 
according  to  Standard  and  Poor’s.  (2)  Considers  implicit  volatility  on  option  from  US  S&P  500  index.  
Sources: Bloomberg and JP Morgan Chase. 
 4 
 BIS Review 97/2007
However, even if this is a normalization process, the dynamics, deepness and extension of 
market adjustment are difficult to foresee. As with earlier episodes of sharp increases in risk 
premiums  and  market  volatility,  some  market  segments  and  specific  agents  have  found 
themselves unexpectedly in weaker financial positions, which generate tensions and doubts 
about  particular  entities’  risk  vis-à-vis  their  counterparties.  In  this  sense,  beyond  the  slow 
recovery of the past week, the risk remains being a worsening of the international financial 
scenario if this correction deepens, with more severe implications on the functioning of the 
principal  markets  and  global  financial  intermediaries  and,  ultimately,  on  world  economic 
activity. 
Although  this  correction  was  triggered  by  the  deterioration of  sub-prime  mortgage  debtors’ 
payment capacity in the US, what is surprising is that the exposure to such deterioration has 
spread  to  financial  entities  elsewhere,  causing  tension  in  the  trade  securities  market  and 
even  in  the  global  interbank  market.  These  mortgages  were  originated  by  companies 
specializing in mortgage loans; then they were sold to institutions that packed them as bonds 
collateralized by payment flows associated to these mortgages, to higher quality mortgages 
and  to  other  credits.  These  bonds  are  known  as  ABS.  With  the  increase  in  sub-prime 
mortgage delinquency rates, widespread uncertainty arose regarding the value of the ABSs 
because of lack of clear information on their content of sub-prime mortgage credits and the 
increase in payment delays. These ABSs are in the balance sheets of non-banking financial 
entities (NBFEs) throughout the world, such as hedge funds agencies, or financial vehicles 
tied to banks, the latter particularly in Europe. 
Although the main global banks do not seem to be directly and significantly exposed to this 
component of mortgage loan risk in the US, they do have indirect exposures through credit 
lines  or  guarantees  to  NBFEs  and  in  Europe  they  also  have  direct  exposure  to  financial 
vehicles or conduits that they own. As these ABSs are illiquid, no direct information exists on 
their market value, which restricts the access to the market for NBFE  trade securities that 
have – or are suspected to have – ABSs backed by sub-prime mortgage loans among their 
assets.  This  uncertainty  has  eroded  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds’  appetite  for 
buying NBFEs’ trade securities, which has substantially raised costs and reduced access to 
financing, hindering the renewal of their liabilities. Thus, the central point of this adjustment is 
located  in  the  ABS-backed  trade  securities’  market  and  in  NBFEs  that  have  –  or  are 
suspected to have – large investments in ABSs backed by sub-prime mortgages. 
In  addition,  in  face  of  the  difficulties  to  renewing  their  traditional  funding  sources  and 
investors’  redemption  claims,  occasionally  these  agencies  or  funds  have  been  forced  to 
make  aggressive  changes  in  their  investing  and  financing  strategies  by  selling  off  assets, 
using  their  commercial  banking  credit  lines,  raising  capital  contributions  or  resorting  to 
sponsor  banks’  guarantees.  In  parallel,  commercial  banks  have  encountered  difficulties  in 
transferring  to  other  investors  the  credit  risk  assumed  when  financing  private  equity  funds 
engaged in leveraged corporate purchases.  
In sum, in this scenario of increased uncertainty regarding the value of some assets, demand 
for safer financial instruments has risen sharply, with increases in risk premiums and large 
downward corrections in the interest rates of government bonds (Figure 5). 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 5
Figure 5: Long-term interest rates 
(percent) 
  
Source: Bloomberg. 
The measures adopted in the past few days by central banks in industrial economies to pour 
liquidity into banking systems have been directed at both preventing financial swings to affect 
monetary  policy  conduction  in  the  main  economic  zones  and  to  facilities  the  operation  of 
credit markets. Rather than sustaining the valuations of asset prices, the main central banks 
focus on ensuring that the process of credit risk revaluation can proceed without jeopardizing 
access to funding and liquidity of solvent entities which, if occur at a generalized scale, could 
have  negative  effects  on  payments’  stability,  economic  activity  and  the  financial  system  at 
large. So, as time goes by, information on the quality of ABSs held by agencies and hedge 
funds  should  become  clear,  together  with  the materialization  of  equity  contributions  and/or 
liquidation of funds that have lost a big portion of their capital. This process is currently under 
way. 
Although this process of financial market normalization is part of a necessary correction, it is 
neither easy nor prudent to express what this correction will finally be like. What can be said 
with some certainty, however, is that volatility will be here for a while and will be associated 
to  lost  or  reduced  access  to  financing  from  non-banking  financial  institutions  or  even 
particular banks. 
The longer and deeper this adjustment, the larger the effects on financial markets and the 
world  economy  overall.  The  most  likely  final  effects  will  be  increased  risk  premiums  (an 
inevitable or even healthy correction), a deeper and more prolonged adjustment in the US 
housing  market,  and  some  less  economic  growth  in  the  US  and  in  the  world.  Evidently,  a 
deepening  of  these  problems  could  be  more  hurtful  for  global  growth  and  the  commodity 
prices.  
This  adjustment  comes  on  after  a  long  period  of  very  expansionary  monetary  policies  in 
industrial  economies  that  had  begun  a  normalization  process.  But  still,  one  should  not 
overlook the fact that this correction finds the world economy close to completing the best 
five-year growth period since the early seventies, with large commercial banks in a very solid 
position,  enterprises  with  good  profits  and  the  main  industrial  economies  with  flexible 
exchange  rate  regimes,  controlled  inflation  and  central  banks  that  have  gained  great 
credibility for their commitment to price stability. In addition, a significant number of important 
emerging economies are in a very favorable situation of liquidity and external solvency, with 
more flexible foreign exchange rate systems and low inflation rates.  
6 
 BIS Review 97/2007
The Chilean economy in this new financial setting 
It  is  premature  and  bold  to  try  to  quantify  the  possible  effects  on  the  economy  of  this 
adjustment that is under way. Pass-through channels will be rises in risk premiums, changes 
in  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy  interest  rates  in  industrial  economies,  adjustments  in 
government  bonds’  interest  rates  of  industrial  economies,  a  slowdown  in  the  US  and  the 
world  economy  and  a  drop  in  commodity  prices.  What  we  do  know  is  that  Chile  has  built 
through  the  years  a  framework  of  policies  and  institutions  that  has  not  only  favored  price 
stability and reduced output volatility, but also increased the economy’s resilience to shocks 
generated by adjustments occurring in international financial markets as have been observed 
recently.  
Such a framework includes an autonomous Central Bank that conducts an inflation-targeting 
monetary policy under floating exchange rate, a fiscal policy whereby public spending is tied 
to  the  government’s  permanent  income,  accumulating  foreign  exchange  assets  abroad 
during times of copper-price bonanza, thus contributing to enhance fiscal solvency, stabilize 
the real exchange rate and smooth the business cycle.  
Finally, Chile’s banking regulation and supervision system has helped develop a strong and 
safe banking system.  
This framework of macro/financial policies and institutions have allowed the country to take 
big steps in achieving economic stability, with inflation around the target, surpluses in fiscal 
balances and in the current account of the balance of payments in times of bonanza, the real 
exchange rate aligned with its fundamentals and output growing around trend. In  addition, 
this framework of policies and institutions imprints a countercyclical character of fiscal policy 
and favors the use of countercyclical monetary policy. 
In  particular,  in  this  setting  monetary  policy  reacts  to  deflationary  effects  of  a  weakened 
economy and vice-versa, so it naturally helps to stabilize the effects of demand-side shocks.  
In  the  present  conjuncture,  this  macro/financial policy  framework  should  favor  the  way  the 
Chilean economy absorbs swings in the international scenario. Two factors contribute. First, 
with inflation expectations well anchored around the target, the disinflationary effect of idle 
capacity (i.e., a negative gap between output and trend output) originating in less favorable 
external conditions, would naturally lead to a  countercyclical monetary policy. At the same 
time,  the  floating  regime  permits  the  real  exchange  rate  to  adjust  to  changes  in  the 
international scenario. Overall, depending on the size and on the inflationary effect of said 
adjustment,  it  could  restrict  monetary  policy  reaction.  Therefore,  the  composition  and 
transmission of the external shock is very relevant in the most adequate policy reaction.  
Second,  fiscal  policy,  whereby  spending  is  tied  to  permanent  income  of  the  government, 
largely eliminates the traditional pro-cyclicality that Chile has shown in face of shocks in the 
terms of trade. 
In fact, the market itself has this evaluation. Comparing with the effects in other countries, the 
last  three  episodes  of  increased  volatility  and  tension  in  world  financial  markets  have  had 
very limited effects on the Chilean economy (Figure 6).  
BIS Review 97/2007 
 7
Figure 6: Exchange rates 
(local currency units per US dollar, percent change) 
May 2006(1)
February 2007 (2)
August 2007 (3)
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Chile
Eurozone
Hungary 
Indonesia
Japan
Malaysia
Mexico
New Zealand
Philippines 
Poland
Russia 
South Africa
South Korea
Turkey
United Kingdom 
1,5
5,8
8,0
7,3
1,6
7,0
6,6
5,2
2,9
5,4
3,3
4,0
6,1
0,1
20,3
3,2
20,3
2,3
0,0
3,0
2,6
1,0
0,7
0,7
2,0
-4,2
0,7
1,0
5,2
1,0
0,6
0,4
5,9
1,2
5,1
2,2
(1) Shows variation between 10 May and 27 June. 
(2) Shows variation between 26 February and 5 March. 
(3) Shows variation between 19 July and 17 August.   
Source: Bloomberg.
Long-term interest rates 
(variation in basis points) 
May 2006(1)
1,7 Argentina
10,3 Australia
8,8 Brazil
1,9 Chile
2,4 Eurozone
5,1 Hungary
 
3,3 Indonesia
-6,3 Japan
2,3 Malaysia
3,1 Mexico
13,6 New Zealand
4,1 Philippi
1,8 Poland
1,4 Russi
a 
6,8 South Africa
2,9 South Korea
7,0 Turkey
3,4 United Kingdom 
nes 
 August 2007 (3)
--
4
15
25
11
108
118
-9
30
50
9
--
72
-11
122
--
679
4
8
382 Argentina
-36 Australia
90 Brazil
-8 Chile
-26 Eurozone
53 Hungary
 
112 Indonesia
-33 Japan
23 Malaysia
27 Mexico
-60 New Zealand
February 2007 (2)
--
-18
35
-7
-8
6
7
-4
-3
-6
-12
--
-5
0
20
--
75
-9
-13
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Chile
Eurozone
Hungary 
Indonesia
Japan
Malaysia
Mexico
New Zealand
Philippines 
Poland
Russia 
South Africa
South Korea
Turkey
United Kingdom 
USA
(1) Shows variation between 10 May and 27 June. 
(2) Shows variation between 26 February and 5 March. 
(3) Shows variation between 19 July and 17 August.   
Source: Bloomberg.
Something very simple reflects the proper functioning of our economy: in a moment where 
the  world  has  seen  a  major  retraction  of  credit  operations,  in  Chile  companies  have 
continued to place long-term bonds in the private market. 
-- Philippines
 
12 Poland
26 Russi
a 
3 South Africa
-- South Korea
161 Turkey
-34 United Kingdom 
-33 USA
 8 
 BIS Review 97/2007
Conclusions 
It follows, then, that the Chilean economy has resumed a strong growth after the unexpected 
slowdown in the third quarter of last year. In parallel, due mainly to a different supply-side 
shocks,  inflation  has  risen  considerably.  In  this  setting,  monetary  policy  must,  aside  from 
anticipating  the  inflationary  consequences  of  the  business  cycle,  prevent  second-round 
effects related to these shocks.  
Adjustments and increased volatility recently observed in international financial markets are 
other factors to consider in this conjuncture, and their implications will depend critically on 
how they will ultimately affect the future inflation trajectory. We have the luxury of having a 
well-established  macro/financial  framework  that  permits  us  to  be  well  prepared  to  face 
turbulences as they occur. 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 9
