Hermann Remsperger: Developing bond markets in emerging market 
economies – conclusions and political recommendations  
Speech  by  Professor  Dr  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  High  Level  Workshop  2007  “Developing  Bond  Markets  in  Emerging  Market 
Economies”, Frankfurt am Main, 10 May 2007.  
 Ladies and gentlemen  
The  main  objective  of  this  workshop  was  to  bring  together  international  expertise  and  practical 
knowledge about local currency bond markets in emerging market economies (EMEs). I would now 
like  to  distil  from  the  presentations  and  discussions  some  key  recommendations  for  further 
strengthening these markets. These recommendations will also be incorporated into an Action Plan 
which will be discussed by the G8 Finance Ministers in their forthcoming meeting in Potsdam.  
I. 
Let me start with a few general remarks. I believe one common element in all of the presentations was 
that  well-functioning  local  currency  bond  markets  can  make  a  vital  contribution  to  strong  and 
sustainable  economic  growth  and  to  financial  stability  in  EMEs  as  well  as  developing  countries.  At 
same  time,  the  increasing  economic weight  of  EMEs  makes  the functioning  of  these  local currency 
bond markets an increasingly important factor for global financial stability.  
Most  EMEs  have  already  implemented  major  reforms  to  develop  their  domestic  markets  in  recent 
years.  They  have  thus  reduced  their  dependence  on  external  credit  sources  and  made  their 
economies less vulnerable to exchange rate and interest rate fluctuations.   
However,  as  new  crises  seldom  emerge  from  familiar  sources,  it  is  essential  to  look  beyond  these 
well-known vulnerabilities. Financial markets, in general, and bond markets, in particular, will certainly 
gain  importance  over  time.  The  related  challenges  may  test  the  resilience  of  the  global  financial 
system, including EMEs’ still young local currency bond markets. Let me give you three examples of 
such challenges.  
• 
First,  the  financing  of  growing  global  current  account  imbalances  requires  a  much  more 
intensive  recourse  to  the  financial  markets.  At  the  same  time,  financial  markets  are  now 
faced with a higher risk of abrupt reversals of global capital flows, which could also affect 
young local bond markets in EMEs.  
Second,  the  share  of  private  savings  allocated  through  institutional  investors,  including 
pension funds, mutual funds, life insurance companies and hedge funds, is likely to increase 
further in the coming years. In the process of searching for yield and diversifying risks local 
currency  bond  markets  seem  very  likely  to  provide  good  diversification  vehicles  for 
international investors. These institutional investors will focus increasingly on EME markets, 
whose infrastructure may not yet be able to cope with these capital inflows. This applies, in 
particular, to the emerging local currency bond markets of sub-Saharan African countries.  
Third, many EMEs have been liberalising their capital flows. There is a close link between 
liberalising the capital account and developing the financial system, including local currency 
bond  markets.  Experience  suggests  that  greater  openness  in  the  capital  account  tends  to 
place greater demands on the resilience of local currency bond markets.  
  At the same time, the development of domestic bond markets can facilitate and stabilise the process 
of  capital  account  liberalisation.  However,  both  processes  are  closely  interrelated  and  need  to  be 
carefully balanced.  
Contributions to our workshop have shown that the experience of the EMEs in this context is quite 
different. The IMF, in particular, would be well placed to further work on these issues.  
While it is difficult to foresee the specific challenges which local currency bond market may face in the 
future,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  financial  markets  with  a  modern  and  internationally  competitive 
BIS Review 47/2007 
 1
infrastructure are better prepared to weather a financial storm from whatever direction it may blow. But 
making financial systems weatherproof is easier said than done.  
Further reforms to deepen and broaden domestic bond markets are still needed in a number of areas, 
and  the  key  question  is  on  which  reforms  EMEs  and  developing  countries  should  focus.  The 
presentations and discussions yesterday and today have provided useful insights in this regard.  
II. 
Now that I have listened to the presentations and discussions in our workshop, the issue seems to me 
to  be  more  complex  than  it  did  two  days  ago.  Perhaps  some  of  you  may  share  this  impression. 
Nonetheless, let me try to draw up some general conclusions and recommendations. 
Experience shows that a credible anti-inflation policy is a crucial prerequisite for developing efficient 
and  liquid  bond  markets.  Indeed,  those  EMEs  which  were  able  to  achieve  and  maintain  a  stable 
macroeconomic  framework  with  well-anchored  inflation  expectations  have  also  made  considerable 
progress in the development of liquid local currency bond markets. In countries where such conditions 
have been lacking, borrowing has tended to be predominantly at the short end of the market.  
Moreover,  a  stable  macroeconomic  framework  also  has  a  positive  impact  on  the  structure  of  the 
markets  and  on  the  financial  instruments.  Recent  empirical  studies  on  the  investment  behaviour  of 
institutional investors tend to confirm that macroeconomic stability improves the return characteristics 
of the EME bond markets and makes them more attractive for institutional investors.  
III. 
However,  while  a  stable  macroeconomic  framework  is  a  necessary  condition  for  developing  and 
strengthening local currency bond markets, it is not sufficient. In deciding which other specific reforms 
are needed for market development, in particular, two broad principles seem to me to be of particular 
importance.  
First, reform measures should be geared to strengthening market forces. Market intervention should 
occur  only  where  markets  are  unable  to  develop  spontaneously  owing,  for  example,  to  insufficient 
critical mass or institutional deficits.  
A direct consequence of this principle relates to sequencing within financial markets. The development 
of financial systems is, above all, a market-led process. Empirical studies show that financial systems 
follow  some  typical  patterns,  but  these  patterns  should  not  be  seen  as  a  “benchmark”  for  country-
specific measures directed at strengthening domestic bond markets.  
• 
Second,  and  simply  stated,  “one  size  cannot  fit  all”:  in  other  words,  when  providing 
recommendations,  we  have  to  take  into  account  the  different  stages  of  development,  the 
reforms  already  taken  and  the  different  financing  and  economic  structures  of  specific 
countries.  
As  regards  the  different  stages  of  development,  I  believe  our  workshop  has  made  a  valuable 
contribution to improving our knowledge. Indeed, there are substantial differences in the structure of 
financial markets and instruments within EMEs.  
• 
In Latin American countries the share of domestic debt outstanding that is foreign currency-
denominated or exchange rate-linked has been substantially reduced, but a large share of 
the debt is still floating-rate. In the larger Asian countries, by contrast, the vast majority of 
domestic debt is straight fixed-rate.  
There are also marked differences with regard to market liquidity. Measured by turnover or 
bid-ask  spreads,  some  EMEs  already  have  relatively  liquid  markets.  But,  in  many  EMEs, 
liquidity remains low.  
As regards the issuer base, it is also worth noting that in Asia financial institutions together 
with  the  corporate  sector  have  a  much  larger  share  in  the  issuance  of  domestic  debt 
securities than in other EME regions.  
  2 
 BIS Review 47/2007
 It is also worth emphasising that in the past few years some EMEs have been raising funds 
through issuing local currency bonds on international financial markets. The largest issuers 
in 2006 were South Africa, Brazil, Mexico and Colombia.  
IV. 
Let me now turn to the reform measures that should to be taken. I believe two areas stand out where 
further reforms are needed: namely, promoting liquidity and developing corporate bond markets.  
There are several measures that EMEs need take to promote liquidity and to develop corporate bond 
markets:  
• 
• 
• 
These areas are, of course, closely interrelated, and I would like to discuss them in turn. 
First, they need to broaden and diversify the investor base;  
Second, they need to develop domestic derivatives markets; and  
Third, they need to strengthen the legal framework and the market infrastructure.  
Broadening and diversification of the investor base  
1.  
In  order  to  promote  market  liquidity,  broadening  and  diversifying  the  investor  base  is  essential. 
Institutional investors having a stronger presence can also contribute to reducing maturity mismatches 
and may be a major driving force for the development of new financial instruments and the transfer of 
expertise to strengthen market infrastructure.  
Many local currency bond markets still have a rather narrow investor base. In most EMEs, investment 
is still concentrated on domestic banks. Their share of outstanding domestic debt is much larger than 
the  corresponding  ratio  in  industrial  countries.  It  is,  however,  positive  that  the  domestic  institutional 
investor base has been growing on average recently.  
In addition, foreign investors play a much smaller role in EMEs than in advanced countries. The share 
of outstanding domestic debt securities held by foreign investors is on average several times higher as 
in EMEs. Here again, of course, there are large differences between EMEs; and, on average, foreign 
participation is growing.  
One  major  element  in  broadening  and  diversifying  the  investor  base  is  the  establishment  of  large 
benchmark issues at key maturities.  
On the domestic investor side, pension funds are an increasingly important investor class in the EMEs, 
and  pension reforms  in  EMEs  have  certainly  played  a  role  in  that  development.  Improving  financial 
literacy  may  be  an  essential  component  of  a  successful  pension  reform,  especially  when  these 
reforms involve setting up Defined Contributions schemes, as has often been the case in emerging 
markets.  
Most EME pension funds are still highly invested in local government bonds. To increase liquidity and 
to  stimulate  the  issuance  of  non-government  securities,  EMEs  should  consider  reviewing  and 
eliminating investment restrictions which hinder a broader diversification of funds.  
The official international financial institutions (IFIs), including the IMF, the World Bank and the BIS, are 
well  placed  to  analyse  which  investment  regulations  discourage  the  development  of  local  currency 
bond markets.  
Since domestic institutional investors often pursue a buy-and-hold strategy, which contributes less to 
improving  liquidity,  measures  to promote  liquidity  also  need  to  be  geared  towards  attracting  foreign 
investors. They tend to restructure their portfolios more frequently.  
It  is  also  necessary  to  support  local  bond  markets  on  the  supply  side.  This  would  include  opening 
markets to foreign issuers, including or starting with IFIs, which would improve the range of high-rated 
instruments in local currency.  
From the viewpoint of IFIs achieving this objective would be helped by adopting standardised bond 
documentation  and  international  accounting  rules,  by  lowering  transaction  costs  (not  least  through 
interlinked clearing and settlement systems) and by developing domestic derivatives markets.  
BIS Review 47/2007 
 3
Promoting domestic derivatives markets  
2.  
Developing domestic derivatives markets is a crucial measure to promote liquidity both directly and 
indirectly through helping to diversify the investor base. Derivative markets provide cost-effective ways 
for  institutional  investors  to  structure  their  portfolios  more  efficiently  and  improve  their  risk 
management.  
Despite their dynamic growth over recent years, the EMEs’ derivatives markets account for no more 
than  10%  of  the  total  outstanding  notional  values  in  global  derivatives  markets.  Furthermore,  the 
development of derivatives markets differs remarkably across regions.  
The  trading  volumes  of  exchange-traded  and  over-the-counter  contracts  are  largest  for  foreign 
exchange  forwards  and  swaps  and  for  equity  options  and  futures.  Trading  of  these  instruments  is 
particularly  important  in  emerging  Asia,  while  exchange-based  trading  of  interest  derivatives  on  the 
whole is lagging somewhat behind and is more important in Latin America.  
To promote the development of derivatives markets, the EMEs should examine the extent to which 
regulatory  deficits  and  shortcomings  in  the  market  infrastructure  may  be  impeding  the  evolution  of 
such markets. The G7 countries could assist this process by providing their expertise and supporting 
technical assistance in this area in close cooperation with the IFIs. 
Strengthening the market infrastructure and the legal framework  
3.  
A strong legal and regulatory framework, international competitive clearing and settlement systems, 
effective credit ratings, and good corporate governance are also key ingredients for the development 
and efficient functioning of capital markets. Despite the remarkable progress that EMEs have made so 
far, further reform steps are needed in these areas.  
Let me address these aspects in more detail.  
First, clearing and settlement systems: capital movements are global but the clearing and settlement 
of securities is very often country-based. The current setup in many EMEs in terms of mitigating risks 
in the settlement process and cost effectiveness is often less than optimal. In addition, clearing and 
settlement systems are still highly fragmented.  
However,  best  practices  in  this  area  are  well  developed  in  the  form  of  recommendations  by  the 
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS), the International Organisation of Securities 
Commission (IOSCO) and the G 30 Action Plan towards enhancing the interoperability of settlement 
systems.  
Thus, the challenge does not lie in determining what goals to set but rather in bringing existing rules 
and  regulations  into  line  with  best  practices,  while  giving  due  regard  to  a  country’  s  specific 
circumstances.  
Regional cooperation in building market infrastructure can also be an effective way of strengthening 
clearing and settlement systems. A regional central security depository that acts as a central access 
point  to  various  domestic  markets,  providing  multi-currency  as  well  as  delivery  versus  payment 
settlement,  would  be  a  possible  alternative  to  a  gradual  expansion  of  cross-border  links  based  on 
existing national systems.  
Finally, in many EMEs, the securities clearing system is not keeping pace with the payments system in 
terms  of  its  technological  and  legal  development.  Improving  the  link  between  the  payments  system 
and  the securities  clearing  system would  be  a major  step  in minimising  transaction risks  that  occur 
when the buyer of a bond makes his payment days before the delivery of the bond takes place. The 
ultimate  objective  must  be  to  accelerate  settlement  and  to  develop  true  delivery-versus-payment 
systems.  
It should also be mentioned that many of the existing barriers to an efficient clearing and settlement 
infrastructure  relate  to  legal  and  regulatory  issues.  This  underlines  the  need  for  close  interaction 
between the private and public sectors.  
Second,  the  legal  framework:  property  rights  and  a  tax  system  that  is  not  overly  complex  or 
discriminatory are key factors in ensuring that markets are fair, efficient and transparent. A governance 
structure that enforces contracts and resolves disputes in a credible, speedy and predictable manner 
is vital for the development of sophisticated financial markets.  
4 
 BIS Review 47/2007
Given the problems of asymmetric information that are inherent in the financial sector, the regulatory 
framework  should  also  set  ambitious  standards  for  auditing  and  accounting.  Disclosure  rules  that 
ensure  the  generation  and  dissemination  of  reliable  information  on  a  timely  basis  are  particularly 
important. The OECD principles of good governance give appropriate guidance in this regard.  
Let me emphasise that full implementation and enforcement of the corporate governance framework, 
information  disclosure  regulations  and  accounting  and  auditing  standards  and  practices  are  as 
important as the laws and regulations themselves.  
Third,  the  credit  ratings:  credit  rating  agencies  play  a  major  role  in  improving  the  price  discovery 
process in bond markets, thereby furthering the growth of the corporate bond market. These agencies 
must  be  able  to  compile  the  necessary  information  to  help  investors  assess  credit  risk  and  pricing 
spreads of corporate bonds.  
The  rating  standards  of  global  agencies  currently  focus  primarily  on  country  risk.  But  they  are  less 
appropriate  for  evaluating  the  specific  creditworthiness  of  particular  firms  in  EMEs,  which  is  a  key 
ingredient for the development of corporate bond markets. There is an ongoing debate, especially in 
Asia, on whether a regional credit rating agency is superior to local credit rating agencies, even if the 
latter used regional standards for their ratings.  
In my view, further standardisation of the rating systems of local credit rating agencies at the regional 
level would be a crucial step in facilitating cross-border comparisons and using the advantages that 
local credit rating agencies have in terms of reducing the problem of asymmetric information.  
V. 
I would now like to turn to two special aspects of developing local currency bond markets which are 
closely related to IFIs, namely the database on local currency bond markets and technical assistance.  
As regards the database, formulating recommendations for further reforms to develop local currency 
bond markets in EME depends on the availability of appropriate macroeconomic and financial data. So 
far the amount of internationally comparable data on domestic bond markets is limited.  
In particular, there has so far been little internationally comparable data on the maturity and on the 
instrument structure, and thus on the currency and maturity composition of domestic debt securities in 
EMEs. The information on sectoral mismatches is even more limited. There is also little information on 
derivatives markets in EMEs.  
However,  more  data  on  these  aspects  of  domestic  debt  would  be  a  vital  factor  in  making  a  better 
assessment of the risk characteristics of domestic debt. In view of the increasing importance of global 
portfolio flows for real economic development, a more comprehensive and timely coverage of cross-
boarder activities – especially of non-bank private activities – is also necessary.  
Improving transparency of local currency bonds is not only a matter of macro and microeconomic data. 
It  is  also  a  matter  of  qualitative  data,  namely  regarding  the  regulatory  and  legal  framework  or  the 
market infrastructure.  
These  qualitative  factors  can  have  a  significant  impact  on  transaction  costs  for  issuance  and 
investment. Empirical studies by the Asian Development Bank have shown that legal protection and 
standards for governance and transparency are major determinants for deepening bond markets.  
In my view, improving transparency is not only important for central banks or supervisory authorities 
but also for competition between financial markets, and thus also for market participants. Therefore, 
we should encourage the BIS, the IMF and the World Bank as well as the national statistical agencies 
to improve the data basis for local bond markets.  
But  let  me  add  a  word  of  caution.  I  am  also  responsible  for  statistics  at  the  Bundesbank,  and 
complaints about the statistical burden are frequently brought to my attention. It is therefore important 
to balance the need for more and better data with the additional workload placed on those who are 
required to provide the figures.  
As regards technical assistance (TA), most IFIs and many advanced countries have been providing 
technical assistance to develop domestic bond markets for years. However, I believe most observers 
would agree that such technical assistance could and should be more selective and better coordinated 
among the main providers of TA. 
BIS Review 47/2007 
 5
I  think  the  workshop  has  revealed  some  consensus  that  a  collaborative  approach  is  needed  with 
increased cooperation between the IMF and the World Bank and with other IFIs. And while I am sure 
that  in  the  follow-up  to  our  workshop,  there  will  be  more  discussion  on  the  extent  to  which  the 
collaboration  between  the  main  providers  of  TA  could  be  stepped  up,  I  believe  three  aspects  of 
technical assistance may be worth mentioning.  
• 
First, as mentioned earlier, market-oriented debt management strategies that also establish 
large benchmark issues at key maturities are crucial for the development of domestic bond 
markets.  
Second,  there  may  also  be  a  need  to  for  closer  cooperation  on  technical  assistance  to 
strengthen trading, clearing and settlement systems.  
Third, what is also important is an in-depth exchange of information as well as cooperation 
among debt managers, institutional investors, market associations, on the one hand, and the 
IMF, the World Bank and multilateral development banks, on the other. One option could be 
to join forces with forums that already exist, such as the IMF's Debt Management Forum, or 
that of the OECD or the Group of Trustees.  
  VI. 
Let me finally add a few remarks on sub-Saharan African countries. Local currency bond markets in 
these  countries  are  at  a  very  early  stage  of  development.  In  2006,  market  capitalisation  in  sub-
Saharan African countries was US$ 87 billion, with South Africa accounting for 62% of this amount.  
Local bond markets in this region also vary widely in size and structure. Foreign debt in relation to total 
debt is still high, the investor base quite narrow, and the maturity structure of government debt very 
short-term. Corporate bond markets are lacking.  
As  bond  markets  in  this  region  are  small  and  will  probably  remain  so,  closer  regional  cooperation 
could pave the way to creating critical masses for bond markets, with low transaction costs and well-
functioning clearing and settlement systems. Strengthening regional cooperation is one possible way 
of increasing the size of the markets. In this context, African countries could use the experience of 
closer regional cooperation which has been gained by Asian countries.  
VII. 
Before closing, I would like to make three final and very quick points.  
First, I hope that this workshop will be a catalyst for further international dialogue on developing bond 
markets in EMEs. It would be a major achievement in itself if this two-day event here in Frankfurt were 
to provide an opportunity to establish a network of experts.  
Second,  as  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech,  the  results  of  our  workshop  will  be 
incorporated into an Action Plan which G8 Finance Ministers will discuss at their forthcoming meeting 
in Potsdam.  
Third,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  all  of  you  for  your 
outstanding contributions to this workshop. 
6 
 BIS Review 47/2007
