Axel A Weber: Monetary policy strategy and communication  
Dinner speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Deutsche 
Bundesbank/Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland conference on “Monetary policy strategy: old issues 
and new challenges”, Frankfurt am Main, 6 June 2007.  
 Introduction  
1  
Ladies and gentlemen  
Welcome to this conference on “Monetary policy strategy: old issues and new challenges”.  
The  general  thinking  on  monetary  policy  strategy  has  undergone  some  important  changes  in  most 
countries  over  the  past  few  decades.  There  has  been  a  considerable  convergence  of  some  core 
principles  concerning  monetary  policy  across  countries.  To  name  just  the  most  important  aspect: 
Central  banks  should  concentrate  on  price  stability.  The  principle  of  “price  stability  first”  enhances 
monetary  policy  credibility,  and  credibility  is  a  prerequisite  for  successfully  anchoring  inflation 
expectations at levels consistent with price stability.  
It  is  therefore  certainly  true  that  there  is  much  more  commonality  and  shared  interest  between  the 
largest central banks than is sometimes assumed in the public debates about our respective policies. 
However,  different  approaches  and  open  questions  continue  to  exist.  Against  this  background,  a 
conference  on  monetary  policy  strategy  will  undoubtedly  be  enriched  by  the  various  perspectives 
which different central banks can provide. Ideally, such a joint effort will enhance our knowledge about 
common challenges  as well  as  develop  a  beneficial,  mutual  insight  into  issues  on  which  we  take a 
more idiosyncratic course.  
I  am  therefore  very  pleased  that  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Cleveland have been able to organise this joint conference on research issues related to monetary 
policy  strategy  and  communication.  So  thank  you  to  the  organisers  from  both  central  banks  for 
bringing together an impressive array of outstanding researchers.  
And,  of  course,  thank  you  also  to  the  Bundesbank’s  conferences  division  which  has,  as  always, 
successfully mastered all of the logistical and organisational challenges that such an event involves.  
In my remarks I would like to focus on a matter of direct relevance to this research conference, namely 
the relationship between communication and strategy.  
2  
Communication and monetary policy strategy  
Some general aspects  
2.1 
Nowadays, it is widely accepted that public institutions have to be transparent and accountable. This is 
even  more  the  case  for  central  banks  with  a  guaranteed  independence.  There  is  no  question  that 
transparency and accountability of monetary policy are rightly regarded as indispensable elements of 
public  policy  in  a  democratic  society.  However,  central  banks’  communication  efforts  usually  go  far 
beyond merely fulfilling such legal requirements. This is because communication is also an important 
element in fostering the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
The  importance  of  communication  for  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  rests  on  the  fact  that 
monetary policy measures influence only current short-term interest rates. The success of monetary 
policy to a very large extent depends on the degree to which it can affect expectations about future 
developments, for instance, the expected rate of inflation and the expected sequence of future short-
term interest rates. The key aspect in this respect is the anchoring of inflation expectations at levels 
consistent with price stability.  
Communication and transparency therefore have to be structured in a way that helps to achieve this 
primary  objective.  So, 
in  a  democratic  system, 
communication and transparency have no intrinsic value of their own. Consequently, monetary policy 
has to balance carefully the respective benefits and costs in order to reap possible gains in terms of 
improved policy effectiveness and credibility.  
the  aspect  of 
leaving  aside 
transparency 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 1
And  while  it  is  true  that,  ultimately,  words  have  to  be  followed  and  confirmed  by  actions  as  they 
otherwise  remain  empty,  it  is  equally  true  that  explaining  monetary  policy  in  addition  to  merely 
announcing decisions taken is always important. Consequently, in my view, communication has to be 
analysed as an integral part the overall monetary policy framework – and not in isolation  
This is where the monetary policy strategy becomes important. An explicit strategy is basically the tool 
with  which  central  banks  provide  an  analytical  framework  to  establish  consistency  between  a 
sequence of short-term monetary policy measures derived from current economic conditions and long-
term objectives.  
An  explicit  rule-based  strategic  framework  fulfils  many  important  tasks.  It  enables  observers  to 
understand how economic data are analysed and transformed into the central bank’s assessment of 
the  current  policy  stance  and  risks.  At  the  same  time,  in  doing  so,  it  reduces  the  need  for  more 
continuous direct communication. Moreover, an explicit strategy helps to de-personalise the monetary 
policy framework and thereby to provide continuity of the decision-making process. This offers clear 
advantages compared with an implicit strategy of “just do it”.  
However, since the specific way by which economic data is transformed into a coherent policy choice 
is by no means self-explanatory, and thus communication has a key role to play in order to explain the 
analysis  underlying  policy  decisions,  and  to  avoid  that  external  observers  have  to  adopt  a  complex 
learning process in order to understand the policy framework. Both aspects should help to limit market 
participants’ uncertainty about the conduct of monetary policy, thereby reducing inflation persistence 
and lowering macroeconomic volatility.  
2.2  
Communication and strategy: some issues related to the Eurosystem  
Communication about monetary policy objectives  
2.2.1  
The  price  stability  focus  and  the  quantification  of  price  stability  as  year-on-year  increase  in  the 
harmonised  index  of  consumer  prices  (HICP)  below  but  close  to  2%  over  the  medium  term  is  one 
defining element in the Eurosystem’s strategy.  
Empirical  research  shows  that  in  countries  where  central  banks  have  adopted  an  explicit  inflation 
objective. inflation is lower, inflation persistence is reduced and long-term inflation expectations are not 
correlated  with  lagged  inflation.1,2  Interestingly,  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  also  less 
responsive to macroeconomic news and monetary policy announcements than in countries where no 
explicit inflation objective has been announced.3  
For the euro area, the short time span since the beginning of EMU does not yet allow for an in-depth 
empirical  analysis  comparable  with  these  studies.  However,  empirical  work  has  found  that  inflation 
persistence has been lower in those euro area countries that had an independent central bank and a 
clear  price  stability  objective  already  before  monetary  union.4  Survey  results  for  the  euro  area 
furthermore  indicate  that  our  definition  of  price  stability  is  well  understood  and  perceived  as  being 
credible. However, there are some indications that the general understanding of the monetary policy 
strategy could be further improved.  
Communication about the monetary policy stance  
2.2.2  
Central  banks  devote  significant  resources  not  only  to  explaining  their  objective  and  the  general 
strategic framework to the public, but also to communicating the current policy stance.  
                                                      
1   A Fatas, I Mihov and A Rose (2006), Quantitative Goals for Monetary Policy, forthcoming, Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking; A T Levin, F M Natalucci and J M Piger (2004), Explicit inflation objectives and macroeconomic outcomes, ECB 
Working Paper No 383. 
2   L Benati (2006), Investigating Inflation Persistence Across Monetary Regimes, mimeo. 
3   R Gürkaynak, A Levin and E Swanson (2006), Does Inflation Targeting Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence 
from  Long-Term  Bond  Yields  in  the  US,  UK  and  Sweden,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  Working  Paper 
No 2006-09. 
4   G  Coenen  and  A  Levin  (2004),  Identifying  the  Influences  of  Nominal  and  Real  Rigidities  in  Aggregate-Price-Setting 
Behaviour, ECB Working Paper No 418. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2007
This is achieved through a wealth of different communication tools, but one important aspect is the 
communication on the days when decisions are taken. Owing to the high degree of predictability in the 
case of both the Eurosystem and the Federal Reserve, the main market reactions on meeting days are 
not  due  to  any  announcements  per  se,  but  rather  to  the  information  which  accompanies  them,  in 
particular  when  there  is  an  unexpected  component  in  the  announcement  or  indications  about  the 
future course of policy are given.5
Both  the  Eurosystem  and  the  Federal  Reserve  do  provide  additional  information  on  those  days. 
However,  the  detailedness  of  explanations  given  differs:  The  Federal  Reserve  offers  a  brief 
explanatory  note;  the  Eurosystem  publishes  an  introductory  statement  and  conducts  real-time 
communication via a press conference of the ECB president with an intensive Q&A session.  
The  approach  used  by  the  Eurosystem  enables  observers  to  digest  in  real  time  the  information 
provided and to clarify any issues if necessary.  
In my opinion, this demanding communication exercise is highly valuable for external observers as it 
improves their understanding of the Governing Council’s reasoning and deliberations. I will come back 
to this point later.  
Over the past few years, there have been repeated calls for the Eurosystem to publish the minutes of 
its  meetings  because  this  is  often  seen  as  a  means  to  enhance  transparency.  I  would  like  to 
emphasise here that the market responses to published minutes in the United States and the United 
Kingdom  result  mainly  from  the  timeliness  with  which  this  information  is  provided.  This  view  is 
supported  by  the  fact  that  the  market  responses  to  the  minutes  increased  considerably  after  the 
publication schedule was changed; minutes are now published before the next meeting.6
Markets  therefore  seem  to  be  more  interested  in  a  timely  assessment  of  how  the  latest  economic 
information  is  transformed  into  a  coherent  narrative  by  the  decision-making  bodies,  rather  than  in 
deducing the specific opinions of Board members. Insofar as this is the case, the current Eurosystem 
practice  of  providing  real-time  transparency  through  introductory  statements  and  press  conferences 
appears to be especially well-tailored to this particular need.  
I thus do not see that the benefits of publishing additional minutes outweigh the inherent risks, which 
are especially pronounced for a new and supranational body like the Eurosystem.  
Providing information about the future  
2.2.3 
One additional issue that has received increased interest over the past few years is information about 
the future course of monetary policy. A number of central banks recently started to provide some form 
of  guidance  on  future  interest  rates.  The  potential  advantages  of  such  disclosure  could  lie  in  an 
increased predictability of monetary policy, which should ultimately enhance the policy’s effectiveness 
due to a stronger effect on expectations.  
The most far-reaching approach is taken by a few central banks that communicate a quantified future 
own  interest  rate  path  (and  the  uncertainty  surrounding  it).  With  regard  to  the  latter,  the  “own 
instrument projection” is supposed to be the interest rate path that is best able to achieve the central 
bank’s objectives under certain model and judgement-based assumptions concerning the functioning 
of the economy.  
This  approach  has  the  property  of  being  fully  consistent  with  the  central  bank’s  targets  and  other 
inputs.  However,  it  also  entails  several  problems.  It  is  highly  dependent  on  the  specific  analytical 
framework  from  which  it  is  derived.  In  the  light  of  model  uncertainty  and  the  unavoidable  use  of 
judgement  in  the  forecasting  process,  the  optimal  interest  rate  path  involves  considerable 
communication  challenges.  In  particular,  communicating  a  future  subjective  path  for  the  policy  rate 
might  be  interpreted  as  an  unconditional  commitment  –  which  in  turn  could  reduce  the  necessary 
flexibility of monetary policy.  
                                                      
5   C Brand, D Buncic and J Turunen (2006), The impact of ECB monetary policy decisions and communication on the yield 
curve, ECB Working Paper 657; R Gürkaynak, B Sack and E Swanson (2005), Do Actions Speak Louder than Words? The 
Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements, International Journal of Central Banking, 1, pp 55-94. 
6   V Reinhart and B Sack (2006), Grading the Federal Open Market Committee’s Communications, paper presented at the 
2006 AEA meetings, Boston; Bank of England (2005), Do Financial Markets React to Bank of England Communication?, 
Quarterly Bulletin, Winter 2005, pp 431-39. 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 3
Therefore, communicating the conditional nature of the interest rate path is of key importance.  
From an empirical point of view, it is certainly too early to reach a definitive conclusion regarding the 
overall costs and benefits of this approach. However, existing empirical analysis does not indicate that 
this approach delivers an uniquely superior predictability of monetary policy outcomes.  
As regards forward guidance, I prefer the approach of “letting the strategy speak for itself”. In my view 
the most beneficial role of communication in fostering monetary policy effectiveness lies in improving 
medium-term to long-term predictability and credibility. And here, our explicit strategy must play the 
central role.  
Conditioning  any  forward  guidance  on  the  strategy  helps  making  clear  that  we  do  not  act  in  an 
unconditional and pre-committed way whilst at the same time lending credibility to the attitude that we 
will  do  what  is  necessary  to  guarantee  price  stability.  This  contributes  to  anchoring  inflation 
expectations at levels consistent with price stability.  
Communication and the introductory statement  
2.2.4  
The introductory statement of the Eurosystem published shortly after the policy decision is announced 
provides the policy relevant information in a structured manner to the public in real time.  
It is the Governing Council’s main instrument of context-specific communication. The wording of the 
statement is agreed upon in the foregoing meeting, and thus it presents the consensual assessment of 
the  Governing  Council.  It  portrays  the  Council’s  deliberations  through  the  lenses  of  the  two  pillar 
strategy.  
And  it  puts  into  perspective  the  linkages  between  data,  decisions  and  stated  medium-term  policy 
objectives. The time lags in the transmission of monetary policy and the medium-term orientation of 
the Eurosystem require describing how present and future information that comes in is processed. In 
this  respect,  we  offer  guidance  about  what  academics  would  call  the  reaction  function  of  the 
Governing Council.  
The  introductory  statement  specifies  the  way  we  react  to  economic  and  monetary  developments, 
analyse and judge shocks hitting the euro area, and view the outlook for economic growth and inflation 
as well as the associated risks over different time horizons. In doing so we constantly emphasise the 
forward-looking  nature  of  our  policy  framework  and  the  medium-term  orientation  with  regard  to  our 
price stability objective.  
The first part of the statement entails our combined broad assessment of the information from both 
pillars.  In  the  subsequent  parts  economic  and  monetary  analysis  is  presented  in  greater  detail  and 
cross-checked with one another. I will only make some remarks on the latter sections.  
Our  assessment  keeps  economic  and  monetary  analysis  distinct  because  from  an  empirical 
perspective the information content of both pillars relates to different time horizons regarding the risks 
to price stability. Having both, monetary and economic analysis instead of just cyclical information, one 
avoids the mistake of taking a too narrow view of the data. Our broad-based and robust strategy thus 
prevents us from ignoring potentially relevant information.  
Let  me  put  these  general  remarks  into  a  more  specific  context  by  referring  to  the  statement  we 
published today. As the President of the ECB announced today we decided to increase the key ECB 
interest rate by 25bp to 4%. This decision was based on our assessment of the risks to price stability 
which we have identified from our economic and monetary analysis.  
Our  economic  analysis  suggests  the  following:  Regarding  growth,  incoming  information  clearly 
confirms  that  the  euro  area  economy  continues  to  expand  at  a  pace  significantly  stronger  than 
expected. The medium-term outlook is that the solid and broad based economic recovery is likely to 
continue  at  sustained  growth  rates  around  potential.  This  outlook  is  also  reflected  in  the  new 
Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections.  The  projections  foresee  average  annual  real  GDP 
growth  in  a  range  between  2.3%  and  2.9%  in  2007  and  between  1.8%  and  2.8%  in  2008.  In 
comparison with the previous ECB staff projections, the ranges projected for real GDP growth in 2007 
are within the upper part of the ranges from March. For 2008, the ranges have been revised marginally 
downwards, following the increase in oil prices over recent months. Risks to the outlook for growth are 
overall balanced on a short-term perspective, whereas longer term risks remain on the downside due 
to external factors, most notably oil prices, global imbalances and potential shifts in financial market 
sentiment.  
4 
 BIS Review 61/2007
Regarding inflation, the short-term profile of annual inflation rates continues to be determined largely 
by current and past energy price developments due to significant base effects. Annual inflation rates 
are likely to fall slightly in the months ahead before rising again significantly towards the end of the 
year. Eurosystem staff projects average annual HICP inflation of between 1.8% and 2.2% in 2007 and 
between 1.4% and 2.6% in 2008. Compared with the March 2007 projections the range projected for 
inflation  in  2007  is  somewhat  higher,  largely  reflecting  higher  oil  prices.  The  projected  range  for 
inflation in 2008 is unchanged.  
Risks to the outlook for price stability over the medium-term are on the upside. This is most notably 
due  to  domestic  factors,  in  particular,  increasing  capacity  utilisation,  gradually  improving  labour 
markets and the associated risk of higher than expected wage developments.  
Our monetary analysis suggests clear upward risks to price stability in the medium to long-term due to 
the  underlying  trend  of  continued  vigorous  money  and  credit  growth  in  an  environment  of  already 
ample liquidity.  
The cross-check of the monetary and the economic analysis supports the assessment that the overall 
risks to price stability over the medium to longer term are therefore on the upside.  
I leave it up to you what this means for the future course of monetary policy in the euro area.  
Conclusion  
3  
The issues I touched upon in this dinner speech clearly require more research efforts to improve the 
empirical basis for some of the conclusions and interpretations I have referred to.  
Naturally, the mere fact that there are still more unresolved issues than resolved ones explains why 
conferences like this one are so useful.  
In this respect I hope that you have many stimulating discussions and a productive conference.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 61/2007 
 5
