Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro area and its monetary policy 
Address  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference “The ECB and its Watchers IX”, Frankfurt am Main, 7 September 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Television dramas tend to be made about medical rescue teams, hospital emergency rooms 
and  heart  surgeons,  not  about  the  internists  who  regularly  take  your  blood  pressure  and 
check your cholesterol.  
A  central  bank  has  one  emergency  room  which  –  sporadically  –  tackles  casualties  of  car 
accidents  and  applies  angioplasty  and  bypass  surgery.  These  are,  for  example,  the 
exceptional  decisions  on  the  refinancing  on  the  money  market  to  help  it  normalize  its 
functioning. But these activities – critical as they are to the functioning of the system – make 
up a small fraction of their duties. Central banks are for the most part made up of legions of 
internists who stare at your X-rays and engage in sober consultations. At the end, they write 
diagnostic  statements  based  on  regularities  and  new  facts  –  facts  that  can  change  your 
conditions in the longer run. We call regularities the “deep structure of the economy”. We call 
the new facts “shocks”.  
The  deep  structure  is  formed  by  economic  institutions,  which  take  considerable  time  to 
develop.  So  central  banks,  not  unlike  doctors,  take  them  largely  as  given.  Shocks 
occasionally surprise economic agents, causing them to revise their medium-term outlook.  
Because constant monitoring of regularities and new facts that can change the outlook in a 
long-lasting fashion is what we practice most often in central banks, central bank watchers 
should resist the temptation to focus on the drama of emergency medicine. Central banking 
is prevention and regular, unglamorous assistance – the better part of cure. It is concerned 
always with life-time health conditions, only occasionally with emergency interventions, and 
never with the application of quick fixes. 
So  I  will  concentrate  on  structure  and  facts  that  can  change  the  outlook  in  a  long-lasting 
fashion,  not  on  the  drama.  And  I  will  give  you  a  diagnosis  and  draw  an  inference  for 
monetary policy.  
Diagnosis 
The diagnostic part of my observations has two elements. One is a basic stylised fact that 
can  be  shown  –  like  an  X-ray  –  in  a  simple  picture.  The  second  element  consists  in  a 
substantial  body  of  evidence  on  the  deep  economic  structure  that  forms  the  landscape  in 
which  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  has  to  operate.  I  will  argue  that  the  two  elements 
taken together – the stylised fact and what we know about the deep economic structure – 
pose a puzzle. I will then offer the key to solving the puzzle. 
Take the simplest measure of economic performance, the mean and the standard deviation 
of annual CPI inflation and of a conventional measure of detrended output for the euro area, 
the United States and several other countries over the period following the start of Economic 
and  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  Plot  these  statistics  in  the  same  chart  and  treat  this  simple 
picture as a representation of the facts. [Figure 1 does this in the form of a scatter-plot.1 In 
                                                 
1   For the euro area, inflation has been computed on the basis of the HICP. For all economies, the detrended 
measure of output is the Hodrick-Prescott-filtered logarithm of real GDP. With the exception of the euro area, 
the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  –  for  which  data  are  from  their  respective  national  statistical 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 1
order  to  make  the  comparison  meaningful,  take  detrended  output,  which  in  the  short-to-
medium term reflects output movements over and above the low-frequency variation that is 
beyond the control of monetary policy. If you compare means and standard deviations across 
countries, several interesting aspects emerge from the chart. 
Figure 1. Inflation and de-trended output: means and volatilities since January 1999  
 Source: ECB calculations 
First, and almost en passant, you are led to confirm a fundamental economic principle which 
is a cornerstone of our monetary framework: higher inflation is not automatically associated 
with a superior economic performance. Comparing means – of inflation and detrended output 
– across countries you can find simply no connection between average inflation and average 
macroeconomic  performance,  even  at  business  cycle  frequencies.  As  a  simple  corollary, 
higher inflation merely imposes additional costs on the economy, costs which it is my precise 
duty to spare euro area businesses and consumers.2  
But it is by comparing volatilities in the right-hand panel that you would be most surprised. In 
terms  of  volatility,  the  euro  area  exhibits  a  remarkable  comparative  performance  for  what 
concerns both inflation and detrended output. EMU has kept inflation in the vicinity of levels 
consistent  with  our  objective,  without  this  having  caused  abnormal  swings  in  business 
conditions. 
When seen from an international perspective, real activity in the euro area – in its deviation 
from trend – has been remarkably in line with that seen in other countries, but with a crucial 
difference: euro area inflation has been appreciably lower and more stable, thus benefiting 
consumers  and  allowing  businesses  to  make  decisions  within  an  economic  environment 
unclouded by the “fog” that inflation inevitably creates. In the volatility scatterplot, you would 
                                                                                                                                                      
agencies – all data are from the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics database. We 
have considered all the economies for which we could obtain data for both CPI inflation and real GDP. 
2   The average value of euro area detrended output under EMU, at 0.5, is exactly equal to the median of the 
distribution  across  countries  (see  the  left-hand  panel  of  the  chart).  To  put  it  differently,  over  the  period 
following  the  start  of  EMU,  half  of  the  countries  in  the  sample  experienced,  on  average,  weaker  economic 
conditions,  while  the  other  half  had  stronger  pressures  on  economic  resources.  It  could  be  noted  that  the 
favourable performance of the euro area might be due in part to the fact that the euro area is a collection of 
economies still lacking complete economic integration and thus over different cyclical phases. However, we 
have  evidence  of  an  increasing  synchronisation  of  cycles  within  the  euro  area,  which  would  weaken  the 
argument. 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2007
find the euro area at bottom-left corner, close to the zero point: low inflation volatility has not 
come at the cost of larger swings in activity.  
Now,  moderate  real  and  nominal  volatilities  are  hard  to  square  –  at  first  sight  –  with  the 
second element of my diagnosis: a structural environment in the euro area characterised by 
pervasive rigidities. While the sources of structural rigidities in the euro area are manifold, I 
will single out one dimension on which we have access to high-quality information, nominal 
rigidities. Here I can build on an extensive body of empirical research into price flexibility that 
has  been  assembled  by  staff  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  of  the  entire 
European  System  of  Central  Banks  in  a  monumental  analytical  effort  to  identify  the  main 
microeconomic facts on which the workings of EMU are founded.3 This research comes to 
one  main  conclusion.  In  the  euro  area,  prices  are  distinctly  less  flexible  than,  say,  in  the 
United States.  
Prices  change  infrequently.  The  frequency  of  price  adjustments  –  the  share  of  prices  in  a 
representative sample of product categories that are changed each month – is low relative to 
the US record [Table 1]. The average duration of a consumer price spell – a measure of the 
time that it takes for retailers to re-price their products – is 13 months. According to surveys, 
the  average  producer  price  spell  is  11  months.  In  the  United  States,  comparable  figures 
indicate durations of less than 7 months and slightly more than 8 months respectively.4  
More infrequent price revisions make the setting of prices less responsive to economic news, 
including changes in monetary conditions. In general, sticky price revision processes reduce 
the odds that the imbalances created by economic shocks can be rectified by adjustments in 
prices. Symmetrically, they make the burden of adjustment to a shock fall disproportionately 
on changes in output, incomes and employment. Also, stickier prices tend – all other things 
being equal – to increase the persistence of inflation. This is because the impact of a shock 
that  today  modifies  firms’  real  cost  conditions,  and  whose  impact  is  itself  protracted  by 
transmission lags in the real economy, tends to be spread out over an extended future, as 
staggered  price  adjustments  catch  up  only  slowly  with 
the  changed  underlying 
circumstances. 
                                                 
3   See  E.  Dhyne,  L.  Alvarez,  H.  Le  Bihan,  G.  Veronese,  D.  Dias,  J.  Hoffmann,  N.  Jonker,  P.  Lünnemann,  F. 
Rumler and J. Vilmunen (2005), “Price-setting in the euro area: some stylised facts from individual consumer 
price data”, ECB Working Paper No 524. The paper reports that the average duration of CPI price spells in the 
euro area is 4.3 quarters. By comparison, M. Bils and P. Klenow (2005), in “Some evidence on the importance 
of sticky prices”, Journal of Political Economy  112, calculate that  the average  duration of CPI prices  in the 
United States is 2.2 quarters. Other Phillips curve-based analyses broadly confirm these results. For the euro 
area, see J. Galí, M. Gertler and D. López-Salido (2001), “European inflation dynamics”, European Economic 
Review  45(7),  and  J.  Gáli,  M.  Gertler  and  D.  López-Salido  (2003),  “Erratum”,  European  Economic  Review 
47(4). 
4   Allowing for methodological differences in price-collecting procedures across statistical institutes, it emerges 
that differences in the frequency of price adjustments can be due to various causes. Differences in the degree 
of  competition,  especially  in  the  services  sector,  may  be  a  factor,  particularly  given  evidence  that  the 
divergence  of  such  frequencies  is  most  pronounced  in  that  sector.  Another  often  cited  factor  is  that  small 
corner shops, which change their prices less frequently than supermarkets, have a larger market share in euro 
area countries than in the United States. 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 3
Table 1: Measures of price stickiness for the euro area and the United States 
 Sources: On CPI for the euro area, Dhyne et al. (2005); for the United States, Bils and Klenow (2004). For the 
producer price index, PPI, Vermeulen et al. (2005). Surveys: for the euro area, Fabiani et al. (2005); for the United 
States, Blinder et al. (1998). New Keynesian Phillips curve: estimates from Galí et al. (2001, 2003), referring to 
the GDP deflator and converted from original quarterly figures.  
As  I  mentioned  before,  this  evidence  poses  a  puzzle.  By  placing  the  great  burden  of 
macroeconomic adjustment on volumes rather than prices, nominal rigidities tend to increase 
– not decrease – the volatility of real activity that an economy would experience at any level 
of  inflation volatility.  Indeed,  symmetrically,  stabilising  inflation  at  levels  consistent  with  the 
central bank’s objective is more costly – and thus less likely to happen – in economies where 
prices  are  slow  to  respond  to  innovations.  Bearing  in  mind  the  microeconomics  of  price 
adjustments in continental Europe, one would thus expect to see the euro area in the upper-
right-hand quadrant of the volatilities scatterplot. Instead, as the scatterplot makes clear, the 
volatilities  of  both  inflation  and  detrended  output  have  been  remarkably  low  under  EMU, 
lower  than  in  more  flexible  economies.  What  can  reconcile  the  facts  with  the  structural 
evidence? 
A first possibility is that, since January 1999, the euro area has simply been lucky, and has 
been  hit  by  a  sequence  of  smaller  and  more  favourable  shocks  than  other  economies. 
Reduced  shock  volatility  may  have  created  a  steadier  economic  picture,  and  thus  steady 
inflation and output.  
Structural  analysis  does  not  support  this  conjecture,  however.  As  a  matter  of  long-run 
regularities,  the  variance  of  the  shocks  hitting  the  euro  area  economy  is  not  statistically 
different than that, say, in the United States, the epitome of a flexible economy.5 More to the 
point, over the past eight years, the shocks that have driven the business cycle in the euro 
area and US economies have differed in timing and nature, not in magnitude.6 The shocks 
that in late 2000 drove the United States into recession hit almost a year before those that 
produced the slump in the euro area. But, when the sharp reappraisal of the outlook in 2000 
caused  the  markets  to  collapse  and  business  investment  to  enter  a  prolonged  phase  of 
retrenchment,  capital  deepening  in  the  United  States  was  promptly  replaced,  as  the  main 
engine of output-per-hour growth, by extraordinary advancements in total factor productivity. 
                                                 
5   See  in  particular  F.  Smets  and  R.  Wouters  (2005),  “Comparing  shocks  and  frictions  in  US  and  euro  area 
business cycles: a Bayesian DSGE approach”, Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 20(2), March, pp. 161-
183. 
6   See in particular L. Christiano, R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2007), “Shocks, structures or policies? The euro 
area and the US after 2001”, ECB Working Paper No 774, forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Dynamics 
and Control. 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2007
As  I  have  argued  elsewhere,  US  firms  have  been  able  to meet  expanding  demand  with  a 
more efficient organisation of their production processes.7  
The same ten-year episode had a distinctly different face in the euro area. In the downswing 
that  started  in  2001,  a  decline  in  total  factor  productivity  reinforced,  rather  than  offset,  the 
diminishing contribution of capital.8 Rapidly decelerating productivity was one force behind 
the counter-cyclical rebound in unit labour costs that we observed during the early part of the 
new millennium.9
These events played out for much of the short history that is summarised in the volatilities 
scatterplot.  All  in  all,  the  technological  shock  was  negative,  protracted  and  quantitatively 
important,  a  primary  additional  drag  on  activity  in  a  phase  of  falling  demand  and  dim 
economic prospects.  
During  this time,  if  shocks  were  no  milder  or more  benign,  moderate  volatilities and  sticky 
underlying  mechanisms  of  macroeconomic  adjustment  in  the  euro  area  still  need  to  be 
reconciled. An alternative channel might hold the key to resolving the puzzle. This channel is 
suggested by time series evidence that points to low inflation persistence in the euro area.10 
The extent of serial correlation that one can find in inflation statistics is very moderate. An 
inflationary  shock  dissipates  quickly  in  the  euro  area  despite  rigidities,  and  inflation  has  a 
tendency  to  return  to  its  long-run  norm  reasonably  quickly.  The  duration  of  the  effect  of  a 
shock  to  inflation  is  considerably  less  than  one  year,  which  is  close  to  the  figure  that  one 
obtains, for example, for the United States, again notwithstanding vastly different patterns of 
price-updating practices across the two areas.  
Recent  ECB  research  goes  further  than  pure  time  series  analysis,  and  helps  it  to  be 
interpreted.11 This research – adopting a structural approach – identifies the launch of EMU 
and the establishment of a clearly defined nominal anchor as the defining event that changed 
                                                 
7   See  J.-C.  Trichet  (2006),  “Activism  and  alertness  in  monetary  policy,”  lecture  given  at  the  Conference  on 
Central  Banks  in  the  21st  Century,  organised  by  the  Banco  de  Espana  (Madrid,  8  June).  I  expounded  the 
reasons  for  sluggish  productivity  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  a  recent  lecture.  See  J.-C.  Trichet  (2007), 
“Productivity in the euro area and monetary policy,” special lecture delivered at the 22nd Annual Congress of 
the European Economic Association (Budapest, 27 August). 
8   Fresh evidence on the underlying factors explaining growth in the euro area and the US has become available 
in  the  so-called  EU-KLEMS  Growth  and  Productivity  Accounts  database,  the  first  result  of  a  two-year 
collaborative  effort  by  researchers  based  on  16  institutions  across  the  EU  to  produce  long  and  internally 
consistent  time  series  for  output  growth,  employment,  capital  formation  and  total  factor  productivity  at  a 
disaggregated industry level. The dis-aggregation of output growth by source which results from this analysis 
indicates that the average contribution of capital to value added growth in the United States was 1 percentage 
point in the first half of the 1990s, increasing to 1.9 percent in the second half of the decade, and stabilising at 
0.8  percentage  point  on  average  between  2001  and  2004.  In  the  euro  area  –  excluding  Belgium,  Greece, 
Ireland, Luxembourg, Portugal and Slovenia – the contribution of capital accounted for 1 percentage point in 
the first half of the 1990s and 1.4 percent in the second half, declining to 0.9 percentage points in 2001-2004. 
The TFP contribution in the  United States  was 0.7  percent in the first half of the 1990s, 1.4 percent in the 
second  half  of  the  1990s  and  1.9  percent  on  average  between  2001  and  2004.  In  the  euro  area,  the 
contribution of TFP was 0.2 percent during the first half of the 1990s, 0.9 percent during the second half and a 
disappointing  -0.1  percent  on  average  between  2001-2004.  In  my  Budapest  intervention,  I  mention  the 
strengths and weaknesses of this body of evidence (see Trichet, J.C., 2007, op. cit.). 
9   Nominal wage growth per worker has been remarkably stable since the beginning of EMU but also relatively 
invariant  to  the  cycle.  So,  the  slowdown  in  labour  productivity  growth  translated  into  greater  increases  in 
nominal unit labour costs in the contractionary phase between 2001 and 2003. See, for empirical evidence, A. 
Arpaia. and K. Pichelmann (2007), “Nominal and real wage flexibility in EMU,” European Economy Economic 
Papers No 281 (June). 
10   See F. Altissimo, M. Ehrmann and F. Smets (2006), “Inflation persistence and price-setting behaviour in the 
euro area – a summary of the IPN evidence”, ECB Occasional Paper No 46, June. 
11   See  L.  Benati  (2007),  “Investigating  inflation  persistence  across  monetary  regimes”,  ECB  Working  Paper, 
forthcoming. 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 5
the  very  nature  of  the  inflationary  process  in  the  euro  area.  This  institutional  break  has 
eradicated the “intrinsic” component of the inflation formation mechanism, namely the extent 
to  which  economic  agents  –  in  re-setting  prices  or  negotiating  wages  –  look  at  the  past 
history of inflation, rather than into the eyes of the central bank.  
To be sure, this phenomenon is not confined to the euro area. The results of this research, 
reported in Table 2 show that the introduction of clearly defined nominal anchors has been 
associated with the disappearance of intrinsic persistence in other countries as well. When 
structural models of inflation are estimated over the full data samples – i.e. including years 
during  which  virtually  none  of  these  economies  enjoyed  monetary  stability  –  intrinsic 
persistence is estimated to be uniformly high. This is perfectly logical and to be expected, 
since for all these economies the full samples include observations from the Great Inflation of 
the  1970s,  with  its  erratic  inflation  fluctuations.  In  the  absence  of  guidance  from  central 
banks,  extrapolation  of  past  experience  was  a  secure  way  for  price  and  wage  setters  to 
protect  the  real  value  of  earnings  and  returns.  Through  this  mechanism,  past  inflationary 
shocks tended to be perpetuated and become endemic. 
Table 2: Estimates of intrinsic inflation persistence by monetary regime 
 Full sample European Monetary Union
Euro area 
0.855 
0.000 
  New monetary regime  
Switzerland 
0.672 
0.000 
  Inflation targeting  
United Kingdom  0.600 
Canada 
Australia 
Sweden 
New Zealand 
  0.539 
   0.008 
0.103 
0.010 
0.000 
0.006 
After the Great Inflation  
United States 
0.904 
Japan 
0.660 
0.519 
0.634 
(2007).  Figures 
report the  mode  of 
Sources:  Benati 
the estimated  structural  persistence  parameter 
in conventional  hybrid  Phillips  curves,  featuring  a  forward-looking  and  a  backward-looking  term  for  inflation. 
Monetary  regimes  are  defined  as  follows.  For  the  euro  area,  the  full  sample  is  1970Q1-2006Q4,  and  the 
European Monetary Union period includes 1999Q1-2006Q4. For Switzerland, the full sample is 1970Q1-2006Q4, 
and  the  new  monetary  regime  includes  2000:1-2006:4.  For  the  United  Kingdom  the  full  sample  is  1963Q1-
2006Q4, and the inflation targeting period includes 1992Q4-2006Q4. For Canada the inflation targeting sample 
includes  1991Q1-2006Q4.  For  Australia,  the  full  sample  includes  1969Q3-2006Q3,  and  the  inflation  targeting 
sample includes 1994Q3-2006Q3. For Sweden, the inflation targeting sample includes 1993Q1-2006Q3. For New 
Zealand, the inflation targeting sample includes 1990Q1-2006Q4. For the US, the full sample is 1954Q3-2007Q1, 
and after the Great Inflation includes 1983Q1-2007Q1. For Japan, the full sample includes 1957Q1-2006Q4, and 
after the Great Inflation includes 1983Q1-2006Q4.  
However, when the same test is conducted on a restricted sample, including the most recent 
years only, a dramatic difference emerges between the economies where there is a clearly 
defined  objective  of  price  stability  –  namely  the  euro  area,  Switzerland  and  the  inflation-
6 
 BIS Review 97/2007
targeting regimes –and the rest of the sample. While in the former group intrinsic persistence 
has entirely vanished – to the point that, today, inflation can be characterised as a quasi-pure 
forward-looking process – in the latter it is still clearly there, and is still comparatively high.12 
Research in the Federal Reserve System has produced reinforcing evidence of this.13
What can explain these results? Although, it is certainly possible to conjure up many different 
and convoluted explanations, Occam’s razor naturally cuts through all and picks the simplest 
and most logical one. And the simplest, most logical and most elegant explanation is that, 
even  if  “hardwired”  nominal  and  real  sluggishness  introduces  persistence  into  the  inflation 
process  –  which  in  itself  tends  to  perpetuate  past  inflation  pressures  into  the  future14  –  a 
great  portion  of  that  persistence  can  be  eradicated  if  the  expectations  of  price  and  wage-
setters are focused on the objective of the central bank. Indeed, another ECB study finds that 
the influence of the ECB’s numerical objective of price stability on the evolution over time of 
inflation outweighs the influence of past shocks, and thus to a great extent compensates for 
the added inertia resulting from a more rigid economic structure.15  
Returning to my original puzzle, we now have what I think is a simple and theoretically sound 
explanation:  by  eradicating  intrinsic  inflation  persistence  from  the  economy,  the  current 
monetary regime has improved the inflation-output volatility trade-off, moving the euro area 
economy down and to the left – close to the zero point – where indeed you would find it in 
the scatterplot.  
Was it luck? As the time-honoured saying goes, “The harder I try, the luckier I get”. 
                                                 
12   It is worth mentioning that there is a complete lack of persistence when structural models are estimated on the 
basis  of  data  from  another  stable  monetary  regime,  from  a  distant  era:  the  classical  gold  standard  (1879-
1914). Benati (2007) shows that a century ago, exactly as today in the euro area, Switzerland and inflation-
targeting countries, inflation exhibited no persistence and was purely forward-looking. 
13   See  R.  Gürkaynak,  B.  Sack  and  E.  Swanson  (2005),  “The  excess  sensitivity  of  long-term  interest  rates: 
evidence and implications for macroeconomic models”, American Economic Review, 95(1), pp. 425-36 and R. 
Gürkaynak, A. Levin and E. Swanson (2006), “Does inflation targeting anchor long-run inflation expectations? 
Evidence from long-term bond yields in the U.S., U.K., and Sweden”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Working Paper 2006-09. The first paper finds that, while in the United States the difference between long-term 
forward rates on nominal and inflation-indexed bonds reacts significantly to macroeconomic announcements 
and new data releases – something which should not happen if inflation expectations were perfectly stabilised 
– in the United Kingdom there has been no such reaction since May 1997, when the Bank of England became 
independent.  Again,  the  most  logical  explanation  for  this  finding  is  that  a  clearly  defined  inflation  target, 
coupled with central bank independence, has firmly anchored long-term inflation expectations, thus eliminating 
at the root the key cause of inflation persistence. 
14   Nominal  price  rigidities  need  not  imply  inflation  persistence.  For  example,  in  a  conventional  simple  New-
Keynesian model with a Calvo-based Phillips curve, inflation is not inertial unless a backward-looking term is 
introduced in the Phillips curve itself. In this case, price-level inertia does not lead to inflation inertia. However, 
in  a  more  complex  model  with  wage  and  real  rigidities  of  the  sort  that  have  become  standard  in  dynamic 
general  equilibrium  modelling,  inflation  inherits  persistence  from  the  inertia  that  the  real  rigidities  inject  into 
firms’  real  marginal  costs.  In  this  latter  case,  augmenting  price-level  inertia  –  a  higher  Calvo  parameter  – 
increases inertia in inflation. See for example the discussion in L. J. Christiano, M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans 
(2005),  “Nominal  rigidities  and  the  dynamic  effects  of  a  shock  to  monetary  policy”,  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, 113(1), pp. 1-45. Benati (2007), op. cit., convincingly argues that the intrinsic component of inflation 
persistence  which  many  researchers  have  found  in  the  past  is  the  spurious  statistical  product  of  a  central 
bank’s  early  failure  to  firmly  stabilise  inflation  expectations.  It  is  “spurious”  is  that  such  persistence  is  not 
“hardwired” in the structure of the economy – technically, it is not structural in the sense of the Lucas (1976) 
critique, and therefore invariant to policy – but is rather the product of the inability of monetary regimes lacking 
a clear nominal anchor to reliably guide expectations. 
15   See L. Christiano et al. (2007), op. cit. 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 7
Alertness 
The nature of the inflation process and the structural peculiarities of the euro area – some of 
which I tried to outline in my remarks today – have played an important role in positioning the 
stance of monetary policy over the past. The policy course was carefully calibrated to a rigid 
environment where, however, expectations have learned to look forward – and into the eyes 
of the ECB – rather than backward.  
For one thing, we have been guided by the understanding that a central bank operating in a 
relatively rigid economy is able to exert the same amount of impact by adjusting its policy 
instrument  in  more  moderate  steps  than  in  a  relatively  more  flexible  economy.  Under  the 
structural  conditions  that  prevail  in  our  economy,  an  erratic  policy  course  would  introduce 
unwelcome  volatility  in  both  inflation  and  output  that  would  necessitate  corrective, 
countervailing action further down the road.  
And  such  harmful  side-effects  would  be  compounded  in  an  economy  where  the  inflation 
process  is  intrinsically  forward-looking.  In  these  conditions,  a  central  bank  that  moves  its 
policy rate around in response to each twist and turn in the data loses influence and works 
against its own intentions, because policy shifts that lack a steady orientation do little – in 
such  an  environment  –  to  guide  expectations  when  agents  build  their  decisions  on  policy 
patterns, on the central bank’s long-term strategic orientations, rather than on extrapolations 
of their past experience.  
The steady course of our policy did not impede a smooth adjustment of the euro area to the 
shocks that have hit the global economy over the turn of the century.  
The  markets  have  internalised  these  strategic  principles  with  an  increasing  degree  of 
precision.  In  some  notable  instances  in  the  past,  we  were  even  able  to  steer  market 
expectations effectively without explicit action, proof that markets accept as true the ultimate 
motives of policy that we profess. In those instances in which expectations displayed signs of 
overreaction to current events our renewed emphasis in communication on our objective, on 
the  determination  that  we  would  apply  to  enforce  it,  on  our  steady  alertness,  provided 
effective resistance to inordinate developments.16  
Over more recent times, incoming data which have indicated increasingly persuasive signs of 
a  recovery  in  an  environment  of  abundant  credit  and  elevated  commodity  prices  were 
correctly  mapped  into  expectations  that  the  stance  would  –  gradually  –  be  adjusted, 
consistent with our remit to control inflation over the medium term.  
Concluding remarks  
In  retrospect,  market  expectations  have  aligned  well  with  our  intentions.  They  have 
internalised  the  principle  that  the  withdrawal  of  accommodation  is  conditional  on  the 
evolution of our analysis. It is not been predicated on any single short-term indicator of the 
macroeconomic state. In the last few months, the ECB has not measured the state of the 
economy  by  the  strength  or  weakness  of  any  particular  piece  of  incoming  news.  It  has 
continued  to  extract  the  macroeconomic  trend  from  the  wealth  of  cumulative  evidence 
accruing – from month to month – from the economic and the monetary side.  
As I said yesterday, on behalf of the Governing Council, our monetary policy stance is still on 
the accommodative side and the medium term outlook for price stability remains subject to 
upside risks. I said that at the same time, the financial market volatility and reappraisal of risk 
                                                 
16   I  have  described  this  situation  in  an  earlier  intervention.  See  J.C.  Trichet  (2005),  “Monetary  Policy  and 
‘Credible alertness’,” speech delivered at the Panel discussion “Monetary Policy Strategies: A Central Bank 
Panel” at the Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 
27 August. 
8 
 BIS Review 97/2007
of recent weeks have led to an increase in uncertainty. Given this high level of uncertainty, it 
is  appropriate  to  gather  additional  information  and  to  examine  new  data  before  drawing 
further conclusions for monetary policy in the context of our medium term oriented monetary 
policy strategy. That being said, our “constant steady alertness”, and determination to act in 
the future whenever it is necessary makes no doubt in the mind of observers. 
By  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely  manner  we  will  ensure  that  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium  term  do  not  materialise  and  that  medium  term  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly 
anchored in line with price stability.  
Particularly  in  times  of  high  financial  market  volatility  this  continued  solid  anchoring  of 
inflation expectations is one of the most precious assets on which we can draw to rebuild and 
consolidate the confidence which ultimately will itself permit the return to a normal functioning 
of the financial markets. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 9
