Mary C Nkosi: Information and communications technology in the SADC region 
Opening speech by Mrs Mary C Nkosi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the 2007 
SADC ICT Forum Conference, Mangochi, 14 May 2007. 
 The Chairman of the SADC ICT Forum, Mr Paulo Maculuve 
The Executive Director, Corporate Services 
The ICT Directors from the SADC Central Banks 
Representatives of Hardware and Software Suppliers 
Members of the Press 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
On behalf of the Governor, who is not able to be with us this morning due to other prior engagements, 
I am pleased to warmly welcome all of you here today. I would most especially like to extend a special 
welcome to our distinguished delegates from sister central banks within the SADC region. I would also 
like  to  recognize  representatives  of  hardware  and  software  suppliers  who  are  amongst  us  this 
morning. 
Mr  Chairman  and  Distinguished  Delegates,  it  is  pleasing  to  note  that  the  SADC  Information  and 
Communications  Technology  (ICT)  Forum  will  this  year  be  celebrating  its  10th  Anniversary.  Malawi 
has therefore been fortunate enough to host this Conference in this memorable year. 
As you are all aware, information and communications technology (ICT) has become a critical facet for 
the day to day operations in all our central banks. The rapid evolution of ICT, which is generally called 
the “ICT revolution”, has been exerting a profound impact on the world’s economies. As we all can 
acknowledge, technological innovation has brought about the speedy processing and transmission of 
information,  resulting  in  substantial  reduction  in  costs,  wider  networking,  and  globalization  on  an 
unprecedented scale and scope.  
Undoubtedly, ICT has affected a varied range of industries world wide, and the banking industry and 
central banks in particular, have benefited greatly from this ICT revolution.  
Mr Chairman and Distinguished Delegates, the central banks within the SADC region have registered 
unprecedented developments and advances in the areas of Payment Systems, website development, 
and Banking Supervision Application, just to mention a few areas which are projects emanating from 
the SADC ICT Forum. These projects have been possible and successfully implemented largely due 
to the co-operation and collaboration that exists between the central banks in the region.  
The issues that will be discussed at this Conference are very important in the context of the realization 
of some of the key objectives of our central banks that can be achieved through sound implementation 
of  the  ICT  functions.  This  Conference  therefore  offers  all  of  us  various  opportunities  to  effectively 
contribute to positive developments of our central banks. 
I am informed that one of the notable important projects being undertaken collaboratively is on ICT 
Governance implementation within the central banks using the Control Objectives for Information and 
related Technology (COBIT) framework.  
Mr  Chairman  and  Distinguished  Delegates,  the  importance  of  ICT  Governance  can  never  be  over 
emphasized. You may recall that infamous scandals such as Enron in the USA, were largely caused 
by lack of resilient and sound corporate governance structures within the corporation. It is therefore 
only  prudent  that  we  must  embrace  and  implement  proper  corporate  governance  structures  in  our 
central banks. 
The  recent  emergence  of  good  corporate  governance  as  a  key  business  driver  has  seen  the 
emergence of a new ball game, hence the importance of such frameworks as COBIT. It is therefore 
my hope that by the end of the Conference, delegates will learn and share a lot of issues on this tool.  
Let  me  now  turn  my  attention  to  another  key  issue  that  I  expect  delegates  to  discuss  at  this 
Conference.  This  relates  to  the  operation  of  the  Regional  Indicative  Strategic  Development  Plan 
(RISDP), which is the SADC long-term (15-Year) Strategy. Briefly, the RISDP realigns the cooperation 
and  integration  priorities;  articulates  the  policies  and  strategies;  and,  sets  the  overall  targets  of  the 
processes for the different priority intervention areas. As you all know ICT is listed as one such critical 
BIS Review 59/2007 
 1
area. I therefore trust that this Conference will seek to prepare a RISDP Action Plan which will steer 
ICTs within the SADC region to higher levels. Equally important, I also expect that this initiative will 
assist central banks to harmonise their functions so that they can benefit from each others’ resources 
and knowledge.  
Mr Chairman and Distinguished Delegates, at this juncture let me also thank representatives of the 
hardware  and  software  suppliers  for  coming  to  this  Conference.  These  are  our  partners  and  the 
technologies that have been implemented in our central banks would not have been possible without 
their technical advice, expertise and innovation. It is the wish of the Reserve Bank of Malawi that in 
future all the SADC central banks can enter into group agreements on certain ICT services that are 
provided  by  the  vendors.  We  believe  that  this  would  enable  us  share  the  cost  of  expensive  ICT 
resources in order to achieve economies of scale.  
I would like to conclude by again thanking you all for coming to this Conference and to Malawi, which 
is widely recognized the world over as the “Warm Heart of Africa.” You obviously may not have ample 
time  to see what Lake Malawi  has  to offer  but  the least  you can  do  is  to sample our  most  popular 
“Chambo” fish dish as well as taking a cruise on the lake. 
I wish you fruitful deliberations. 
It is now my pleasure to declare the 2007 SADC ICT FORUM CONFERENCE OFFICIALLY OPENED. 
I thank you all for your attention.  
God bless us all. 
 2 
 BIS Review 59/2007
