Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The BSP and the banking community – a partnership 
for a better year in 2007 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Annual Reception for the Banking Community, at the Central Bank of the 
Philippines, Manila, 16 January 2007. 
 Distinguished members of the banking community, special guests, friends, ladies and gentlemen. On 
behalf  of  the  Monetary  Board,  I  welcome  all  of  you  to  our  Annual  Reception  for  the  Banking 
Community.  
We at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas always look forward to this yearly event because it gives us, 
central  bankers,  the  opportunity  to  interact  with  you  at  the  social  level  and  -  more  importantly  - 
because we have you as a captive audience as we deliver the banking sectors’ report card for the past 
year, as well as our roadmap to the future. 
To put these in perspective, I will review our economic performance in 2006, share our views on how 
the economy will perform in 2007, and what these imply for the monetary and banking policies of the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  In  plain  language,  2006  was  a  good  year  for  the  economy.  We  saw  GDP 
continue  a  pattern  of  broad-based  expansion,  with  the  services  sector,  to  which  banks  belong, 
recording the strongest performance.  
Fiscal  reforms  and  government’s  prudent  management  of  its  resources  continue  to  yield  strong 
dividends, with revenue growth outpacing spending.  
At the same time, monetary and banking policies generated positive results: slower inflation, declining 
interest  rates,  a  stronger  peso,  and  gross  international  reserves  at  an  all-time  high  on  the  back  of 
strong inflows from export receipts, OFW remittances, and foreign investments.  
It is noteworthy that even with supply shocks from record-high domestic oil prices and the value-added 
tax reforms, we managed to grow the economy without fueling inflation.  
It is equally noteworthy that in 2006, the consolidated assets of the Philippine banking sector reached 
a record high level, even as asset quality continued to improve with the implementation of the SPV 
Law. In fact, as of November 2006 and for the first time since the 1997 Asian crisis, the benchmark 
non-performing loan ratio of commercial banks dropped to less than seven per cent; similar trends are 
being observed in thrift and rural banks. 
Let us therefore give the banking sector a well-deserved round of applause.  
Moreover, the capital adequacy ratio of the banking system stands strong at about 16% in 2006, even 
as the banking system increased provisioning levels and made the transition to the demanding new 
international accounting standards.  
I  also  wish  to  commend  the  banking  sector  for  its  growing  support  for  microfinance,  our  special 
advocacy  for  alleviating  poverty  in  our  country.  Latest  data  indicate  that  there  are  more  than  200 
banks  providing  microfinance  services  to  630,000  micro-borrowers  with  total  loan  portfolio  of  P3.7 
billion. The average is P11,600 per borrower, more than double the 2006 figure of about P5,000 for 
each borrower. Let us thank these banks for their support through another round of applause!  
Market  reforms  continued  to  take  root  in  2006  including  the  development  of  market  infrastructure. 
Among  others,  we  saw  the  full  implementation  of  the  third-party  custodian  system  and  the  fixed 
income exchange. Another is the interconnection of the Bangko Sentral’s real-time gross settlement 
system or Philippine Payments and Settlements System with the Philippine Dealing System and the 
Bureau of Treasury in line with the Delivery-versus-Payment settlement of government securities.  
The BSP capped the year with the prepayment of $1.4 billion in loans, including all its obligations to 
the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  This  ended  4  ½  decades  of  continuous  borrowing  from  the 
Fund. This sends a clear signal to the international community that the structural reform process and 
macroeconomic prudence in the Philippines have firmly taken root and that Philippine authorities can 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 1
independently  craft  and  pursue  a  credible  and  strong  policy  framework  and  reform  program  for 
sustaining the country’s economic growth.  
The  year  2006  also  saw  the  BSP  implementing  the  following  enhancements  in  our  monetary  and 
banking policies:  
• 
Refinements  in  our  inflation  targeting  framework  to  align  it  with  practices  in  other  inflation 
targeting countries. 
Streamlined  access  to  our  rediscounting  facilities,  one  of  our  instruments  for  conducting 
monetary policy. In particular, we launched electronic rediscounting facility to ensure wider 
and faster delivery of credit to SMEs in the countryside.  
Continued  alignment  of  domestic  prudential  standards  with  international  benchmarks  and 
best practices, particularly in upgrading the quality of corporate governance and disclosure 
as well as risk management. 
Issuance of guidelines on banks’ internal credit rating systems, technology risk management, 
as well as market and liquidity risks management. 
The adoption of the prompt corrective action framework which provides a time bound setting 
to deal with problem banks. 
Adopted  measures  to  improve  access  of  SMEs  to  financing  through  lower  reserve 
requirements  and relaxed  -  but  still  prudent -  regulations  on bank branching,  risk weights, 
single borrower’s limit, connected lending and documentation.  
     Indeed,  the  continuing  partnership  between  the  BSP  and  the  banking  sector  has  produced  very 
positive results in 2006.  
Economic and monetary policy outlook 
Moving  forward,  let  me  share  with  you  our  views  on  the  likely  economic  prospects  for  2007.  With 
resilient personal consumption, strong exports performance and robust services and industry output, 
GDP growth is expected to rise to 5.7-6.5 percent for 2007. If our fiscal position continues to improve, 
we can look forward to stronger, more sustained long-term growth.  
Inflation is seen to continue to slow down in 2007, with the government target of 4-5 percent likely to 
be achieved, in the absence of new shocks. Nevertheless, there are certain risks to inflation that need 
to be carefully monitored and assessed, including oil prices, possible impact of El Nino on agricultural 
output, wage adjustments, and possible liquidity expansion. The BSP will continue to keep a vigilant 
eye on these risks so that it could move pre-emptively against threats to price stability. 
On the external front, dollar inflows from OFW remittances and foreign investments are expected to 
remain strong. This should continue to boost our external payments position and enable us to further 
build up our international reserves. These conditions, in turn, underpin our expectations of a strong 
peso in 2007. In fact, we are now our reviewing foreign exchange regulations, with further liberalization 
as our goal. 
Going forward, we will continue to support various legislative initiatives to foster the development of 
our  financial  markets,  including  the  creation  of  a  centralized  credit  information  bureau  system  to 
improve  the  quality  of  financial  information  available  to  investors,  enhance  private  sector  access  to 
credit, and minimize exposure to risks of financial intermediaries. We are hopeful that the bill will be 
approved by the Bicameral Committee and signed into law by the President as soon as possible. 
The BSP will also continue to support additional legislative initiatives to hasten the development of the 
Philippine  capital  market,  including  the  amendments  to  the  BSP  charter,  Corporate  Recovery  Act, 
Revised Company Investment Act, and the Personal Equity Retirement Act.  
In the banking sector, we expect further expansion of bank resources, improvement in banks asset 
quality  through  NPL  disposal,  and  improved  capitalization.  We  should  also  see  a  stronger  banking 
system  resulting  from  more  mergers  and  acquisitions.  This  should  make  banks  better  financial 
intermediaries and risks managers. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2007
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  Improved  macroeconomic  conditions,  accumulating  banking  reforms,  and 
robust  improvements  in  banks’  profitability,  set  the  stage  for  an  even  stronger  performance  of  the 
Philippine banking system in 2007.  
Finally,  I  wish  to  thank  all  the  bank  associations  and  all  our  partners  in  the  retail  and  the business 
sector, including our media friends, for their support in making our joint program “Tulong Barya Para 
sa Eskwela” a resounding success! Clearly, the combined donations/savings of around P12.5 million 
which we generated sends a clear signal that coins are indeed valuable; that “ang barya, mahalaga.” 
This  should  convince  our  schoolchildren  to  start  saving  up  with  their  coins.  Let  us  therefore  give 
everyone who participated in “Barya Para sa Eskwela” a well-deserved round of applause. Salamat po 
sa inyo.  
We look forward to your continuing support for the nationwide implementation of our economic and 
financial  literacy  program  in  cooperation  with  the  Department  of  Education  which  should  transform 
each child into regular savers.  
Concluding remarks 
Friends. 2006 was a good year for the economy and the banking sector. We are therefore primed for 
an even better and stronger performance in 2007.  
While mindful of the challenges ahead, we at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas are determined to move 
forward in partnership with the banking community.  
And so, ladies and gentlemen, may I offer a toast to a strong and successful partnership between the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and the banking sector. May we become a truly potent enabling force in 
moving the country forward and providing a better life for all Filipinos.  
Cheers!!! 
Thank you everyone and enjoy the rest of the evening.  
BIS Review 9/2007 
 3
