Ben S Bernanke: The Community Reinvestment Act - its evolution and new 
challenges 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Community Affairs Research Conference, Washington DC, 30 March 2007.  
 This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). Enacted in 1977, 
the  CRA  affirmed  the  obligation  of  federally  insured  depository  institutions  to  help  meet  the  credit 
needs of communities in which they are chartered, consistent with safe and sound operations. The act 
also charged the federal bank regulatory agencies, including the Federal Reserve, with implementing 
the  CRA  through  regulations  and with  examining  banks  and  thrifts  to  determine  whether  they  meet 
their CRA obligations. 
The  CRA  presents  an  interesting  case  study  of  a  regulatory  regime  that  has  evolved  to  adjust  to 
changes  in  the  economic,  financial,  and  social  environment.  Since  the  CRA's  enactment,  the 
implementing regulations have been substantially amended three times--in 1989, 1995, and 2005. In 
each case, changes to the regulations reflected both experience gained in the implementation of the 
law as well as ongoing developments in financial markets and the economy. In my remarks today, I 
will survey some milestones in the evolution of the CRA, beginning with a description of the economic 
and social concerns that prompted the passage of the act. With this brief history as background, I will 
comment on the challenges we face in ensuring that the CRA remains effective and relevant in the 
future.  
The origins of the Community Reinvestment Act 
Public  and  congressional  concerns  about  the  deteriorating  condition  of  America's  cities,  particularly 
lower-income and minority neighborhoods, led to the enactment of the Community Reinvestment Act. 
In  the  view  of  many,  urban  decay  was  partly  a  consequence  of  limited  credit  availability,  which 
encouraged  urban  flight  and  inhibited  the  rehabilitation  of  declining  neighborhoods.  Some  critics 
pinned  the  blame  for  the  lack  of  credit  availability  on  mainstream  financial  institutions,  which  they 
characterized  as  willing  to  accept  deposits  from  households  and  small  businesses  in  lower-income 
neighborhoods but unwilling to lend or invest in those same neighborhoods despite the presence of 
creditworthy borrowers.  
Several  social  and  economic  factors  help  explain  why  credit  to  lower-income  neighborhoods  was 
limited  at  that  time.  First,  racial  discrimination  in  lending  undoubtedly  adversely  affected  local 
communities.  Discriminatory lending practices had deep historical roots. The term "redlining," which 
refers to the practice of designating certain lower-income or minority neighborhoods as ineligible for 
credit, appears to have originated in 1935, when the Federal Home Loan Bank Board asked the Home 
Owners' Loan Corporation to create "residential security maps" for 239 cities that would indicate the 
level of security for real estate investments in each surveyed city.1 The resulting maps designated four 
categories of lending and investment risk, each with a letter and color designation. Type "D" areas, 
those  considered  to  be  the  riskiest  for  lending  and  which  included  many  neighborhoods  with 
predominantly  African-American  populations,  were  color-coded  red  on  the  maps--hence  the  term 
"redlining"  (Federal  Home  Loan  Bank  Board,  1937).  Private  lenders  reportedly  constructed  similar 
maps that were used to determine credit availability and terms. The 1961 Report on Housing by the 
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights reported practices that included requiring high down payments and 
rapid  amortization  schedules  for  African-American  borrowers  as  well  as  blanket  refusals  to  lend  in 
particular areas.  
                                                      
1   The Home Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC) was a New Deal agency established in 1933 to help stabilize real estate that 
had depreciated during the Depression and to refinance mortgage debt of economically distressed homeowners.  It granted 
fifteen-year mortgage loans at 5 percent interest to some 1 million homeowners between August 1933 and June 1936, the 
period it was authorized to originate new loans (Hiller, 2003). 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 1
Besides  discrimination  a  variety  of  economic  and  institutional  factors  help  to  explain  the  relative 
unavailability  of  credit  in  lower-income  neighborhoods.2  Thirty  years  ago,  the  secondary  market  for 
mortgages was rudimentary at best, which limited local loan originators' access to capital and reduced 
their  ability  to  diversify  credit  risks  geographically.3  Informational  problems  also  inhibited  lending  in 
some urban areas. For example, relative to higher-income neighborhoods, lower-income areas tend to 
have  fewer  home  sales  and  more-diverse  housing  structures,  making  accurate  appraisal  more 
difficult4.  Similarly,  credit  evaluations  tend  to  be  more  costly  for  lower-income  borrowers,  who  are 
relatively more likely to have short or irregular credit histories.5 Informational barriers to lending were 
heightened by the absence of uniform national depositories of information on the credit experiences of 
consumers; at the time, the credit-reporting system consisted of hundreds of local credit bureaus, each 
of which maintained limited information on local residents.6 The high costs of gathering information, 
together  with  the  difficulty  of  keeping  information  proprietary,  may  have  created  a  "first-mover" 
problem, in which each financial institution has an incentive to let one of its competitors be the first to 
enter  an  underserved  market.  Without  some  coordination,  the  first-mover  problem  may  result  in  no 
institution  choosing  to  incur  the  costs  of  entry  (Lang  and  Nakamura,  1993;  Barr,  2005;  and  Ling, 
1998).  
The regulatory environment of the period was yet another factor limiting broad access to credit. State 
and  federal  rules  prohibited  interstate  branching  or  acquisitions  and  in  some  cases  restricted  even 
intrastate branching, reducing competition and the ability of lenders to diversify geographic risk.7 Also, 
interest rate ceilings on mortgages in some locations effectively blocked lending to potential borrowers 
judged to pose higher risks, and interest rate ceilings on deposits (notably, the infamous Regulation Q) 
led 
to  periodic  episodes  of  disintermediation  and  reduced  availability  of  mortgage  credit 
(Chomsisengphet and Pennington-Cross, 2006; and McNeil and Rechter, 1980). 
Taken  together,  these  social,  economic,  and  regulatory  factors  contributed  to  the  perception  that 
banking  institutions  were  failing  to  adequately  serve  the  credit  needs  of  some  residents  of  their 
communities,  a  concern  that  led  the  Congress  to  enact  the  CRA.  The  CRA  reaffirmed  the  long-
standing principle that financial institutions must serve "the convenience and needs," including credit 
needs, of the communities in which they are chartered. The obligation of financial institutions to serve 
their communities was seen as a quid pro quo for privileges such as the protection afforded by federal 
deposit insurance and access to the Federal Reserve's discount window (FFIEC, 1992). Indeed, the 
Bank Holding Company Act, passed in 1956, had already required the Federal Reserve Board, when 
ruling  on  proposed  acquisitions  by  banks  or  bank  holding  companies,  to  evaluate  how  well  the 
institutions involved were meeting community needs, consistent with the requirements of safety and 
soundness. 
The CRA was only one of a series of laws passed during the 1970s intended to reduce credit-related 
discrimination, expand access to credit, and shed light on lending patterns. The CRA itself focused on 
the provision of credit to low- and moderate-income communities rather than on discrimination by race, 
sex,  or  other  personal  characteristics.  Legislation  that  addressed  discrimination  in  lending  explicitly 
included the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act. The Home Mortgage Disclosure 
Act was enacted to increase transparency in the mortgage lending market and to support public and 
                                                      
2   Debate continues on the relative importance of racial bias and economic factors for explaining redlining and similar practices 
(see Lacker, 1995). 
3   The Federal Reserve's Flow of Funds accounts did not even record private securitization activity until the early 1980s, and 
purchases  by  federal  housing  agencies,  which  were  focused  on  government-backed  loans  and  lower-risk  conventional 
loans, represented less than 1 percent of total outstanding home mortgage debt in the years preceding enactment of the 
CRA. 
4   Analysis of decennial census and Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data indicates that lower-income areas have about half 
the number of owner-occupied homes and home purchase loans in a given year than do higher-income areas. 
5   Although information from the period before the CRA is not available, a review of credit records from one of the national 
credit-reporting agencies today supports this conjecture, as it finds that individuals in lower-income areas have, on average, 
substantially shorter credit histories and only about half as many credit accounts.  Also, nearly 40 percent of the individuals 
in lower-income census tracts cannot be scored, a proportion nearly three times that found in higher-income areas.  This 
information  comes  from  analysis  by  staff  members  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  in  conjunction  with  a  report  to  the 
Congress (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, forthcoming). 
6   The low-cost summary measures of credit history that have gained widespread market acceptance today did not emerge 
until 1989, when Fair Isaac and Company developed the FICO score. 
7   For a listing of these rules, see Amel and Keane (1986). 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2007
private investment activity. From an economic perspective, the CRA can be interpreted as an attempt 
to  rectify  market  failures--for  example,  by  inducing  banks  to  invest  in  building  the  knowledge  and 
expertise necessary to lend profitably in lower-income neighborhoods. Similarly, to the extent that the 
CRA encouraged coordinated or simultaneous efforts by banks to lend in underserved areas, it had 
the potential to reduce the first-mover problem.  
The debate surrounding the passage of the CRA was contentious, with critics charging that the law 
would  distort  credit  markets,  create  unnecessary  regulatory  burden,  and  lead  to  unsound  lending. 
Partly  in  response  to  these  concerns,  the  Congress  included  little  prescriptive  detail  in  the  law. 
Instead, the CRA simply directs the banking regulatory agencies to ensure that banks serve the credit 
needs of their local communities in a safe and sound manner. In effect, the agencies were left with 
considerable  discretion  and  flexibility  to  modify  the  rules  in  light  of  changes  in  the  economy  and  in 
financial markets (Garwood and Smith, 1993). At times, this discretion has been the source of some 
uncertainty on the part of regulated institutions concerned with compliance. However, the flexibility has 
proved valuable in allowing the CRA to remain relevant despite rapid economic and financial change 
and widely differing economic circumstances among neighborhoods.  
The evolution of the CRA 
For more than a decade after its enactment, the CRA was a rather low-profile banking regulation, one 
that set minimal compliance requirements for depository institutions and attracted limited supervisory 
attention  from  the  bank  regulatory  agencies.8  By  the  late  1980s,  however,  the  issues  surrounding 
access to credit were attracting renewed interest. In response to this interest, the Congress included in 
the  Financial  Institution  Reform  and  Recovery  Act  of  1989  (FIRREA)  an  amendment  to  the  CRA 
statute to require public disclosure of institutions' ratings and performance evaluations. FIRREA also 
expanded data collection and made public certain data reported under the HMDA. With the requisite 
data becoming available, advocacy groups, researchers, and other analysts began to perform more-
sophisticated,  quantitative  analyses  of  banks'  records  in  meeting  the  credit  needs  of  their 
communities.  
Further attention to CRA was generated by the surge in bank merger and acquisition activities that 
followed the enactment of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. As 
public scrutiny of bank merger and acquisition activity escalated, advocacy groups increasingly used 
the  public  comment  process  to  protest  bank  applications  on  CRA  grounds.  In  instances  of  highly 
contested applications, the Federal Reserve Board and other agencies held public meetings to allow 
the public and the applicants to comment on the lending records of the banks in question. In response 
to  these  new  pressures,  banks  began  to  devote  more  resources  to  their  CRA  programs.  Many 
institutions established separate business units and subsidiary community development corporations 
to  facilitate  lending  that  would  be  given  favorable  consideration  in  CRA  examinations.  Local  and 
regional  public-private  partnerships  and  multibank  loan  consortia  also  gained  more  prominence  as 
banks developed strategies for expanding and managing CRA-related activities.  
Even  as  these  developments  were  occurring,  extensive  change  was  taking  place  in  the  financial 
services  sector.  During  the  1980s  and  1990s,  technological  progress  significantly  improved  data 
collection  and  information  processing,  which  led  to  the  development  and  widespread  use  of  credit-
scoring models and the availability of generic credit history scores. Deregulation also contributed to 
the  changes  in  the  marketplace.  Notably,  the  lifting  of  prohibitions  against  interstate  banking  was 
followed by an increased pace of industry consolidation. Also, the preemption of usury laws on home 
loans  created  more  scope  for  risk-based  pricing  of  mortgages.  Securitization  of  affordable  housing 
loans  expanded,  as  did  the  secondary  market  for  those  loans,  in  part  reflecting  a  1992  law  that 
required  the  government-sponsored  enterprises,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  to  devote  a 
percentage  of  their  activities  to  meeting  affordable  housing  goals  (HUD,  2006).  A  generally  strong 
economy and lower interest rates also helped improved access to credit by lower-income households.  
Bankers  were  also  gaining  experience  in  underwriting  and  managing  the  risk  of  lending  in  lower-
income communities. After years of experimentation, the managers of financial institutions found that 
                                                      
8   Examinations  were  conducted  to  evaluate  an  institution's  compliance  in  five  performance  areas,  comprising  twelve 
assessment  factors.   The  examination  culminated  in  the  assignment  of  a  rating  (Outstanding,  Satisfactory,  Needs  to 
Improve, or Substantial Noncompliance) and a written report that became part of the supervisory record for the institution. 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 3
these  loan  portfolios,  if  properly  underwritten  and  managed,  could  be  profitable.  In  fact,  a  Federal 
Reserve study found that, generally, CRA-related lending activity was at least somewhat profitable and 
usually  did  not  involve  disproportionately  higher  levels  of  default  (Avery,  Bostic,  and  Canner,  2000; 
see also Board of Governors, 1993). Moreover, community groups and nonprofit organizations began 
to take a more businesslike, market-oriented approach to local economic development, leading them 
to  establish  more-formalized  and  more-productive  partnerships  with  banks.  Community  groups 
provided information to financial institutions on the needs of lower-income communities for credit and 
services,  offered  financial  education  and  counseling  services  to  community  members,  and  referred 
"bankable"  customers  to  partner  banks.  Specialized  community  development  banks  and  financial 
institutions with the mission of providing financial services and credit to lower-income communities and 
families emerged and grew.  
Policy  developments  bolstered  the  infrastructure  and  funding  of  community  development  lending 
organizations. Notably, the passage of the Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Act 
of  1994  created  the  CDFI  Fund  at  the  Department  of  Treasury.  The  expansion  of  CDFIs  provided 
banks with access to new opportunities to finance community economic development. Other initiatives, 
such as the federal Low Income Housing Tax Credit and New Markets Tax Credit programs provided 
vehicles  for  investing  in  affordable  housing  development  and  economic  revitalization  in  distressed 
communities.  
Even  as  CRA-related  lending  became  more  extensive  and  more  market-based,  concerns  were 
expressed  about  the  implementation  of  the  law.  Financial  institutions  complained  about  compliance 
costs  (Elliehausen,  1998).  Both  bankers  and  community  groups  criticized  the  CRA  examination 
procedures  as  emphasizing  process  over  results,  arguing  that  the  examination  criteria  were  too 
subjective and that a more-quantitative system for evaluating institutions' CRA performance should be 
developed.  In  response  to  these  criticisms,  President  Clinton  in  1993  directed  the  agencies  that 
implement  CRA  to  review  and  revise  the  regulations,  with  the  goals  of  clarifying  performance 
standards,  making  examinations  and  evaluations  more  consistent,  and  reducing  the  compliance 
burden.  
The CRA regulations adopted in 1995 established for large institutions a three-pronged test based on 
performance  in  the  areas  of  lending,  investments,  and  services.  While  the  regulations  placed  the 
greatest  emphasis  on  lending,  they  encouraged  innovative  approaches  to  addressing  community 
development credit needs. Several provisions were included to reduce compliance costs, among them 
a  new  rule  that  allowed  small  banks  to  meet  their  requirements  by  means  of  a  streamlined 
examination focused on lending activities.9
When  the  new  regulations  were  adopted,  the  agencies  committed  themselves  to  reviewing  the 
regulations in 2002 to assess their effectiveness. The promised review made use of extensive public 
comment and scholarly research on the efficacy of CRA programs. In their comments on the proposed 
revisions  to  the  rules,  bankers  and  community  organizations  generally  agreed  that  the  fundamental 
elements of the regulations were sound and that the agencies should maintain the overall structure of 
the  1995  regulations,  although  each  group  raised  a  number  of  specific  issues.  Findings  from  the 
research  by  Board  staff  members,  in  combination  with  the  public  comments,  led  the  agencies  to 
propose  new  definitions  for  "small"  banks,  which  would  be  subject  only  to  a  lending  test  to  assess 
compliance with the CRA, and for "intermediate small" banks, which would be subject to a lending test 
as well as a new and more-flexible community development test (Avery, Canner, Mok, and Sokolov, 
2005).  In  addition,  the  research  underscored  the  benefit  of  expanding  the  definition  of  "community 
development" to include activities benefiting middle-income communities in distressed rural areas and 
in disaster areas. The final rule was adopted in July 2005.  
In  each  of  the  major  regulatory  revisions,  the  goal  of  the  regulators  has  been  to  increase  the 
effectiveness of the CRA in promoting the economic development of lower-income communities while 
reducing  the  associated  compliance  burden.  Again,  making  progress  toward  achieving  these  goals 
has  been  made  easier  by  the  flexibility  of  the  original  statute,  which  has  allowed  the  regulators  to 
                                                      
9   The agencies sought to offer banks some flexibility in choosing an examination strategy that suited their business models.  
The  1995  regulations  gave  banks  the  option  to  submit  a  strategic  plan  for  complying  with  CRA  in  lieu  of  the  standard 
approach  to  examination.   A  community  development  test  was  offered  to  wholesale  and  limited-purpose  banks  as  a 
standard  for  their  compliance.   The  agencies  also  required  that  examiners  evaluate  a  bank's  CRA  record  within  a 
performance context that considered socioeconomic factors and market conditions within the institution's service area. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2007
adapt the rules to changing market and economic circumstances and to give financial institutions the 
latitude to meet their CRA obligations in diverse and cost-effective ways.  
Has the CRA achieved its objectives? Research on the CRA has tended to find positive net effects, 
but the results are not uniform. A paper by Board staff members compared census tracts just above 
and  below  the  low-  and  moderate-income  threshold,  finding  that the  tracts below  the  threshold  had 
higher  homeownership  rates,  higher  growth  in  owner-occupied  units,  and  lower  vacancy  rates  than 
would  have  otherwise  been  predicted  (Avery,  Calem,  and  Canner,  2003).  An  analysis  by  Harvard's 
Joint  Center  for  Housing  Studies  concluded  that  the  CRA  has  expanded  access  to  residential 
mortgages  for  lower-income  borrowers,  but  that  research  also  finds  that  the  CRA's  effect  is 
diminishing  as  mortgage  lending  by  nonbank  institutions  expands  (Apgar  and  Duda,  2003).  Yet 
another review concludes that the CRA has been effective in helping to overcome market failures and 
reduce discrimination at a relatively low cost, precisely because the CRA sets forth a flexible standard 
rather than a rule (Barr, 2005). However, some critical studies have argued that the CRA has been 
ineffective  in  addressing  discrimination  and  market  failures  and  that  its  social  costs  outweigh  its 
benefits (see, for example, Hylton, 2006, and Barr, 2005).  
The CRA is clearly far from perfect. Although its objectives are broad and ambitious, its net effects on 
lower-income neighborhoods are difficult to measure with precision.10 Addressing CRA responsibilities 
also imposes costs on financial institutions. It appears that, at least in some instances, the CRA has 
served  as  a  catalyst,  inducing  banks  to  enter  underserved  markets  that  they  might  otherwise  have 
ignored.  At  its  most  successful,  the CRA  may  have  had  a  multiplier  effect,  supplementing  its  direct 
impact  by  stimulating  new  market-based,  profit-driven  economic  activity 
lower-income 
neighborhoods.  
in 
The future of the CRA 
As we look forward, the CRA will have to continue evolving to reflect the ongoing changes in financial 
markets and in the economy more generally. I will conclude by flagging just a few of the issues that will 
remain important for the implementation and the effect of CRA. 
First, for some institutions the concept of the "local community" is no longer as clear as it was when 
the CRA was enacted. Today, some institutions are not identified with a particular community but are 
regional or national in scope, which inevitably makes the definition of the relevant assessment areas 
somewhat difficult. Moreover, to an increasing extent, banks use nontraditional avenues--the Internet, 
for  example--to  interact  with  customers,  in  some  cases  avoiding  a  bricks-and-mortar  presence 
altogether.  To  date,  defining  "local  community"  for  the  purposes  of  CRA  assessment  has  been 
manageable as most banks still lend in local communities where they have deposit-taking facilities or 
branches. However, if these trends continue, defining a "local community" may become increasingly 
difficult, and the concept eventually may require reconsideration by regulators or even the Congress.  
Second, changes in the structure of the financial industry have resulted in many financial transactions 
that fell under the CRA umbrella in 1977 having become increasingly the province of nondepositories 
not  subject  to  CRA,  including  companies  owned  by  banks  or  bank  holding  companies.  Holding 
companies' nonbank affiliates, for instance, can be included in the CRA assessment of the banking 
institution  at  the  discretion  of  the  bank  but  need  not  be.  Most  mortgages  are  now  packaged  by 
brokers,  and  nearly  two  in  three  mortgages  are  originated  by  nondepositories  not  covered  by  the 
CRA.11  Nonbank  institutions,  such  as  payday  lenders,  check  cashers,  and  remittance  agents,  are 
important  sources  of  financial  services  in  low-  and  moderate-income  communities.  In  some  cases, 
nonbank  service  providers  offer  convenience  to  customers  but  at  prices  that  have  raised  concerns 
(Carr and Schuetz, 2001, and Barr, 2004).  
                                                      
10   Distinguishing with certainty the effects that the CRA had on "CRA-type" activity from the effects of simultaneous regulatory 
and market changes over this period has not been possible.  It is highly likely that these factors have interacted with one 
another to affect consumers. 
11   The National Association of Mortgage Brokers reports that 68 percent of home loan originations involve mortgage brokers.  
In 2005, 63 percent of mortgages were originated by mortgage companies.  (Of the mortgage companies, 70 percent were 
independent; the rest were affiliated with depository institutions.)  The remaining 37 percent were originated by depositories 
directly:   21.6  percent  by  commercial  banks,  12.9  percent  by  savings  institutions,  and  2.5  percent  by  credit  unions  (see 
Avery, Brevoort, and Canner, 2006). 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 5
Some observers have suggested extending the CRA to nonbank providers, but this proposal neglects 
a fundamental premise of the CRA legislation--that banks incur special obligations in exchange for the 
advantages conferred by their charters, such as deposit insurance. Of course, the CRA is not the only 
tool for addressing such issues, should it be determined that consumers are not adequately protected 
in their dealings with nonbanks. The CRA may nevertheless have some role to play; for example, a 
possible question to consider is whether increasing the focus on services by banking institutions might 
encourage them to compete more actively with nonbank providers in lower-income neighborhoods.  
Third, access to credit in lower-income communities is obviously much greater today than when the 
CRA  was  enacted.  This  greater  access  has  had  tangible  benefits,  such  as  the  increase  in 
homeownership  rates  (Joint  Center  for  Housing  Studies,  2006).  However,  recent  problems  in 
mortgage markets illustrate that an underlying assumption of the CRA--that more lending equals better 
outcomes for local communities may not always hold.12 Whether, and if so, how to try to differentiate 
"good" from "bad" lending in the CRA context is an issue that is likely to challenge us for some time. 
One possible strategy is to place more weight in CRA examinations on factors such as whether an 
institution  provides  services  complementary  to  lending--for  example,  counseling  and  financial 
education.  
The CRA was created to help ensure lower-income communities have access to credit and financial 
services. When it passed the legislation, the Congress could not have foreseen the extensive changes 
in financial markets and the economy that have occurred over the past thirty years; thus, the decision 
to write the statute broadly and with considerable flexibility appears wise in retrospect. In implementing 
the law, the banking agencies have tried to learn from market developments, from research, and from 
the comments of financial institutions, consumers, and other interested parties. The regulations have 
thus changed over time in response to the changing financial landscape and as we have learned more 
about what works and what doesn't. We do not know how the economy and the financial system will 
change in coming decades, but it is safe to assume that change will be rapid. Considerable creativity 
and flexibility will thus be necessary to ensure that the CRA continues to assist community economic 
development without placing an undue burden on financial institutions. 
References 
Amel,  Dean  F.,  and  Daniel  G.  Keane  (1986).  "State  Laws  Affecting  Commercial  Bank  Branching, 
Multibank Holding Company Expansion, and Interstate Banking," Issues in Bank Regulation, vol. 10 
(Autumn), pp. 30-40. 
Apgar, William, and Mark Duda (2003). "The Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the Community Reinvestment 
Act:  Past  Accomplishments  and  Future  Regulatory  Challenges"  (209  KB  PDF),  FRBNY  Economic 
Policy Review, vol. 9 (June), pp. 169-91. 
Avery, Robert B., Raphael W. Bostic, and Glenn B. Canner (2000). "CRA Special Lending Programs" 
(115 KB PDF), Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 86 (November), pp. 711-31.  
Avery, Robert B., Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner (2006). "Higher-Priced Home Lending 
and 
(vol.  92), 
www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin.  
Avery,  Robert  B.,  Paul  S.  Calem,  and  Glenn  B.  Canner  (2003).  "The  Effects  of  the  Community 
Reinvestment Act on Local Communities" (89 KB PDF) paper presented at "Sustainable Community 
Development:  What  Works,  What  Doesn't  and  Why,"  a  conference  sponsored  by  the  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 27-28.  
Avery, Robert B., Glenn B. Canner, Shannon C. Mok, and Dan S. Sokolov (2005). "Community Banks 
and Rural Development: Research Relating to Proposals to Revise the Regulations that Implement the 
Community  Reinvestment  Act" 
(vol.  91), 
www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin. 
Barr, Michael S. (2004). "Banking the Poor," Yale Journal on Regulation, vol. 21 (Winter), pp. 121-237. 
(149  KB  PDF),  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin 
(580  KB  PDF),  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin 
the  2005  HMDA  Data" 
                                                      
12   These  concerns  are  reflected  in  the  Interagency  Guidance  on  Nontraditional  Mortgage  Product  Risks  (Office  of  the 
Controller of the Currency and others, 2006), as well as recently issued requests for public comment on the expansion of 
that guidance.  For further discussion of the emergence of the subprime mortgage market, see Gramlich, 2007. 
6 
 BIS Review 32/2007
Barr, Michael S. (2005). "Credit Where It Counts: The Community Reinvestment Act and Its Critics" 
(558 KB PDF), New York University Law Review, vol. 80 (May), pp. 513-652. 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (forthcoming). The Effects of Credit Scores and 
Credit-Based Insurance Scores on the Availability and Affordability of Financial Products. Washington: 
Board of Governors.  
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2000). The Performance and Profitability of CRA-
Related Lending. Washington: Board of Governors, July. 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1993). Report to the Congress on Community 
Development Lending by Depository Institutions.Washington: Board of Governors, October. 
Carr, James H., and Jenny Schuetz (2001). Financial Services in Distressed Communities: Framing 
the Issue, Finding Solutions (188 KB PDF). Washington: Fannie Mae Foundation. 
Chomsisengphet, Souphala, and Anthony Pennington-Cross (2006). "The Evolution of the Subprime 
Market" (553 KB PDF), Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, vol. 88 (January/February), pp. 31-
56. 
Elliehausen, Gregory (1998). The Cost of Banking Regulation: A Review of the Evidence, Staff Study 
171. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.  
Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council  (1992).  "A  Citizens  Guide  to  CRA,"  Washington: 
FFIEC, June, pp. 3-5. 
Federal Home Loan Bank Board (1937). "Appraisal Methods and Policies," Federal Home Loan Bank 
Review, vol. 3 (4), pp. 110-13, 120. 
Garwood, Griffith L., and Dolores S. Smith (1993). "The Community Reinvestment Act: Evolution and 
Current Issues," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 79 (April), pp. 251-67. 
Gramlich, Edward M. (2007). America's Second Housing Boom. Washington: The Urban Institute, UI 
Press.  
Hiller,  Amy  (2003).  "Redlining  and  the  Home  Owners'  Loan  Corporation,"  Journal  of  Urban  History, 
vol. 29 (May), pp. 207-9.  
Hylton,  Keith  (2006).  "Development  Lending  and  the  Community  Reinvestment  Act,"  Law  and 
Economic Working Paper Series 06-07. Boston: Boston University School of Law. 
Joint  Center  for  Housing  Studies  of  Harvard  University  (2006).  The  State  of  the  Nation's  Housing. 
Cambridge, Mass.: JCHS. 
Lacker,  Jeffrey  M.  (1995).  "Neighborhoods  and  Banking,"  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Richmond 
Economic Quarterly, vol. 81 (Spring), pp. 13-38.  
Lang,  William  W.,  and  Leonard  I.  Nakamura  (1993).  "A  Model  of  Redlining,"  Journal  of  Urban 
Economics, vol. 33 (Spring), pp. 223-34. 
Ling,  David  C.,  and  Susan  M.  Wachter  (1998).  "Information  Externalities  and  Home  Mortgage 
Underwriting," Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 44 (November), pp. 317-32. 
McNeil,  Charles  R.,  and  Denise  M.  Rechter  (1980).  "The  Depository  Institutions  Deregulation  and 
Monetary Control Act of 1980," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 66 (June), pp. 444-53. 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision,  and  National  Credit  Union  Association 
(2006).  "Federal  Financial  Regulatory  Agencies  Issue  Final  Guidance  on  Nontraditional  Mortgage 
Product Risks," press release, September 29, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.htm. 
United  States  Commission  on  Civil  Rights  (1961).  "Report  on  Housing,"  Washington:  Government 
Printing Office. 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2006). "HUD's Regulation of Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac," HUD, www.hud.gov/offices/hsg/gse/gse.cfm. 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 7
