Svein Gjedrem: Uncertainty, economic models and monetary policy  
for  Monetary  Economics/Norwegian  School 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
Centre 
of  Management,  Oslo, 
17 September 2007. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the 
assessments  presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy 
meeting on 15 August, Monetary Policy Report 2/07 and on previous speeches. 
 I welcome the opportunity this time to discuss with you at the Centre for Monetary Economics 
certain  themes  that  are  not  related  to  the  most  newsworthy  economic  policy  issues.  I  will 
discuss the following three themes:  
• 
the role of monetary policy  
our view of economic models as a basis for interest rate setting  
• 
and  finally,  measuring  inflation  and  uncertainty  linked  to  the  rate  of  inflation  at  a 
• 
given point in time  
Let me start by discussing the role of monetary policy. 
The primary objective of monetary policy is to ensure that inflation expectations are low and 
stable. Expectations of low and stable inflation provide a nominal anchor. Economic agents’ 
inflation  expectations  influence  the  decisions  they  make  today.  Our  experience  –  and  the 
experience  of  other  countries  –  shows  that  without  a  nominal  anchor  we  cannot  achieve 
stability in employment and output.  
The  aim  of  preventing  inflation  expectations  from  becoming  entrenched  below  the 
operational  target  of  2.5  per  cent  was  one  of  the  main  reasons  that  the  interest  rate  was 
lowered to a very low level in 2003 and 2004, when inflation receded and approached zero. 
Low  interest  rates  stimulated  demand  and  output  and  have  gradually  led  to  prospects  for 
higher inflation, to which we have responded by increasing the interest rate. Consumer price 
inflation is still fairly low, but capacity utilisation is now at such a high level that inflation is 
projected  to  move  up  gradually  to  2.5  per  cent.  Higher  interest  rates  will  contribute  to  a 
gradual decline in capacity utilisation so that inflation will not become too high.  
In spite of several years of fairly low inflation, inflation expectations, as for example these – 
and  not  necessarily  precisely  –  are  measured  by  TNS  Gallup’s  expectations  survey,  have 
held  up  around  the  inflation  target.  Even  if  there  has  been  a  longer  period  of  low  and 
relatively stable inflation expectations, we must be alert to developments that may change 
this.  
Norway’s and other countries’ economic history show that inflation and inflation expectations 
can  become  unhinged.  There  are  many  self-regulating  mechanisms  in  the  economy,  but 
inflation does not regulate itself.  
Through  history,  monetary  policy  has  in  various  ways  been  geared  towards  providing  the 
economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  From  the  mid-1800s,  many  countries  decided  to  peg  the 
value  of  money  to  gold.  Norway  switched  from  the  silver  standard  to  the  gold  standard  in 
1874.  The  latter  system  provided  the  economy  and  prices  with  a  fixed  nominal  anchor. 
Inflation was determined by growth in output on the one hand the supply of gold on the other. 
This  was  a  system  we  had  in  common  with  our  trading  partners.  Furthermore,  we 
participated in the Scandinavian currency union as from 1875.  
The gold standard was suspended during World War I when the British government largely 
financed the war by printing money. Parity policy in the interwar years was unsuccessful in 
many  countries.  After  World  War  II,  countries  made  a  joint  effort  to  stabilise  price 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 1
developments by establishing the Bretton Woods system. The US dollar was pegged to gold 
and the other currencies to the dollar. In this way, we chose – with the value of gold as the 
basis – a fixed exchange rate and indirect inflation in other countries as our nominal anchor. 
The Bretton Woods system collapsed in 1971. In the absence of gold as an anchor, the real 
value of banknotes and coins and bank deposits was now dependent on confidence that the 
central  banks  would  not  inject  so  much  cash  into  the  economic  system  that  the  value  of 
money  declined.  The  various  countries  chose  different  solutions.  In  Norway,  we  looked  to 
other  countries  for  both  confidence  and  our  inflation  level,  by  tying  our  exchange  rate  in 
various ways to other countries’ currencies. 
In  the  ten  years  from  1976  to  1986,  confidence  in  this  policy  was  severely  eroded.  In  this 
period,  there  were  a  total  of  ten  devaluations  or  "technical  adjustments"  that  entailed 
devaluation, often with the aim of bringing costs back under control. The objective of keeping 
inflation stable was set aside. Repeated devaluations eventually led to expectations that the 
authorities would not in the future stand by their promise of a fixed exchange rate, and that if 
price and cost inflation became too high, it was expected that the krone would be devalued 
again. The social partners began to take higher inflation into account in wage demands and 
price setting.  
The last devaluation came in 1986. Subsequently, the interest rate was used to maintain a 
fixed krone exchange rate in order to bring price and cost inflation under control. We again 
chose  a  fixed  exchange  rate  and other  countries'  inflation  as  a  nominal  anchor. Economic 
policy was influenced by the experiences of other countries that had dealt with the problem of 
inflation earlier, such as the US and Germany. The decline in inflation in Norway thus came 
in the wake of the fall in inflation abroad. 
Historical data seem to suggest that after turbulent periods, inflation gradually reverts to a 
low and stable level and that over time domestic inflation is determined by external inflation. 
However, inflation in a country with its own national currency is not something that just drifts 
in  with  the  wind  from  abroad.  It  is  the  monetary  policy  choices  we  make  in  Norway  that 
determine price developments here.  
We had to abandon our fixed exchange rate policy in December 1992. One important reason 
for this was the inherent weaknesses in the fixed exchange rate system in an environment of 
free  capital  flows  and  deep  financial  markets.  When  the  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  was 
formally  abandoned,  there  was  a  risk  that  the  Norwegian  economy  could  again  lose  its 
nominal anchor. However, the krone exchange rate showed little movement and soon found 
a new range. Fiscal policy had a stabilising effect. 
The  exchange  rate  remained  stable  until  autumn  1996.  This  was  partly  due  to  low  wage 
growth and a level of total demand that did not generate pressures in the economy. After a 
period, the krone began to show wider fluctuations. The experience of the latter half of the 
1990s demonstrated that monetary policy cannot fine-tune the exchange rate. Developments 
in the international financial markets led to greater fluctuations. And more fundamentally – 
exchange rate developments no longer sent signals back to wage formation and fiscal policy 
when labour market pressures mounted and incomes policy failed. High petroleum revenues, 
fiscal slippage and expectations of increased use of petroleum revenues contributed to this. 
The exchange rate was therefore no longer suitable as a nominal anchor. 
As a result, Norges Bank gradually placed increasing emphasis on low and stable inflation. In 
2001, the Norwegian authorities decided that monetary policy in Norway was to be oriented 
towards low and stable inflation through a numerical target for inflation, as was the case in 
many other countries later in the 1990s. As under the gold standard or the fixed exchange 
rate  regimes,  it  is  again  our  own  choice  of  nominal  anchor  that  determines  the  rate  of 
inflation in Norway over time.  
2 
 BIS Review 102/2007
Future studies will probably find that inflation reverts to the inflation target over time. This is 
an indication that monetary policy is working and not that there is a natural inflation rate or a 
natural, self-regulating mechanism.  
Inflation  is  still  influenced  by  exogenous  conditions.  Increased  globalisation,  particularly 
China’s growing importance in world trade, has in the past ten years for example resulted in 
low imported inflation measured in a foreign currency. At the same time, productivity growth 
has  been  high  in  many  countries.  These  positive  supply-side  features  have  for  a  period 
contributed  to  a  favourable  development  in  the  short-term  trade-off  between  economic 
growth and inflation. As a result, many countries where inflation was a little too high at the 
outset  have  been  able  to  bring  down  inflation  at  virtually  no  cost.  In  this  respect,  we  can 
probably  talk  about  some  degree  of  endogeneity  in  inflation.1  However,  it  is  still  up  to  the 
authorities through the orientation of monetary policy to choose whether inflation is to remain 
low and stable on a more permanent basis.  
Over time, interest rate setting is aimed at keeping inflation close to target. In the process, 
interest rates will have short-term direct or indirect effects on a number of other economic 
variables.  In  the  short  to  medium  term,  we  weigh  the  aim  of  stability  in  output  and 
employment on the one hand against stability in inflation on the other hand. This does not 
mean  that  this  is  one  instrument  and  two  separate  objectives,  but  that  we  weigh  the  two 
objectives against each other.  
It might be tempting to give weight to other objectives beyond the effects they might have on 
inflation. This would entail taking risks and making compromises with regard to the inflation 
target. There are in particular two other such objectives that have been singled out:  
• 
• 
High demand for labour can encourage more people, who would otherwise have remained 
stuck in the welfare system, to enter the labour market. A period of high demand for labour 
may  thus  increase  the  effective  labour  force  on  a  more  permanent  basis.  Conversely,  a 
period  of  low  demand  for  labour  can  increase  flows  into  benefit  schemes  and  lead  to  a 
permanent  reduction  in  the  labour  force.  If  the  central  bank  were  to  attempt  to  use  such 
labour market mechanisms, it would have contributed to amplifying demand for labour in an 
upturn  through  lower  interest  rates,  while  countering  a  fall  in  demand  in  a  downturn  by 
keeping interest rates low. Such a policy can be reminiscent of the low interest rate policy of 
the  1970s  and  the  1980s  and  will  fairly  rapidly  be  factored  into  economic  agents’  inflation 
expectations.  Over  time,  such  a  monetary  policy  will  lead  to  higher  inflation,  not  higher 
employment.  
Unemployment has declined markedly and is now very low. At the same time, wage earners’ 
share  of  corporate  earnings  has  declined.  Historically,  there  has  been  a  clearly  negative 
relationship between unemployment and wage shares. Developments in recent years have 
paved the way for strong growth in employment, also today when the cyclical upturn is in a 
mature phase.  
Developments  in  the  past  years  must  be  seen  against  the  background  of  the  effects  of  a 
number  of  positive  supply-side  conditions  on  the  Norwegian  economy.  High  export  prices 
and low import prices have led to a low rate of increase in consumer prices and an increase 
in  household  real  wage  income,  but  also  to  high  corporate  earnings  and  solid  growth  in 
employment.  
sustaining employment at a high level,  
stabilise property prices and credit. 
                                                 
1   See, inter alia, Rogoff, K. (2003), “Globalization and Global Disinflation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Economic Review, Fourth Quarter, 45-78. 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 3
At the same time, productivity growth has been unusually high. The effects of this are more 
complex. In the early phase of the recovery, this delayed a pick-up in employment growth, 
but also contributed to low inflation. Increased productivity means that demand can remain 
high without rising inflation. The interest rate was set at a low level to bring inflation back to 
target.  At  the  same  time,  this  also  enabled  enterprises  to  make  use  of  a  higher  growth 
potential. Eventually this also resulted in higher demand for labour.  
Improved  efficiency  is  another  factor  that  explains  the  high  level  of  profitability  in  the 
Norwegian  business  sector.  At  the  same  time,  there  has  been  an  ample  supply  of  foreign 
labour, which has probably had a dampening impact on wage growth. In addition, increased 
globalisation in general may have broadened the scope for Norwegian enterprises to relocate 
production to other countries if labour costs become too high. Such a development probably 
places some restraint on wage demands among workers in sectors where enterprises have 
such opportunities.  
Is it possible to sustain the combination of low employment and low wage shares? 
First, it partly depends on whether the positive supply-side conditions are sustained. There is 
probably symmetry here. Should the terms of trade deteriorate, productivity growth slacken 
and  foreign  workers  return  to  their  home  country,  the  wage  share  will  increase,  profits  fall 
and unemployment increase.  
Second, even without a reversal profits may fall and unemployment rise. The implications of 
this  will  depend  on  how  far  businesses,  in  their  search  for  qualified  labour,  will  stretch 
themselves  in  bidding  up  wages.  This  will  also  depend  on  how  employees  react  and  their 
adaptability as well as developments in benefit schemes and other social schemes.  
Long periods of rapidly rising property prices and debt can be a source of future instability in 
the real economy. Should monetary policy give weight to developments in property and credit 
markets beyond their impact on inflation? 
Low  interest  rates  have  fuelled  the  rise  in  property  prices  and  debt  accumulation.  Large 
volumes  of  lending  are  being  used  to  finance  consumption  and  investment,  among  other 
things in housing. At the same time, the many positive supply-side conditions – with strong 
growth in real income in the household sector and in private and public enterprises – have 
probably  made  a  more  direct  contribution  to  the  sharp  rise  in  house  prices  and  debt 
accumulation.  When  capital  –  and  increasingly  labour  as  well  –  flows  more  freely  across 
borders, prices for these factors of production will to a greater extent reflect global growth 
and competitive conditions. On the other hand, the price of fixed capital, such as property, 
will be influenced by expected future income in different countries.  
Even if construction costs have increased somewhat – and accelerated to some extent this 
year  –  it  is  primarily  the  price  of  land  that  has  increased  in  Norway.  Land  is  valued  at  a 
considerably higher level, while the price of the dwelling itself has not increased to the same 
extent.  
Norway is now reaping the gains of the strong expansion of Asian countries and changes in 
the  division  of  labour  between  countries.  The  improvement  in  Norway’s  term  of  trade, 
coupled with high growth in productivity, has delivered very strong, positive income shocks to 
the Norwegian economy. It follows that land prices will rise at a faster pace than other prices. 
This  is  a  real  economic  effect,  which  monetary  policy  cannot  eliminate.  In  addition,  both 
house prices and debt accumulation are affected by structural changes in capital and credit 
markets and by changes in lending willingness, demographic trends and migration patterns.  
It  is  difficult  to  determine  to  what  extent  house  prices  have  risen  as  a  result  of  structural 
changes  and  wealth  gains  and  to  what  extent  house  prices  have  been  pushed  up  by 
expectations of a continued high rise in house prices. Developments since the beginning of 
the 1990s may have engendered expectations that house prices will only continue to rise. 
This  may  have  increased  house  purchases  for  pure  investment  purposes  and  induced 
younger buyers to enter the housing market earlier than otherwise. The pronounced fall in 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2007
saving over the past few years indicates that households take greater chances. The housing 
market may have been in a state of euphoria.  
We  can  influence  house  prices  through  the  interest  rate,  but  if  the  interest  rate  had  been 
increased to a markedly higher level in order to curb house price inflation, the krone would 
have been significantly stronger and CPI inflation significantly lower. Yet it is low and stable 
inflation that is the operational target of monetary policy.  
There  is  symmetry  here  as  well.  Should  house  prices  fall  sharply,  we  will  in  interest  rate 
setting concentrate on dampening the effects on inflation and overall activity in the economy.  
Nevertheless, through our communication, we have sought to take account of the possibility 
that debt and asset price developments may be a potential source of subsequent instability, 
but  it  is  neither  our  ambition  nor  our  conviction  that  monetary  policy  can  control 
developments in these variables. Moreover, we have stated in clear terms that the interest 
rate has been unusually low and that it would have to increase gradually to a more normal 
level.  Since  2005,  this  has  been  reflected  in  our  own  interest  rate  forecast.  Since  inflation 
expectations have been firmly anchored, we have also been able to increase the interest rate 
gradually even though actual inflation has been below target. The time horizon for reaching 
the target in our forecasts has been stretched. 
Let me now turn to economic models and their use.  
Even though monetary policy cannot operate with objectives for developments in the labour 
market, asset prices or debt accumulation, these and other economic variables can provide 
information about future price developments, which is included in the basis for interest rate 
setting. In order to glean as much information as possible about future inflation and to gain 
insight into how the interest rate is affecting the economy, Norges Bank – like other central 
banks – uses economic models as an analytical tool. What makes a good model depends on 
the intended purpose of the model. The models' purpose must thus be given decisive weight 
in the choice and design of modelling tools.  
The model must provide some indication of how the interest rate is working. We assume that 
Norway with its own national currency can determine inflation over time. One of our model 
requirements is therefore that monetary policy anchors inflation expectations. We must also 
take into account that economic agents look ahead when they make decisions concerning 
consumption,  investment,  wages  and  prices  and  base  these  decisions  not  only  on  today's 
economic  policy,  but  also  their  expectations  as  to  future  policy.  In  addition,  we  build  on 
theory and experience of the 1970s and 1980s indicating that in the medium and long term 
unemployment  could  not  be  reduced  if  we  were  only  willing  to  accept  somewhat  higher 
inflation.  
At a given point in time, we can on the basis of current statistics and anecdotal information 
provide some indication of how the economy has evolved up to a few months ago. But even 
this  basis  is  uncertain.  Statistics  are  prone  to  substantial  revisions  and  data  from  different 
sources can provide different profiles for the same  variable. For example, financial market 
statistics  and  national  accounts  statistics  now  show,  as  on  many  previous  occasions, 
different profiles for household net lending.  
In  order  to  obtain  a  more  accurate  picture  of  today’s  situation  and  developments  over  the 
next  few  quarters,  we  rely  to  a  large  extent  on  various  statistical  forecasting  techniques. 
Such techniques and models can capture time series properties in data and correlations that 
in  many  cases  feature  a  fairly  high  degree  of  accuracy  without  the  model  relationships 
following  from  economic  theory.  Norges  Bank  now  devotes  considerable  resources  to 
improving  and  developing  our  model  apparatus  for  such  “nowcasting”.  We  engage  in 
extensive cooperation with researchers in Norway and abroad and with other central banks. 
Results and documentation of this work will be published in coming monetary policy reports 
and articles by researchers at Norges Bank.  
BIS Review 102/2007 
 5
In order to forecast somewhat further ahead, we must gain more insight into the forces at 
work  and  how  they  are  affecting  the  economy.  Statistical  forecasting  models,  or  models 
largely  based  on  previous  experiences,  will  be  of  limited  help.  For  example,  previous 
experience  provides  limited  guidance  in  explaining  the  driving  forces  behind  this  cyclical 
upturn because of the many differences in relation to earlier periods.  
A  solid  basis  in  economic  theory  is  required  to  shed  light  on  causal  relationships.  Norges 
Bank's work on models in recent years has aimed at constructing a theoretical macro model 
that can enhance our understanding of economic developments. By looking at households' 
and firms' behaviour, we can analyse the effect of changes of a more structural nature on the 
economy. In the model that has been given the name NEMO (Norwegian Economy Model), 
developments in the Norwegian economy can be explained among other things by changes 
in  business  technology,  market  structure  in  the  product  and  labour  market,  household 
preferences with regard to work and leisure and monetary policy. A model will never be able 
to provide an exhaustive description of reality, but a good macro model can and should be a 
framework for ratiocination. In this way, the model plays an important role in the analytical 
basis for interest rate setting. 
At  the  same  time,  there  are  many  questions and  conditions  about  which  we  are  uncertain 
and where models cannot help us. For example, we do not know whether the high rate of 
growth in productivity is a permanent phenomenon or whether it will gradually fall back. We 
have little precise knowledge about what is driving productivity growth. It may be that we are 
seeing a period of equilibrium with higher employment, lower unemployment and lower wage 
shares than earlier. But we are uncertain how long this period will last.  
Even if we use different models and anecdotal information, we cannot escape the need for a 
healthy portion of qualified judgement when making forecasts and setting the interest rate. 
My experience from as far back as the 1970s is that in the event of major disturbances and 
structural changes in the economy, one essentially has to rely on general insights about the 
functioning of the economy. Models that rely heavily on regressions easily break down. As 
Mervyn King, the Governor of the Bank of England, stated explicitly to the point2: 
“..that’s what we have to do with every variable that we look at, work out why it’s growing 
faster or slower than it was before and not to use some rather mindless regression.…The 
secret of good policy is to try and think trough what are the economics of the shocks hitting 
the economy at present. That in a nutshell is my philosophy of how you should do policy. 
Don’t rely on regressions from the past.”  
Having  discussed  the  role  of  monetary  policy  and  rather  complex  economic  models,  I  will 
move  on  to  the  final  theme  which  may  seem  more  prosaic,  notably  measuring  current 
inflation.  In  general,  the  production  level  of  economic  statistics  is  probably  very  high  in 
Norway, as shown in international comparisons by the IMF among others. It would also seem 
that it is very cost-effective.  
Improvements are frequently made to the methodology and the compilation of CPI statistics. 
In August this year, the indices for electricity, books and air travel were revised. Last year, 
Statistics Norway changed the method for the treatment of rents in the housing market, and 
the previous year the food index was revised.  
A  general  view  is  that  changes  in  statistics  production  should  be  well  documented  and 
should  place  particular  emphasis  on  identifying  the  effects  such  changes  might  have  on 
measured  inflation.  Furthermore,  the  statistics  should  be  comparable,  but  not  necessarily 
                                                 
2   See Mervyn King, Governor, Bank of England on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the central bank's 
independence: (see Financial Times, Thursday, 3 May). 
6 
 BIS Review 102/2007
identical,  across  countries.  It  is  positive  that  others  are  interested  in  and  debate  statistics 
production.3  
With an inflation target for monetary policy,  measuring inflation is of particular importance. 
CPI  inflation  is  used  as  a  reference  in  the  wage  negotiations  each  spring.  Many  financial 
contracts are linked to CPI inflation. A number of international studies have concluded that 
there  are  considerable  measurement  errors  in  official  consumer  price  indices.4  The  main 
criticism  is  that  official  indices  are  not  sufficiently  adjusted  for  changes  in  quality  and  that 
they do not capture consumers’ possibilities for shifting consumption away from the goods 
that show the fastest rise in prices. Many of the studies have concluded that consumer price 
indices  overestimate  the  actual  rise  in  prices.  That  is  one  reason  why  inflation-targeting 
countries  set  the  target  higher  than  zero.  But  there  are  also  studies  that  point  out  that 
consumer price indices can underestimate the rate of increase for some components.  
Against this backdrop, I will now discuss two particular notional concepts used in estimating 
the  consumer  price  index  in  Norway  to  illustrate  the  uncertainty;  how  to  impute  rent  for 
owner-occupied dwellings and how to measure clothing prices. 
A  common  method  for  imputing  rent  for  owner-occupied  housing  is  to apply  the  rent  for  a 
dwelling of an equivalent type, which is often referred to as rental equivalence. In addition to 
Norway, statistical agencies in Denmark, the US and Germany, among others, use imputed 
rent to calculate owner occupants’ housing costs in the consumer price index.  
The consumer price index is designed to measure price developments for a stream of goods 
and  services.  It  is  the  service  the  dwelling  provides  that  the  consumer  price  index  is  to 
capture. House prices are more like asset prices, such as share prices or bond prices. It may 
nevertheless be interesting to look at the relationship between house price and rents, at least 
in theory.  
Let us assume that the rental market and home ownership market are in equilibrium. In this 
case, home rental prices will reflect the cost of owning a home.  
What  is  included  in  the  cost  of  owning  a  dwelling?  The  cost  of  acquiring  a  home  must 
obviously be included and the financing cost is determined by the interest rate. Norwegian 
households  primarily  finance  home  purchases  with  floating-rate  mortgages.  Long-term 
interest  rates  are  still  important  because  they  provide  information  about  developments  in 
short-term interest rates over time. The long-term interest rate is therefore the most relevant 
rate.  Housing  depreciation  also  has  a  bearing  on  user  costs.  Moreover,  the  expected 
increase in the price of a dwelling represents a gain that must be deducted from costs. If we 
now add and subtract expectations about the general rise in prices in the economy, we are 
left with the following four variables that have a bearing on user costs: house prices, long-
term real interest rates, capital depreciation and expected real rise in house prices.5  
                                                 
3   As did, for example, Knut Anton Mork, chief economist in Handelsbanken Norge, in the Norwegian financial 
daily Finansavisen on 25 August. 
4   See for example Lebow, David E. and Jeremy B. Rudd (2003): “Measurement Error in the Consumer Price 
Index: Where Do We Stand?” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. XLI, pages 159-201, or Boskin, Michael J., 
Ellen  R.  Dulberger,  Robert  J.  Gordon,  Zvi  Griliches  og  Dale  Jorgenson  (1996):  “Toward  A  More  Accurate 
Measure  Of  The  Cost  Of  Living.”  Final  report  to  the  Senate  Finance  Committee,  Advisory  Commission  to 
Study the Consumer Price Index, 4 December 1996 or Gordon, R. J. (2005): Apparel price 1914-93 and the 
Hulten/Brueghel paradox, NBER Working Paper 11548. 
5   For purposes of simplification, capital gains tax of 28 per cent is disregarded. Interest rate expenses are tax 
deductible, while capital gains on the sale of a dwelling are not liable to tax if the dwelling has been owned for 
more than 12 months and the dwelling has been occupied by the owner for at least 12 of the 24 months prior 
to sale. Any losses are tax deductible only if any capital gains are liable to tax. 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 7
Let  us  assume  that  capital  depreciation  is  fairly  constant.  We  can  then  expect  parallel 
movements in house prices and rents and in user costs, if expectations concerning long-term 
interest rates and real house price inflation are stable.  
But actual house prices have doubled since the latter half of the 1990s in relation to the rise 
in house rents in the consumer price index. Between 50 and 70 per cent of this change is 
probably ascribable to a fall in the expected level of real interest rates. Viewed over the past 
5-10 years, the expectation as to what a neutral real interest rate is may have fallen by close 
to 2 percentage points. This may be because expectations concerning future inflation in our 
economy  and  the  world  economy  have  become  far  more  stable,  with  a  smaller  inflation 
premium on the real interest rate, and because we are in a period with unusually ample flows 
of savings from Asian and oil-producing countries, which have driven down interest rates.  
At the same time, house price inflation expectations have been high in recent years. Such 
expectations will push down user costs, and hence rents. 
As  a  result,  we  must  expect  some  difference  between  developments  in  house  rents  and 
house prices in periods. Rents can lag behind to a fairly large extent during an upturn, and 
only pick up when house price inflation expectations stagnate or fall.  
In Norway, the number of rental properties is small in relation to the total stock of housing. 
The rental market in outlying areas, which now indirectly has a larger weight in the CPI, is 
thin. Hence, the rental market does not necessarily provide a representative expression of 
owner-occupants’ housing costs.  
It  is  difficult  to  estimate  the  cost  of  owner-occupied  housing.  The  harmonised  index  of 
consumer prices for the euro area, which the ECB uses as its measure of inflation, has not 
included owner-occupied housing so far. Nor do many of the national consumer price indices 
in the EU include this component.  
This is clearly not a good solution because housing costs normally account for a large portion 
of  households'  total  cost  of  living.  Eurostat,  the  European  statistical  agency,  has  therefore 
initiated a pilot study where they use the net acquisition approach.6 This approach is different 
from  our  method  in  that  the  treatment  of  purchasing  a  house  for  owner  occupation  is  the 
same  as  for  all  other  goods  in  the  consumer  price  index.  Only  the  household  sector’s  net 
acquisition of dwellings is included. In other words, purchases of dwellings bought from other 
private  households  are  excluded.  In  addition,  expenditures  related  to  major  repairs  and 
conversions of a dwelling, and other expenditures such as estate agent fees, indirect taxes 
and insurance are also included in the acquisition approach. Land is treated as an asset and 
excluded.  
If  European  countries  switch  to  including  housing  costs  estimated  using  the  acquisition 
approach, it will be natural for Norway to publish a comparable index for consumer prices, cf. 
figures  based  on  Eurostat’s  current  method  are  also  presented  in  Norway.  In  practice, 
housing costs for owner occupants based on the acquisition approach will move closely in 
line  with  construction  and  maintenance  costs.  They  would  probably  be  given  a  somewhat 
lower weight in an overall index over time than imputed rent in the CPI in Norway today. 
The chart shows developments in the construction cost index and developments in imputed 
rent in the CPI, which is based on developments in the rental market. The two indices have 
risen at about the same rate in recent years, but have diverged since summer 2006. Higher 
prices for both labour and building materials have pushed up the rise in construction costs. In 
August 2007, the 12-month rate of increase in construction costs was 7.9 per cent, while the 
12-month rate of increase in imputed rent was 1.5 per cent.  
                                                 
6   See Eiglsperger, M. (2006) The treatment of owner-occupied housing in the harmonised index of consumer 
prices. IFC Bulletin 24, 68-79. 
8 
 BIS Review 102/2007
A change from imputed rent to the acquisition approach may change the path for the CPI 
over  the  business  cycle.  While  rents  probably  react  with  a  lag,  movements  in  the  rate  of 
increase in construction costs will be more coincident with cyclical developments.  
Prices for clothing can also be difficult to calculate. As measured by the CPI, clothing prices 
in  Norway  have  fallen  markedly  over  the  past  few  years.  This  may  reflect  the  removal  of 
import quotas, reduced tariff rates, a shift in imports towards Chinese goods and improved 
efficiency  in  retail  industry.  These  changes  have  also  had  an  impact  in  other  countries. 
Clothing price developments in Norway have nonetheless followed a different path compared 
with Sweden and other European countries, with the exception of the UK.  
Trade in clothing in Sweden and Norway has many features in common. We have many of 
the  same  shop  chains,  and  trade  in  both  countries  is  increasingly  concentrated  on  chain 
stores.  Even  though  Norway  has  gone  somewhat  further  in  removing  trade  barriers,  and 
even though the price level in Norway was initially relatively high, the question may still be 
raised as to whether there is reason to expect such wide differences in clothing prices in the 
two countries year after year.  
It is difficult to measure changes in clothing price. Although a clothing article often has a high 
introductory  price,  the  price  falls  after  a  relatively  short  period.  Sales  activity  is  high.  The 
range  of  goods  changes  frequently.  A  large  share  of  the  assortment  in  a  shop  is  typically 
replaced in the course of 3-4 months. Changes in quality are difficult to define and identify.  
In  Norway,  it  is  the  shops  themselves  that  report  clothing  prices  and  changes  in  quality, 
which are used as a basis for the clothing price index in the CPI. In Sweden and many other 
countries  (Denmark,  Ireland,  the  UK),  price  inspectors  perform  this  task.  In  Sweden, 
statistical methods are also used to calculate changes in quality.  
It may be that some of the difference in the rise in clothing prices in the two countries is due 
to  the  way  prices  are  measured  and  interpreted  rather  than  to  actual  price  developments. 
This is also supported by Eurostat’s price level survey.  
Eurostat compares different countries’ prices for identical goods and finds that the level of 
clothing  prices  in  Norway  has  in  fact  risen  somewhat  compared  with  clothing  prices  in 
Sweden in recent years. According to the CPI in the two countries, clothing prices in Norway 
have fallen by 30 per cent relative to clothing prices in Sweden in the period 1999-2005. The 
goods  measured  in  Eurostat’s  survey  are  probably  not  representative  of  the  basket  of 
consumer goods in Norway. The survey nonetheless illustrates the uncertainty surrounding 
actual developments in clothing prices.  
Allow me to conclude. 
Inflation in a country with its own national currency is not something that just drifts in with the 
wind from abroad. It is monetary policy that over time determines the nominal path. In the 
short  and  medium  term,  we  can  weigh  the  variability  in  inflation  against  the  variability  in 
output and employment. Nevertheless, the overriding objective is to anchor expectations of 
low and stable inflation. We must never lose sight of this. 
There  is  considerable  uncertainty  surrounding  the  economic  situation  and  economic 
developments  ahead.  Statistical  forecasting  techniques  and  macroeconomic  models  can 
help  us  gain  further  insights  into  and  a  better understanding  of  the  driving  forces,  but  can 
obviously not eliminate risk and uncertainty. 
Measuring  inflation  is  no  trivial  matter  and  should,  like  monetary  policy,  be  reviewed  and 
discussed and be open and transparent. Measured as a ten-year average, inflation is now 
2.0 per cent. Given the uncertainty surrounding the economic situation, the projections and 
the measurement of inflation, this is quite close to the target of 2.5 per cent.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 102/2007
    11
BIS Review 102/2007 
     12 
 BIS Review 102/2007
    13
BIS Review 102/2007 
     14 
 BIS Review 102/2007
    15
BIS Review 102/2007 
     16 
 BIS Review 102/2007
 BIS Review 102/2007 
  17
