Mario Draghi: Growth and stability of the economy and financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Annual  Congress  organised  by 
AIAF - ASSIOM - ATIC FOREX, Turin, 3 February 2007. 
 Growth and stability 
Against the background of an international expansion that remains strong, the euro area is growing at 
a rate almost double that of the last five years. 
In the eight years since the launch of the Economic and Monetary Union monetary policy has created 
conditions that are conducive to growth and investment. Real short-term interest rates have remained 
low in all the phases of the cycle, ranging from zero to 2.3 per cent. In the previous two decades they 
were close to 3 per cent in the countries with a history of monetary stability and to 4 per cent in Italy. 
Since the end of 2005 the monetary stimulus to the economy has been progressively reduced, with the 
gradual raising of interest rates. The European Central Bank has acted to tie expectations firmly to the 
objective of price stability. The credibility of monetary policy has countered the risks of an increase in 
inflation in connection with the reduction in idle capacity and, until last summer, the rise in the price of 
oil. 
In this stable environment, the euro-area economy has benefited from the structural measures taken 
so  far.  As  we  recalled  at  the  last  meeting  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  since  the  beginning  of 
monetary union Europe’s economy has created 12 million jobs, helped by labour market reforms and 
wage  moderation.  These  results  clearly  indicate  the  way  forward;  they  call  for  further  progress  in 
eliminating the constraints that still hold down employment, slow growth and exclude too many people 
from the labour market. 
In the last ten years a large part of the developing world, which historically had been a debtor, has 
become a creditor. This shift was made possible by the opening up of international trade and has been 
accompanied by an extraordinary boom in financial innovation. The dismantling of barriers has also 
opened  the way  for  investment  in  illiquid  assets,  which  has  risen  to  unprecedented  levels;  financial 
leverage is now used more than ever before. One has the impression that the signals coming from the 
market  may  occasionally  have  been  distorted  by  these  changes:  the  exceptionally  low  level  of  risk 
premiums  does  not  fully  reflect  creditworthiness;  real  long-term  interest  rates  also  continue  to  be 
extremely low, both compared with long-term averages and in relation to the economies’ position in 
the cycle. Liquidity continues to be abundant, although the monetary policies of the leading countries 
have been less accommodating for some time. The world economy continues to grow at a rapid pace. 
It is unrealistic to expect that today’s orderly market conditions will last forever. This is why there has 
been a call from many quarters for closer international collaboration, not only in order to take steps 
towards  gradually  overcoming  global  imbalances,  but  above  all  to  strengthen  the  world  financial 
structure.  We  do  not  know  where  the  next  crisis  will  come  from  but  we  must  do  everything  in  our 
power to be ready for it. 
We also need to shun policies that could generate financial instability and cause growth to slow. In 
particular, we must resist protectionist pressures, such as the measures to obstruct international trade 
with the emerging Asian economies advocated on many sides. 
The Italian economy: an opportunity for restructuring and revival 
The Italian economy continues to benefit from the favourable European and world cycle, although it is 
growing at a slower pace than the average for Europe. It is estimated that in 2006 output expanded by 
slightly less than 2 per cent. The improvement in the economic situation compared with previous years 
is  undeniable.  But  it  is  not  sufficient:  the  growth  achieved  so  far  mainly  thanks  to  the  favourable 
performance  of  the  European  economies,  and  of  Germany’s  in  particular,  must  be  progressively 
replaced by domestic expansion. If this is to happen a process of strong and lasting growth in total 
factor  productivity,  which  has  stagnated  since  the  middle  of  the  1990s,  must  be  set  in  motion.  The 
material  and  above  all  human  resources,  especially  young  people,  that  the  country  possesses  in 
abundance must be brought into play. Positive signs are already visible, mainly among the firms most 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 1
exposed  to  international  competition,  but  it  is  still  difficult  to  distinguish  with  certainty  between  the 
effect of structural changes and that of the factors usually observed during cyclical upturns. 
Many national labour contracts have now expired or will do so by the end of this year. Hopefully, action 
by the social partners will lead to an upturn in productivity and growth in employment. One of the first 
rounds  of  negotiations,  which  will  evidently  have  implications  for  the  rest,  is  for  the  renewal  of  the 
contract governing the public sector, where increases in per capita earnings in recent years have far 
outpaced  those  in  the  private  sector  without  explicit  or  adequate  consideration  for  the  real 
performance of productivity. Personnel management in the public sector is subject to strict constraints, 
incentives  are  few  and  the  independence  and  accountability  of  managers  are  often  insufficient. 
Satisfactory systems of individual evaluation and differentiation need to be introduced. 
Action must be taken to continue and reinforce policies to promote competition in areas where it is still 
unsatisfactory.  The  Government  is  moving  in  this  direction,  as  the  measures  recently  adopted  also 
testify. The objectives are commendable. The means must be given careful consideration: liberalizing 
signifies relying for consumer protection as much as possible on transparency and competition and the 
oversight of the competent authorities. 
The structural reform agenda is still a long one and I shall come back to it on another occasion. Let me 
just  say  here  that  it  is  easier  to  implement  reforms  when  the  economic  situation  is  favourable;  the 
present offers an opportunity that must not be missed. 
The  recovery  also  creates  favourable  conditions  for  continued  action  to  consolidate  the  public 
finances.  In  2006  these  benefited  from  higher-than-expected  revenue,  partly  due  to  the  good 
performance  of  the  economy.  The  temptation  to  squander  this  fiscal  windfall  must  be  resisted.  The 
public  debt,  the  cumulative  result  of  improvident  decisions  over  a  long  stretch  of  time,  remains 
extremely large – the largest in Europe in relation to gross domestic product. The low interest rates 
obtaining since the introduction of the euro have diminished the public’s perception of the burden this 
represents for us and for future generations. The size of the debt makes any increase in the return on 
government securities very costly for the public finances; it is also an obstacle to public investment 
and the restructuring of public spending; and it hamstrings fiscal policy. If the debt can be cut over the 
next  decade,  which  will  remain  fairly  favourable  in  demographic  terms,  the  costs  of  an  ageing 
population could be tackled more gradually and distributed more equitably. 
The public debt can be reduced significantly within a short space of time. We must aim to achieve a 
structurally balanced budget. At the end of the 1990s the public debt represented the same proportion 
of  GDP  in  Italy  and  in  Belgium,  114  per  cent.  In  Belgium,  a  virtually  balanced  budget  and  greater 
growth than in Italy by some 6 percentage points over the period allowed the debt ratio to be reduced 
to less than 90 per cent in 2006. In Italy it currently stands at 107 per cent. This year interest payments 
in Belgium will be about 1 percentage point of GDP less than in Italy. For the ratio of debt to GDP to 
be reduced on a lasting basis two conditions must be met: economic growth and the curtailment of 
expenditure. 
The level of taxation in Italy is high, imposing a penalty on the firms and households that pay their 
taxes in full. In the future it needs to be attenuated. The fruits of the fight against tax evasion must be 
used  to  lower  tax  rates.  It  is  estimated  that  general  government  revenue  increased  by  about  one 
percentage point of GDP in 2006 and it is forecast to rise further in 2007. Permanent adjustment of the 
public finances requires structural measures that will hold the rate of increase in outlays in the main 
areas  of  expenditure  below  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  economy.  In  2005  the  ratio  of  primary 
current  expenditure  to  GDP  was  the  highest  since  the  Second  World  War,  and  the  figures  now 
available indicate that it remained near that level in 2006. 
In  the  field  of  pensions,  it  is  necessary  to  ensure,  at  the  same  time,  tolerable  contributions,  the 
financial  equilibrium  of  the  system,  and  the  payment  of  adequate  benefits.  Italy’s  employment  rate 
among persons aged 55 to 64 is scarcely 31 per cent, which is more than ten percentage points lower 
than  the  European  Union  average  and  nearly  twenty  points  short  of  the  target  for  2010  set  by  the 
European Council in Lisbon in 2000 with Italy’s accord. What is needed is a collective coming to grips 
with  the  situation,  similar  to  the  effort  that  –  in  the  mid-1980s  and  then  with  the  concertation 
agreements of  1992-93 –  enabled  Italy  to  break  the rigid wage-price spiral with  hard but  farsighted 
decisions on wage indexation. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2007
The transformation of the financial markets 
A  year  ago  on  this  occasion  I  recalled  the  necessity  of  pursuing  the  integration  of  the  European 
markets  and  lowering  transaction  costs.  Since  then  a  number  of  far-reaching  transformations  have 
begun in the configuration of Europe’s financial markets. 
The merger between a leading European and a leading American stock exchange will give rise to a 
circuit offering competitive liquidity and cost conditions to issuers and investors. 
The  implementation  of  the  Markets  In  Financial  Instruments  Directive  will  heighten  competition 
between  regulated  markets  and  the  trading  platforms  operated  by  major  financial  institutions  or 
consortia of intermediaries. The greatest impact will be felt in countries, Italy among them, that had 
previously required all equity trades to be carried out on the official stock exchange. Some significant 
initiatives  are  now  materializing.  A  group  of  international  banks  have  an  agreement  to  construct  a 
platform for trading in equities and a common system for gathering and sharing the equities trading 
data. 
The  cost  of  cross-border  transactions  in  Europe  is  still  too  high.  The  initiatives  for  cooperation 
undertaken  by  the  main  settlement  providers  have  not  yet  produced  satisfactory  results,  and  the 
Eurosystem  central  banks  are  weighing  the  possibility  of  directly  managing  the  final  phase  in  the 
settlement process, in order to lower costs and facilitate the settlement of transactions. 
The  European  Commission  has  recommended  a  code  of  conduct  for  market  operators,  securities 
depositories  and  central  counterparties  to  eliminate  barriers  to  access  to  the  various  services, 
enhance transparency on costs and income, and achieve interoperability. 
Together,  these  developments  will  result  in  a  rapid  and  significant  heightening  of  competition  and 
concentration  at  European  and  world  level.  The  challenge  has  been  issued.  Italian  banks  and  the 
stock exchange must take note and prepare to meet it. 
The  banks  will  have  to  make  choices,  and  promptly.  The  main  initiatives  already  taken  in  Europe 
range from stepping up the internal provision of trading services to forming consortia. In Italy the major 
banks,  if  they  do  not  consider  they  have  the  size  and  range  of  business  to  follow  either  of  these 
courses, must capitalize on their position as shareholders of the organized markets. 
Thanks to low prices and the quality of its services, Borsa Italiana has a powerful competitive tool at its 
command.  In  addition,  it  can  still  benefit  from  the  informational  edge  deriving  from  the  customary 
practice,  common  to  all  financial  marketplaces,  of  channelling  trading  in  securities,  especially  in 
equities, to domestic exchanges. Nevertheless, the spur of growing competition will inevitably make 
itself felt. In the long run, the significant network externalities and economies of scale that characterize 
financial  markets  and  the  natural  gravitation  of  liquidity  to  deeper  markets  threaten  to  squeeze  out 
exchanges  that  remain  isolated.  This  is  what  happened  to  Italy’s  regional  bourses.  Looking  to  the 
future,  a  failure  to  exploit  scale  economies  could  even  undermine  the  competitiveness  of  Borsa 
Italiana’s  prices.  In  the  choices  it  makes,  the  exchange  must  succeed  in  combining  the  advantage 
deriving  from  its  roots  in  the  national  economy  with the  benefits of  integration.  Its  shareholders  will 
have a unique opportunity: to make the most of their investment while simultaneously contributing to 
the development of Italy’s corporate sector. 
The transposition of the European directive on takeover bids into Italian law is now imminent. The fruit 
of  an  unhappy  compromise,  the  directive  lays  down  only  minimum  harmonization  and  leaves 
considerable  scope  for  national  law  to  limit  the  contestability  of  control  of  listed  companies.  This 
approach threatens to undo past progress in the protection of minority shareholder rights in countries, 
such as Italy, where these safeguards are strongest. Transposition must not provide the occasion for 
overturning  the  principles  established  in  this  respect  by  the  Consolidated  Law  on  Finance.  The 
mandatory  nature  of  the  passivity  rule  has  to  be  confirmed  and  there  must  be  strict  and  extremely 
limited  conditions  for  invoking  the  reciprocity  clause.  Finally,  considering  the  importance  of 
shareholder agreements in the control of Italian corporations, the law transposing the directive should 
confirm shareholders’ right to withdraw from such pacts in the case of a takeover bid. 
In other countries pension funds, along with other institutional investors, help to ensure the efficiency 
and  the  liquidity  of  the  financial  markets.  They  stimulate  innovation  and  competition  between 
intermediaries, they increase the resources available to firms in the form of equity and bond issues, 
and  they  exercise  continuous  monitoring  of  the  strategy  of  listed  companies,  to  the  benefit  of  the 
transparency and quality of corporate governance. The relative underdevelopment of pension funds in 
Italy is an impediment to the growth of the financial system and to the restructuring of the productive 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 3
economy.  Bringing  forward  the  entry  into  force  of  the  new  retirement  system  rules  to  this  year  has 
been a step in the right direction. 
Enrolment in supplementary pension plans is low especially among the groups whose public pensions 
are  likely  to  be  smallest  –  self-employed  workers,  young  people  and  women,  all  penalized  by  the 
greater  variability  and  discontinuity  of  their  earnings.  These workers  must  be  offered  pension  plans 
that afford ample freedom in determining contribution flows and facilitate totalization and the portability 
of contributions, including those paid in different phases of one’s career, from one form of retirement 
saving to another. The possibility of enjoying the advantages of supplementary pension plans should 
be extended to public employees. 
The investment of severance pay in supplementary pension plans can bring substantial benefits for 
workers. Accumulation over a considerable time horizon is necessary in order to reach pensions of 
adequate size. On the financial markets investment strategies can be used to obtain, with limited risks, 
real  rates  of  return  in  line  with  or  higher  than  those  delivered  by  the  revaluation  of  severance  pay 
funds. Over long time horizons higher rates of return can be achieved through investment in equities, 
though at the cost of additional risk. 
According to recent surveys, workers continue to overestimate the amount of their future pensions by 
a large measure and are still poorly informed about supplementary pension schemes. It is their right to 
get  clear,  regular  and  complete  reports  on  their  accumulated  position  in  their  compulsory  pension 
system;  the  experience  of  other  countries,  especially  Sweden,  is  enlightening  in  this  regard.  It  is 
necessary  to  increase  workers’  knowledge  of  supplementary  pension  schemes;  to  highlight  the 
flexibility  they  are  given  in  using  the  different  forms  of  saving,  particularly  as  regards  the  right  to 
transfer their accumulated position between schemes and to obtain advances in case of exceptional 
needs,  such  as  the  loss  of  their  job,  the  purchase  of  a  house  or  serious  illness.  The  Finance  Law 
included a specific appropriation for information campaigns that will give workers the facts they need 
to make an informed decision on enrolment in supplementary pension plans. 
The banking system: efficiency, competition, fairness 
The number of banks operating in the euro area fell by more than 900 between 2001 and 2005. In the 
euro-area countries, the average share of total assets held by the top five banks rose by 4 percentage 
points to 43 per cent. In the same period the degree of concentration of the Italian banking system 
diminished slightly. Using data referring not to the top five banks but to all the domestic banks in the 
five largest groups – figures that give a more accurate picture of the Italian banking system – the share 
declined  from  46  to  44  per  cent  between  2001  of  2005;  it  rose  to  48  per  cent  last  year.  Although 
substantial, the latest consolidation left the overall degree of concentration little changed, owing to the 
fragmentation that still marks the second tier of banks. Italian banks were at the centre of major cross-
border transactions. They are stronger today in Italy and abroad but there is still room for mergers and 
acquisitions able to create synergies, with benefits for shareholders and customers. 
The  restructuring  has  been  driven  by  market  forces.  The  Bank  of  Italy  does  not  promote  or  guide 
mergers  and  acquisitions,  neither  does  it  impede  them;  it  does,  within  the  scope  of  its  powers, 
evaluate the market’s choices, with a view to ensuring conditions of stability serving to protect savers 
and guarantee the orderly functioning of the financial system. It does not create unjustified barriers to 
entry for new bank operators. 
The  consolidation  of  the  banking  industry  can  and  must  produce  greater  efficiency  among 
intermediaries, not less competition; it must lead to lower prices and better service quality. The groups 
created  by  mergers  and  acquisitions  must  demonstrate  that  they  are  able  to  reduce  the  costs  for 
customers significantly and swiftly by accelerating the integration of previously separate organizations. 
An effective governance structure is one of the necessary conditions for banks to achieve efficiency 
gains. A rational use of the diversified system of  administration and control recently introduced into 
Italian law can contribute to this. In the two-tier system, the supervisory board, clearly separated from 
the  management  board,  which  is  responsible  for  operating  decisions,  is  interposed  between 
shareholders and managers and performs some of the oversight functions that in the one-tier system 
are  left  to  the  shareholders.  Where  ownership  structures  are  particularly  complicated,  the  two-tier 
system can permit more effective control of management’s performance. In the case of recent bank 
mergers, the initiators have seen the two-tier system as a means of capitalizing on the traditions and 
experience of the pre-existing institutions. Against this, however, there is the risk of an unclear division 
of  roles  and  responsibilities,  detrimental  to  efficiency  and  speed  in  decision-making.  The  pros  and 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2007
cons of the choices made will have to be weighed in the light of developments. The two-tier system 
has  facilitated  the  mergers;  it  may  prove  not  to  be  functional  in  the  future,  in  which  case  it  will  be 
necessary to obviate the shortcomings in a pragmatic spirit. 
The time has come to revise the governance of cooperative banks, especially the largest, in order to 
adapt it to the changed competitive conditions. Their contribution to this revision is important. Without 
prejudice to the core principles of cooperation, it is desirable that Parliament act to increase the room 
available for outside investors to participate in their capital and decision-making. This must happen in 
a transparent and open manner; under the legislation now in force, the Bank of Italy can only demand 
compliance with the letter and the spirit of the existing rules. 
Protection  of  the  users  of  banking  services  is  a  reference  point  for  the  Bank  of  Italy.  A  correct 
relationship between intermediaries and customers is important to banks’ stability itself. Industrial and 
financial  crises,  including  recent  episodes,  have  exposed  banks  and  the  entire  financial  system  to 
serious legal and reputational risks. 
Regulatory  action  to  protect  customers  must  be  effective  and  measured.  Competition  between 
intermediaries in serving customers must remain the linchpin of regulations governing bank-customer 
relations.  All  measures  that  enhance  the  transparency  of  price  structures  are  appropriate.  The 
spontaneous initiative of the banks themselves is the best defence against intrusive regulation, which 
could rigidify the market and thwart the intended objective of safeguarding the weaker party. Hopefully, 
legislative proposals for the protection of bank customers with regard to overdraft fees will increase the 
transparency of banking terms and conditions without turning into a detailed prescription of contractual 
clauses. 
In my Concluding Remarks last year I stressed the need to eliminate the costs associated with the 
closing  of current  accounts.  The statutory  provisions  recently  passed  have proved  difficult to  apply, 
which  may  give  rise  to  litigation;  the  expected  benefits  risk  being  annulled.  In  order  to  foster  the 
mobility  of  bank  customers  and  increase  competition,  the  abolition  of  these  costs  must  be 
accompanied by simplification of the bureaucratic formalities and the automatic transfer of account-
related  services  within  a  short  and  definite  time  limit.  This  is  the  message  of  the  European 
Commission’s recent report on competition in the banking sector. According to the report, the annual 
management  fees  for  a  bank  current  account  in  Italy  amount  to  €90,  compared  with  a  European 
average of €14. An earlier survey by the Bank of Italy on a sample of accounts at banks subject to 
inspection  indicated  a  figure  of  €163.  Naturally,  difference  between  the  estimates  also  reflects  the 
number, type and frequency of use of the services considered. 
The  Markets  in  Financial  Instruments  Directive,  which  I  mentioned  earlier  in  connection  with  its 
influence  on  the  structure  of  financial  markets,  will  also  inevitably  have  a  significant  effect  on  the 
relations between banks and customers. A new and clearer definition of the information and conduct 
requirements applying to banks will increase the transparency of their relations with customers and 
make  the  latter’s  choices  better  informed.  The  new  rules,  especially  those  concerning  conflicts  of 
interest and inducements, will have a major impact on banks’ operations and organization. 
Effective protection of customers also requires rapid and economical ways to enforce rights. The law 
on the protection of savings requires banks to adhere to mechanisms for the out-of-court settlement of 
disputes. The rules governing the procedures and the composition of the decision-making body will 
build on the experience gained with the banking ombudsman; they will adopt an approach based on 
self-regulation by intermediaries and careful consideration of customers’ claims and interests. 
No formal guarantee can be effective if the persons concerned do not have appropriate instruments for 
making evaluations. If savers are to be able to find their way among so many different and complex 
financial products, they will need to have an adequate and up-to-date financial culture. The initiatives 
undertaken in this field are only a start. The Bank of Italy stands ready to contribute. 
In  my  speech  to  you  last  year  I  drew  attention  to  the  need  to  ensure  that  asset  management 
companies  were  independent  of  the  banking  and  insurance  groups  that  control  them  and  distribute 
their products. This can be achieved by strict corporate governance rules and, if these are insufficient, 
by  measures  regarding  ownership  structures.  The  present  integration  between  production  and 
distribution of financial products reduces the scope for exploiting the economies of scale present in 
asset management, attenuates the pressure of competition, increases the risk of conflicts of interest, 
and  ultimately  limits  the  growth  of  the  sector  and  the  protection  of  investors.  Intermediaries,  and 
especially banks, must make asset management  companies independent and permit competition in 
the distribution of products, so as to reduce the costs borne by investors. As in other fields, market 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 5
initiatives are to be preferred to legislative measures; in their absence legislation or regulation will be 
inevitable. 
The competitiveness of Italian funds also requires a review of their tax treatment. It is important that 
the  current  revision  of  the  mechanism  for  taxing  financial  income  take  account  of  the  need  for  a 
reasonable degree of uniformity across countries as regards how and when taxes are levied and their 
level. 
There  is  room  for  increased  competition  and  efficiency  in  the  field  of  payment  services  as  well. 
Technology  now  makes  it  possible  to  open  the  market  to  new  participants,  such  as  mobile  phone 
operators and providers of other services. Within the sphere of its regulatory responsibilities the Bank 
of  Italy  will  introduce  the  measures  needed  to  permit  such  developments,  while  simultaneously 
ensuring  the security of  transactions.  At  European  level  the creation  of  a single  payments area will 
require  legislative  harmonization.  The  proposals  under  discussion  envisage  a  new  category  of 
specialized  European  intermediaries  that  will  be  able  to  combine  payment  transactions  with  other 
commercial  activities;  supervision  will  be  based  on  the  principle  of  proportionality  and  prudential 
requirements related to the risks. This is a development to be encouraged. 
The  integration  of  markets  and  the  growing  role  of  transnational  intermediaries  require  the 
harmonization at European level of the rules governing supervision and a strengthening of cooperation 
among national authorities. This year will see another review of the Lamfalussy process, including its 
extension  to  banking  and  insurance.  Convergence  of  supervisory  practices  is  essential  for  the 
efficiency of the European capital market. There are still important differences, such as those in the 
treatment of hybrid instruments in computing regulatory capital, that must be analyzed and removed. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  will  liberalize  and  simplify  the  procedures  for  opening  new  branches,  thereby 
increasing banks’ independence in shaping their distribution strategies. 
What is required of the supervisory authority is not so much rigid regulation as the ability to intervene 
promptly  to  facilitate  and  orientate  solutions  found  independently  by  the  market.  In  applying  the 
highest standards of risk management, the activity of the Bank of Italy and that of banks pursue largely 
similar objectives. Prudential rules reinforce, do not replace, the practices of sound bank management. 
Sometimes situations arise in which individual intermediaries perceive the need for corrective action 
but  are  reluctant  to  act  independently,  because  none  of  them,  for  fear  of  suffering  a  competitive 
disadvantage, has an incentive to move first. In such cases the initiative of the market is insufficient; 
the  authorities  must  intervene.  Here  again,  rather  than  introducing  legislative  measures  it  is  often 
preferable  to  persuade  intermediaries  to  cooperate  in  the  search  for  solutions.  There  have  recently 
been some encouraging instances of this internationally. In the derivatives market the problem of order 
confirmation backlogs has been tackled on the basis of a solution promoted by the financial industry 
rather  than  imposed  by  regulators.  But  without  the  latter’s  intervention  the  problem  would  have 
remained unsolved, entailing a significant risk for financial stability worldwide. 
There  may  be  other  circumstances  in  which  closer  cooperation  between  regulators  and  regulated 
entities  is  likely  to  contribute  to  strengthening  the  financial  system.  Innovation  has  increased  the 
efficiency of risk management enormously. But risk itself has not actually diminished. The growth of 
the financial services industry allows investors and intermediaries, encouraged by the new forms of 
diversification, to take on greater and more complex risks than in the past, sometimes without being 
fully aware of what they are. Often these risks migrate from the balance sheets of banks to other parts 
of  the  financial  system.  This  brings  new  challenges  for  the  supervisory  authority  responsible  for 
stability and especially for ensuring that the regulatory framework and intermediaries’ management of 
their operational risks are adequate. 
Quite often the market is well ahead of regulators in perceiving the existence of problems in collective 
action, risk management and infrastructure shortcomings. It is essential that intermediaries promptly 
inform  the  Bank  of  Italy.  In  this  way  the  smooth  functioning  of  markets,  the  stability  of  the financial 
system and the protection of their customers will be maintained. With the meeting of 24 January with 
some large banking groups we gave new force to a practice of consultation whose primary aim must 
be to foster such cooperation between the supervisory authority and banks. 
The principle upon which our action is based is that of a modern and agile supervisory authority ready 
to listen to the suggestions of the private sector with a view to improving regulation and making it more 
effective, but at the same time inflexible in working to ensure intermediaries’ competence, fairness and 
solidity. 
6 
 BIS Review 12/2007
