Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Improving lives through better access to credit 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Launching of E-Rediscounting in Mindanao, Davao City, 
20 July 2007. 
 Maayong udto sa inyong tanan! Honrable Members of the Monetary Board; fellow bankers; 
business leaders of Mindanao as represented by the Chamber of Commerce and Industry, 
the Small and Medium Enterprise Development Council and Micro-finance Council; special 
guests;  government  officials  who  are  here  today,  Mayor  Lobrigat;  my  colleagues  at  the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas; friends; Ladies and Gentlemen – I am very pleased to lead the 
launching here today of the BSP’s Electronic or e-Rediscounting System. 
Only a few weeks ago at the Mindanao Peace and Security Summit in Cagayan de Oro City 
the President identified two key priority programs for Mindanao, which is particularly relevant 
to our program today. 
The  first  priority  is  to  increase  the  funding  for  key  government  economic  programs  in 
Mindanao. The second is to strengthen the institutions of government to promote economic 
prosperity in the region. 
Given this, the launching of the Bangko Sentral’s e-Rediscounting System here in Mindanao 
is indeed very timely and appropriate. With this electronic loan refinancing facility, we expand 
and facilitate access to credit of countryside areas in Mindanao where there are micro, small 
and medium enterprises, as well as exporters. This should stimulate economic activities in 
the local communities here. 
So far, the seven-month track record of our e-rediscounting system has been positive. Since 
its  initial  launching  in  Manila  in  December,  the  number  of  participating  banks  in  our  e-
Rediscounting  System  has  increased  from  88  to  129  while  the  total  loans  processed  and 
released during this period has reached an unprecedented level of over P14 billion. 
The importance that the Monetary Board attaches to this initiative is clearly demonstrated by 
the  presence  of  our  Monetary  Board  members  in  this  launching  today  and  let  me 
acknowledge them: First, MBM Vicente Valdepeñas, Jr., MBM Raul Boncan, MBM Juanita 
Amatong,  MBM  Alfredo  Antonio,  and  earlier  today  MBM  Nelly  Favis-Villafuerte  was  also 
here. 
The BSP Top Management is here with us as well today we have DG Diwa Guinigundo, DG 
Armando Suratos, DG Nestor Espenilla, Jr. and General Counsel and Asst. Governor Juan 
de Zuñiga, Jr.  
What  makes  e-Rediscounting  attractive  to  banks?  Well,  as  an  online rediscounting  facility, 
banks  file  loan  applications  through  the  Internet  and  –  if  their  application  is  approved  -- 
receive the  loan proceeds within minutes, through their demand deposit accounts with the 
Bangko  Sentral.  In  other  words,  they  same  time,  incur  lower  transaction  costs  and  are 
spared  the  inconvenience  of  physically  filing  their  applications  and  going  through  manual 
processing. 
On  the  other  hand,  bank  customers  can  look  forward  to  lower  borrowing  costs  when  their 
banks start sharing the cost benefits of e-rediscounting.  
At this point, let me also take the opportunity to acknowledge the dedication of the officers 
and  staff  of  the  pilot  and  participating  banks  who  made  their  resources  available  for  the 
success of this project. We also wish to thank the officials and staff of the BSP, particularly 
BIS Review 85/2007 
 1
from  the  Department  of  Loans  and  Credit  and  the  Information  Technology  Sub-sector.  Of 
course,  we  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  the  assistance  and  participation  of  the  Davao 
Regional Office.  
Let me assure our colleagues from the banking community and the business sector here in 
Mindanao that we shall continue to explore ways to enhance our operations so as to facilitate 
the greater flow of credit in the countryside. In line with this strategy, the BSP has approved a 
new  project  that  will  compliment  the  e-rediscounting  system.  We  call  this  project  the 
Collateral  Information  and  Management  System  or  CIMS.  The  CIMS  is  envisioned  as  a 
system by which the BSP can monitor, control and manage collaterals submitted by banks as 
security  for  their  loans.  The  CIMS  is  expected  to  enable  authorize  users  to  electronically 
obtain information on the status of collateral documents particularly the collateral positions of 
borrower  banks  and  end-user  borrowers.  This  system  will  also  further  facilitate  loan 
processing as well as ensure the BSP’s protection against potential credit risk. Phase I of the 
CIMS is targeted for completion by the end of this year. 
Indeed,  the  Monetary  Board  and  the  Bangko  Sentral  are  committed  to  continuously  find 
better  ways  of  serving  our  country  through  the  delivery  of  fast,  adequate,  and  affordable 
credit, particularly to small- and medium-sized borrowers from the countryside. 
We hope therefore that our partners from the banking community and the business sector 
will  continue  to  work  closely  with  us  in  ensuring  sustained  and  balanced  growth  of  our 
economy. Together, let us create more economic opportunities that will liberate our people 
from poverty and make our country a better place for all Filipinos. 
Daghan Salamat sa inyong lahat, Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2007
