Njuguna Ndung’u: MEFMI Fellows Department Programme 
Speech by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya and Chairman of 
the  MEFMI  Executive  Committee,  during 
the  2007  MEFMI  Fellows  Graduation  & 
Accreditation Ceremony, Harare, 31 July 2007. 
 Your Excellencies, 
Governor Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe, Dr. Gideon Gono, 
Executive Director of MEFMI, Dr. Ellias Ngalande, 
Distinguished Invited Guests, 
Graduated and Accredited Fellows, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
It  is  indeed  a  great  honour  and  privilege  for  me  to  be  here  and  witness  this 
memorable occasion as we confer MEFMI Fellows in recognition of their hard work. 
Congratulations to you all the Graduated and Accredited Fellows! This occasion is 
especially  memorable  because  of  the  presence  of  our  distinguished  guests;  the 
financial cooperating partners. Your Excellencies once more, you are very welcome 
to the MEFMI family. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Allow  me,  on  behalf  of  the  board  and  indeed  on  my  own 
behalf, to thank you for accepting to come to bear testimony to one of the significant 
outputs  of  MEFMI.  Let  me  assure  you  of  MEFMI’s  commitment  in  pursuing  its 
objectives and ideals of building sustainable capacity in the region as affirmed by its 
leadership. 
I  wish  also  to  acknowledge  the  great  hospitality  the  Institute  continues  to  receive 
from the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe, Dr. Gideon Gono that enables 
us  to  convene  effectively  in  Harare.  Your  presence  here  today,  Honourable 
Governor,  further  demonstrates  the  very  commitment  you  have  for  the  intended 
success of MEFMI. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: MEFMI Fellows Development Programme was conceived as 
a flagship to address the capacity needs of the region in terms of the development 
of local and regional expertise. Specifically the programme was set up to meet the 
following objectives: 
(i) 
To  develop  a  critical  mass  of  regional  expertise  in  the  priority  areas  of 
sovereign debt, macroeconomic and financial management, as a means to 
gaining sustainable and self-generating capacity; 
To  create  sustainable  regional  capacity  for  delivery  of  MEFMI  capacity 
building products and services to answer the concerns about sustainability 
of the Institute’s activities; and 
To  create  regional  capacity  for  complementing  MEFMI’s  capacity  building 
efforts at in-house level in MEFMI member states’ institutions. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
training,  professional  exposure 
The Fellows who have graduated today have gone through an intensive programme 
of  customized 
institutions  and 
attachments  at  exemplary  institutions.  In  addition  MEFMI  arranged  a  “one-to-one” 
mentoring and coaching programme to all Fellows with leading experts in the sub-
specialty  chosen.  Having  personally  participated  in  these  activities  as  a  Resource 
Person, I can vouch for the quality of the process. 
Today we have witnessed the largest group of 25 Fellows ever graduating, at once, 
since  the  inception  of  MEFMI.  This  crop  will  bring  the  total  number  of  graduate 
to  renowned 
2. 
3. 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 1
(Basel 
(oversight);  Banking  Supervision 
Fellows to 36. The number for the Accredited Fellows now stands at 19 following the 
3  that  have  qualified  today.  I  am  also  told  that  currently  there  are  12  candidate 
Fellows under training who will be graduating early in 2008. In addition, tomorrow 
the Secretariat will be conducting rigorous interviews to recruit a new group of 17 
Fellows, which will bring the total number of Fellows under training to 29. 
These developments are a clear demonstration that the Fellows programme is rising 
to greater heights than was the case at the beginning. This is evident from not only 
the number of graduating Fellows but also the diversity of the specialty areas. The 
diverse  areas  now  include:  Post  HIPC  Debt  Strategy  Formulation  and  Analysis; 
formulation;  Financial  Supervision  of  Pension  Funds; 
Public  Debt  Strategy 
Payments  Systems 
II);  Financial 
Programming; and Policy and Economic Modelling that reflect the emerging capacity 
building needs of the member states. The expertise acquired by the Fellows will be 
utilized in assisting member states in designing appropriate policies and strategies 
for enhancing economic growth relevant for poverty reduction. 
Although  MEFMI  may  have  registered  success  in  the  Fellows  Development 
Programme because of the notable outputs, the demand for capacity far outstrip the 
supply.  MEFMI’s  vision  is  to  realise  that  dream  of  a  critical  mass  of  Accredited 
Fellows being available in each institution of the member state. 
Your  Excellencies,  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  one  of  the  gains  of  the 
Fellows programme is the benefit of high quality expertise at a minimal cost. As you 
may  well  know,  for  decades,  Africa  has  been  grappling  with  problem  of  limited 
capacity in specialist areas. Long term technical assistance provided from overseas 
has been perceived as a solution. Experiences in the region, however, indicate that 
technical assistance perpetuated and turned into great dependency.  
The coming of institutions such as MEFMI, with the noble approach of empowering 
its  member  states  officials  and  reducing  use  of  external  experts.  This  aspect  has 
become a route towards sustainable and self-generating capacity for MEFMI. 
Ladies and Gentlemen:  Allow me to acknowledge both the financial and technical 
support received from our partners that have rendered the MEFMI capacity building 
efforts effective in general. Particularly and in support of the Fellows Development 
Programme,  the  technical  cooperating  partners  have  gone  an  extra  mile  by 
providing expertise that groom the Fellows on gratis terms. 
Turning to the Fellows who have graduated today, I would like you to sincerely note 
that MEFMI holds you in very high esteem. As such you need to live to its ideals. 
MEFMI’s  investment,  let  alone  the  investment  of  member  states  in  human  capital 
development, is very dear. In this regard, I urge you to display high levels of integrity 
and  dedication  by  leading  in  assisting  to  impart  knowledge  and  skills  in  your  own 
institutions. It is our honest expectation that compensation from your own institution 
or MEFMI will not be the only guiding motive for you to impart skills on behalf of your 
institution  or  MEFMI  because  they  have  respectively  assisted  you  to  acquire  the 
special skills in this programme. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  I  believe  the  graduants  are  anxiously  waiting  to  celebrate 
later tonight and as such I do not intend to prolong my speech. I would like once-
more to thank all the distinguished guests that joined us in this memorable occasion. 
I  would  like  to  especially  thank  the  financial  cooperating  partners  that  are  ably 
represented by their Ambassadors resident in Harare and also the Africa Capacity 
Building Foundation (ACBF). 
I wish all the graduated Fellows a safe return home. Finally allow me to thank our 
host Government through Governor Gono and Principal Secretary, Manungo, for the 
excellent  hospitality  that  MEFMI  Secretariat  is  enjoying  in  spite  of  the  economic 
BIS Review 91/2007
4. 
5. 
2 
 challenges that Zimbabwe is going through. MEFMI will continue to count on you in 
this regard. 
Last but not least let me thank MEFMI staff for the Secretariat’s hard working spirit 
that guarantees good outcomes all the time. 
I thank you all! Asanteni!! 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 3
