John Hurley: Recent economic developments in Ireland and the outlook for the 
economy 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services 
Authority of Ireland, at the presentation of the Annual Report 2006, Dublin, 11 July 2007.  
 You are all very welcome to this press briefing to mark the publication of the Annual Report 
of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland.  
I will briefly introduce my colleagues who join me today. Liam Barron, our Director General, 
Deputy  Director  General  Brian  Halpin,  Director  General  Designate,  Tony  Grimes,  and 
Maurice McGuire, Head of Economic Analysis and Research. 
As you know, Liam Barron is retiring as Director General next month. At the outset today I 
would like to thank Liam for his outstanding contribution to this organisation over a long and 
distinguished career, in particular as Director General and as a member of the Board. I would 
also like to take this opportunity to wish Tony Grimes all the very best in his new role. Tony is 
well placed to bring this organisation forward and to meet the various challenges in the years 
ahead. 
The Annual Report describes in detail our activities in 2006, which proved to be another busy 
year for the Bank, both in terms of our domestic and our euro area responsibilities. Today we 
are also publishing our strategic plan for the coming three years. 
I  should  also  mention  that  the  annual  Financial  Stability  Report  will  be  published  in  the 
autumn and that the Financial Regulator will publish its own Annual Report later this month. 
Economic developments 
I will begin by reviewing economic developments in Ireland over the past year or so, before 
moving on to discuss the outlook for the economy for this year and next. 
The latest CSO National Accounts data, which were released after the Annual Report was 
finalised, indicate that the economy performed very well last year with GNP growth of 6.5 per 
cent and GDP growth of 5.7 per cent.  
Reflecting the strength of output growth, last year was another good year for employment. An 
expansion of almost 4½ per cent in the numbers employed brought total employment above 
the 2 million mark for the first time. The unemployment rate remained low, below 4½ per cent 
– essentially full employment conditions.  
The pace of expansion last year was, in fact, somewhat above the economy’s medium term 
potential and, partly as a result, there was an increase in inflation. The Harmonised Index of 
Consumer  Prices, which is the most appropriate measure, rose by 2.7 per cent compared 
with 2.2 per cent the previous year. The rate of inflation for goods remained broadly in line 
with the euro area average but services inflation moved noticeably higher. This undoubtedly 
reflected  the  strength  of  domestic  demand  in  particular,  and  occurred  in  spite  of  the 
significant increase in labour supply through substantial inward migration.  
Domestic demand was the main source of output growth. Construction spending was still a 
major contributor, although it is clear, in retrospect, that housing completions reached a peak 
last  year  and  are  declining  towards  a  more  sustainable  level.  Consumption  growth  also 
remained strong in 2006, buoyed up by the continued growth in employment and earnings. In 
contrast, export growth was quite muted. The volume of exports of goods and services grew 
by just 4.4 per cent, mostly due to trade in services. This implies a decline in Ireland’s share 
of world trade.  
BIS Review 80/2007 
 1
Another  feature  of  last  year  was  the  further  increase  in  the  current  account  deficit  on  the 
balance of payments. The latest CSO data indicate that the deficit reached nearly 5 per cent 
of GNP last year. This indicates a need to rebalance growth. Some of this rebalancing will 
occur, as a matter of course, as the growth in consumer spending is expected to moderate 
next year. This is likely to result in reduced import growth. A recovery in export growth is, 
however,  also  required  as  a  part  of  this  rebalancing.  In  the  long  run,  in  a  small  open 
economy like Ireland, continued growth in incomes and employment depends, to a significant 
extent, on a satisfactory performance by the traded goods sectors. In this regard, there are 
welcome signs of a somewhat improved export performance in the first quarter of this year 
but  we  need  to  see  further  data  in  the  coming  months  before  we  can  be  confident  that  a 
sustained improvement is taking place. 
Last  year  was  a  very  good  one  for  the  public  finances.  The  strength  of  growth  helped  to 
boost revenues resulting in a General Government Surplus of 2.9 per cent of GDP, one of 
the best performances in the European Union. Some of the strength of revenue, however, 
reflected the composition of growth, with construction and the property market contributing 
significantly. This factor was taken into account in framing the fiscal forecasts for 2007 in the 
context of the last Budget. 
There were also important developments in the price of residential property last year. You 
may recall, at this time last year, that the Bank was very concerned about the reacceleration 
in house prices that had occurred. Current developments are more consistent with stability in 
the  market.  Looking  forward,  it  is  important  to  recall  that  the  major  underlying  factors 
supporting  the  demand  for  housing  are  employment  growth,  increases  in  incomes, 
demographics and social changes. The prospects for these key factors remain favourable, 
even allowing for some moderation in the growth rate of the economy, and we continue to 
believe that the most likely scenario is a soft landing for the housing market. 
There has also been a welcome deceleration in the rate of growth of credit in the economy, 
though it is still at high levels. The rate of growth in overall private sector credit has fallen 
from over 30 per cent in June of last year to just under 21 per cent in May of this year. The 
rate of increase in mortgage credit growth has also decelerated from a peak of over 28 per 
cent in March 2006 to about 20 per cent this May. If this trend continues, the growth rate in 
mortgage credit should be substantially lower at the end of the year. 
Turning  now  to  the  outlook  for  the  economy  generally  for  this  year  and  2008,  the  Bank’s 
current projections are that output growth will moderate, though still remaining strong. Overall 
growth this year is expected to be about 5 per cent, in terms of both GDP and GNP. The data 
for the early part of this year suggest that growth was probably in excess of these levels but 
there are two factors that will act to reduce growth somewhat as the year progresses and into 
next year. These are the impact of the gradual decline in house building towards sustainable 
levels and a moderation in consumer spending growth. In spite of the deceleration in growth 
and a modest rise in unemployment, the projected growth rate for next year, at about 4 per 
cent, remains favourable by comparison with other economies with broadly similar level of 
incomes.  HICP  inflation  is  projected  to  ease  from  an  average  of  2¾  per  cent  this  year  to 
about 2¼ per cent next year. 
It is, nevertheless, important to discuss some downside risks to the outlook, always bearing 
in  mind  that  they  are  risks  rather  than  forecasts.  Some  risks  reflect  factors  or  events 
completely outside the control of domestic policy makers. The most obvious of these, at the 
moment, are exchange rate movements and oil price volatility. There is still the risk that there 
could  be  a  sharp  depreciation  of  the  dollar  against  the  euro  as  part  of  a  correction 
mechanism for persistent global current account imbalances. It is impossible to quantify this 
risk  but  it  would  be  complacent  to  rule  out  the  possibility  of  a  correction  occurring  that 
involved  significant  exchange  rate  movements.  Given  the  openness  of  the  Irish  economy, 
this would impact on our competitiveness position and highlights the need to keep a focus on 
all the various factors that can contribute positively to the economy’s competitiveness and its 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2007
ability  to  respond  flexibly  to  adverse  developments.  The  Irish  economy  is  also  particularly 
exposed  to  oil  price  volatility  as  the  country’s  dependence  on  imported  oil  as  an  energy 
source is high by international standards. 
There  are  also  some  other  domestic  vulnerabilities.  The  house  building  sector,  though 
currently reducing its output, is still large – as a share of activity – by international standards. 
I have already outlined the Bank’s view that a gradual decline in output to more sustainable 
levels is the most likely outcome, but a sharper than expected contraction in housing output 
cannot  be  completely  ruled  out,  particularly  in  the  event  of  a  greater  than  anticipated 
downturn  in  the  economy  that  affects  employment  and  incomes.  There  has  also  been  a 
recent deterioration in competitiveness and measures should be taken now to reverse this 
trend, in order to avoid a more serious situation emerging in the future. Key elements in this 
regard would be to continue policies and behaviour which maximise productivity growth and 
limit inflationary pressures, for example, by investing in infrastructure, providing a framework 
that fosters R&D and promoting increased levels of competition in the economy. While many 
of  these  measures  require  action  at  national  level,  in  practice,  productivity  improvements 
ultimately take place at enterprise level, making it essential for public and private enterprises 
to focus on efficiency in their operations in an increasingly globalised environment.  
Appropriate  pay  developments,  which  take  account  of  productivity  trends  and  the  low-
inflation environment of the euro area, are also important. In particular, pay developments in 
the more sheltered sectors of the economy should not put pressure on wages and costs in 
the economy more generally.  
In order to cope with any unanticipated slowdown in the economy, whether from international 
or domestic risks, it is important to maximise flexibility in the economy. One element of this is 
maintaining a strong fiscal position and thus providing a buffer in the public finances which 
will  help  any  adverse  developments  to  be  absorbed.  This  would  make  it  more  likely  that 
remedial  fiscal  measures  could  be  avoided  against  a  background  of  somewhat  reduced 
economic growth and facilitate a quicker rebound in the performance of the economy. 
In summary, the outlook for the domestic economy remains favourable. There will be some 
deceleration  in  growth,  which  will  reflect  a  return  to  a  more  sustainable  level  of  housing 
output and more moderate consumer spending. The growth rate is still expected to be strong 
by international standards, however, as I have indicated, there are some risks to the outlook 
that have to be considered in framing policy. 
International and euro area economy 
Turning to the international background for the Irish economy, developments have remained 
broadly  favourable.  The  global  economy  expanded  rapidly  in  2006,  and  while  some 
moderation  is  projected  this  year,  global  activity  is  expected  to  continue  to  grow  strongly. 
Economic growth in the euro area increased by 2.7 per cent in 2006, its fastest pace in six 
years,  and  activity  has  remained  robust  in  the  first  half  of  this  year.  Growth  has  become 
increasingly  broad  based,  with  the  strength  of  fixed  investment  spending  particularly 
impressive.  The  conditions  are  in  place  for  sustained  growth  over  the  medium-term,  with 
domestic demand remaining strong and global growth continuing to provide support for euro 
area exports. But downside risks that I have already referred to, relating to potential volatility 
in the oil market and the possibility of a disorderly adjustment of global imbalances, are also 
relevant.  
With regard to euro area price developments, the headline rate of inflation has stabilised at 
just  under  2  per  cent  in  recent  months,  but  is  expected  to  increase  somewhat  in  the  final 
quarter of the year. Looking past this short-term volatility and focusing on the policy relevant 
medium-term horizon, risks to the outlook for price stability remain on the upside. Against the 
backdrop  of  high  capacity  utilisation  and  the  rapidly  improving  labour  market,  there  is  the 
potential for supply side pressures to emerge, and there is also the risk of further unexpected 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 3
increases in oil prices. In order to ensure that these risks to price stability do not materialise 
over  the  medium  term,  and  that  inflationary  expectations  are  kept  firmly  anchored,  the 
Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor  closely  all  developments.  As  you  know  the 
Governing Council never pre-commits to a specific course of action. 
Activities and financial accounts 
The annual report gives a full and detailed account of the Bank’s activities. I will just refer 
here to our financial accounts. The Bank’s profits for 2006 amounted to €110.2 million. After 
transfers to reserves and adjustments related to the recognition of the Bank’s pension liability 
as  required  under  FRS  17,  the  Bank’s  surplus  income  amounted  to  €98.5  million,  which 
accrues to the Exchequer. In addition, a total of €39.5 million, in respect of the net proceeds 
of coin issued, was also paid to the Exchequer. 
Strategic plan  
We are also publishing our new three-year Strategic Plan today. The plan sets out the key 
challenges  facing  the  Bank  over  the  next  three  years.  These  include  our  role  in  the 
Eurosystem  and  in  the  domestic  economy,  management  of  investment  assets,  both  on 
behalf of the CBFSAI and the ECB, the management of risk and management of resources. 
Our Strategic Plan sets out eight high level goals. Individual strategies with specific actions 
and  timeframes  have  been  established  to  achieve  these  goals.  The  inclusion  of  specific 
actions  will  allow  them  be  easily  included  in  work  plans  of  departments  and  performance 
objectives of staff. 
This concludes my opening remarks. My colleagues and I are now on hand to answer any 
questions you may have. 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2007
