Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Nurturing financially literate Filipinos 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the MOA signing on the “DepEd-BSP-EPRA Financial Literacy Project, Manila, 
12 April 2007. 
 Secretary Jesli Lapus, Dr. Cielito Habito, our partners from the Department of Education and EPRA, 
special guests from the Bankers Association of the Philippines and the Chamber of Thrift Banks, fellow 
central bankers. Magandang umaga po sa inyong lahat!  
On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board, I thank our partners at the Department of Education 
and  EPRA  for  sharing  our  goal  to  teach  money  management  to  our  elementary  students  and  to 
transform them into net savers.  
Specifically, our program involves the incorporation into the elementary curriculum lessons in saving 
and money management, as well as the values of pagka-masinop (prudence/avoiding waste), pagka-
matipid (thrift), and pag-iimpok (saving).  
A survey indicating that less than 5% of our youth regularly save money lends urgency to our program. 
If we can turn the tide with our present crop of elementary pupils, this will have long-term benefits for 
them and, ultimately, our country. Add to this the potential influence they can wield in their homes and 
in their communities as change agents.  
Actually,  there  are  other  initiatives  that  are  underway  under  our  Economic  and  Financial  Literacy 
Program.  In  particular,  the  Bangko  Sentral  is  at  the  forefront  of  a  money  management  program  for 
OFWs and their families; microfinance for the entrepreneurial poor; continuing economic and financial 
education for journalists; and consumer protection for bank customers. We are also set to establish 
economic and financial literacy centers in BSP offices in the province.  
Of course nurturing a new generation of savers and financially literate adults entails a lot of work and 
unflagging commitment from all of us. For this, we need all the help we can get.  
This is the reason why we at the Bangko Sentral are very pleased that no less than the heads of our 
principal partners are here with us this morning. Ladies and gentlemen, let us give a big hand to the 
Honorable Secretary of Education Jesli Lapus who is known for his ability to transform institutions and 
their human resources into models of excellence! Let us also give a round of applause to our other 
hardworking partners from the Department of Education!  
Bigyan din po natin ng masayang palakpakan si former Socioeconomic Planning Secretary Dr. Ciel 
Habito who continues to be deeply involved in making our country a better place! Palakpakan din po 
natin ang ibang EPRA representatives who are here.  
We are also pleased that we have with us today representatives from the Chamber of Thrift Banks 
headed  by  Executive  Director  Suzanne  Felix;  and  the  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines 
represented by its Executive Director Topper Coronel. Let us also give our banker guests a big hand 
for they continue to work with us closely on our economic and financial literacy programs, including our 
successful and award-winning “Tulong Barya Para sa Eskwela” project.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  “Tulong  Barya  Para  sa  Eskwela”  generated  more  than  P6.5  million  in  cash 
donations for public elementary schools and savings of more than P8 million for the Bangko Sentral. 
This national lesson in saving proved beyond any doubt to our school children, that every little amount 
we can save will eventually add up and even be the start of wealth creation!  
As our slogan says: “Ang Barya Mahalaga, Lalo na Kapag Pinagsama-sama.”  
With  the  incorporation  of  money  management  into  the  elementary  curriculum,  we  move  to  the  next 
step and formalize the education of our children on this vital subject. Indeed, today marks a high point 
in our continuing program to educate and inform our people on basic economic and financial concepts.  
Again,  thank  you  to  all  our  partners  and  to  all  others  with  us  today  who  share  our  commitment  to 
economic and financial literacy programs.  
BIS Review 37/2007 
 1
Together, let us help Filipinos manage their personal finances well, transform them into net savers and 
help them identify options that can ultimately lead to wealth creation. Maraming salamat po sa inyong 
lahat! Mabuhay ang mga Pilipino! 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2007
