Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic integration and adjustment processes in the 
euro area 
Speech by Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Wirtschaftstag 2007 
as recipient of the “Ludwig Erhard Memorial Coin in Gold”, Berlin, 13 June 2007.  
I thank Malin Andersson and Juan Luis Diaz del Hoyo who prepared this paper, Hans-Joachim Klöckers and Klaus Masuch for 
their helpful comments, and Arne Gieseck, Ruth Imkemeier and Philipp Rother for their additional input. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Es  ist  mir  eine  große  Ehre,  als  Ehrengast  zu  dieser  Veranstaltung  eingeladen  zu  sein  und  mit  der 
Ludwig Erhard Gedenkmünze in Gold ausgezeichnet zu werden. Nicht nur Deutschland, sondern ganz 
Europa  ist  Ludwig  Erhard  zu  Dank  verpflichtet  für  seine  mutige,  auf  den  Prinzipien  von  freiem 
Wettbewerb,  flexiblen  Preisen  und  offenen  Märkten  beruhende  Politik,  und  insbesondere  für  seine 
Ideen zum Konzept der Sozialen Marktwirtschaft. Er hat überdies auf die Bedeutung der Preisstabilität 
hingewiesen, welche er als menschliches Grundrecht aufgefasst hat. 
[English version: It is a great honour for me to be invited as guest of honour and to receive the Ludwig 
Erhard  Memorial  Coin  in  Gold.  Not  only  Germany  but  the  whole  of  Europe  is  indebted  to  Ludwig 
Erhard for his courageous policies based on the principles of free competition, flexible prices and open 
markets, and above all for his ideas on the concept of the social market economy.1 He also stressed 
the importance of price stability, which he considered to be a basic human right.] 
We  are  today  –  thanks  to  the  work  of  Ludwig  Erhard  –  confronted  with  exciting  challenges  and  a 
unique  historical  development.  The  creation  of  the  euro  area  is  an  exceptional  endeavour,  now 
comprising 13 countries, with the entry of Slovenia, and 318 million people. I remember many critical 
voices anticipating a failure and claiming that it would be impossible to share a single monetary policy 
and a single currency.  
Let me be clear from the very beginning: while there are still formidable challenges and we should not 
be complacent, Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) has been a great success. Some people claim 
that  the  euro  and  our  focus  on price  stability  have undermined  job  creation.  I  always put  facts  and 
figures first: over the eight years since the creation of the euro, employment in the euro area has risen 
by more than 12 million people. This can be compared with a rise of less than 3 million in the eight 
years  preceding  the  adoption  of  the  euro.  Obviously,  I  do  not  intend  to  give  all  the  credit  for  this 
impressive employment growth to the creation of the euro alone, but it is difficult to deny that the solid 
anchoring of price stability for all our vast continental economy has contributed to this achievement. 
It is a fact that economic integration has increased among the euro area countries. However, it is also 
true that the creation of the euro area – like globalisation – highlights the need for flexible economies. I 
do not see this as a negative aspect. On the contrary, it is a positive implication. In this sense, EMU 
has increased the pressure on all policy-makers and also all social partners – and I stress the word 
“all”.  They  must  ensure  a  well-functioning  euro  area,  by  good  management  aimed  at  enhanced 
flexibility, integrated labour, product and financial markets and disciplined fiscal policies. 
This leads me to the two main issues I would like to address this evening. First, I would like to share 
with you some stylised facts on the features of the euro area’s economic integration process. Second, 
I  will  address  the  complex  and  important  issue  of  how  to  ensure  that  economic  adjustment 
                                                      
1  
 “A free economic order can only continue if and so long as the social life of the nation contains a maximum of freedom, of 
private initiative and of foresight. If, on the other hand, social policy aims at granting a man complete security from the hour 
of birth, and protecting him absolutely from the hazards of life, then it cannot be expected that people will develop that full 
measure of energy, effort, enterprise and other human virtues which are vital to the life and future of the nation, and which, 
moreover, are the prerequisites for a social market economy based on individual initiative. … It should not be denied that in 
modern industrialised countries even a good economic policy will have to be complemented by social policy measures. On 
the other hand it is true to say that every effective social aid will have to be based on an adequate and growing national 
income,  which  means  an  efficient  economy.  Thus  it  must  be  in  the  interests  of  every  organic  social  policy  to  secure  an 
expanding and sound economy, and to take care that the principles guiding this economy are maintained and extended.” 
From:  Ludwig  Erhard,  “Prosperity  through  Competition”  (Wohlstand  für  alle),  Chapter  12  “Welfare  State  –  The  Modern 
Delusion” (Versorgungsstaat – der moderne Wahn), London 1958. 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 1
mechanisms  function  properly  in  the  euro  area.  Why  are  these  topics  so  decisive,  you  may  ask? 
Economic integration benefits consumers through lower prices and leads to increased employment. It 
is also crucial to enhancing the adjustment mechanism. This, in turn, helps to improve the ability of 
economies  to  cope  with  various  events,  with  various  “shocks”  as  we  say  in  economics,  so  as  to 
prevent  a  country  or  a  region  from  entering  into  a  long-lasting  period  of  recession  or  overheating. 
These are very important issues because they are intrinsically linked to the welfare of our citizens and 
the continuing success of the euro area. 
Features of economic integration in the euro area 
2. 
Allow me to briefly elaborate on five main features of the process of economic integration in the euro 
area. 
The  first  three  are  related  to  the  completion  of  the  Single  Market,  i.e.  the  integration  of  goods, 
services, capital and labour markets across the euro area countries.  
i) 
As to the first feature, economic integration has been reflected in a marked increase in intra-
euro area trade in goods and services. Let me provide you with some figures. Exports and 
imports of goods within the euro area increased from about 26% of GDP in 1998, the year 
before the adoption of the common currency, to around 32% in 2006. Intra-euro area exports 
and imports of services increased from about 5% of GDP in 1998 to almost 7% in 2006. The 
full achievement of a single market for services should further facilitate trade in services.2 As 
this interdependence within the euro area becomes stronger, the euro area is also becoming 
a more open economy. Extra-euro area exports and imports of goods rose from about 24% 
of GDP in 1998 to around 33% in 2006. Over the same period, extra-euro area exports and 
imports of services increased from about 8% of GDP to almost 10%. These developments 
clearly show that we are not witnessing the creation of a “fortress Europe”. On the contrary, 
European integration complements global integration.3  
As a second feature, the introduction of the euro has also contributed to financial integration 
which,  in  turn,  improves  the  free  movement  of  capital  in  the  euro  area.  First,  financial 
integration  raises  the  potential  for  stronger,  non-inflationary  growth.  For  example,  recent 
research  by  London  Economics  estimated  the  benefits  of  the  integration  of  EU  bond  and 
equity markets to be around 1 percentage point of additional GDP growth over a ten-year 
period,  or  approximately  €100  billion.4  Second,  a  well-integrated  financial  system  is,  of 
course, also crucial for the conduct of the single monetary policy, as it enhances the smooth 
and effective transmission of monetary policy throughout the euro area. Generally, financial 
integration  is  more  advanced  in  those  market  segments  that  are  closer  to  the  single 
monetary  policy,  especially  the  money  market.5  However,  as  I  have  stressed  on  several 
occasions, further financial integration is particularly needed in a number of areas, including 
in retail banking. 
Turning  to  labour  mobility,  which  constitutes  the  third  feature  I  would  like  to  mention, 
available evidence suggests that, overall, cross-border labour mobility is still low in the euro 
area. And we still have formal barriers to labour mobility across the euro area. This is in clear 
contrast to the situation in the United States.6 
ii) 
iii) 
                                                      
2   See Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks “Competition, productivity and 
prices in the euro area services sector”, ECB Occasional Paper No 44, 2006. 
3   See R. Baldwin “The euro’s trade effects” ECB Working Paper No 594, 2006. 
4   London  Economics,  “Quantification  of  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  integration  of  EU  financial  markets”,  report  to  the 
European Commission, 2002. 
5   See “Financial Integration in Europe”, ECB, March 2007. 
6   Although  the  data  available  refer  mostly  to  the  15  earliest  members  of  the  European  Union,  the  EU15,  they  are  still 
illustrative  of  the  situation  in  the  euro  area.  In  2000  only  0.1%  of  the  total  EU15  population  (or  around  225,000  people) 
moved their official residence between two Member States. Furthermore, only a small proportion of individuals – 0.4% of the 
EU15 population – were known to commute across borders to work, and half of this amount was to a non EU15 country. In 
the United States, geographical labour mobility appears to be far higher. Evidence suggests that around 5.9% of the total 
US  population  moved  their  residence  between  US  states  in  1999.  See  F.  F.  Heinz  and  M.  Ward-Warmedinger,  “Cross-
2 
 BIS Review 65/2007
iv) 
v) 
As a fourth feature, economic integration and convergence is also reflected in the fact that 
current  inflation  and  output  growth  differences  among  euro  area  countries  are  relatively 
limited by historical standards. The differences also appear to be similar to those observed 
across regions or states within the United States.7  
I understand that some observers may like to create headline news from the differences in 
economic growth or inflation between some euro area countries in a specific quarter or year. 
But let me stress that it is absolutely normal in a monetary union, such as the euro area, for 
economic  developments  to  differ  across  individual  regions.  This  is  also  the  case  among 
regions in the United States. Why is it normal? First, differences in growth rates and inflation 
may  be  related  to  catching-up  phenomena.  A  region  which  is  relatively  underdeveloped 
would, if not hindered by bad economic policies, be expected to grow at a rate above the 
currency area average and thus, over time, reach an income per capita level similar to the 
currency area as a whole. This process is highly welcome. Second, there are countries that 
are more advanced, in terms of structural reforms, than others and have therefore a higher 
growth  potential.  Third,  a  country  or  region  might  also  be  exposed  to  country  or  region-
specific shocks. This specific shock may cause a growth or inflation differential, which is also 
normal  in  any  monetary  union.  However,  it  is  also  true  that  persistent  differentials  which 
reflect structural rigidities are a concern. I will address this issue later.8
Equally relevant for the conduct of the single monetary policy of the ECB is the fifth and final 
feature of economic integration I would like to mention to you. The degree of synchronisation 
or  co-movement  between  the  different  cyclical  positions  across  the  euro  area  countries 
seems to have increased since the beginning of the 1990s. In other words, a large number of 
euro area economies now share similar business cycles.9  
The increased co-movement of business cycles across the euro area economies has resulted from a 
continuous process of integration. The move from several currencies to a single currency has meant 
the elimination of exchange rate risk between countries in the euro area. The euro has also reduced 
information costs and has enhanced price transparency. This, in turn, has fostered competition and 
market integration. In this way, the adoption of the euro has acted as a catalyst for the Single Market, 
within which goods, services, people and capital are to move freely. Ludwig Erhard said 
“ A free market can only be said to exist […] if and as long as free performance competition and free 
price formation are the motor and means of steering the economy.”10
In sum, there is evidence of stronger economic integration among the euro area countries. Evidence 
of the completion of the Single Market looks promising, especially the rise in intra-euro area trade and 
integration  in  the  money  market.  Business  cycles  have  become  more  synchronised.  This  is  an 
encouragement  to  continue  to  work  actively  to  enhance  integration,  notably  in  the  provision  of 
services, in labour mobility and in the integration in some segments of the financial markets. A lot of 
homework remains to be done in the euro area. 
                                                                                                                                                                      
border  labour  mobility  within  an  enlarged  EU”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper  No  52,  2006.  See  also  “Action  plan  for  skills  and 
mobility”, European Commission, 2002. 
7   The  decline  in  inflation  differentials  has  been  impressive.  At  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  the  difference  in  inflation  rates 
across the euro area countries was on average around 6 percentage points (standard deviation measured in unweighted 
terms). Last year, the inflation differential was only 0.7 percentage point. Moreover, the current degree of inflation dispersion 
among the euro area countries is practically the same as that seen in the United States. As to real GDP growth rates across 
the  euro  area  countries,  the  difference  has  been  fluctuating  around  a  level  of  2  percentage  points  over  the  past  few 
decades, with no apparent upward or downward trend. Since 1999, however, it has declined from 2.8 percentage points in 
that year to close to 1.5 percentage points last year. Again, the growth dispersion within the euro area is virtually the same 
as across the eight US regions defined by the US Bureau of Economic Analysis. 
8   On output growth differentials see the article entitled “Output growth differentials in the euro area: sources and implications”, 
in the April 2007 issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin, and N. Benalal, J. L. Diaz del Hoyo, B. Pierluigi and N. Vidalis, “Output 
growth differentials across the euro area countries: some stylised facts”, ECB Occasional Paper No 45, 2006. On inflation 
differentials, see the article entitled “Monetary policy and inflation differentials in a heterogeneous currency area”, in the May 
2005 issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. 
9   See D. Giannone and L. Reichlin (2006), “Trends and cycles in the euro area: how much heterogeneity and should we worry 
about it?”, ECB Working Paper No 595. 
10   From: Ludwig Erhard, “Die Ziele des Gesetzes gegen Wettbewerbsbeschränkungen” (speech to the German Bundestag on 
24 March 1955), in Ludwig Erhard, Deutsche Wirtschaftspolitik, Düsseldorf, 1962. 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 3
Adjustment processes in the euro area 
3.  
Economic integration is a clear prerequisite for the smooth functioning of the euro area. All the more 
because the euro area is continuously confronted with adverse events or shocks, for instance in the 
fields of global competition or energy price developments. In addition, individual euro area economies 
or regions may be affected by specific sectoral developments, for example in real estate markets. It is 
therefore important to make sure that adjustment mechanisms function efficiently.  
Why  is  an  efficient  adjustment  mechanism  important  in  the  euro  area?  As  national  monetary  and 
exchange  rate  policies  are  no  longer  available  options,  it  is  important  to  make  sure  that  other 
mechanisms of adjustment to shocks function properly within the euro area. This is needed to avoid a 
situation where a country or a region, after suffering a specific or asymmetric shock, enters either into 
a period of protracted low growth and high unemployment, or in a long period of overheating. 
There are many factors that can improve the resilience of the euro area economies to adverse shocks. 
But before addressing this issue, let me stress that the ECB’s single monetary policy contributes to the 
proper functioning of adjustment mechanisms within the euro area by ensuring price stability, i.e. by 
anchoring  price  stability  in  economic  agents’  decisions.  I  believe  that  this  is  a  very  important 
contribution. In other words, the social partners when agreeing on wage increases, and also national 
authorities when preparing their budgets or designing policies in their fields of responsibility, should 
be, and, as a matter of fact, are fully confident that we at the ECB and in the Eurosystem will deliver 
price stability. On this issue, Ludwig Erhard said that 
“ It is a great mistake for a people, or a State, to believe that it can introduce and pursue an inflationary 
policy, yet insure itself against the results. This is to try to lift oneself by one’s own bootlaces. On the 
contrary, it is essential to concentrate all efforts to prevent an inflation […]”.11
And let me add that the best way of anchoring price stability in economic agents’ decisions is through 
an independent and accountable central bank. German history provides the best possible example of 
this. 
Turning to other factors which are particularly relevant for the proper functioning of the euro area, well-
designed structural reforms that enhance flexibility in product and labour markets are crucial. This is 
helping  to  better  absorb  shocks  and  thereby  improve  the  working  of  adjustment  mechanisms  in 
individual countries, regions or sectors.  
In  this  context,  the  Lisbon  strategy  is  a  fundamental  and  ambitious  programme  to  draw  Europe’s 
attention to the urgency of structural reforms. Such reforms would improve long-term growth prospects 
in the euro area by, on the one hand, affecting positively labour participation and, on the other hand, 
improving labour productivity growth through the promotion of innovation and technological change. 
Needless  to  say,  the  responsibility  for  the  implementation  of  reforms  is  in  the  hands  of  national 
governments, of Parliaments and of social partners. We know very well that structural reforms may 
face both resistance from economic agents and different sensitivities in public opinion. This is why it is 
extremely  important  to  communicate  the  fact  that  the  medium  to  long-term  benefits  of  structural 
reforms will significantly outweigh any short-term cost. We therefore strongly support governments in 
their implementation of structural reforms and we consider our duty to stress and explain their benefits. 
What factors may help to increase flexibility within the euro area? Economic flexibility can be promoted 
by  removing  the  institutional  barriers  to  flexible  wage  and  price-setting  mechanisms.  If  wages  and 
prices are flexible enough and be able to adjust to the changes in the economic conditions, then this 
will help to avoid unwelcome fluctuations in unemployment. 
Specifically,  in  a  monetary  union  most  of  the  adjustment  has  to  take  place  through  national  labour 
markets.  Therefore,  wage  setting  should  appropriately  reflect  the  different  situations  of  sectors,  of 
firms and of overall labour market conditions. 
Let  me  stress  that  governments  and  social  partners  share  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  wage 
determination  sufficiently  takes  into  account  labour  market  conditions  and  does  not  jeopardise 
competitiveness and employment. Governments should also be aware that wage setting in the public 
sector can serve as a role model for the private sector. And social partners need to take into account 
                                                      
11   From  Ludwig  Erhard  “Prosperity  through  Competition”  (Wohlstand  für  alle),  Chapter  12  “Welfare  State  –  The  Modern 
Delusion” (Versorgungsstaat – der moderne Wahn), London 1958. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2007
the  different  conditions  at  the  firm  and  sectoral  level,  internalising  the  repercussions  of  wage 
settlements on competitiveness and thus employment at their company and in their industry, sector or 
region.12  Sufficient  wage  differentiation  would  improve  employment  opportunities  for  less  skilled 
workers and in regions or sectors with high unemployment. In this respect, excessive wage regulations 
are undermining job creation, in particular for young and less qualified workers as well as for all those 
who face problems entering the labour market.  
Allow me to mention also that corporate governance should ensure that executive board remuneration 
is properly set, in line with the performance of the board members and conditions at the respective 
company. 
As seen in the German case, the period of adjustment can be painful, but reforms and unit labour cost 
moderation is paying off and contribute to robust growth and impressive economic records, like the 
one  currently  observed  in Germany.  I  remember some  observers  arguing  that  much  stronger wage 
increases were needed for higher growth. The recent evidence does not confirm this view. As seen in 
Germany  since  last  year,  past  moderation  of  unit  labour  costs  has  very  significantly  contributed  to 
declining unemployment and higher growth. The competitiveness gained by the German economy was 
an important prerequisite for sustainable job creation and sound and long-lasting growth. 
The  proper  functioning  of  adjustments  through  labour  markets  also  requires  the  completion  of  the 
Single Market. In particular, all existing barriers to labour mobility within the euro area – in particular as 
regards Slovenians – must be removed.  
As to product markets, let me stress that it is essential that the Single Market must be fully completed, 
particularly in services and network industries. A deeper integration of markets would stimulate price 
flexibility by fostering competition and open product markets. Greater cross-border competition and the 
integration of markets across the euro area countries would contribute to lower prices. It could also 
enhance the adjustment processes in the individual countries in the event of asymmetric shocks or 
differing cyclical developments.13  
Another important market-based mechanism in a monetary union that can help to attenuate the impact 
of shocks in a country or region is well-integrated financial markets and readily available opportunities 
for  portfolio  diversification.  Well-integrated  financial  markets  and  diversified  portfolios  reduce  the 
dependence  of  firms’  and  households’  saving  and  spending  decisions  on  economic  and  financial 
developments in a specific country, region or sector. This mechanism is known as the “credit and risk-
sharing  channels”.  In  essence,  it  means  that  consumption  does  not  need  to  follow  movements  in 
regional  output,  first  because  consumers  can  borrow  abroad  and  second  because  their  financial 
wealth  is  less  dependant  on  local  conditions  thanks  to  an  internationally  well  diversified  portfolio 
allocation.14 Moreover, more integrated financial markets give rise to greater competition, resulting in 
more favourable financing conditions for consumers and firms. 
This mechanism is more important in the United States than among the euro area countries. However, 
recent evidence shows that the degree of risk-sharing across euro area countries has increased since 
the 1990s.15
                                                      
12   See, for example, the analysis of the role of wage developments in the 1970s in explaining European unemployment in O. 
Blanchard, “The medium run”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1997, pp. 89-141. 
13   As an example, fully integrated markets across countries mean that a country which is under-utilising its capacity can more 
easily absorb some of the excess demand from  overheating countries. Regional differentials in capacity utilisation would 
then not persist for a lengthy period and would not be associated with high and persistent unemployment in the region or 
country facing a lack of demand. 
14   Moving from a pay-as-you-go to a capital-based pension system would contribute to improve portfolio diversification. 
15   In the United States, over the period 1963-90, capital markets smoothed out 39% of the shocks to gross state product (the 
equivalent to GDP), the credit channel smoothed out 23% and the federal government, through the fiscal channel, 13%. 
Around 25% of the shocks were not smoothed out. Hence financial markets and financial institutions contributed 62% to the 
absorption of idiosyncratic state shocks. We therefore see from the US example that the financial channel can be much 
more  important  than  the  fiscal  channel.  This  is  an  additional  reason  to  speed  up  financial  integration  in  Europe.  See  P. 
Asdrubali, B. Sorensen and O. Yosha, “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States 1963-1990”, Quarterly Journal of 
Economics Vol. 111, 1996. In a more recent study, it was found that the euro area situation has begun to converge towards 
the situation of the United States and that there is already modest but non-negligible insurance through inter-state capital 
flows. It was found that in the euro area (excluding Luxembourg), capital markets would have smoothed out about 10% of 
the  country-specific  shocks  to  GDP  between  1993  and  2000.  See  S.  Kalemli-Ozcan,  B.  Sorensen  and  O.  Yosha, 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 5
National authorities can make a substantial contribution to ensuring a proper functioning of adjustment 
mechanisms within the euro area. Not only can they improve the flexibility and integration of labour, 
product,  including  services,  and  financial  markets,  but  they  can  also  conduct  a  well-designed  fiscal 
policy.  As  I  have  stressed  on  many  occasions,  the  best  contribution  fiscal  policy  can  make  to  the 
proper functioning of the euro area is by being sustainable and medium-term oriented, fully in line with 
the orientations provided by the Stability and Growth Pact. Moreover fiscal policy can and should also 
help mitigate undesirable trend growth differentials through “high quality” expenditure and tax policies. 
In particular, high and inefficient public expenditure can put a brake on economic activity by imposing 
a high tax burden on the economy and channelling resources into unproductive uses. 
Let  me  take  the  opportunity  to  stress  that  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  welcomes  the  recent 
commitment by the euro area finance ministers at the Eurogroup meeting here in Berlin on 20April. All 
euro  area  finance  ministers  then  committed  to  making  full  use  of  the  current  economic  growth  and 
better than expected tax revenues to pursue sound fiscal policies and to avoid procyclical policies in 
line with the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
In  the  view  of  the  Governing  Council,  this  requires  a  rigorous  implementation  of  2007  budgets,  the 
avoidance of expenditure overruns and the allocation of unexpected extra revenues to deficit and debt 
reduction.  For  2008,  countries  with  remaining  fiscal  imbalances  are  expected  to  pursue  more 
ambitious than currently planned budgetary targets. This would allow euro area countries not only to 
meet their commitments but also to prepare themselves for less favourable economic conditions and 
the rising fiscal burden in the longer run associated with population ageing. In this context, the gradual 
increase of the pension age in Germany is an important step in the right direction. It will help to reduce 
the large ageing-related fiscal burden on the active and younger generations. 
Let  me  finally  mention  the  important  issue  of  competitiveness.  One  of  the  most  important  market-
based adjustment mechanisms in a monetary union works via changes in competitiveness.16 Simply 
put, competitiveness is the ability of an economy to compete in international markets. This ability to 
compete is usually assessed on the basis of various measures of cost and price competitiveness17, 
complemented by accounting for some “non-price” factors, such as the quality and the technological 
content of the goods produced. 
Economic adjustment via the competitiveness channel works as follows. Assume, for example, that a 
country  or  a  sector  in  a  monetary  union  experiences  an  increase  in  demand  that  drives  its  output 
above  long-term  sustainable  production.  This  will  lead  to  inflationary  pressures  in  this  country  or 
sector,  in  particular  a  rise  in  wages  and  other  domestic  costs.  As  a  result,  competitiveness  will 
gradually deteriorate over time, reducing demand for goods or services produced by this country or 
sector. This decline in demand will tend to restore output to its potential level and to dampen previous 
inflationary pressures.  
Differences in price and cost competitiveness are observed between the various regions and states of 
any vast economy of the size of the euro area or of the United States. The competitiveness channel 
plays a permanent role in the adjustment. It is particularly justifiable, economically, when any particular 
economy has to cope with a demand shock, whether positive or negative, as in the previous example. 
Such differences are also a normal phenomenon when any particular economy is in the process of 
catching up, leading to a higher level of per capita income, or whenever an economy has to cope with 
structural  changes  or  past  shocks  of  any  nature  that  would  be  reflected  in  a  new  relative  price 
equilibrium. 
That being said, developments in price competitiveness and unit labour cost competitiveness across 
the  euro  area  economies  need  to  be  closely  monitored.  Persistent  losses  in  relative  cost 
competitiveness, for instance, can also relate to a number of structural rigidities leading to inertia in 
price and wage formation. If and when such phenomena are identified, it is important for all parties 
                                                                                                                                                                      
“Asymmetric shocks and risk sharing in a monetary union: Updated evidence and  policy implications for Europe”,  CEPR 
Discussion Paper No 4463. 
16   See, for an extensive discussion of adjustment mechanisms, “The EU economy 2006 review: adjustment dynamics in the 
euro area – experiences and challenges”, European Commission, 2006 and F. P. Mongelli and J. L. Vega “What effects is 
EMU having on the euro area and its member countries? An overview”, ECB Working Paper No 599, 2006. 
17   The  ECB  has  recently  started  to  publish  price  competitiveness  measures,  the  Harmonised  Competitiveness  Indicators 
(HCIs).  See  the  box  entitled  “The  introduction  of  harmonised  competitiveness  indicators  for  euro  area  countries”,  in  the 
February 2007 issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. 
6 
 BIS Review 65/2007
concerned  –  the  private  sector,  social  partners,  the  national  public  authorities  –  to  be  as  lucid  as 
possible in their own decision-making, to avoid relative losses of competitiveness that would not be 
economically  justified  and  to  minimise  therefore  possible  unwelcome  future  adjustment  through  the 
competitiveness channel.  
M.  Chairman,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  conclude.  The  single  currency  and  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union  have  been  an  impressive  and  remarkable  success,  perhaps  Europe’s  most 
remarkable success since the Treaty of Rome was signed half a century ago. It is up to all of us to 
consolidate  this  great  success  and  ensure  that  it  is  reinforced  in  the  years  to  come.  As  regards 
monetary policy, Europe can count on the European Central Bank and the Eurosystem to be faithful to 
its  primary  mandate  and  to  deliver  price  stability  to  our  318  million  fellow  citizens.  This  is  a  pre-
requisite for sustainable growth and job creation. As regards the other elements of policy that do not 
depend on the central bank, let me stress the three areas where sound policies are absolutely of the 
essence: sound fiscal policies, fully in line with the Stability and Growth Pact; structural reform policies, 
fully  in  line  with  the  Lisbon  program  and  the  achievement  of  the  Single  Market;  and  appropriate 
monitoring of the relative cost competitiveness indicators in the euro area. 
Ludwig  Erhard  was  a  pioneer  in  understanding  the utmost  importance  of  price  stability,  of  free  and 
flexible markets and of competition for social and economic progress and job creation. We are also 
indebted to him for his thoughts and leadership that left a clear mark on the later negotiations for the 
preparations for Economic and Monetary Union. I am greatly honoured to receive the Ludwig Erhard 
Memorial Coin in Gold. 
BIS Review 65/2007 
 7
