Zhou Xiaochuan: Providing financial support to enterprises “Going 
Abroad”  
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the 11th China 
International  Fair  for  Investment  and  Trade  and  the  International  Investment  Forum  2007, 
Xiamen, 8 September 2007. 
 Your Excellency Vice Premier Wu Yi,  
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning! 
It is a great pleasure to attend the 11th China International Fair for Investment and Trade and 
the International Investment Forum 2007 in particular in the beautiful coastal city of Xiamen. 
On behalf of the People’s Bank of China, I would like to extend warm congratulations on the 
convocation of this Forum. 
Thanks  to  rapid  economic  globalization,  the  trade  links  between  China  and  the rest  of  the 
world are expanding, and investment cooperation is deepening with each passing day. Since 
the initiation of reform and open-up, China has made remarkable achievements in attracting 
foreign  capital  and  learning  advanced  technology  and  management  expertise  from  other 
countries.  At  the  same  time,  the  Chinese  enterprises  are  making  good  progress  in  their 
endeavor to invest and operate abroad. Indeed, this “going-abroad” endeavor has become a 
strategic measure of major importance as China’s open-up reaches a new stage. 
The financial sector has played an important role in these two-way interactions. But, the work 
of financial sector is not yet sufficient, in particular in terms of supporting enterprises going 
abroad. On this front, the financial sector has not fully adapted to the new developments in 
implementing the strategy of going abroad. Therefore, the People’s Bank of China attaches 
great  importance  to  this  matter  and  is  intensifying  research  and  study.  In  the  future, 
measures will be taken to deepen and broaden the financial markets to satisfy demand of 
enterprises  for  foreign  exchange  products  and  risk  management  instruments,  and  change 
the  foreign  exchange  administration  policy  that  is  strict  with  capital  outflow  and  easy  with 
inflow;  greater  convenience  and  facility  will  be  provided  in  financial  services  to  support 
enterprises going abroad in a better way.  
First  of  all,  the  financial  market  will  play  a  bigger  role.  We  will  actively  foster  foreign 
exchange market growth and encourage product development to help enterprises manage 
interest rate and exchange rate risks in their overseas investment and operation. In recent 
years,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  has  worked  hard  to  foster  foreign  exchange  market 
development. The products in the foreign exchange market are increasingly diversified. With 
the launch of RMB foreign currency swap transactions, and availability of future and swap 
foreign exchange sale and purchase to a larger variety of enterprises, the foreign exchange 
market has grown rapidly. The trading volume in the first half of 2007 was 4.5 times that in 
the corresponding period of 2005. In the future, in order to support overseas investment and 
operation of Chinese enterprises, we will make fresh efforts to develop the foreign exchange 
market,  promote  products  diversification,  and  create  a  more  favorable  environment  for 
instrument innovation.  
Second, there will be stronger financial policy support. The foreign exchange administration 
reform will be deepened by lifting unnecessary controls and simplifying procedures to provide 
foreign exchange convenience to enterprises investing and operating abroad. Last year, the 
quota limit of foreign exchange purchase for overseas investment purpose was abolished to 
satisfy the need of enterprises in outward investment. In the next step, we will lift the control 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 1
in  terms  of  verification  of  sources  of  foreign  exchange  fund,  examination  prior  to  foreign 
exchange purchase, and repatriation of outward investment profit; we will allow enterprises to 
conduct outward investment with their own or purchased foreign exchange, and make it more 
convenient to use and transfer foreign exchange; research will be made to explore channels 
for  domestic  enterprises  and  financial  institutions  to  support  enterprises  investing  and 
operating abroad with foreign exchange.  
Third, financial services will be improved to support eligible enterprises to invest and operate 
in  other  countries.  Qualified  financial  institutions  will  be  encouraged  to  establish  overseas 
operations, and explore equity investment in overseas financial institutions through merger 
and  acquisition,  in  order  to  provide  enterprises  with  convenient  financial  services  in  their 
overseas  investment  and  operation;  enterprises  investing  and  operating  abroad  are 
encouraged  to  take  advantage  of  financing  tools  in  host  countries  such  as  lending,  asset 
securitization,  stock  offering,  bond  issue,  project  financing,  and  etc;  domestic  investment 
entities will be allowed to provide financing guarantee to their overseas subsidiaries subject 
to approval.  
Fourth,  regional  financial  platforms  will  be  used  to  encourage  enterprises  to  take  part  in 
international  economic  cooperation.  China  is  a  member  of  various  regional  development 
banks 
including  Asia  Development  Bank,  Africa  Development  Bank,  West  Africa 
Development Bank, PTA Bank and Caribbean  Development Bank, and has applied to join 
the  Inter-American  Development  Bank.  Good  cooperative  relations  have  been  developed 
with  these  regional  development  institutions.  The  People’s  Bank  has  signed  bilateral 
technical cooperation agreement or established bilateral technical cooperation fund with the 
Africa  Development  Bank,  West  Africa  Development  Bank,  and  Caribbean  Development 
Bank. It is desirable to use these regional development banks as a platform for exchanges, 
and conduct project consulting and market research through bilateral technical cooperation 
fund  and  agreements,  and  better  understand  the  business  and  legal  environment  of  host 
countries. This will be a catalyst for the going abroad endeavor. 
Promoting the two-way interaction of foreign enterprises coming to China and Chinese ones 
going  abroad  is  conducive  to  the  economic  complementarity  and  helps  promote  common 
prosperity, global harmony and progress. On this front, the financial sector definitely will do a 
lot more to provide support.  
In conclusion, I wish the Forum a complete success.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2007
