Jarle Bergo: Will strong growth in the banking industry continue? Views 
on the balance of risks  
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at a 
banking industry seminar on primary capital certificates, Oslo, 13 September 2007. 
The  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  15 
August, Financial Stability Report 1/07 and on previous speeches. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this  seminar  on  primary  capital  certificates  to  give  an 
introductory speech on developments in the banking industry and the balance of risks. 
As we all know, there is a strong global focus on financial institutions and financial markets at 
present, with frequent use of words such as "turbulence", "problem" and "crisis". I will spend 
some  time  on  the  background  to  these  developments  and  try  to  assess  the  possibility  of 
similar problems in Norway. I will also point to other risk elements that the industry should 
bear in mind. First, however, I will give a brief review of the economic situation in Norway and 
how this has affected the banking industry. 
The Norwegian economy and the financial sector 
The  Norwegian  economy  is  now  in  a  cyclical  upturn.  Over  the  past  three  years,  mainland 
GDP  has  grown  by  approximately  4½  per  cent  annually,  and  this  high  rate  of  growth  has 
continued in 2007. In the first half of the year, annualised growth was close to 6 per cent, and 
even if GDP growth in the third and fourth quarters should be zero, annual growth will be well 
over 4 per cent. As the chart shows, a four-year period of such strong growth has not been 
seen since 1971. 
The strong rate of growth has only to a limited extent fed through to a higher rise in prices for 
consumer  goods  and  services.  Consumer  price  inflation  adjusted  for  tax  changes  and 
excluding energy products (CPI-ATE) has admittedly picked up gradually since late summer 
2006,  but  in  relation  to  the  economic  situation,  underlying  inflation  remains  low.  After 
hovering around 1-1½ per cent over a longer period, the year-on-year rise in the CPI-ATE 
was 1.8 per cent in August. Other measures of underlying inflation show approximately the 
same rise in prices. The year-on-year rise in the total consumer price index (CPI) has been 
just  under  ½  per  cent  in  recent  months.  This  is  because  electricity  prices  have  been 
substantially lower this year than last year. 
There  are  a  number  of  reasons  why  inflation  has  been  low  in  an  environment  of  high 
economic growth. 
First: Norway’s terms of trade have improved. Prices for export goods such as oil and gas, 
freight, fish, industrial commodities and engineering products have increased considerably. 
In addition, market growth abroad has provided market opportunities for Norwegian export 
goods.  At  the  same  time,  Norwegian  importers  have  been  able  to  shift  demand  to  new 
markets  in  central  Europe  and  Asia,  which  has  led  to  a  fall  in  prices  for  many  imported 
consumer goods. The terms of trade have improved by about 40 per cent since 2002. This 
has resulted in a vigorous rise in Norway's disposable income. Even excluding oil, there has 
been a marked improvement. 
Second: An ample supply of labour has boosted output growth. In particular, the supply of 
foreign labour has increased sharply after EU enlargement in 2004. Over the past two years, 
these  labour  inflows  have  accounted  for  over  30  per  cent  of  growth  in  the  labour  force  in 
Norway. At the same time, this has enabled Norwegian companies to be bolder in accepting 
new  assignments  and  making  investments,  in  the  knowledge  that  they  can  procure  labour 
BIS Review 100/2007 
 1
throughout  Europe.  High  inward  labour  migration  and  the  scope  for  relocating  portions  of 
production abroad have led to increased competition in the labour market and have probably 
curbed wage growth. 
Third: The Norwegian business sector has been quick to adopt new technology and to reap 
the benefits. In comparison with other countries, productivity gains in service sectors stand 
out in particular. 
On balance, these factors have contributed to the economy’s high capacity for growth. But 
strong  activity  growth  has  now  resulted  in  a  high  level  of capacity  utilisation.  Shortages  of 
labour and other factor inputs have been reported. This may curb growth in the Norwegian 
economy and lead to higher wage and cost inflation. Inflation is expected to pick up ahead. 
The upturn has also benefited the financial industry. Strong economic expansion has pushed 
up an already high level of lending growth. As a result, total assets in Norwegian banks and 
mortgage  companies  have  risen  sharply  over  the  past  decade.  Growth  in  lending  to 
households has been high since 2000, but growth in corporate lending showed a sharp rise 
towards the end of 2005. Profitability in the financial industry in Norway has been high. What 
is the outlook ahead? Will strong growth continue? 
The strong rate of growth we have witnessed in the past few years is not sustainable over 
time. Capacity utilisation is very high with labour shortages in many sectors. Monetary policy 
must be oriented to bringing inflation up to target while avoiding an overheating of the real 
economy. The scenario ahead, then, is a continued upward adjustment of the interest rate 
while  curbing  the  high  rate  of  economic  growth.  It  is  likely  that  credit  growth  will  gradually 
slow, and this may also pose challenges for banks. I will return to this later. 
Risks to financial stability in Norway 
In Norges Bank’s most recent Financial Stability report, published in June, we concluded that 
the  overall  outlook  for  financial  stability  was  satisfactory.  We  nonetheless  highlighted  a 
number of factors that might constitute a risk. In connection with international risk factors, we 
placed emphasis on the uncertainty surrounding international economic conditions and the 
concern  about  the  low  risk  premia  in  financial  markets.  I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that 
developments have borne us out here. Other risk factors were related to the vulnerability of 
Norwegian bank customers, lower interest margins for banks and the new capital adequacy 
rules.  
Uncertainty surrounding developments in international economic conditions and 
financial markets 
There  has  recently  been  considerable  turbulence  in  international  financial  markets.  Could 
this  have  a  substantial  impact  on  Norwegian  financial  markets  and  could  it  have  serious 
consequences  for  growth  and  employment  in  Norway?  Let  us  look  at  the  reasons  for  the 
turbulence and how it has spread.  
The source of the turbulence can be found in the US housing market and particularly in the 
subprime mortgage market. In addition, this type of loan is frequently offered at a low rate of 
interest with small repayments in the first years of the loan term and a higher interest rate 
later. Mortgages with this structure involve gambling on a rise in house prices. If house prices 
rise, borrowers’ collateral will increase in value, allowing the mortgage to be refinanced on 
better terms. Or the borrower can turn around and sell the dwelling at a profit. This is what 
happened  for  a  period,  but  then  house  price  inflation  slowed,  partly  as  a  result  of  tighter 
monetary policy.  
The fall in house prices towards the end of 2006 and in 2007 resulted in rising defaults on 
mortgages,  especially  in  the  subprime  segment.  In  2007  and  2008,  interest  rates  will 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2007
increase for a substantial portion of the most recently granted subprime mortgages. This will 
probably result in a further rise in defaults on these mortgages. 
Housing  starts  have  also  declined  considerably.  The  sharp  fall  in  housing  investment  has 
reduced the annual rate of US economic growth by about ¾ percentage point on average 
over the past year and a half. Housing market developments in the US may result in a more 
sluggish trend in private consumption and may further amplify the tendency to slower growth 
in  the  US,  which  may  spread  to  the  global  economy.  At  the  moment,  the  spillover  effects 
seem  to  have  been  moderate  and  downward  revisions  of  growth  estimates  have  been 
modest. 
In  the  US,  more  than  half  of  total  mortgage  debt  is  securitised  and  sold  to  investment 
managers all over the world. This is one of the largest fixed income markets in the world and 
accounts  in  volume  terms  for  almost  10  per  cent  of  global  securities  debt.  Subprime 
securitised issuance showed a sharp rise in 2004 and increased further in 2005. Estimates of 
subprime mortgages as a share of the total volume of securitised mortgages in the US are 
uncertain and vary from 12 to 18 per cent. In the chart, the share is 12 per cent, or USD 665 
billion.  
One  reason  for  the  popularity  of  securitised  subprime  mortgages  was  the  development  of 
collateralized  debt  obligations,  CDOs,  based  on  portfolios  of  these  mortgages.  The  rating 
agencies  have  been  actively  involved  in  developing  these products.  Mortgages  were  often 
packaged in such a way that the securities in the most secure or senior tranches were given 
an AAA rating. This gave the subprime market access to funding from insurance companies 
and other investment managers that otherwise would not have invested in this market. High 
lending  growth  would  probably  not  have  developed  without  this  type  of  financing.  The 
securities  in  the  least  secured  tranche  (equity  tranche)  were  in  demand  from  investors 
seeking high returns, such as hedge funds. It has been difficult to price CDOs. As a rule, the 
issuer has calculated a fair value using complicated mathematical models. Because of the 
pricing difficulties, there has been little trading in these securities since their issue. This has 
resulted in problems for funds interested in selling, or who were forced to sell. 
In winter 2007, the rise in defaults on subprime mortgages resulted in a sharp increase in 
credit  spreads  for  bonds  backed  by  this  type  of  mortgages.  The  credit  spread  for  bonds 
backed by subprime mortgages rose further in June in the wake of problems in two funds 
specialising in investment in this kind of bonds. 
Credit  premia  also  increased  for  other  fixed  income  instruments,  such  as  conventional 
mortgage  bonds,  corporate  bonds  and  loans  to  emerging  markets,  from  summer  2007, 
although on a far more moderate scale than for subprime-backed securities. 
In the last half of July, the turbulence spread to other financial market segments. The risk 
premium required by investors rose, and equity prices fell sharply. The contagion was due to 
uncertainty  as  to  the  risk  subprime-backed  financial  products  represented  for  the  financial 
system, and to a lack of information about who had invested in such products.  
Conduits  and  Structured  Investment  Vehicles  (SIVs)  were  among  the  investor  groups 
investing in the financial products based on subprime mortgages. As a rule, these investment 
companies  were  wholly  or  partially  owned  by  banks.  They  invested  in  assets  with  a  high 
rating,  such  as  the  senior  tranche  in  subprime-backed  securities.  These  investments  were 
debt-financed,  primarily  in  the  short-term  money  market  through  asset-backed  commercial 
paper (ABCP). High ratings on these assets gave investment companies favourable funding 
rates.  Due  to  the  turbulence  in  the  subprime  market,  interest  rates  for  ABCP  have  risen 
sharply  and  maturities  have  been  reduced.  The  flow  of  money  to  investment  companies 
through  money  markets  has  dried  up.  Banks  have  to  a  large  extent  had  to  finance  the 
investment  companies  themselves.  However,  this  increases  banks’  liquidity  requirements. 
There  have  been  examples  of  banks  that  did  not  have  the  capacity  to  finance  their 
investment companies. 
BIS Review 100/2007 
 3
Due to uncertainty as to which financial institutions were exposed to the subprime market, 
many operators became very cautious about extending loans, and this eventually also led to 
liquidity  problems  in  the  interbank  market.  On  9  August  and  in  the  days  ensuing,  many 
central banks offered extra liquidity to safeguard liquidity in the banking system. Norges Bank 
supplied liquidity to the Norwegian banking system through ordinary market operations on 9 
August. In many countries, the money market is still dependent on injections of extra liquidity 
from the central bank. The banking system’s capacity and willingness to redistribute funds is 
still moderate. This increases banks’ financing costs. 
The turbulence in the financial markets has also led to a sharp rise in prices for transferring 
credit risk, i.e. credit default swaps (CDS), for both banks and other companies. CDS prices 
for  US  banks  rose  for  the  first  time  in  March  and  began  to  rise  again  at  end-June. 
Developments in CDS prices for European banks lagged behind somewhat, but in the last 
half  of  July  CDS  prices  rose  sharply  for  both  US  and  European  banks.  This  also  affects 
Norwegian  banks  and  enterprises,  but  the  increase  in  CDS  prices  for  DnB  NOR  was 
considerably lower than for European banks on average.  
Kredittilsynet  (Financial  Supervisory  Authority  of  Norway)  announced  at  the  end  of  August 
that  financial  market  turbulence  seems  to  have  had  little  impact  on  Norwegian  banks. 
Kredittilsynet’s  analyses  showed  that  Norwegian  banks  are  not  directly  exposed  to  the 
subprime market and that they have limited exposure to hedge funds. Norwegian banks have 
some  indirect  exposure  through  their  regular  connections  with  foreign  banks  and  credit 
institutions  that  are  more  exposed  to  subprime  mortgages  and  hedge  funds  than  their 
Norwegian counterparts. However, general liquidity problems in international money markets 
might also affect Norwegian banks and lead to higher funding costs. To some extent, this has 
in fact happened. 
Norwegian money market rates have risen relative to the risk-free interest rate, but less than 
in the major economies. It is uncertain how sensitive risk premia will be in the event of higher 
demand for funding. The price of obtaining dollar liquidity seems to have increased, and this 
also affects Norwegian banks. 
Since the end of June, the yield curve in the Norwegian money market has become steeper 
at the short end. Two- and three-month rates have risen more than the other money market 
rates in this period.  
We do not know how long the turbulence will last or what the consequences will be for the 
real  economy.  So  far,  the  turbulence  has  not  resulted  in  substantial  reassessments  of  the 
international outlook for economic growth. The OECD has revised down its growth estimates 
for 2007 somewhat, particularly for the US and some European countries, and the IMF has 
indicated that it will do the same. Uncertainty with regard to 2008 is probably greater, but the 
turbulence seems to have had little impact on emerging economies so far, with the prospect 
that strong growth will continue in the world economy as a whole. The turbulence has led to a 
fall  in  short-term  interest  rate  expectations,  particularly  in  the  US.  Long-term  interest  rates 
have also declined. Interest rate expectations have also fallen somewhat in Norway. 
Covered bonds  
Norwegian  banks  and  mortgage  companies  have  also  been  given  the  right  to  securitise 
mortgages.  Will  this  lead  to  developments  similar  to  those  we  have  seen  in  the  US?  The 
rules for covered bonds entered into force on 1 June 2007. These bonds give the bondholder 
a preferential claim in relation to a specified selection of a mortgage company’s assets. DnB 
NOR,  Terra-Gruppen  and  the  SpareBank  1  group  have  all  established  their  own  covered 
bonds companies for this purpose. So far mortgages that have been transferred from banks 
to this type of mortgage institution have a high level of security. Because of this high level of 
security, the new type of bond is expected to have a somewhat lower yield than traditional 
4 
 BIS Review 100/2007
bank bonds, which is likely to reduce banks’ total funding costs. DnB NOR Boligkreditt and 
Terra Boligkreditt have both issued covered bonds.  
In  addition  to  lower  financing  costs,  the  reason  why  banks  establish  mortgage  credit 
institutions  is  that  the  assets  in  a  mortgage  credit  institution  can  easily  be  converted  to 
liquidity by issuing covered bonds. 
Norwegian covered bonds are very different from US CDOs backed by subprime mortgages. 
The  regulations  ensure  that  Norwegian  covered  bonds  are  a  more  transparent  and 
substantially  more  secure  investment  alternative.  The  cover  pool  in  the  mortgage  credit 
institutions  consists  of  mortgages  with  a  maximum  loan  to  value  ratio  of  75  per  cent.  The 
loan to value ratio of the cover pool in Norwegian mortgage credit institutions that have so far 
issued covered bonds is well below this. All holders of covered bonds have the same right to 
the mortgage credit institution’s cover pool. In other words, there is no tranching as is the 
case for CDOs backed subprime mortgages. Investors will also have an overview of the risk 
parameters  for  mortgages  that  are  part  of  the  cover  pool.  This  means  that  Norwegian 
covered bonds are far more transparent with respect to the assets that are the bondholders’ 
cover than CDOs backed by US subprime mortgages.  
Another difference between subprime mortgages in the US and Norwegian mortgages is that 
the regulations relating to the provision of credit are stricter in Norway. Subprime mortgages 
in the US have been sold through agents and mortgage brokers that have not been subject 
to federal supervision. In a number of cases, mortgages have been extended to persons with 
no income. Before Norwegian banks extend a loan, they assess a customer’s debt-servicing 
capacity.  Norwegian  banks  are  also  required  to  advise  a  customer  against  taking  out  a 
mortgage if they feel that the customer will find it difficult to service the loan.  
Risk factors related to domestic conditions 
Events that have taken place abroad are actually more a liquidity crisis rooted in uncertainty 
about the valuation of assets and the distribution of losses among institutions than a crisis 
due  to  the  size  of  the  losses  themselves.  The  credit  risk  for  the  more  senior  tranches  of 
subprime  CDOs  is  probably  manageable.  But  we  should  not  forget  credit  risk  in  the 
traditional sense when we assess risk elements. 
Loans  to  Norwegian  households  and  enterprises  account for  approximately  70  per  cent  of 
banks’  balance  sheets.  Risk  factors  related  to  these  customer  groups  are  therefore  very 
important to financial stability in Norway. 
Households 
Strong household debt growth and the sharp rise in house prices constitute a risk factor with 
regard  to  financial  stability  in  Norway.  Household  debt  growth  has  been  high  since  2000, 
primarily  driven  by  low  interest  rates  and  a  sharp  rise  in  house  prices  and  income.  Loans 
secured on dwellings have shown high and increasing growth. Strong competition between 
banks has pushed down lending margins. The new capital adequacy rules (Basel II), which 
involve a substantial reduction in risk weights for mortgages, may also have contributed to 
the rise in mortgage growth and the decline in lending margins. 
Real  house  prices,  deflated  by  consumer  prices,  building  costs  and  house  rents,  are 
historically  high.  Deflated  by  disposable  income,  however,  house  prices  have  only  risen 
moderately over the past ten years. 
In recent months, there have been signs of a slackening in the housing market. The rise in 
house prices has slowed. Resale home turnover is still high, but it is taking longer to sell a 
dwelling compared with the same time last year.  
BIS Review 100/2007 
 5
Financial market innovations have also contributed to strong lending growth. In recent years 
loan products have been introduced that facilitate mortgage equity withdrawal – credit lines 
secured on dwellings. These loans are normally extended to borrowers with good collateral 
and  debt-servicing  capacity.  They  therefore  present  very  little  risk  in  a  financial  stability 
context. Credit lines secured on dwellings have rapidly increased in volume and now account 
for over 12 per cent of mortgages in banks and mortgage credit institutions. Foreign-owned 
banks were among the first to offer credit lines secured on dwellings and a far higher share 
of their mortgages are classified as this kind of loan. 
Other aspects of household behaviour in the housing market are increasing their vulnerability 
and giving greater cause for concern. First, the number of interest-only mortgages has risen. 
The  possibility  of  interest-only  periods  is  a  buffer  for  households  with  debt-servicing 
problems.  For  many  households,  this  buffer  has  already  been  used.  Kredittilsynet’s  2006 
mortgage survey, which includes loans secured on dwellings excluding credit lines, showed 
that  around  one  in  six  mortgages  in  the  survey  had  included  an  introductory  interest-only 
period.  This  share  was  somewhat  higher  than  in  2005.  Another  aspect  that  increases 
vulnerability is that a number of borrowers have a high loan to value ratio, particularly those 
below the age of 35. 
Household debt growth has been higher than income growth since 1999. The debt burden, 
defined as debt in relation to disposable income, has therefore increased markedly.  
Households’ financial position is nonetheless sound. As measured here, housing wealth in 
Norway is almost four times higher than total household debt. Debt and wealth are, however, 
unevenly  distributed.  Combined  with  any  marked  turnaround  in  the  housing  market,  this 
would create problems for exposed groups.  
However, the financial situation of households as a whole is satisfactory. Unemployment is 
unusually low, but must be expected to increase somewhat in the medium term. Household 
disposable income is expected to show continued high growth ahead. Due to the long period 
of  strong  debt  growth  and  sharply  rising  house  prices,  however,  households’  financial 
position has become more vulnerable. 
Corporate sector 
Corporate  profits  have  been  very  high  in  recent  years.  These  positive  developments  have 
been broadly based and are mainly driven by favourable economic conditions in Norway and 
abroad. Enterprises have on average large financial buffers. 
Banks’ lending to the property industry accounts for approximately one third of their lending 
to  the  corporate  sector.  This  sizeable  exposure  to  one  industry  is  a  possible  risk  factor  in 
relation to financial stability in Norway. Both property enterprises and their tenants are in a 
generally  healthy  financial  position.  Prices  in  the  commercial  property  market  have  risen 
considerably in the past two years, and market participants are expecting the sharp rise to 
continue.  Lower  demand  in  the  Norwegian  economy  may  result  in  a  slower  rise  than  the 
market  expects.  Combined  with  higher  interest  rates,  this  may  reduce  profitability  in  the 
commercial  property  market,  increasing  banks’  losses.  Losses  on  loans  to  the  property 
industry accounted for a large share of banks’ loan losses during the banking crisis. 
Outlook for the banking industry 
Banks  in  Norway  have  experienced  extremely  favourable  developments  over  the  past  few 
years: strong lending growth, minimal loan losses, high returns in securities markets and firm 
cost control. 
Despite  lower  interest  margins,  banks’  net  interest  income  in  NOK  is  rising  as  a  result  of 
strong lending growth. Measured in relation to total assets, however, net interest income is 
6 
 BIS Review 100/2007
falling. In recent years, this has been offset by a reduction in costs. Today’s high debt growth 
is not sustainable over time, and it is unlikely that the pressure on interest margins will abate. 
Given these developments, banks must reduce costs or increase income from other sources 
if they are to maintain their current profitability. 
To  illustrate  the  effect  of  lower  lending  growth  on  banks’  income,  we  have  carried  out  a 
simple calculation where the interest margin is held constant. If lending growth among banks 
had only been 3 per cent in 2006, banks’ net interest income and pre-tax results would both 
have been approximately 6 per cent lower this year. 
The composition of banks’ income has been fairly stable in the past ten years, even though 
net  interest  income  has  become  less  important  since  2002.  One  reason  for  these 
developments is that net price gains on securities have increased in this period. Bearing in 
mind that this was a favourable period for securities markets, it will be difficult to maintain the 
income share from price gains in periods of more normal returns in securities markets.  
With  a  slower  rise  in  house  and  commercial  property  prices  and  lower  lending  growth, 
combined with a normalisation of loan losses, banks may find it more difficult to maintain the 
high level of profitability that we have witnessed in recent years. The new capital adequacy 
rules have had a strong impact on Norwegian banks and will continue to do so in the years 
ahead.  How  banks  choose  to  utilise  capital  freed  up  as  a  result  of  the  reduced  minimum 
capital  requirements,  may  have  an  impact  on  both  competition  and  structure  in  the 
Norwegian banking sector. Freed-up capital may be used to finance lending growth, acquire 
other  institutions  or  pay  back  capital  to  shareholders  and  other  stakeholders.  On  average, 
Norwegian banks’ capital adequacy is solid. However, the substantial reduction in minimum 
capital requirements, even though there are transitional arrangements, also entails some risk 
that  banks  will  reduce  their  capital  to  such  an  extent  that  the  buffer  needed  to  meet 
unforeseen events may become smaller than advisable. 
Banks’  profitability  may  also  depend  on  the  duration  and  severity  of  liquidity  problems  in 
international  financial  markets.  Although  Norwegian  banks  are  probably  somewhat  less 
exposed  than  banks  in  many  other  countries,  the  impact  may  nonetheless  be  felt.  It  must 
also be expected that there will be strong focus on liquidity risk by financial institutions and 
supervisory  authorities, and  not  least  in  the  work  on  international  regulations  in  the  period 
ahead. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 100/2007 
 7
   8 
 BIS Review 100/2007
    BIS Review 100/2007 
 9
   10 
 BIS Review 100/2007
   BIS Review 100/2007 
 11
   12 
 BIS Review 100/2007
    BIS Review 100/2007 
 13
   14 
 BIS Review 100/2007
   BIS Review 100/2007 
 15
   16 
 BIS Review 100/2007
   BIS Review 100/2007 
 17
