Svante Öberg: Increased financial integration – future challenges 
Speech by Mr Svante Öberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Conference “Bank & 
Finance Outlook” (Affärsvärlden), Stockholm, 19 April 2007.  
 Introduction 
To begin with I would like to thank you for the opportunity to come here and speak about financial 
integration and the challenges this entails.  
My main message today is that financial integration is increasing rapidly in Europe, and that this leads 
to  better  conditions  for  economic  growth,  but  that  it  also  means  that  regulations,  supervision  and 
arrangements for crisis management must become more international.  
I have divided my speech into four parts. I shall begin with a brief description of financial integration in 
Europe in recent years. After that I shall discuss the advantages of greater integration. Then I will go 
on to talk about the challenges we face as a result of integration and conclude with some possible 
solutions to the problems.  
It is a broad subject and we have very little time, so I will limit myself to the banking sector. 
Financial integration  
Traditionally, most countries’ bank markets have been almost exclusively national. When banks have 
conducted  operations  abroad,  these  have  primarily  focused  on  large  corporations  and  securities 
markets. Smaller companies and consumers have in principle been obliged to use the services offered 
by the domestic banks. 
However, in recent years the bank markets have undergone major changes. Several European banks 
now offer their services outside of their national borders. More than 40 European bank groups have a 
substantial part of their operations in more than three European countries. Names such as Unicredit, 
Barclays,  Fortis  and  ING  are  all  examples  of  banks  in  the  forefront  of  this  development.  The 
internationally-active  banks  are  moreover  increasingly  offering  services  to  households  and  smaller 
companies.  
The integration process has been particularly evident in our own neighbourhood. Nordea and Danske 
Bank have substantial market shares outside of their respective home countries. With the exception of 
Iceland, it is in Nordea’s case a question of market shares of more than 10 per cent in all of the Nordic 
countries. Swedbank and SEB are dominant actors in the Baltic region. 
But  financial  integration  is  now  also  increasing  rapidly  in  other  parts  of  Europe.  The  timing  of  my 
speech  could  hardly  be  more  appropriate.  Only  in  recent  weeks  the  media  has  reported  on  far-
reaching plans for a merger between British Barclays and Dutch ABN Amro, two banks which together 
would become one of the world's largest players in this sector.  
Parallel  to  this  cross-border  integration  process  there  is  also  another  type  of  integration  within  the 
banks. It is becoming increasingly common for these groups to organise themselves so that they in 
practice function as one bank instead of a number of independent bank companies. What drives the 
banks to change their organisation is the efficiency gains obtained through greater centralisation and 
specialisation.  At  the  same  time,  the  operations  are  woven  together  in  a  way  that  means  that  the 
different parts of the group become more dependent on one another.  
Advantages 
Increased  financial  integration  in  Europe  involves  economic  advantages.  Integration  leads  to 
increased competition. This in turn leads to companies and consumers being able to choose between 
a greater variety of products and to prices and interest rates being lower. More products make it easier 
to manage and diversify risks. Lower interest rates mean lower costs for borrowing, which is beneficial 
for both companies and households. Integration thereby means better conditions for economic growth.  
BIS Review 38/2007 
 1
The list of gains that integration brings could be made longer. But the advantages are well known to 
this assembly and I don’t believe I need to go into this in more detail.  
It is enough to emphasise that we at the Riksbank welcome increased financial integration. 
Challenges 
I will now move on to the challenges we face due to financial integration. 
As  the  increased  integration  means  that  countries’  financial  markets  become  increasingly  woven 
together, the risk increases that problems will spread between different countries. To counter this, new 
and greater demands are made to find joint solutions and to cooperate across national borders. Those 
days are gone when we could work on the basis of a purely national perspective for financial market 
issues. Now it is a question of finding ways to manage both our interests and those of other countries 
in a good way. This includes how we should conduct supervision, how we formulate regulations and 
how we organise ourselves to be able to manage financial crises, if these should arise.  
In Europe, the EU cooperation gives us a joint forum for tackling this challenge. The EU’s Financial 
Services  Action  Plan  was  launched  in  1999.  It  has  been  a  driving  force  behind  the  development  I 
described earlier. The measures proposed in the action plan have now largely been implemented.  
However,  much  remains  to  be  done.  This  is  evident  when  one  looks  more  closely  at  the  EC 
regulations  that  form  the  basis  for  the  national  frameworks  for  supervision  and  crisis  management. 
The regulations we have in the EU at present and the way we organise ourselves is not adapted to the 
new conditions prevailing due to the increased integration. 
One  problem  is  that  the  responsibility  for  supervision  is  not  adapted  to  banks  with  cross-border 
operations. 
Within the EU the supervisory responsibility for banks is governed by the principle which in practice 
imbues  all  EC  regulations  in  the  financial  field,  namely  the  home  country  principle.  This  means,  in 
brief, that the responsibility for supervision lies with the country where the bank is legally domiciled. 
To  illustrate  how  this  works,  we  can  imagine  a  bank  with  branch  offices  abroad.  The  bank  and  its 
branch offices are regarded as one single legal entity. They are therefore governed by the regulation 
and supervision that apply in their home country. How the operations are actually divided up between 
the different countries in principle has no relevance.  
Danske  bank  is  an  example  of  a  bank  that  has  chosen  to  organise  its  operations  in  this  way.  The 
relatively extensive operations conducted by the bank in Sweden are largely under Danish regulations 
and supervision.  
If a bank instead chooses the form of subsidiaries for its foreign operations, then its subsidiaries – as 
they are regarded as independent entities – will be covered by the regulations and supervision that 
apply in the respective countries in which they are domiciled. In this case, there are in a formal sense 
several "home countries”.  
Nordea’s operations in Sweden, Finland, Norway and Denmark are organised in this type of subsidiary 
structure,  which  means  that  the  group  is  covered  by  four  different  systems  of  regulation  and 
supervision. 
In both of these cases there is reason to ask whether a pure “home country principle” is the best basis 
for supervision of banks with considerable operations in several countries. 
In the case of Danske bank, where the foreign operations are conducted in the form of branch offices, 
the  most  important  question  is  whether  it  is  reasonable  and  appropriate  that  the  responsibility  for 
supervision is concentrated to one single country. This question becomes particularly relevant if the 
bank is a large actor outside of the home country and in these countries plays a decisive role in the 
stability of the financial system. In the case of Danske bank’s Swedish operations, one perhaps cannot 
say that this is currently the case. However, it is not inconceivable that this situation might arise in the 
future. The situation would be even more critical if the bank was at the same time a relatively small 
actor in its own country. In this type of situation the supervisory authority in the home country – which 
in this case is the one that decides – would probably consider that the need for supervision was not as 
great as the other countries might consider it to be. There is an evident risk of a conflict of interests 
between the countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2007
There are elements of similar problems in the Nordea case, too. However, here the problem is rather 
the opposite – namely that the bank group’s different companies (parent and subsidiaries) would be 
covered by supervision in several countries. The fact that each cross-border bank group has to obey 
and report to several supervisory authorities leads to additional costs and administrative duties for the 
bank. This is an obstacle to continued integration and to the competitiveness of the European bank 
market. 
Another problem is that there are no common arrangements for crisis management within the EU. 
Basically the only EC regulations defining how responsibility should be divided between the countries 
in the event of a cross-border crisis are regulations for compensating depositors in the case of bank 
failures. However, these regulations are not primarily intended to ensure efficient crisis management. 
They should rather be seen as protection for consumers.  
The fact that the allocation of responsibility between countries in the event of cross-border crises is in 
principle unregulated leads to at least two serious problems. 
Firstly, it lays the foundation for the conflict of interests I just described. Even if the responsibility for 
crisis management is formally unregulated, it will unavoidably fall to the country whose economy is to 
a  large  degree  dependent  on  the  bank  that  is  in  distress.  This country  is  not  necessarily the  same 
country that has the responsibility for supervision of the bank. One consequence could thus be that a 
country  which  is  substantially  influenced  by  foreign  banks  could  be  forced  to  pay  the  bill  for 
unsatisfactory  supervision  exercised  by  another  country.  The  lack  of  a  formal  link  between 
responsibility for supervision and crisis management is in this case an evident problem.  
Secondly, the unregulated allocation of responsibility for crisis management means that each country 
that is involved in a cross-border crisis is thrown upon its own national crisis management and on the 
goodwill  of  the  other  affected  countries  in  contributing  to  efficient  crisis  management.  It  is  far  from 
certain that this will lead to the optimal solutions. Without uniform regulations, forms for cooperation or 
mechanisms for joint decision-making, there is a considerable risk that we will find ourselves in “game-
like situations” where the countries involved act in various ways to avoid paying the crisis “bill”. In this 
type of situation there is a clear risk that all parties involved will be the losers. 
This  is  a  problem  that  affects  not  only  the  governments  and  authorities  in  the  countries  suffering 
crises. The arrangements for crisis management, like the supervision, affect the business conditions 
the banks work under. An efficiently-functioning safety net comprises a form of "quality label” on the 
bank system. This in turn has significance for the banks’ ability to attract customers and financiers. If 
legislators  and  authorities  cannot  supply  this,  the  domestic  market  will  lose  out  in  competitiveness 
compared  with  other  markets.  The  fact  that  there  is  currently  a  lack  of  joint  regulations  for  crisis 
management within the EU is therefore a problem, also from the banks' perspective. 
Possible solutions 
I have now come to the fourth and final part of my speech, the part about possible solutions to the 
problems.  
Regulations,  supervision  and  crisis  management  need  to  be  developed  so  they  can  function  even 
when banks have cross-border operations. The aim is to form a framework that can supply the need 
for  financial  stability,  both  nationally  and  internationally.  It  is  equally  important  to  ensure  that 
regulations and institutional arrangements are designed so that the financial integration process can 
continue and the competitiveness of the European bank sector can thereby be strengthened.  
Considerable  thought  is  being  put  into  these  issues  at  EU  level  right  now.  Some  measures  have 
already been taken. For instance, the need for a more efficient and uniform supervision of banks with 
cross-border operations has partly been met by giving the supervisory authority in the group’s home 
country strengthened powers and increased responsibility for coordination. To improve the exchange 
of information and the cooperation between the authorities in different countries, special agreements 
have been signed between the EU member states. In addition, various work is being done to ensure 
that the member states implement and apply relevant EC regulations in a uniform manner.  
All of this is good, of course, and is aimed at managing the problems and challenges I have taken up 
here today. But it is far from sufficient. I do not intend to go into any detailed suggestions of how the 
various  problems  should  be  resolved.  Instead,  I  would  just  like  to  convey  –  as  a  contribution  to 
continued discussions on this subject – some general thoughts on how we can proceed. 
BIS Review 38/2007 
 3
In the short term, we should make improvements primarily in three areas:  
Firstly, we in the EU should develop joint regulations for crisis management, which link together the 
responsibility  for  supervision  and  crisis  management  in  a  good  way.  The  ultimate  driving  force  to 
achieving  efficient  and  appropriate  supervision  is,  after  all,  the  knowledge  that  one  has  to  bear  the 
consequences of deficiencies in supervision.  
Secondly, we should improve and deepen the exchange of information, cooperation and coordination 
between the authorities in the different countries. At present there is, for instance, no common model 
as  to  how  supervisory  authorities  can  work  together.  Such  a  model  is  necessary  to  maintain  high 
quality  and  efficiency  in  the  supervision  of  complex  banks  with  operations  in  several  countries.  An 
expanded  cooperation  can  hopefully  also  contribute  to  harmonisation  of  the  supervision  that  goes 
further than what can be achieved merely through joint regulations.  
The agreements that I have mentioned earlier are aimed at achieving this. But it is doubtful how well 
these voluntary agreements will function in an acute crisis situation. To ensure efficient supervision 
and crisis management the content of the agreements needs to be formalised. An important part in 
this is finding methods of resolving differences of opinion between authorities.  
Thirdly,  we  also  need  to  work  to  reduce  the  introduction  of  national  special  regulations  in  the  EU’s 
member states. Of course, there must still continue to be scope for countries to formulate regulations 
on the basis of their domestic conditions. However, this impairs the prospects of bringing about a true 
harmonisation.  It  is  therefore  important  to  constantly  question  the  need  for  national  solutions  in  the 
regulatory work within the EU. The aim should be to reduce national deviations as far as possible.  
In  the  long  term,  more  in-depth  structural  changes  will  be  necessary.  This  primarily  concerns 
establishing joint institutions for supervision and crisis management at EU level. It may mean creating 
a supervisory authority for the 40 or so banks that currently conduct extensive operations in several 
European countries. It may also be a question of acting to create a joint European deposit guarantee 
scheme for cross-border banks. Such a system would have several advantages. Above all, it would 
mean that individual countries were not forced to pay large compensation amounts to depositors in 
other countries. 
I am aware that this type of suggestion is far-reaching and controversial. It would mean a transfer of 
power from the member states to the EU. But the suggested arrangements would only apply to the 
banks conducting cross-border operations of sufficiently large scope to warrant EU-wide measures.  
The  main  advantage  of  such  a  “supranational”  arrangement  is  that  the  public  frameworks  for 
regulation, supervision and crisis management can correspond to the actual structure of the financial 
market. When supervision and crisis management are centralised, this also creates the conditions for 
reducing the administrative burdens on the banks and at the same time managing the risks where they 
actually arise. Both the banks and the individual countries would be the winners in such a system. 
Conclusion 
My main message today has been that financial integration is increasing rapidly in Europe, and that 
this leads to better conditions for economic growth, but that it also means that regulations, supervision 
and  arrangements  for  crisis  management  must  become  more  international.  Financial  integration 
provides  us  with  a  number  of  new  challenges  and  we  must  work  together  to  find  solutions  to  the 
problems that arise. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2007
