Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  CBI  Wales/CBI  CYMRU,  Cardiff, 
11 June 2007. 
 Chairman, First Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Two  years  ago  I  spent  a  few  days  walking  along  Offa’s  Dyke.  Up  on  the  ridge,  between  Hay  and 
Pandy, there is a magnificent 360° view. The patchwork quilt of green fields in England lies to the east. 
But the eye is drawn to the rugged and spectacular scenery of the Black Mountains in “Wild Wales” to 
the west. The landscape, however, is not everything because as George Borrow wrote in 1862: 
“Wales has something beyond wonderful scenery, its eventful history, and its illustrious men of yore to 
interest the visitor. Wales has a population, and a remarkable one.” 
It is a population that has had to adapt to great changes in the world economy over the past century 
and continues to do so today. You need only look outside at the Cardiff Bay development to see the 
way the Welsh economy has changed. 
When you take a flight, the aircraft may well have wings made in Wales. Your car might have a Welsh 
engine and be insured in Cardiff. And when you holiday in France your morning croissant has probably 
been baked in an oven made in Swansea. 
What happens in Wales matters for the UK economy. That is why the Bank of England has a team 
who live and work in Wales. Last year our Agents – Adrian and Ian – drove 30,000 miles to talk face-
to-face with you. The rugged scenery is, I suspect, less appealing to them as they wind their way – 
slowly – through the valleys and mountains. When you talk to them, you are speaking to the Monetary 
Policy Committee at only one remove before it sets interest rates. 
On this occasion, I am not in Wales to enjoy the scenery. I am here to listen to your views at first hand. 
But tonight I want to explain. 
Over the past year Bank Rate has risen four times to reach 5½%. A year ago, few expected that to 
happen – markets thought that by now Bank Rate would be only 4¾%. 
Market  expectations  of  where  Bank  Rate  will  be  at  the  end  of  this  year  have  risen  from  5%  in  the 
middle of last year to 6% now. So what has happened over the past twelve months? 
The right place to start is with inflation – that is, after all, the Bank of England’s target. A year ago 
inflation was bang on the 2% target. The latest figure – for April – is 2.8%. In recent months inflation 
has been volatile, rising to above 3% in March, when I had to write an open letter to the Chancellor, 
and subsequently falling back. The number for May, to be published tomorrow, is awaited with interest. 
Many column inches have been devoted to these short-run movements. But, because it takes some 
time before changes in Bank Rate affect inflation, it is important that the Monetary Policy Committee 
look  through  this  short-run  volatility  and  try  to  understand  where  inflation  might  be  heading  in  the 
medium term. 
That poses a real challenge. None of us can foresee the future. To assess the likelihood of different 
possible outcomes for inflation, we examine all the available information – official statistics, business 
surveys, and reports from around the country, including those from our team in Wales. Then we make 
a judgement about the outlook for inflation. 
That judgement cannot be made on the basis that just because certain developments seem to have 
forecast inflation in the past they will do so again. Such correlations are not stable over time. We have 
to try to discover the driving forces behind the mosaic comprising all the different pieces of information 
that  we  examine  each  month.  To  understand  what  is  likely  to  happen  in  the  economy,  we  have  to 
behave  like  the  child  who  cannot  stop  asking  “why?”  Why  is  output  growing  so  steadily?  Why  did 
recorded  employment  fall  last  quarter?  Why  are  money  and  credit  rising  so  rapidly?  Why  have  oil 
prices picked up? And each answer inevitably provokes another question “why?” So setting interest 
rates is not straightforward. 
Our job, in fact, is rather like taking part in a “spot the ball” competition. Although the Western Mail and 
the  South  Wales  Echo  stopped  running  such  competitions  in  1992  –  at  the  same  moment  that  the 
BIS Review 63/2007 
 1
inflation target was being introduced – I am sure many of you will remember that in those competitions 
the key piece of information, the location of the ball or, in our case, the outlook for inflation, is missing. 
You are shown the position of the players from which you have to deduce the position of the ball. That 
is no easy matter. To pinpoint the ball you need to ask: why is that player jumping? Or why is that 
player looking there? Only when you have identified the factors to which the players are responding 
can  you  try  to  spot  the  ball  itself.  And  obviously  in  our  case  there  is  rather  more  than  guesswork 
involved. 
In essence, each month the Monetary Policy Committee is trying to identify the changes in the driving 
forces  to  which  the  economic  data  are  responding.  Those  changes  are  described,  somewhat 
obscurely  by  economists,  as  “shocks”.  That  is  not  to  say  they  are  necessarily  sudden,  violent 
upheavals. “Shocks” are forces that stop the economy running with clockwork regularity. They are the 
answer to the question “why?” 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  constantly  engaged  in  an  exercise  of  “spot  the  shock”.  Without 
understanding why the economy is moving in the way that it is, we cannot gauge correctly where it 
might be going and hence set the right course for interest rates. There is no mechanical link between 
any piece of data and inflation – despite the impression often created by newspaper headlines. Policy 
cannot be set by a simple scorecard. There is no substitute for asking the question “why?” 
One  of  the  achievements  of  Alan  Greenspan  during  his  time  as  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board was his recognition that when output growth picked up in the United States in the late 1990s it 
reflected an increase in supply capacity as productivity growth rose in the wake of the application of IT 
to business processes generally. This “supply shock” meant that output could expand faster without 
generating inflation. 
“Spotting the shock” is a perpetual challenge for us. The shocks we have identified are the reasons we 
raised  Bank  Rate  four  times  over  the  past  year.  We  spotted  them  by  asking  three  questions,  all 
beginning with “why”. So let me give you those questions and our answers. 
The first question is why total output has grown steadily at an annualised rate of around 3% for 18 
months  –  the  longest  run  of  stable  output  growth  since  1997  and  much  stronger  than  most 
commentators anticipated, even though interest rates and the sterling exchange rate have risen. And 
why are business surveys even more upbeat? Notwithstanding a slowdown in the United States, the 
world economy, especially the euro area, our largest export market, has been surprisingly buoyant. 
World GDP growth over the past three years has averaged over 5% a year, the strongest such period 
since the late 1960s. And business investment has expanded at the fastest rate for almost a decade. 
These  upside  demand  “shocks”  have  not  –  at  least  so  far  –  been  offset  by  a  slowing  in  consumer 
spending. 
Given  past  relationships,  we  might  expect  some  upward  pressure  on  inflation.  But  we  should  be 
cautious. Like the US in the late 1990s, we have experienced our own positive “supply shock” in the 
form of a significant wave of inward migration, especially from the accession states, of people looking 
for work. That has reduced the risk of a rising demand for labour leading to faster wage inflation. 
But  despite  greater  availability  of  labour,  businesses  have  not  over  the  past  year  expanded 
employment sufficiently to prevent stronger demand from increasing capacity pressures. The Bank’s 
Agents report that capacity utilisation is now at an unusually high level. These pressures encourage 
businesses  to  raise  prices.  And  that  is  exactly  what  the  business  surveys  suggest  has  been 
happening.  A  position  in  which  growth  is  above  its  long-run  average  and  businesses  are  already 
operating with pressures on capacity is unlikely to be one without inflationary risks. That is one reason 
why the Monetary Policy Committee has raised interest rates over the past year. 
The second question is about money and credit. The quantities of broad money and bank lending are 
now around 14% higher than a year ago – rates of growth last seen in 1990 when inflation was more 
than  8%.  But  again,  we  should  be  cautious.  If  credit  becomes  cheaper  and  more  widely  available, 
thereby  increasing  the  stock  of  money  (a  “money  supply  shock”),  households  and  businesses  will 
increase  their  spending  on  goods  and services and on  assets,  both  financial and real,  and  this will 
push up on inflation. But if they wish to hold more money in their portfolios – a “money demand shock” 
– then the extra money will have few, if any, implications for inflation. 
So why have money and credit been growing so rapidly? Given the pace of their expansion, it is likely 
that there has been both a demand and a supply shock. The supply shock is that banks have become 
increasingly  willing  to  provide  finance.  Credit  has  been  readily  available  and  the  spread  between 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2007
interest rates paid by households and businesses and interest rates available in the money market has 
fallen. That is one factor behind the rapid growth of business investment spending over the past year. 
In light of the greater availability of credit, any person or family that borrows at a variable rate should 
recognise  that  the  interest  rate  they  will  pay  in  the  future  may  vary.  Obvious  though  the  point  may 
seem, it is unwise to borrow so much that the repayments are affordable only if interest rates remain at 
their initial levels. Indeed, wider and cheaper availability of credit was a “shock” that boosted spending, 
and so was a further reason why the Monetary Policy Committee raised interest rates over the past 
year. 
The third, and most important, question is about inflation. Why has it picked up so sharply over the 
past year? Are those changes temporary or more persistent? The recent rise in inflation to over 3% 
does look temporary. The pickup in the months leading up to March this year reflected in part a rise in 
domestic gas and electricity prices. And the fallback in inflation which has already begun, and which is 
likely to continue for several months, is in part the result of cuts in domestic gas and electricity prices 
which have already been announced. 
Those shocks are relatively easy to identify. But it is much harder to know where inflation would have 
been without them. Sharp rises in the prices of energy and food have squeezed spending on other 
goods  and  services,  putting  downward  pressure  on  those  prices.  That  is  why  measures  of  “core 
inflation”  that  strip  out  certain  prices  can  be  highly  misleading.  Even  accounting  for  the  temporary 
influences, more persistent inflationary pressures have picked up. Some of that stems from the shocks 
to  demand  and  credit  supply  that  I  described  earlier.  And  against  that  background,  expectations  of 
inflation over the next year, on which price and wage decisions are based, have drifted up. That is the 
third reason why the MPC has raised Bank Rate. 
Those are the shocks we have spotted. A boost to supply from inward migration has not compensated 
for a positive shock to both domestic and overseas demand. And it would be optimistic in the extreme 
to suppose that the rapid growth of money and credit could be dismissed solely as a positive shock to 
the demand for money. So there has been some underlying upward pressure on inflation that is in part 
hidden by the volatility in domestic energy prices. 
That is the past. What about the future? Our central view is that inflation will fall back this year as the 
rises in domestic gas and electricity prices last year drop out of the annual comparison and the recent 
cuts in prices feed through to household bills. Looking through those temporary effects, if inflation is 
then to remain around the 2% target businesses will need to expand employment to relieve pressures 
on  their  capacity.  And  they  will  need  to  do  so  with  only  a  limited  impact  on pay.  Average  earnings 
seem so far to have been subdued, although the two main official measures of pay growth are sending 
conflicting signals and the Committee awaits an explanation of their divergence. 
Faster  employment  growth  and  lower  domestic  energy  bills  will,  by  boosting  real  incomes,  add  to 
consumer spending. With continued robust growth of the world economy, the past rises in Bank Rate 
will need to slow domestic demand. And inflation expectations will need to fall back in line with the 2% 
target. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  will  be  watching  closely  indicators  of  capacity  pressures,  pricing 
intentions and inflation expectations. If these indicators remain elevated, the MPC may need to take 
further action. There is no simple or self-evident answer to the question of what path of interest rates 
will be necessary to bring inflation back to the 2% target and keep it there. 
By now you must be asking your own “why?” question – why is he keeping us from such a splendid 
dinner? So I will not detain you. I have tried to explain this evening why interest rates have gone up. 
Each month we try to spot the shocks, evaluate their implications for inflation, and set interest rates to 
meet  the  2%  target.  We  do  that  to  provide  a  backdrop  of  macroeconomic  stability  so  that  you  can 
focus on the really important questions for your businesses. Why is that product selling better than this 
one? Why is my competitor changing his prices? And, most important, why did the Wallabies run the 
Welsh defence ragged in Brisbane, where Wales lost by almost as big a margin as England did to 
South Africa? 
I  don’t  have  the  answers  to  those  questions.  But,  of  one  thing  I  can  assure  you,  in  terms  of  the 
economy we will never stop asking “why?” 
BIS Review 63/2007 
 3
