Klaus Liebscher: EMU and globalization – chances and challenges 
Speech  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the  Central 
Council of ELEC, Vienna, 1 June 2007.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen! 
It  is  both  a  privilege  and  a  pleasure  for  me  to  address  this  distinguished  audience  on  the 
topic “EMU and Globalization – Chances and Challenges”. 
European Monetary Union (EMU) and the euro, which seemed to be very ambitious projects 
of  European  integration  some  decades  ago,  meanwhile  have  become  a  remarkable 
contribution both to the stability and the international competitiveness of the European Union, 
and in particular of the euro area. One of the success factors of this milestone of European 
integration  was  the  strong  political  will  to  follow  the  “stability  architecture  of  EMU”,  which 
rests  on  three  pillars:  a  monetary  policy  oriented  to  price  stability,  a  fiscal  policy  geared 
towards sound public finances (Stability and Growth Pact) and structural policies designed to 
foster competitiveness and sustainable economic growth (Lisbon Agenda). So far, EMU and 
the euro can be seen as one of the EU’s most important strategic responses to the chances 
and challenges of a globalized world. 
Earlier  this  year,  we  celebrated  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  Treaty  of  Rome,  which 
established  the  European  Economic  Community  (EEC).  The  day  the  Treaty  was  signed, 
March  25,  1957,  is  considered  the  birthday  of  the  European  Union,  which  today  unites 
around 490 million people in 27 countries. And in today’s euro area, about 317 million people 
in 13 countries benefit from a low inflation environment and stable inflation expectations, a 
high degree of confidence in their currency and moderate interest rates – all elements of a 
favorable economic environment conducive to investment and business. 
Since 1999, we have experienced a number of important shocks to the global economy, such 
as  the  Y2K  challenge,  substantial  oil  price  increases,  the  ups  and  downs  of  the  euro 
exchange rate, the boom and the burst of the equity market bubble, global imbalances and 
the clouds of war and terrorism. Amidst all of this, the Governing Council of the European 
Central  Bank  (ECB)  has  guided  inflation  expectations  in  a  manner  consistent  with  price 
stability and thus provided a reliable anchor for the euro-area economy, while the euro has 
sheltered euro area financial markets against those shocks. 
Not least because of the growing international use of the euro, the stability culture formed by 
the single currency has already bestowed positive benefits on the non-euro area EU Member 
States  and  many  Eastern  European,  Middle  Eastern  and  African  countries.  Meanwhile, 
nearly  one-third  of  all  international  debt  securities  are  denominated  in  euro,  and  the  euro 
accounts for about 25% of global foreign exchange reserves. Since its introduction, the euro 
has become the second most widely used currency in the world. Moreover, with 646 billion 
banknotes and coins in circulation, the euro has already overtaken the US dollar.1
In  a  global  perspective  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  are  unique.  No  other  model  of  supra-
national  cooperation  or  agreement  has  achieved  such  a  high  level  of  integration.  In  the 
classification of the IMF, the euro area is the 3rd largest economic area in the world in terms 
of real GDP (15%), after the US (20%) and developing Asia (27%). 
Moreover, following a few years of economic sluggishness, the euro area is now becoming 
an  ever  larger  player  in  the  global  economy,  thereby  contributing  to  an  urgently  needed 
                                                 
1   USD banknotes and coins: USD 810 bn = EUR 615 bn (all data and the exchange rate at end-2006). 
BIS Review 89/2007 
 1
rebalancing in global economic growth. Economic activity, in fact, accelerated to 2.7% last 
year, and since the start of Monetary Union real GDP growth has averaged 2.1%. The ECB 
staff projections from March 2007 see growth ranging between 2.1% and 2.9% in 2007 and 
between 1.9% and 2.9% in 2008. 
Unemployment  has  declined  significantly,  from  9%  in  1999  to  7.2%  (March  2007),  a 
development  which  is  particularly  welcome.  12  million  new  jobs  have  been  created  since 
1999. 
On average, inflation has stood at 2.1% since the start of EMU, which shows that inflation 
expectations are firmly anchored. Hence, price stability has created a favorable environment 
for investment and growth in the euro area. Concerning the outlook for prices, the ECB staff 
projects annual inflation to average between 1.5% and 2.1% this year and between 1.4% and 
2.6% in 2008. 
Risks  to  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price  stability  remain  on  the  upside,  relating  in 
particular  to  stronger  than  currently  expected  wage  developments  in  a  context  of  ongoing 
robust growth in employment and economic activity. Given the vigorous monetary and credit 
growth in an environment of already ample liquidity, the Governing Council of the ECB will 
continue to be strongly vigilant in order to ensure that risks to price stability over the medium 
term do not materialize. 
A price stability-oriented monetary policy is a necessary precondition for sustainable dynamic 
growth and employment, but it is by no means the only precondition. Monetary policy needs 
to  be  supported  by  sound  public  finances,  ambitious  structural  reforms  and  a  competitive 
economic framework. 
It is important to understand that unsustainable fiscal policies may put the entire euro area at 
risk. For instance, higher risk premiums in response to unsustainable policies in one Member 
State could spill over to other euro-area countries. Euro-area membership thus also means 
compliance with a stringent regulatory framework, the Stability and Growth Pact. 
We  are  aware  that  structural  improvements  are  only  part  of  the  reason  for  the  current 
improvement in euro-area fiscal balances, from -1.6% in 2006 to an expected -1.0% in 2007. 
Thus,  it  is  essential  that  any  budgetary  leeway  granted  by  the  current  favorable  economic 
environment be used for lasting budgetary consolidation in order to prepare for challenges 
such as population ageing and to create room to maneuver for future economic downturns. 
In  addition,  structural  polices  are  needed  to  ensure  that  countries  can  flexibly  react  to 
asymmetric shocks, as the single monetary regime makes adjustments to asymmetric shocks 
a painful and drawn-out process. 
In  2000  the  European  Council  adopted  the  Lisbon  Agenda.  In  broad  terms,  the  Lisbon 
strategy  aims  to  “make  Europe,  by  2010,  the  most  competitive  and  the  most  dynamic 
knowledge-based  economy  in  the  world”.  In  2005,  after  the  mid-term  review,  European 
policymakers renewed their commitment to the ambitious goals. Even though a number of 
Member  States  have  achieved  significant  progress  in  several  areas,  much  remains  to  be 
done. This includes more effective and efficient investment in knowledge and innovation and 
making  labor  and  product  markets  more  flexible.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  only  dynamic 
economies can sustain modernized yet generous welfare systems in Europe. 
This brings me to further challenges facing the EMU in the years to come, most notably the 
further enlargement of the euro area and the EU. 
The  new  Member  States  to  date  have  succeeded  in  transforming  their  economies  from 
centrally planned systems to market economies. Substantial progress has been achieved in 
the areas of property rights and privatization as well as capital and trade liberalization. As 
these  countries  have  anchored  their  institutional  structures  to  the  EU,  they  are  viewed  as 
increasingly secure places for investing and doing business in general. Moreover, the euro 
anchors  monetary  stability  in  the  region,  often  directly,  for  instance  through  the  European 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2007
Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  ERM  II.  Currently,  six  of  the  12  new  Member  States  are 
members of ERM II: Cyprus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, and Slovakia. 
Full monetary integration will be the ultimate goal of all new Member States depending on 
their  progress  of  sustainable  convergence.  However,  the  application  of  the  convergence 
criteria  for  the  new  Member  States  must  not  be  more,  but  also  no  less  strict  than  for  the 
current  euro  area  countries.  Moreover,  when  adopting  the  euro,  quality  must  not  be 
compromised for the sake of speed. 
Slovenia became the 13th member of the euro area at the beginning of this year. In February 
2007, Malta and Cyprus submitted their requests for convergence assessment by the ECB 
and the European Commission. If given approval by the European Council, both countries 
would adopt the single currency at the beginning of 2008. 
The  anchoring  effect  of  the  euro  also  applies  to  many  other  countries  located  in  the 
neighborhood of the euro area. Tightening financial and institutional links is an integral part of 
the EU’s Stabilization and Association process with the countries of the Western Balkans. 
The  merits  of  the  process  are  assessed  regularly.  Bulgaria  and  Romania  joined  the  EU 
on1 January 2007, with some more countries to follow in the future. 
As a small open economy, Austria  is highly exposed to the changing global economy and 
globalization.  Open  economies  face  greater  challenges  than  less  open  economies  in 
adjusting  to  a  more  integrated  world  and  to  the  greater  exposure  to  real  and  financial 
volatility that comes with integration. Large capital flows can complicate the task of achieving 
sustainable growth, low inflation and financial stability. Austria has never shied away from the 
challenges  of  globalization.  Not  in  the  period  prior  to  EU  and  EMU  membership,  when 
Austria  followed  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  which  became  a  role  model  coined  as 
stability-oriented  exchange  rate  policy,  nor  later  on  when  the  euro  replaced  the  Austrian 
Schilling. 
All in all, we can safely say today that Austria’s EU membership has contributed not only to 
solid economic growth, a significant consolidation of public finances and price stability, but 
also  to  structural  changes  which  have  securing  Austria’s  position  in  a  highly  competitive 
environment.  Thus,  over  the  past  decades,  Austria  has  become  a  leading  small  open 
economy in Europe. This achievement is borne out by GDP per capita figures which place 
Austria third in the euro area, right behind Luxembourg and Ireland in 2006. Austria’s goods 
exports-to-GDP  ratio  grew  from  about  24%  in  1995  to  43%  in  2006  (goods  and  services 
exports-to-GDP ratio: 58% in 2006), and foreign direct investment has increased from 5% to 
23% of GDP in 2005. In addition, average (CPI) inflation fell from approximately 2.7% in the 
decade  before  EU  membership  to  some  1.7%  thereafter  and,  at  4.8%  in  2006,  the 
unemployment  rate  is  one  of  the  lowest  in  the  EU,  also  due  to  a  successful  “social 
partnership”. The employment rate of 15-64-year olds is one of the highest in Europe. 
Austria benefited not only from EU membership and the Single Market, but also from the fall 
of  the  Iron  Curtain  in  1989  and  from  the  transition  and  integration  process  in  Central  and 
Eastern Europe, including Southeastern Europe. FDI in the region and bilateral trade have 
intensified very markedly. Bilateral trade with Central and Eastern Europe has tripled since 
1993 in real terms. 
Austrian  companies  in  general,  and  Austrian  banks  in  particular,  were  quick  to  identify 
market opportunities in Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe and have established a 
considerable  presence.  With  an  average  market  share  in  banking  sector  assets  of  almost 
25%, Austria’s banks are among market leaders in this region.2 More than one-third of the 
profits  of  the  six  largest  Austrian  banks  already  come  from  this  region.  As  Austrian  banks 
                                                 
2   Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe, excluding CIS countries. 
BIS Review 89/2007 
 3
continue to move into the southeast and east, their exposure is broadly diversified, which is 
intended to contain risks. At the same time, the Austrian authorities closely monitor potential 
challenges  involved.  Stress  tests  indicate  that  the  banks’  exposure  is  manageable  and 
potential contagion effects on Austrian banks should be very limited. 
Having  mentioned  some  positive  effects  for  Austria,  we  must  concede  that  big  changes 
rarely  only  create  winners.  In  balance,  however,  EMU  and  the  euro  have  undoubtedly 
shielded the Austrian economy well from possible adverse effects of globalization. Moreover, 
backsliding into protectionism would be like traveling back in time. 
From the narrow focus, let me again widen the perspective to the world economy. 
The increasing emergence of new players on the globalized stage has contributed to the very 
impressive  recent  expansion  of  the  world  economy.  Yet,  this  dynamic  growth  has  also 
created  economic  challenges,  such  as  surging  commodity  prices  and  significant  current 
account  imbalances.  Recently,  global  growth  appears  to  have  become  somewhat  more 
even-footed, as growth in Japan and the euro area has been picking up. 
The  economic  upswing  in  the  euro  area  can  be  attributed  at  least  in  part  to  improved 
economic  structures  and  is  based  on  the  stability-oriented  framework  of  EMU.  The 
Governing Council of the ECB will continue to support this upswing by acting vigorously to 
maintain price stability. 
Moreover,  the  international  competitiveness  of  the  euro  area  has  to  be  improved.  With 
structural  reforms  still  ahead,  the  euro  area  economy  seems  vulnerable  to  an  abrupt 
unwinding  of  global  imbalances  in  the  US  and  Asia.  Today,  there  is  large  consensus  in 
Europe  that  lower  growth  in  the  EU  is  largely  structural  in  nature.  In  order  to  improve  its 
position in the global economy, we have to work on reducing growth differentials, in particular 
vis-à-vis  the  US.  We  should  respond  with  policies  designed  to  use  opportunities  of 
globalization, particularly to increase productivity and growth, while minimizing unavoidable 
adjustment costs. The right answer to globalization and international competition is therefore 
to continue and intensify the structural reform process. Standstill would be detrimental. 
In this context, let me mention the moribund Doha round, which has even cast doubt on the 
future of the World Trade Organization (WTO). Although calls for protectionist measures to 
counter the increasing competition from Asian economies should be taken seriously, I stand 
on the side of free trade and believe that protectionist pressures need to be firmly resisted. 
There is no doubt that globalization has worked well for the people of Europe. After nearly 
nine  years  of  experience,  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  and  the  euro  have  proven  to  be 
Europe’s  most  forceful  strategic  responses  in  a  changing  global  economy.  It  is  said  that: 
“Change is inevitable; growth is optional.” In a globalized world, Europe has chosen to grow. 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2007
