Caleb M Fundanga: Local bond market developments in Zambia 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, on the occasion of the Listing of 
the Development Bank of Zambia Bond, Lusaka Stock Exchange, Lusaka, 4 April 2007. 
 • The General Manager – Lusaka Stock Exchange 
• The Chairman, DBZ Board of Directors 
• The Chairman, Standard Chartered 
• The Secretary – Securities and Exchange Commission 
• Mr Ade Adebajo, Director, Standard Chartered Africa Debt Capital Markets 
• Member of the DBZ Board 
• All Senior Government Officials Present 
• Acting Managing Director, DBZ 
• Managing Director – Zambia State Insurance Corporation 
• Chief Executive Officer – Stock Brokers (Z) Limited 
• Representative of DBSA 
• Distinguished invited guests; and 
• Ladies and Gentleman 
Today marks another important milestone in financial sector development indicative of the coming of 
age of the Zambian financial system in general and local bond market in particular. The issue of the 
K68.620  billion  senior  unsecured  floating  rate  note  under  the  Development  Bank  of  Zambia  (DBZ) 
K150 billion Medium  Term  Note  Programme  and  listing of  the  note  on  the  Lusaka  Stock Exchange 
(LuSE) is a landmark transaction for two key reasons. The first is that this is the first time in the history 
of the local bond market that a local currency medium term note programme has been established. 
The  second  is  that  this  transaction  marks  the  largest  single  issue  ever  offered  to  Zambian  fixed-
income institutional investors. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the development of the local bond market is central to Government’s strategy 
for  diversification  of  the  economy  for  one  key  reason.  All  businesses,  including  state  owned 
enterprises, require finance, covering both equity and debt, and ranging from short-term to long-term. 
In  the  absence  of  a  properly  functioning  local  bond  market,  those  in  need  of  capital  and  qualified 
enough  have  had  to  turn  to  international  financial  markets  to  finance  their  local  projects  with  the 
attendant exchange rate risk. Similarly, those seeking a competitive return on their investments that 
also meet their maturity preferences but are unable to find these features locally, have always sought 
out  alternative  avenues  offshore  in  foreign  currency,  thereby  creating  pressures  in  the  foreign 
exchange market. Therefore, Government’s involvement in improving the local bond market has been 
deliberate. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Government’s  participation  in  improving  the  functioning  of  the  local  bond 
markets has seen the establishment of appropriate market infrastructure that facilitates cost-effective 
and  secure  trading,  and  a  transparent  price  discovery  process.  Further,  Government’s  decision  to 
bring to market longer term bonds in 2005 have proved to be positive and catalytic for the local bond 
market  as  this  has  resulted  in  an  extended  yield  curve  that  has  provided  a  benchmark  for  pricing 
longer dated security issues by the private sector and banking industry. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  arising  from  our  core  responsibility  for  financial  system  stability,  Bank  of 
Zambia  is  deeply  concerned  about  the  proper  functioning  of  the  local  bond  market,  in  terms  of  its 
security, liquidity, transparency and ability to withstand contagious disruptions emanating from other 
jurisdictions.  In  this  regard,  Bank  of  Zambia  has  two  broad  responsibilities.  The  first  is  that  of 
enhancing  the  price  discovery  process  by  promoting  transparency  in  our  own  policy  actions.  The 
second  is  that  of  ensuring  that  the  banks,  as  providers  of  liquidity,  perform  their  proper  role  in 
supporting the trading process by making sound credit decisions. We therefore applaud this initiative 
from the Development Bank of Zambia and encourage the board and management not to rest on its 
laurels. The eyes of the outside world – local and international investors and other key stakeholders 
are paying close attention, and expect Development Bank of Zambia to deliver, and inescapably so, in 
terms  of  adherence  to  world  class  corporate  governance  standards  and  ensuring  safe  and  sound 
operations. On these two responsibilities, I wish to remind Development Bank of Zambia board and 
management that the business world and stakeholders out there today do not hold two different sets 
BIS Review 35/2007 
 1
of standards for effective corporate performance, a set for private sector businesses and another for 
state owned enterprises. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we similarly welcome the role of financial advisors and intermediaries such as 
Standard  Chartered  played  in  bringing  to  market  of  this  initiative.  Their  participation  brought 
international  best  practice  and  standards  to  this  landmark  transaction  which  we  expect  will  have  a 
developmental impact on the local bond market. It is also our expectation that other intermediaries will 
look to this initiative to motivate them to seek to do more in this area for the benefit of our economy. 
So,  in  conclusion,  what  we  as  Bank  of  Zambia  can  do  is  to  understand  the  dynamics  of  the  debt 
market,  how  it  is  evolving,  and  whether  it  is  sufficiently  liquid  and  transparent.  We  can  also  help 
ensure that banks perform their proper role and enhance the price discovery process by promoting 
transparency in the conduct of our own monetary policy actions. Finally, and most importantly, we can 
strive to help create conditions in our economy that will support sustainable, non-inflationary growth 
and  so  promote  the  overall  welfare  of  all  citizens.  It  is  this  is  a  role  that  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is 
committed to playing effectively. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, with these remarks, I wish to thank all stakeholders in this important initiative. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2007
