Lim Hng Kiang: The Singapore financial services sector 
Address by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and Minister 
for Trade and Industry, at the ABS Annual Dinner, Singapore, 29 June 2007. 
 Chairman, ABS 
Council Members of ABS 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is good to be here tonight. The ABS Dinner is an excellent opportunity for the Singapore financial 
services community to get together, catch up and look ahead. 
State of the Singapore financial sector 
2006 has been a good year for Singapore. The financial services sector has done particularly well. All 
in, financial services grew 9.2% in 2006, outperforming Singapore’s overall GDP growth of 7.9%. This 
momentum has carried into this year. 2007 first quarter growth for the financial services sector came in 
at 13% on a year-on-year basis. 
Growth  has  been  broad-based,  with  brokerage,  treasury  and  advisory-related  services  being  the 
largest contributors. Volumes in the Singapore foreign exchange market have also grown steadily. The 
equity markets have been hot. Volume of securities traded has gone up sharply. 
The local debt market has also registered good growth in 2006. In the latest Annual Corporate Debt 
Review  for  2006  which  MAS  released  today,  the  total  market  capitalization  of  the  Singapore  bond 
market has reached S$243 billion. 
Indeed, the Government’s efforts to grow the Singapore Government Securities (SGS) market have 
produced  results.  Since  1996,  outstanding  SGS  has  grown  from  S$20.5  billion  to  S$85.8  billion  in 
December  2006.  This  year  we  issued  the  first  20-year  SGS.  The  20-year  SGS  has  extended  the 
benchmark yield curve as a price discovery mechanism and liquid hedging instrument for the broader 
Singapore debt market. 
The  corporate  debt  market  has  also  seen  good  growth.  As  at  the  end  of  last  year,  outstanding 
corporate debt securities were up 14% from a year earlier. This represents an increase of more than 6 
times in size since 1996 to S$157 billion. 
Another  encouraging  development  has  been  an  increase  in  the  diversity  of  issuers.  We  have  seen 
more real-estate borrowers and foreign issuers tapping the SGD bond market. Almost one-fourth of 
SGD-denominated  bond  issuance,  or  S$6  billion,  was  made  up  by  foreign  entity  issuers.  We  have 
issuers from the US, Europe and more recently from Korea, Latin America and the Middle East. 
In  line  with  the  growing  sophistication  of  the  investor  base,  the  asset  securitization  market  in 
Singapore has also taken off. For 2006, ABS issuance amounted to more than S$19 billion. There is 
also  an  influx  of  more  structured  products  into  our  market  such  as  convertibles  and  synthetic 
Collateralized Debt Obligations. 
Turning  to wealth  management,  Assets Under  Management  (AUM)  has continued  to  grow  strongly. 
2005 was the fifth consecutive year of double-digit growth for Singapore, with AUM increasing 26%. 
This  trend  has  continued  in  2006,  evidenced  by  the  expanding  wealth  management  community  in 
Singapore. This underscores Singapore’s emergence as a wealth management center. Singapore is 
strategically  placed  to  capitalize  on  the  significant  wealth  building  up  in  Asia.  At  the  same  time, 
increasing  interest  from  international  investors  to  diversify  a  greater  proportion  of  their  portfolios  to 
Asian  assets  has  created  business  opportunities  for  fund  managers  based  in  Asia,  including 
Singapore. 
The local banks too registered good financial performance last year. Altogether, their profit grew by 
over 40%. Their return on equity also improved by 2-3% points compared to the year before. At the 
same  time,  the  local  banks  have  also  shown  improved  financial  health.  Asset  quality  has  improved 
further. Classified loans represented 1.6% of total loans in 2006 compared to 2.2% in 2005. The local 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 1
banks  remain  well  capitalized,  meeting  MAS’  regulatory  requirements  and  in  comparison  with  peer 
banks internationally. 
Taken  together,  these  developments  bode  well  for  Singapore’s  efforts  to  develop  itself  as  an 
international financial center. Barring any unforeseen shocks, 2007 looks to be another good year for 
the financial services sector. 
Navigating the risks ahead 
That said I would be remiss if I did not point out some of the risks on the horizon. 
For  now,  the  global  environment  appears  benign  with  rosy  prospects  for  growth  worldwide. 
Nevertheless, various uncertainties could quickly unsettle this. For one, it is unclear how the mounting 
global imbalances between the East Asian countries and the developed countries will resolve. A sharp 
and abrupt adjustment would affect the global economy. It also remains unclear how long the golden 
era of good growth coupled with low inflation will continue. Already, fears of inflation have resurfaced. 
To complicate matters, we must not forget the geopolitical risks in the Middle East, terrorism and other 
surprises. 
This  year,  we  have  already  had  several  reminders  of  the  risks  in  the  system.  The  Chinese  stock 
market has experienced a few incidents of volatility following expectations of and actual government 
action.  It  remains  vulnerable  to  further  corrections.  In  the  US,  the  sub-prime  market  has  imploded. 
More recently, US treasuries have come under severe selling pressure, causing interest rates to rise 
and generating unease in stock markets. 
Nevertheless,  the  financial  system  has  been  resilient  so  far.  Have  we  learnt  our  lessons  from  past 
crises and are now better prepared? Or are we just plain lucky? Whichever the answer, we should 
remain vigilant. 
As bankers, you will be familiar with the saying that bad loans are made in good times. This saying is 
particularly  worth  repeating  when  the  environment  appears  rosy  and  serves  as  a  reminder  that 
vigilance is our constant responsibility. With this in mind, MAS initiated a survey of risk managers and 
traders, many of whom are based in Singapore, about their key risk concerns. This poll was conducted 
between April and June this year. A roundtable discussion was also held with risk managers. Let me 
now share with you some of the findings from this survey.  
The  feedback  received  was  open  and  honest  and  many  views  were  shared.  Most  respondents 
believed that asset prices were frothy and that a big shock could happen. Some speculated that this 
could happen before the end of 2008. In this age of increased connectivity and correlation of markets, 
respondents felt that a shock event such as a terrorist attack, pandemic or geopolitical instability could 
cause market disruptions. 
Respondents  also  highlighted  the  current  liquidity  in  the  financial  markets.  They  observed  that 
speculative liquidity was circulating in the financial system. This has led to historically unprecedented 
pricing and terms. When referring to the new players in the financial markets, respondents spoke of 
hedge funds and private equity in the same breath as “highly leveraged”, “covenant-lite structures” and 
“large speculative positions”. In the current low interest rate environment, many yield-hungry investors 
have  become  hedge  providers  for  institutions.  Respondents  expressed  concern  about  the  systemic 
risks such providers posed and their default risk in a severe market correction. 
In summary, the responses to the survey indicated that there seems to be a heightened level of risk in 
the macroeconomic and financial environment. Nevertheless, these responses are encouraging from 
another perspective. They indicate that financial institutions are aware of this heightened level of risk. 
With acceptance comes preparedness for the risks that may materialize in future. 
It is important for banks not to become complacent. As banks pursue the many opportunities that lie 
ahead, we must not let our guard down. Banks must not be lulled into a false sense of security by the 
external environment’s bullishness and resilience to shocks so far. We must not allow ourselves to get 
over-confident  with  our  knowledge  and  analyses  of  the  risks  out  there.  Risks  may  deviate  from 
expectations. Situations may take unexpected turns. In the face of such uncertainties, being prepared 
and ready is always a good proposition. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2007
Reputation risk and fair dealing with consumers 
Moving on from macroeconomic and financial risks to something closer to home, there is another risk 
which banks should remain mindful of. Unlike the other risks I had raised earlier, this is a risk which is 
fully within your bank’s domain. This is reputation risk. 
You all appreciate the value of a good reputation in doing business. A good reputation takes years to 
build. It can also be damaged within a short period of time through incidents that undermine consumer 
confidence and that are not managed properly. 
You have read the newspaper articles in recent months concerning public unhappiness and questions 
about  the  transparency  and  fairness  of  practices  concerning  multiple  home  loan  board  rates  and 
promotional fixed deposit rates. You might have asked yourself why these issues should concern you 
as they may not pose any significant impact on the financial standings of your banks. 
While of limited short term bottom-line impact, these issues can affect the longer term reputation of 
and consumer confidence in your banks. The internet has empowered consumers with unprecedented 
reach. A disgruntled customer can post his or her unhappiness on a forum or blog and quickly reach a 
wide  audience.  It  has  become  more  important  for  banks  to  incorporate  good  and  fair  consumer 
outcomes  as  integral  parts  of  the  way  they  do  business.  Banks  should  pay  attention  to  consumer 
feedback for early warnings of potentially larger issues and proactively take steps to address emerging 
customer concerns early. 
The  ABS  Code  of  Consumer  Banking  Practice  is  premised  on  four  key  principles  –  fairness, 
transparency,  accountability  and  reliability.  These  principles  are  a  good  foundation  for  building  a 
trusting  and  open  relationship  between  customers  and  their  banks.  As  members  of  ABS,  we 
encourage  you  to  uphold  and  observe  these  principles.  You  are  best  placed  to  raise  standards 
through market discipline, industry codes and guidelines. 
Together, ABS and banks can do more in monitoring consumer feedback on industry practices and 
taking steps to manage consumers' concerns at an earlier stage before they become broader public 
issues.  For  example,  ABS  could  initiate  measures  to  identify  emerging  issues,  conduct  research  to 
better  understand  consumers'  concerns  and  work  with  member  banks  to  address  them.  Individual 
banks  could  also  do  more  by  reviewing  their  customers’  feedback,  sharing  their  observations  on 
concerns regarding industry practices and working with ABS to manage these issues. 
MAS will continue to share with the industry our observations from feedback received from members 
of the public. We will also continue to work with the industry to encourage best practices by banks, 
with  the  aim  of  achieving  good  consumer  outcomes.  This  more  collaborative  and  consultative 
approach, we believe, is more desirable than formal and often more prescriptive regulation. 
Conclusion 
The Singapore financial services sector looks set for another year of good growth. However, as we 
look forward to the opportunities before us, we must be aware of the risks that lie ahead. As benign as 
the  environment  may  seem,  banks  must  not  become  complacent.  Banks  should  be  prepared  for 
whatever surprises lie ahead. 
At the same time, banks must also safeguard their reputations. More can be done and we look forward 
to seeing ABS working with industry in bringing about good and fair consumer outcomes. 
On this note, let me wish everyone a good year ahead and a pleasant evening. Thank you. 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 3
