Frederic S Mishkin: Credit card disclosures  
Testimony of Mr Frederic S Mishkin, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Financial  Institutions  and  Consumer  Credit,  Committee  on 
Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 7 June 2007. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 Madam  Chair  Maloney,  Ranking  Member  Gillmor,  members  of  the  Subcommittee,  I  appreciate  the 
opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve Board's May 23, 2007, proposal to revise the credit card 
disclosures  required  by  current  Truth  in  Lending  Act  (TILA)  regulations.  The  Board's  proposed 
revisions to Regulation Z, which implements TILA, also apply to other revolving credit accounts not 
secured by a residence. However, I will focus my remarks on credit cards, the subject of this hearing 
and by far the most common form of open-end accounts that are not home-secured.  
Many  more  households  have  obtained  credit  cards  since  the  Board  last  reviewed  TILA  regulations 
comprehensively  in  1981.  In  the  early  1980s,  less  than  half  of  American  families  had  at  least  one 
general purpose credit card (43 percent in 1983), and now close to three quarters have at least one 
(71 percent in 2004). The increase was sharpest among lower-income families. From 1983 to 2004, 
the share of families in the lowest income quintile that hold a credit card jumped from 11 percent to 37 
percent. Not only are more consumers holding credit cards, consumers are using their cards more. 
Total charges on credit cards increased by about four times from 1991 to 2004 alone.1  
Growth in credit card use is explained in part by consumers switching from other forms of credit such 
as installment loans. Growth has also been enhanced by changes in consumer preferences related to 
the convenience and security of using card forms of payment rather than cash. Another substantial 
contributor has been the development of credit scoring and risk-based pricing, which has increased 
use  of  credit  cards  by  consumers  who  traditionally  lacked  access  because  of  poor  or  limited  credit 
histories. 
As credit cards have become more commonplace, they also have become more complicated. Even a 
relatively simple credit card account is more complex than the fixed-payment installment loan it may 
have replaced. Moreover, most credit cards can no longer be described as relatively simple. Once, a 
card  may  have  allowed  the  user  to  make  purchases  or  obtain  cash  advances  and  applied  a  single 
annual percentage rate, or APR, to each feature. Fees were limited to a fee for cash advances, an 
annual fee on the account, and perhaps a fee if the consumer paid late. Today, a card may also offer 
balance transfers and treat different classes of purchases and cash advances as different features, 
each with its own APR. These APRs adjust much more frequently to respond to changes in the market 
or to changes in a borrower's credit risk profile. The typical card no longer has an annual fee, but it has 
many  other  fees  tied  to  a  variety  of  features,  or  to  requirements  of  the  credit  agreement,  or  to  a 
growing number of optional services. 
All  of  these  developments  have  joined  to  produce  the  seeming  paradox  that  credit  cards  are  both 
widely  used  and  widely  criticized.  The  Board  is  keenly  aware  of  concerns  over  the  fairness  and 
transparency  of  card  marketing  and  account  terms.  There  is,  for  example,  a  concern  that  issuers 
advertise low introductory rates while downplaying that these rates can increase sharply. Observers 
worry that the varied reasons that rates can increase, sometimes by a factor of two or three, are not 
made clear when the consumer applies for the card, starts to use it, or builds up a substantial balance. 
Further,  there  are  concerns  that  issuers'  methods  of  calculating  interest,  such  as  the  ways  they 
choose to allocate customers' payments to different balances, are confusing or not clearly disclosed. 
More broadly, the presence in the market of terms seemingly unfavorable to consumers appears to 
some to indicate that the market is not fully competitive. 
                                                      
1   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2006), Report to the Congress on Practices of the Consumer Credit 
Industry  in  Soliciting  and  Extending  Credit  and  their  Effects  on  Consumer  Debt  and  Insolvency  (Washington:  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System), tables 3 and 6. 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 1
The Board’s goals and process 
The goals of our proposed revisions to credit card disclosures are to aid consumer decisionmaking 
and improve competition. More effective disclosures make information about terms and pricing easier 
for consumers to obtain and understand. When that happens, individual consumers are less likely to 
fall into "traps for the unwary" and are more able to choose products that offer the best combination of 
features and pricing to meet their personal financial needs. Better dissemination of information about 
credit  card  terms  and  pricing  also  enhances  competition  among  credit  card  issuers,  which,  in  turn, 
helps generate products that consumers want. 
To achieve these goals, the Board's proposal seeks to ensure that consumers receive key information 
about the costs of credit card transactions in ways they can understand, in formats they can use, and 
at  times  when  it  is  most  helpful.  To  help  us  craft  a  proposal  to  meet  these  specific  objectives,  we 
considered  the  traditional  sources:  public  input  we  received  in  over  250  comment  letters,  available 
sources of data and information, and our own long experience implementing TILA. We also considered 
what  consumers,  themselves,  had  to  say.  As  part  of  extensive  consumer  testing,  we  interviewed 
consumers individually about their use and understanding of different disclosures. Consumers told us 
what information they find useful when making credit decisions and what information they ignore. We 
learned which words and formats for presenting information promote understanding and which do not. 
These lessons are reflected in a myriad of preliminary judgments we have made about appropriate 
disclosure content, format, and timing. 
The judgments required were not always clear-cut. Frankly, it is sometimes difficult to determine which 
transaction terms are most important because consumers use credit cards in many different ways. It is 
also difficult to determine how much information about those terms is enough; what information should 
be highlighted, and what should be disclosed less prominently; what information should be disclosed 
early on in the transaction, and what can be reserved for later. The Board also must balance a rule's 
specificity, which makes disclosures more consistent and reduces the risk of non-compliance, with its 
flexibility, which reduces operational burdens and ensures that disclosures can be adapted to changes 
in credit products and practices. In addition, the Board tried to ensure that creditor compliance and 
operational  burdens  are  justified  by  the  expected  benefits  to  consumers  and  competition,  and  to 
reduce existing burdens if they are not warranted. 
Developing effective credit card disclosures is particularly challenging because of the complicated and 
dynamic nature of the product. First, explaining the effective cost of credit before the consumer uses 
the card is difficult because key elements affecting the cost, such as whether the consumer will pay off 
balances  regularly  or  carry  balances  that  incur  finance  charges,  are  unknown.  So  TILA  requires 
disclosures that provide consumers several terms that, together, determine the effective cost of credit: 
the periodic rate and nominal APR, other charges such as fixed and minimum fees, the grace period, 
and the balance calculation method. Clearly and simply explaining what these terms mean and how 
collectively  they  determine  the  cost  of  credit  is  difficult.  Second,  effectively  disclosing  credit  card 
pricing becomes more difficult as credit card pricing grows more complex with the spread of risk-based 
pricing and penalty pricing and the "unbundling" of the price of a credit card into many different types 
of rates and fees. Clearly explaining costs contingent on future events that might seem remote when 
disclosures are made and promoting awareness of the total cost – not just component costs – pose 
additional challenges. Third, credit card pricing and features will continue to change, which means that 
we must try to craft disclosure requirements that work today and as products change. 
The Board’s proposal 
Taking  all  of  this  into  account,  the  Board  has  developed  a  comprehensive  proposal  to  revise 
Regulation Z that includes the following specific elements: 
• 
Advertisements of introductory rates would more clearly disclose the eventual higher rates 
and how soon they would be imposed;  
Advertisements  of  "fixed"  rates  would  be  restricted  to  rates  that  are  truly  not  subject  to 
change, either for a clearly disclosed period or for the life of the plan;  
The "Schumer box" required with credit card solicitations and applications would be updated 
to more effectively present information about rates and fees. As can be seen in the attached 
model form, the most critical rate and fee information would be presented in the box; rates 
and fees would be separated into two sections; and graphic techniques such as minimum 
BIS Review 62/2007
  2 
        font size, judicious bolding, and vertical alignment of key numbers would make it easier to 
read and use;  
Summary tables similar to the Schumer box would accompany the lengthy, complex credit 
agreements that consumers receive both when they first open an account and would also be 
provided,  later,  when  account  terms  are  amended.  A  model  of  this  new  disclosure  is 
attached;  
The penalty rate and penalty fees would be highlighted in the Schumer box and the account-
opening summary table; and a reminder of late payment penalties would appear on every 
periodic statement;  
A consumer would be sent notice forty-five days before a penalty rate was imposed or the 
rate was increased for other reasons;  
The  cumulative  cost  of  fees  would  be  highlighted  every  month,  as  can  be  seen  in  the 
attached model of a periodic statement. Fees charged in the last cycle would be grouped 
together on the statement in a prominent location and totaled for the cycle and year-to-date;  
The periodic statement's "effective APR," another way of disclosing the total cost of credit, is 
the subject of two alternative proposals. Under one, the effective APR could be revised to 
make it simpler for creditors to compute and potentially easier for consumers to understand. 
Under  the  other,  if  continued  consumer  testing,  the  public  comments  and  the  Board's 
analysis indicate that the effective APR does not have a meaningful benefit, then it could be 
eliminated, as the statute authorizes;  
Consumers would be warned on the periodic statement about the higher cost of making only 
minimum payments, and creditors would be provided incentives to give consumers a more 
precise estimate of the time to repay the balance and to place that estimate on the periodic 
statement rather than make it available by telephone; and  
Creditors would receive clearer guidance as to what charges must be disclosed, when, and 
how,  along  with  increased  flexibility  to  disclose  charges  at  times  and  by  methods  more 
convenient to the creditor and consumer alike.  
We are committed to providing the public a meaningful opportunity to evaluate and comment on these 
and other elements of the proposal, most of which are detailed in Appendix I. The Board has posted to 
its web site a lengthy report of its consumer testing, which forms the basis for major elements of the 
proposal,  and  has  explained  the  reasons  for  the  proposal  in  some  detail  in  over  300  pages  of 
"supplementary information." The public has four months to submit comment letters, which the Board 
expects will contain many useful responses and suggestions. 
I want to say more about two elements of the proposal that we expect will elicit vigorous comment. 
The first is the proposed new notification requirement when rates are raised. With some exceptions, 
the current regulation requires that notice be mailed fifteen days before a rate increase takes effect. 
The Board is concerned that this notice can leave consumers too little time to react and possibly to 
shop for alternative sources of credit or pay off the existing credit card balance under existing terms. 
Further, one of the current exceptions to the fifteen-day notice requirement is for rate increases that 
are penalties (for example, for exceeding the credit limit). The Board believes that consumers will not 
necessarily  anticipate  penalty-based  rate  increases  when  the  penalty  was  disclosed  in  credit 
agreements they received months, or even years, earlier. Thus, the Board has proposed to lengthen 
the  notice  period  for  a  rate  increase  to  forty-five  days  and  require  advance  notification  of  penalty-
based rate increases as well. In practice, consumers would have the benefit of more than a month to 
pursue their options, and creditors would forego collecting some interest revenue. The Board wants to 
receive comments addressing whether the costs are justified by the benefits. 
The  two  alternative  proposals  concerning  the  effective  APR  on  the  periodic  statement  also  are 
expected to elicit vigorous comment. The effective APR reflects the cost of interest and certain other 
finance  charges  imposed  during  the  statement  period.  As  an  example,  a  cash  advance  carries  an 
effective  APR  that  reflects  both  interest  assessed  on  the  balance  in  the  billing  period  and  any  fee 
charged by the creditor for the cash advance. The effective APR can be quite high, often much higher 
than the nominal APR, in part because it amortizes the cost of credit, including fees, over one month. 
Although consumer groups argue that the resulting "sticker shock" helps consumers make better credit 
shopping  and  account  management  decisions,  creditors  argue  that  it  confuses  consumers  and 
misleads them to think the cost of credit is higher than it is. 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 3
Consumer  testing  conducted  for  the  Board  suggests  that  many  consumers  have  a  limited 
understanding,  if  any,  of  the  effective  APR,  but  it  also  suggests  that  clearer  presentation  of  the 
disclosure can improve understanding. Thus, the proposal seeks to present the effective APR more 
clearly  to  consumers  with  more  straightforward  terminology  and  better  formatting  that  promotes 
understanding.  In  addition,  the  proposal  seeks  to  improve  consumer  understanding  and  reduce 
creditor  uncertainty  by  specifying  more  clearly  than  the  present  regulation  which  fees  are  to  be 
included in the effective APR. However, because of inherent limitations of the calculation – such as the 
need  to  assume  the  repayment  period  –  and  continued  concern  that  adequate  consumer 
understanding  may  be  difficult  to  achieve,  the  Board  is  also  seeking  comment  on  an  alternative 
proposal to eliminate the disclosure. When evaluating these two alternatives, and any others the public 
comments might suggest, the Board will consider the comments as well as the results of additional 
consumer testing. 
Conclusion 
Madam  Chair,  in  closing,  let  me  emphasize  the  Federal  Reserve's  commitment  to  ensuring  that 
consumers get key information about credit card terms in ways they can understand, in formats they 
can  use,  and  at  times  when  it  is  most  helpful.  We  appreciate  efforts  in  the  Congress  and  among 
consumer groups and the credit card industry to ensure that disclosure practices are in line with the 
needs of consumers. As my testimony this morning indicates, more complex pricing and continuous 
change  in  the  marketplace  make  the  task  of  writing  rules  for  effective  disclosure  challenging. 
Nevertheless, the combination of extensive review, substantial public input, and systematic consumer 
testing has enabled us to propose changes that we believe will further the original goals of the Truth in 
Lending Act to promote economic stability and competition through the informed use of credit. I look 
forward to our continuing efforts in this regard, and I am happy to address any questions you might 
have.  
 Appendix I 
Summary of proposed changes to the Federal Reserve Board’s Regulation Z 
The following summary is organized according to the major disclosures required under Regulation Z. 
For more information, see the Federal Register notice the Board approved on May 23, 2007. 
Advertisements 
Regulation  Z  requires  that  advertisements  that  contain  certain  information  about  the  cost  of  a  loan 
disclose additional information to give the consumer a fuller picture of the cost. The regulation also 
requires that terms advertised actually be available. 
Advertising discounted rates. Under a proposal that would implement a Bankruptcy Act requirement, 
creditors  that  advertise  a  discounted  initial  annual  percentage  rate  (APR)  in  connection  with  an 
application or solicitation would have to place the term "introductory" or "intro" near each mention of 
that  rate.  Close  to  the  first  mention,  creditors  would  disclose  prominently  the  introductory  rate's 
duration  and  the  higher  rate  that  would  apply  afterwards.  Creditors  would  also  disclose,  in  the 
"Schumer box," the conditions under which consumers could lose the discount prematurely (e.g., if the 
consumer pays late). 
Advertising  "fixed"  rates.  Consumer  testing  indicated  that  many  consumers  believe  that  a  rate 
advertised as "fixed" will not change and do not understand that "fixed" may only mean that the rate 
does not vary based on changes in an index or formula. Under the proposal, an advertisement may 
refer  to  a  rate  as  "fixed"  only  if  the  advertisement  specifies  a  period  during  which  the  rate  cannot 
increase for any reason (and the agreement does not give the creditor the right to increase it during 
that period), or if the rate will not increase while the plan is open. 
Advertising minimum payments. Consumers commonly are offered the option to finance the purchase 
of goods or services (such as appliances or furniture) by establishing an open-end credit plan, which 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2007
may  or  may  not  be  accessed  by  a  credit  card.  These  offers  often  advertise  monthly  minimum 
payments  associated  with  the  purchase.  Under  the  proposal,  advertisements  stating  a  minimum 
monthly payment for an open-end credit plan to finance the purchase of goods or services must state, 
as  prominently  as  the  minimum  payment,  the  time  it  would  take  to  pay  the  balance  and  the  total 
amount the consumer would pay if the consumer made only minimum payments. 
Credit card applications and solicitations; the “Schumer box” 
Under Regulation Z, credit card issuers are required to provide information about key costs and terms 
with their applications and solicitations in the form of a table often referred to as the "Schumer box." 
The table is intended to help consumers focus on the most important terms when comparing offers 
and deciding whether to apply for a credit card account. A model of the proposed new Schumer box is 
attached. 
Format. Consumer testing showed that the basic format of the Schumer box, the vertical presentation 
of information in a tabular format with headings on the left-hand side, is quite effective. Testing also 
suggested, however, that reorganizing the information, adding certain new information, and removing 
other  information  would  make  the  box  more  effective  in  disclosing  today's  more  complex  pricing  of 
credit  cards.  The  proposed  new  Schumer  box  reflects  these  lessons.  For  example,  consistent  with 
testing findings, it separates the box into two parts, "interest rates and interest charges" and "fees." In 
the first part, it presents each major type of APR, such as a cash advance APR and a penalty APR, in 
a  separate  row  instead  of  grouping  them  under  the  single  heading  "other  APRs."  The  fee  section 
divides fees into major categories, such as transaction fees and penalty fees; today these fees may 
appear below the box, where testing confirms consumers do not readily notice them. Cross-references 
between  the  interest  and  fees  sections  were  found  to  help  ensure  that  consumers  understand  that 
both  types  of  costs  can  apply  to  the  same  transaction.  The  proposed  new  Schumer  box  also 
incorporates graphic techniques such as a minimum font size of ten points, judicious bolding of text, 
and vertical alignment of key numbers. Other changes to the content and format of the Schumer box 
are discussed below. 
Rates based on creditworthiness. A creditor may disclose at solicitation a range of APRs or several 
discrete  APRs  because  it  will  determine  a  particular  applicant's  rate  based  on  an  evaluation  of 
creditworthiness.  The  proposal  would  require  the  creditor  to  disclose  in  simple  terms,  tested  with 
consumers, that the rate the applicant receives would be based on the applicant's creditworthiness. 
Adjustable  rates.  Currently,  if  an  application  or  solicitation  offers  a  variable  APR,  the  creditor  must 
disclose  inside  the  Schumer  box  the  index  or  formula  and  the  margin  used  to  determine  the  rate. 
Additional  details,  such  as  how  often  the  rate  may  change,  must  be  disclosed  outside  the  box. 
Consumer  testing  indicated  that  few  consumers  use  details  such  as  the  index  and  margin  when 
shopping for a card and, moreover, that consumers may be distracted or confused by such details. 
Under the proposal, information about variable APRs would be reduced to a single phrase indicating 
the APR varies "with the market," along with a reference to the type of index, such as "Prime." Details 
about the rate's determination would continue to be disclosed to consumers at account opening. 
Fees.  Participants  in  consumer  testing  often  did  not  notice  fees  if  they  were  disclosed  outside  the 
Schumer box, as is common today. The proposal requires card issuers to disclose inside the box the 
most common penalty fees, namely, fees for paying late, exceeding a credit limit, or making a payment 
that is returned. The fee disclosure must also refer the consumer to the penalty rate if, for example, 
paying  late  could  also  trigger  the  penalty  rate.  The  most  common  transaction  fees,  such  as  cash 
advance fees and balance transfer fees, also would be disclosed inside the box.  
Penalty  pricing.  The  proposal  would  make  several  improvements  to  the  Schumer  box  to  increase 
consumers' understanding of default, or penalty, pricing. Currently, credit card issuers must disclose 
inside  the  box  the  APR  that  will  apply  in  the  event  of  the  consumer's  default.  However,  they  must 
disclose the actions that may trigger the penalty APR outside the box, where, according to consumer 
testing, this information often goes unnoticed. Under the proposal, therefore, card issuers would be 
required to include inside the box the specific triggers of a penalty APR – such as paying late on the 
account. Creditors would also disclose the rate that will apply, the balances to which the penalty rate 
will apply, and the circumstances under which the penalty rate will expire or, if true, the fact that the 
penalty rate could apply indefinitely. The proposal would require card issuers to use the term "penalty 
APR"  because  testing  demonstrated  that  some  consumers  misinterpret  the  term  "default  rate." 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 5
Creditors  can  use  the  term  "default"  to  refer  to  one  late  payment,  but  consumers  sometimes 
understand "default" to imply a more serious breach, or to mean something else entirely. 
Payment allocation/loss of grace period. The proposal would add a new disclosure to the Schumer box 
about the effect on credit costs of creditors' payment allocation methods. It is common for a creditor to 
allocate payments first to low-rate balances such as promotional balance transfers. Consumers who 
make  purchases  at  a  higher  rate  will  not  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  any  "grace  period"  on  the 
higher-rate  purchases  until  they  pay  off  the  entire  lower-rate  balance  transfer,  which  they  may  not 
have intended to do until the promotional rate expired. Consumer testing indicated that consumers are 
often confused about this aspect of balance transfer offers; testing also indicated that a disclosure that 
is  short  and  simple  while  accurate  and  complete  is  challenging  to  achieve.  The  proposal  seeks  to 
balance these objectives in a new disclosure that alerts consumers that they will pay interest on their 
purchases until they pay the transferred balance in full. 
Subprime accounts. Subprime credit cards, cards offered to consumers with low credit scores or with 
credit  problems,  sometimes  have  substantial  fees  associated  with  opening  the  account.  Typically, 
these fees are billed to consumers on the first periodic statement, and can substantially reduce the 
amount of credit available to the consumer. For example, the initial fees on an account with a credit 
limit of $250 may reduce the available credit to less than $100. Consumers have complained that they 
were not aware that so little credit would be available to them. To address this concern, the proposal 
would  require  a  card  issuer  offering  a  low  credit  limit  and  high  initial  fees  or  security  deposits  (25 
percent or more of the minimum credit limit) to include in the Schumer box the amount of available 
credit  the  consumer  would  have  after  paying  the  fees  or  security  deposit,  assuming  the  consumer 
received the minimum credit limit. 
Account-opening disclosures 
Regulation Z requires creditors to disclose rates, charges, and related terms such as grace period and 
balance  calculation  method  before  the  first  transaction  on  the  account.  Consumers'  rights  and 
responsibilities in the case of unauthorized use or billing disputes must also be explained. Currently, 
Regulation Z imposes few format requirements on these disclosures and creditors typically integrate 
them with the cardholder agreement, which is usually dense and long. 
Account-opening summary table. The proposal requires creditors to include a table summarizing the 
most  important  terms  in  an  easy-to-follow  format,  substantially  similar  to  the  Schumer  box  the 
consumer typically would have seen with the application. An example of this new table is attached. 
Fees. Under the  current  rules,  a creditor  must  disclose  any  fee  that  is  a  "finance charge"  or  "other 
charge" in the written account-opening disclosures and generally has no obligation to disclose it again, 
unless the charge is increased. New fees added to the plan after account opening must be disclosed 
before they take effect and later if they increase. (Of course, after a fee is charged, it must appear on 
the  periodic  statement;  disclosure  at  that  stage  is  discussed  later.)  Creditors  have  sometimes  had 
difficulty  determining  whether  a  particular  fee  is  properly  classified  as  a  "finance  charge"  or  "other 
charge,"  or  as  neither  of  these.  Although  the  regulation  and  commentary  give  specific  guidance, 
sometimes new services develop before the guidance can be updated. When that happens, creditors 
can  find  it  difficult  to  determine  if  the  fee  for  the  service  must  be  disclosed  in  writing  at  account 
opening (or before the fee takes effect, if a service is added later). This uncertainty can pose legal 
risks  for  creditors  that  act  in  good  faith  to  comply  with  the  law,  and  it  can  lead  to  inconsistent 
disclosure to consumers. 
Moreover, it is not clear that consumers benefit from requiring creditors to disclose every potential fee 
in writing and at account opening. It may be months, and possibly years, until the consumer requests 
the  service  for  which  the  fee  is  imposed.  Furthermore,  the  consumer  may  request  the  service  by 
telephone for speed and convenience, and not expect to have to wait for a written disclosure before 
the transaction can be completed. 
The proposal seeks to address these potential limitations of the present rule while taking into account 
the  Truth  in  Lending  Act's  (TILA)  requirement  to  disclose  plan-related  charges  before  they  are 
6 
 BIS Review 62/2007
imposed. Accordingly, under the proposal, the rules would be revised to2 specify precisely the charges 
that creditors must disclose in writing at account opening (interest, minimum charges, transaction fees, 
annual fees, and penalty fees such as for paying late), which would be listed in the summary table 
referred to above; and (2) permit creditors to disclose other charges, typically fees for optional services 
that may be used infrequently, orally or in writing before the consumer agrees to or becomes obligated 
to pay the charge. To prevent abuse of this flexibility, the proposal requires that an oral disclosure be 
clear and conspicuous, and that it be given when the consumer would likely notice it. 
Periodic statements 
Once an account has been opened, creditors are required to provide periodic statements reflecting the 
account activity for each billing cycle, typically monthly. The statement must identify each transaction 
on  the  account,  such  as  a  purchase  or  cash  advance.  It  must  also  identify  each  "finance  charge" 
(using that term) and other charges imposed as part of the plan during the cycle. And it must identify 
the  periodic  rate(s)  and  corresponding annual  percentage  rate(s),  also known as  the  nominal  APR, 
that applied during the last cycle. If finance charges were imposed in the form of fees (e.g., a cash 
advance fee), as well as (or instead of) monthly interest, then the statement must disclose an effective 
APR reflecting the total finance charge, with limited exceptions. Under amendments to TILA made by 
the  Bankruptcy  Act  that  are  implemented  in  this  proposal,  creditors  must  also  disclose  information 
about  the  cost  of  paying  late  or  making  only  the  minimum  payment  due.  A  model  of  the  periodic 
statement that reflects the revisions discussed below is attached. 
Transactions.  As  the  regulation  currently  permits,  transactions  are  often  presented  in  chronological 
order  and  not  by  transaction  type.  Participants  in  consumer  testing  found  it  easier  to  read  and  use 
statements  where  similar  types  of  transactions  are  grouped  together.  Accordingly,  the  proposal 
requires creditors to group similar transactions together by type, such as purchases, cash advances, 
and balance transfers. 
Fee and interest charges. The proposal contains a number of revisions to the periodic statement to 
improve consumers' awareness and understanding of charges they have incurred in the form of fees 
or interest. Consumer testing indicated that consumers have difficulty understanding the term "finance 
charge." They are more likely to conceive of their charges as "interest," the charge that results from 
applying a rate to a balance, and "fees," such as a cash advance fee or a late payment fee. Consumer 
testing  also  indicated  that  many  consumers  more  easily  compute  the  number  and  amount  of  fees 
when the fees are itemized and grouped together. Participants noticed fees and interest charges more 
readily  when  they  were  located  near  the  transactions.  Also,  many  participants  more  quickly  and 
accurately determined the total charges for the billing cycle when a total fee amount for the cycle was 
disclosed, as well as the total interest. 
These findings led the Board to propose four changes to fee disclosures on the periodic statement. 
First, creditors would no longer have to label charges as "finance charges;" they would instead classify 
charges as "fees" or "interest." Second, creditors would be required to group all charges together in a 
discrete place on the statement under the headings "fees" and "interest charges." Third, these charges 
would  appear  near  the  transaction  items.  Fourth,  creditors  would  disclose  the  total  fees  and  total 
interest imposed for the cycle, and the totals for the year to-date. 
The effective APR. The effective APR disclosed on periodic statements reflects the cost of interest and 
certain other finance charges imposed during the statement period. For example, for a cash advance, 
the effective APR reflects both interest assessed on the balance in the statement period and any fee 
assessed for the advance. The effective APR can be quite high, often much higher than the nominal 
APR,  in  part  because  it  amortizes  the  cost  of  credit,  including  fees,  over  one  month.  Although 
consumer  groups  argue  that  the  resulting  "sticker  shock"  helps  consumers  make  better  credit 
shopping  and  account  management  decisions,  creditors  argue  that  it  confuses  consumers  and 
misleads them to think the cost of credit is higher than it is. 
                                                      
2   Card issuers must establish and maintain their own toll-free telephone numbers to provide the repayment estimates, except 
that depository institutions having assets of $250 million or less may rely for two years on a number the Board is required to 
establish and maintain for them, and non-depository creditors may rely on a number the FTC is required to establish and 
maintain for them. 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 7
Consumer testing suggests that many consumers have a limited understanding, if any, of the effective 
APR, but it also suggests that clearer presentation of the disclosure can improve understanding. Thus, 
the proposal seeks to present the effective APR more clearly to consumers, giving it an intuitive label 
of "fee inclusive APR" and placing it next to other, related information such as the interest and fees it 
includes.  In  addition,  the  proposal  seeks  to  improve  consumer  understanding  and  reduce  creditor 
uncertainty by specifying more clearly than the present regulation which fees are to be included in the 
effective APR. However, because of inherent limitations of the disclosure (such as the need to assume 
the repayment period) and continued concern that an adequate level of consumer understanding may 
be difficult to achieve, the Board is also seeking comment on an alternative proposal to eliminate the 
disclosure.  When  evaluating  these  alternatives  and  any  others  the  public  comments  suggest,  the 
Board  will  consider  the public comments  as  well  as additional consumer  testing  the  Board plans  to 
conduct. 
Late payments. The Bankruptcy Act requires creditors to disclose the payment due date (or if different, 
the date after which a late-payment fee may be imposed) along with the amount of the late-payment 
fee. The proposal implements this requirement and adds a requirement to disclose the penalty APR 
that could be triggered by a late payment. Creditors would be required to disclose the penalty fee and 
rate close to the due date. If the creditor uses an early cut-off time on the payment due date, the time 
would also have to be disclosed near the date. 
Minimum payments. The proposal implements a requirement of the Bankruptcy Act that card issuers 
warn  their  customers  on  the  periodic  statement  about  the  higher  cost  of  making  only  minimum 
payments, give a hypothetical example of the time to repay a balance with minimum payments, and 
refer  the  customer  to  a  toll-free  telephone  number  for  an  estimate  of  the  time  to  repay  the  current 
balance  if  paying  only  the  minimum.1  In  testing  conducted  by  the  Board  and  in  separate  testing 
conducted by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), participants who typically carry credit 
card balances found an estimated repayment period based on terms that apply to their own account 
more useful than a hypothetical example. Accordingly, the proposal gives card issuers incentives to 
provide  a  more  precise  estimate  of  the  time  to  repay  and  to  place  this  estimate  on  the  periodic 
statement. The incentives include exemptions from the requirements to maintain a toll-free telephone 
number and disclose the warning and hypothetical example. 
Changes in consumer’s interest rate and other account terms 
Regulation Z requires creditors to provide advance written notice of some changes to the terms of an 
open-end plan. When notices are required, they must be sent fifteen days before the effective date of 
the  change.  Creditors  need  not  notify  consumers  before  they  increase  a  rate  for  default  or 
delinquency,  or  as  a  penalty  for  other  conduct  if  the  credit  agreement  specifically  provides  for  an 
increase. 
Timing. Allowing creditors to mail a notice fifteen days before increasing the cost of credit can leave 
consumers  too  little  time  to  receive  the  notice,  shop  for  alternative  credit,  and  possibly  pay  off  the 
existing credit card account. Accordingly, the Board is proposing to require sending a notice at least 
forty-five days before the effective date of the change, which would give consumers over a month to 
pursue their options. 
Penalty rates. Credit agreements sometimes define defaults that trigger rate increases quite broadly, 
and often provide that the increased rate will apply to all existing balances, including balances with low 
promotional rates. Months, or years, after receiving the credit agreement, a consumer may no longer 
remember that certain behaviors will trigger a rate increase and, therefore, may be surprised to learn, 
after the fact, that the rate has increased. Thus, the proposal would require a creditor to send a notice 
forty-five  days  before  increasing  the  consumer's  rate  for  default  or  delinquency  or  as  a  penalty  for 
other conduct, to give the consumer time to shop for alternative credit sources and possibly pay off the 
account. The proposal does not limit actions creditors may take to mitigate risk, such as lowering the 
credit limit or suspending credit privileges. 
Format.  Change-in-terms  disclosures,  like  account-opening  disclosures,  are  commonly  interspersed 
with  other  disclosures  and  written  in  small  print  and  dense  prose.  Consumer  testing  indicates  that 
many consumers set the documents containing these disclosures aside without reading them. Under 
the proposal, creditors must highlight critical changes in a summary table. Creditors that enclose their 
notices  with  periodic  statements  must  place  this  table  on  the  periodic  statement  above  the 
transactions list, where consumer testing suggests consumers are most likely to notice it. 
8 
 BIS Review 62/2007
Checks that access a credit card account 
Many credit card issuers provide accountholders with checks that can be used to obtain cash, pay the 
outstanding  balance  on  another  account,  or  purchase  goods  and  services  directly  from  merchants. 
The  solicitation  letter  accompanying  the  checks  may  emphasize  a  low  introductory  APR  for  these 
checks. The proposed revisions would require creditors to disclose other rates and fees that will apply 
if the checks are used, rather than simply suggest the consumer review the disclosures provided at 
account opening. To ensure the disclosures are conspicuous, creditors would be required to place the 
rates and fees in a table on the same page as the checks. 
Right to dispute billing errors 
The  Board  also  has  proposed  several  revisions  to  substantive  and  procedural  protections  TILA 
provides  consumers.  Four  proposed  revisions,  in  particular,  would  clarify  Regulation  Z  in  ways  that 
strengthen  consumers'  rights  to  dispute  billing  errors  on  credit  cards  and  other  forms  of  revolving 
credit. First, if a creditor determined that no error occurred, the proposal would make clear that the 
creditor may not impose finance charges or other charges until the grace period (if any) in the credit 
agreement has elapsed. Second, if a creditor credited a borrower's account for a disputed transaction, 
the proposal would make clear that the creditor may not reverse the credit after two billing cycles or 
ninety  days,  whichever  period  is  shorter;  this  clarification  is  meant  to  ensure  finality.  Third,  the 
proposal would make clear that the right to dispute billing errors covers check transactions that access 
open-end accounts. Fourth, the proposal would make clear that the right to dispute errors applies to 
purchases  of  goods  or  services  made  using  a  third-party  payment  intermediary,  such  as  a 
person-to-person Internet payment service. 
Attachments 
G-10 (C)  
Applications and solicitations sample (credit cards)  
G-17 (B)  
Account-opening sample 
G-18 (H)  
Periodic statement form  
BIS Review 62/2007 
  9
