Y V Reddy: Economic outlook – some thoughts on Asia and India 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 18th Annual Forum "The 
Outlook for Financial Markets, for their Governance, and for Finance" convened by Ambrosetti, The 
European House, Cernobbio, Italy, 30 March 2007. 
 Friends, 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  participating  in  the  18th  Annual  Forum.  The  topic  for  the 
discussion  is  very  broad,  but  there  are  several  eminent  speakers  here  who  would  be  focusing  on 
different aspects of this complex and very relevant issue. For my part, I would, in the first part, make a 
general reference to the Asian economies, specially the common challenges being faced by the policy-
makers in the Asian emerging market economies (AEMEs). The second part will be devoted to the 
Indian economy,  its  growth  performance,  strengths and  major  challenges.  The  third and  concluding 
part  will  be  very  brief,  highlighting  the  current  priorities  for  macroeconomic,  in  particular,  monetary 
management in India. 
Place of Asian economies in the global economy 
It is reasonable to hold that the economies of the Asian region are emerging as the new engines of 
growth in the global economy. Asia is a host to three of the ten largest economies (China, Japan and 
India)  and  accounting  for  more  than  35  percent  of  world  GDP.  Today  Asia's  share  in  world  GDP 
exceeds that of European Union and the US (IMF, 2006). Being the fastest growing economies of the 
world, over the past two years, China and India contributed 73 per cent to the Asian growth and 38 per 
cent to the world GDP growth (IMF, 2005). With the setting in of recovery in Japan, it is expected to be 
another engine of growth for the Asian as well as the global economy. Thus, four poles of growth – 
Japan, East Asia, China and India – forming a sort of quadrangle – have been emerging in Asia, and 
these could henceforth be the new sources for sustaining the global growth engine. It is interesting to 
note  that  among  the  top  four economies  in  terms  of  GDP  based  on  purchasing  power  parity,  three 
Asian economies of this quadrangle, viz., China, Japan and India are ranked second, third and fourth, 
respectively.  
It is also important to recognize the growing significance of the Asian economies in financial stability 
and  global  trade.  For  example,  there  has  been  a  continued  substantial  accumulation  of  foreign 
exchange reserves by several countries of Asia reflecting increasing trade and financial integration of 
the region with rest of the world. Today, Asia holds foreign exchange reserves of US$ 3 trillion, which 
is  62  per  cent  of  total  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the  world.  Further,  the  Asian  region  has 
increasingly  become  a  major  center  of  world  trade,  global  capital  flows  and  other  macroeconomic 
parameters. Today, the contribution of Asia to global trade has increased substantially to about 27 per 
cent. 
Dynamics of Asian economic integration 
There is increasing integration within Asia, as reflected in the pace of change in intra-regional trade 
flows. Intra-regional trade is growing as countries have positioned themselves at different stages of a 
regional supply chain. The rise of China and India is helping Asia to not only grow but to become more 
integrated.  Asian  countries  are  working  to  create  a  cohesive  Asian  community  that  allows  for  both 
complementary growth and positive competition. This phenomenon has been facilitated by an array of 
free trade agreements (FTAs) in Asia. Intra-Asian trade as a share of the region's total trade has risen 
to more than 50 per cent in 2004 from about 30 percent in 1980 (IMF, 2006). In less than 10 years, 
trade between China and the rest of Asia increased fourfold; trade between China and Japan/Korea 
tripled over the same period; intra-ASEAN trade doubled, and trade between ASEAN and India has 
tripled  (Mandelson,  2005).  In  recent  years,  there  is  an  impressive  ongoing  transformation  in  the 
composition  of  production  and  trade  within  Asia  as  the  comparative  advantage  of  many  Asian 
economies continues to change. In particular, economies with relatively high wage costs are shifting 
toward higher value-added products, including services. The shift of labor-intensive manufacturing out 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 1
of Hong Kong into mainland China and the associated boost to Hong Kong’s economy from the growth 
of trade in financial services is perhaps the most appropriate example of this on-going process.  
Financial  flows  within  the  region  have  also  become  more  significant.  Although  the  developing 
countries  of  Asia  still  rely  on  London  and  New  York  to  intermediate  foreign  savings  of  the  region, 
Japan  continues  to  remain  the  world’s  largest  exporter  of  capital.  Moreover,  Hong  Kong  and 
Singapore, with their well-capitalized banks, efficient clearing and settlement systems, and expanding 
range of financial products, have also emerged as major financial centers. Increasingly, these centers 
are intermediating savings within Asia, as well as channeling saving to Asia from other parts of the 
world. In particular, Hong Kong is the main conduit for investment in China and arranges a significant 
proportion of Asia’s syndicated borrowing. Singapore, for its part, has evolved into the main banking 
center for Southeast Asia. 
Asian emerging market economies – some generalisations in the current context 
The growing importance of the Asian economies in the global economy and the dynamics of the Asian 
economic integration are also reflected in the added significance of the Asian EMEs (AEMEs) as the 
sub-set of the EMEs in the global economy. While the AEMEs are not homogenous in their economic 
systems, structure and size, it may be useful to consider some generalisations in the current context 
recognizing  the  severe  limitations  of such  generalizations whenever  a country-context  becomes  the 
focus. Developments in the Japanese economy are very critical to the AEMEs and there is scope for 
considerable  applied  research  in  this  area,  recognising  the  signs  of  resurgence  in  the  Japan’s 
economy.  The  narration  that  follows  essentially  relates  to  the  AEMEs,  commencing  with  favourable 
factors.  
First, they currently enjoy strong global demand for their exports, favourable terms of trade and easy 
access to external financing.  
Second,  comfortable  foreign  currency  reserves  along  with  reduced  external  debt  as  percentage  of 
GDP serve as cushion against any sudden external shocks.  
Third, though public debt in some Asian economies still remains at elevated levels, most of the debt is 
of longer maturity, with higher proportions in local currency.  
Fourth,  the  banking  system  has  been  strengthened  through  restructuring  and  supervisory  systems 
have improved. Financial markets have evolved considerably in most of these economies.  
Fifth, the resilience to external shocks is reinforced by a combination of lower balance sheet exposure 
to exchange rate risks, lower refinancing risks in debt structures, strong financial systems and above 
all, an observed tendency for greater policy flexibility.  
Sixth,  most  of  the  economies  display  strong  growth-performance  and  reasonably  well-anchored 
inflation expectations.  
There  are,  however,  several  challenges  being  faced  by  the  fast-growing  AEMEs,  particularly  in 
sustaining the hard-won stability while maintaining growth momentum.  
First, while growth impulses are strong in Asia and easing of oil-prices should moderate inflationary 
pressures, there are concerns about inflationary pressures being reinforced by ample liquidity driven 
by excess capital flows and rapidly rising credit. Strong capital inflows into Asia pose a challenge to 
monetary management. While some appreciation of currencies of countries enjoying current account 
surplus is evident, the macro policy may need to be predominantly governed by the compulsions of 
domestic  supply  and  demand  considerations.  The  currency  appreciation  or  depreciation  could,  at 
times, be steep and sudden, resulting in possible disruption in the real sector and therefore there is a 
need for containing excess volatility in foreign exchange markets. Further, sterilisation costs may have 
to be often shared between the fisc, the banking sector and the central bank balance sheets. While, to 
meet the surge in capital inflows, liberal capital outflows are recommended, they do not, in fact, take 
place  at  the  time  when  they  are  liberalised.  Further  deepening  of  financial  markets  may  help  in 
absorption of large capital inflows in the medium term, but it may not give immediate succour at the 
current stage of financial sector development in many AEMEs, particularly when speed and magnitude 
of flows are very high.  
Second, significant improvements have taken place in developing local currency markets, especially 
bond markets. However, the operations of large players in financial markets in some Asian economies 
tend to respond more to their global needs than that of host country. Further, some multinational non-
2 
 BIS Review 33/2007
financial  corporates  operating  in  these  economies  may  have  large  treasury  operations,  and  their 
operations, could often make the assessment of risks in financial markets somewhat difficult. While 
supervisory skills in many AEMEs have been strengthened, new instruments, especially derivatives, 
new players such as hedge funds, and large OTC operations tend to diffuse and relocate risks making 
their assessment for policy purposes sometime difficult.  
Third, the banking sector has been strengthened and non-banking intermediation expanded providing 
both  stability  and  efficiency  to  the  financial  sector  in  many  AEMEs.  Yet,  sometimes  aligning  the 
operations  of  large  financial  conglomerates  and  foreign  institutions  with  local  public  policy  priorities 
remains a challenge for domestic financial regulators in many AEMEs. Further, competition in financial 
sector is somewhat limited in many Asian economies. Large players in developed economies compete 
with each other intensely, while it is possible that a few of them dominate in each of Asian financial 
markets.  A  few  of  the  financial  intermediaries  could  thus  wield  dominant  position  in  the  financial 
markets of these countries, increasing the concentration risk. 
Performance of the Indian economy 
There is widespread and intense interest in the Indian economy, but merely by way of recollecting, it is 
useful to mention some features of the economic performance.  
First, the average growth rate of the Indian economy over a period of 25 years since 1980-81 (financial 
year beginning April) has been about 6.0 per cent, with the growth rate averaging 9.1 per cent during 
the last two years.  
Second, the economy has shown considerable resilience during the recent years, as evidenced by the 
avoidance of adverse contagion impact of several shocks in the EMEs and the ability to cope with oil 
price  increases.  The  strengthening  of  economic  activity  in  the  recent  years  has  been  supported  by 
persistent increase in domestic investment rate from 22.9 per cent of GDP in 2001-02 to 33.8 per cent 
in 2005-06 coupled with more efficient use of capital. Domestic saving rate has also improved from 
23.5 per cent to 32.4 per cent during the same period. While the services sector continues to be the 
driver of growth with a share of around 60 per cent in the overall GDP and contributing almost three-
fourth to overall growth, a noteworthy development during the recent years has been the continued 
recovery  in  industrial  sector,  particularly  the  manufacturing  sector,  supported  by  domestic  as  well 
export demand.  
Third, the inflation rates since the second half of the 1990s have been by and large benign despite 
sustained external capital flows and continued surge in fuel prices. In the recent period, the headline 
inflation as measured by the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) has been higher crossing 6.0 per cent level 
in January-March 2007 – a matter of concern at this juncture.  
Fourth, the common intention of the Government and the Reserve Bank of India is to maintain annual 
inflation below 5 per cent in the medium term. A welcome development in this regard is that the fiscal 
position of the Government, both central and States, is undergoing consolidation in terms of targeted 
reduction  in  fiscal  deficit  indicators.  The  improvement  in  the  fiscal  position  of  several  States  is 
particularly impressive.  
Fifth, the financial sector has acquired greater strength, efficiency and stability by the combined effect 
of  competition,  regulatory  measures,  policy  environment  and  motivation  among  the  market  players 
including banks. Keeping in view the diverse investor needs in tune with the Reserve Bank’s liquidity 
management,  thereby  facilitating  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  money  market  has  been 
progressively developed. The Government securities market is quite deep, liquid and vibrant and well 
developed in terms of instruments/processes/participants. The exchange rate of the rupee has been 
flexible,  particularly,  in  the  last  few  years  and  the  turnover  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  has 
increased  considerably.  The  stock  market  has  been  opened  to  foreign  institutional  investors  and  is 
comparable  with  major  international  equity  markets  in  terms  of  market  capitalization,  turnover  and 
systems and processes. The corporate debt market in India is relatively under-developed but has a 
large potential to raise resources particularly for infrastructure projects, housing and for corporate and 
municipal needs. 
Sixth, India’s external sector has become resilient with the current account deficit being maintained at 
very modest levels after a couple of years’ marginal surplus. Exports have been growing at an average 
rate  of  around  25  per  cent  during  the  last  three  years.  Sustained  growth  in  export  of  services  and 
remittances  continued  to  provide  buoyancy  to  the  surplus  in  the  invisible  account  which  enabled 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 3
financing a large part of trade deficit. There was a significant strengthening in the capital account with 
the  foreign  exchange  reserves  close  to  US  $  200  billion  and  the  reserves  currently  exceed  the 
country’s  external  debt  of  about  US  $  140  billion  as  at  end  September  2006,  thereby  reflecting 
improved solvency of the economy. However, the imparting of human skills needed to cope with global 
competition is perhaps the most daunting task to ensure employment and thus, social tranquility.  
Challenges for the Indian economy 
There are, undoubtedly, many challenges for the Indian economy, but it is useful to focus on a few of 
these:  the  "usual  suspects",  I  may  say,  in  the  eyes  of  analysts  that  track  the  developments  in  the 
Indian economy.  
First, the poor state of the physical infrastructure, both in terms of quantity and quality is considered to 
be most critical hindrance for India’s progress by many. The most important issue here is regulatory 
framework  and  overall  investment  climate,  which  are  being  addressed  by  the  Government. 
Technological developments and rapid enhancement of domestic construction capabilities should aid 
the  process  of  speedy  and  efficient  implementation.  Given  the  strengths  of  the  domestic  financial 
sector and the enhanced interest of foreign investors, funding should not pose any serious problem. 
One  other  concern  has  been  the  cost  recovery  in  infrastructure,  which  is  expected  to  improve  with 
more  public-private  partnerships.  Again,  with rapid growth  in  manufacturing  and services, a  sudden 
and  intense pressure  has  developed  in  regard  to availability  and  quality  of  urban  infrastructure  and 
urban services.  
Second,  fiscal  consolidation  still  remains  a  matter  of  concern,  especially  in  the  eyes  of  the  rating 
agencies. The recent budget of the central government brings the consolidation on track. Our studies 
on State finances in Reserve Bank of India give grounds for optimism in regard to their fiscal health. 
We  recognize  two  important  areas  that,  if  addressed  would  result  in  fiscal  empowerment.  One  is 
elimination of subsidies, which are not directly targeted to the poor or inappropriate, and elimination of 
most of the tax exemptions, which are patently distortionary. While in any polity, fiscal consolidation is 
hard, it is particularly so in our setting of democratic compulsions, but there are grounds for optimism. 
Third, and perhaps the most challenging issue relates to development of agriculture. While over 60 per 
cent of the workforce is dependent on agriculture, the GDP growth generated from agriculture is only 
marginally above the rate of growth of the population, which is not adequate to ensure rapid poverty 
reduction. The results of recent surveys on poverty in India, however, provide grounds for optimism in 
regard to accelerated reduction in absolute poverty since the reform period. To facilitate a more rapid 
growth in agriculture, legislative, institutional and attitudinal changes to supplement enhanced public 
and  private  investment  are  needed.  There  is  an  increasing  recognition  of  this  issue  among  policy 
makers. 
Fourth,  delivery  of  essential  public  services  such  as  education  and  health  to  large  parts  of  our 
population is a major institutional challenge. It is strongly felt that education will empower the poor to 
participate  in  the  growth  process  and  the  large  gaps  in  availability  of  health  in  terms  of  minimum 
access  to  the  poor  needs  to  be  filled.  Similarly,  the  judicial  processes  need  to  be  aligned  with  the 
compulsions  of  a  fast-growing  globalising  economy,  especially  in  terms  of  timeliness.  All  these  are 
being intensely debated, and one should hope for significant improvements. 
Strengths of the Indian economy 
There are certain “not easily quantifiable strengths”, which our economy possesses and I would like to 
highlight them here. 
First, a vast pool of science and technology graduates and the millions who are familiar with English 
language are sources of strength for the emerging India so far. India is a country of great diversities 
but with incredibly harmonious co-existence of various religions, languages and a unified culture. The 
familiarity  with  multiple  languages  in  India  prepares  the  people  to  adapt  better  to  multi-lingual 
environment, making it easier for them to fit into international systems very smoothly.  
Second, India also enjoys the distinction of being the largest democracy of the world. The existence of 
a free press provides some insurance against excesses and makes Governments at all levels more 
alert and accountable.  
4 
 BIS Review 33/2007
Third, the political climate is characterised by what may be termed as political system stability, despite 
the coalition cabinets and periodic elections both at the Centre and in several States.  
Fourth,  India  will  remain  one  of  the  youngest  countries  in  the  world  in  the  next  few  decades.  This 
“demographic  dividend”  is  seen  as  an  inevitable  advantage  provided  prerequisites  such  as  skill-
upgradation  and  sound  governance  to  realize  it  are  put  in  place.  More  important,  the  demographic 
transition is likely to be stretched over a longer period since States in India are at different stages of 
such transition from Kerala to Uttar Pradesh.  
Fifth advantage is India’s business culture. In terms of business environment, the impressive growth 
coupled with market orientation of the economy has been a bottoms-up exercise, with a very broad-
based  growing  entrepreneurial  class.  These  tendencies  are  perhaps  reflective  of  a  penchant  for 
innovation among growing entrepreneurial class in India, imbued with professionalism and seeking to 
be globally competitive. 
Sixth, the workers enjoy considerable freedom of movement, expression and rights, especially through 
unionisation which, while making some changes difficult, ensures a vibrancy and timely improvisation 
to deal with competition. The migration of labour in India is sometimes seasonal and also related to a 
particular nature of work such as large construction activity. 
Current priorities for India 
In  the  current  context,  the  real  challenge  for  India  is  to  manage  several  transitions  occurring 
simultaneously.  
First, the structural shift in the domestic economy to higher growth.  
Second, the lagged supply response. 
Third,  supply  shock  of  oil  followed  by  another  of  primary  commodities,  influencing  inflation 
expectations. 
Fourth, manage the consequences of the global excess liquidity, global imbalances, and sudden re-
pricing of risks in international financial markets. 
Fifth, the potential for excess volatility in the cross-border capital flows  
These challenges are managed involving several trade-offs. While pre-commitment to a set of reforms 
is  useful,  some  flexibility  in  policies  may  be  needed  to  respond  to  ongoing  developments.  Such  a 
flexibility to review, rationalise and constantly rebalance the pace and sequencing of various measures 
impacting  financial  markets  is  considered  desirable  and  the  financial  markets  are  generally  kept 
informed of these developments. In fact, there are grounds for the financial markets to be comfortable 
with such flexibilities in policy measures that add to the overall financial stability. 
To conclude, there are reasons to believe that these transitions in India will be managed smoothly by 
public policy, in general, and monetary policy, in particular. Of special interest to this gathering may be 
the  fact  that  India  does  not  contribute  to  global  imbalances  either  positively  or  negatively.  The 
corporate,  banking  and  government  balance  sheets  are  not  unduly  exposed  to  currency  risks. 
Financial sector, including financial markets, are generally considered to be robust and fairly efficient. 
There  seem  to  be  reasonably  good  prospects  for  continuing  the  current  growth  momentum  in  an 
enabling policy environment of contextual re-emphasis on price stability.  
BIS Review 33/2007 
 5
