Lim Hng Kiang: Brief overview of economic links between Vietnam and 
Singapore 
Opening remarks by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and 
Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry,  at  the  Launch  of  Vietnam-Singapore  Listing  Preparatory  Program, 
Hanoi, 2 April 2007. 
 His Excellency, Vu Van Ninh 
Minister of Finance of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure this morning to join His Excellency, Minister Vu and all of you in Hanoi at 
the official launch of the Vietnam-Singapore Listing Preparatory Program. As Minister Vu has shared 
earlier, today’s programme adds yet another pillar to our growing economic relationship. 
Today’s launch is especially meaningful for me, as looking back at 2005, our two countries inked a 
historic Framework Agreement on Vietnam-Singapore Connectivity to strengthen our relations and to 
cooperate  across  the  many  areas  in  which  we  have  shared  interests.  I  am  thus  very  glad  that  my 
officials from the Monetary Authority of Singapore have been working closely with Vietnam Ministry of 
Finance and the State Securities Commission to see through the implementation of the terms provided 
under the Connectivity Agreement.  
The  objective  of  the  Connectivity  Agreement  had  been  to  build  closer  Government-to-Government 
relations between Vietnam and Singapore, to bring about more opportunities for mutual collaboration 
and exchanges between our two countries. More importantly, we believe that by working together in 
partnership,  Vietnam  and  Singapore  can  present  an  even  more  compelling  proposition  to  global 
investors and to raise the profile of ASEAN markets.  
Vietnam  and  Singapore  have  always  enjoyed  strong  economic  linkages.  Bilateral  trade  between 
Singapore  and  Vietnam  rose  by  8.6%  to  US$7.4  billion  in  2006,  making  Singapore  Vietnam’s  4th 
largest  trading  partner.  Likewise,  Vietnam  is  Singapore’s  14th  largest  export  market,  with  over 
US$5.7bn worth of exports in 2006. In the last few years, we have witnessed how Vietnam’s economy 
has flourished, spurred by an impressive growth rate of more than 8%. Vietnam is now Asia’s second-
fastest-growing economy, trailing only China’s. Touted as Asia’s newest economic tiger, we have seen 
Vietnam’s stock market index surged 144% last year and its market capitalisation developed from less 
than  US$1  billion  to  more  than  US$14  billion  now.  These  results  have  been  due  to  Vietnam’s 
commitment  towards  market  liberalization  and  its  steadfastness  in  working  towards  your  accession 
into  the  World  Trade  Organization.  Vietnam’s  strong  economic  story  has  attracted  investors  from 
across  the  globe,  attracting  foreign  direct  investment  of  US$10.2  billion  in  2006.  As  Vietnam’s 
economy  continues  to  boom,  your  capital  markets  will  also  be  developing  just  as  rapidly.  It  is  thus 
important during this dynamic phase of growth that we work closely together to develop more robust 
capital  markets  which  are  efficient,  well-governed  and  will  draw  sustained  investor  interest.  The 
Vietnam-Singapore  Listing  Preparatory  Program  was  developed  with  that  intent.  Officials  from  the 
Monetary Authority of Singapore have been in close dialogue with Vietnam MOF and SSC to develop 
a meaningful programme catered at helping Vietnamese enterprises understand the workings of the 
international capital markets and the regulatory standards as well as market standards required for a 
listing  in  an  international  market  outside  of  Vietnam.  We  have  invited  representatives  from  the 
Singapore  Exchange,  as  well  as  professionals  from  leading  investment  banks,  accountants  and 
lawyers  to  join  us  at  today’s  seminar,  and  they  will  cover  a  wide-ranging  programme  that  helps  to 
prepare  Vietnamese  enterprises  on  cross-border  listings,  training  on  corporate  governance,  listing 
rules  and  accounting  standards,  amongst  others.  I  understand  that  there  are  also  plans  for 
Vietnamese companies to be introduced to institutional investors based in Singapore at a later stage.  
All these efforts will pave the way for Vietnam to tap on Singapore’s capital markets as an additional 
channel to connect with global investors. We believe this will contribute to speeding up the pace of 
Vietnam’s economic growth, even as you are taking significant measures to develop your own capital 
markets. Singapore is now home to a wide pool of institutional funds, with more than S$720 billion of 
assets  under  management.  As  a  well-managed  pro-business  marketplace,  Singapore  is  particularly 
BIS Review 35/2007 
 1
attractive to international companies seeking an offshore listing. Currently, more than 700 companies 
are  listed on the  Singapore  Exchange. Amongst  them,  more  than  30%  are  foreign  companies  from 
around the globe. The experience gained from the listing of these foreign companies has equipped 
Singapore  with  the  necessary  expertise  to  help  companies  from  both  mature  as  well  as  emerging 
markets meet their capital-raising needs.  
In particular, the Singapore Exchange has had a long track record of being home to the IPOs of many 
Southeast  Asian  and  Chinese  companies.  The  Singapore  Exchange  will  be  able  to  share  their 
expertise with our Vietnamese friends on what are some of the areas that you should look out for, as 
you  plan  for  your  listing.  I  am  also  especially  glad  that  the  Singapore  Exchange  will  be  signing  a 
memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the Hanoi Stock Trading Centre this morning. The inking of 
the MoU can only mean more opportunities for both our stock markets to seek greater collaboration, 
and I urge officials from the SGX and Hanoi STC to move beyond just the MoU document to plan for 
even  deeper  level  of  partnership  and  cooperation.  I  understand  as  well  that  a  couple  of  the 
Vietnamese State-owned Enterprises have also made plans to explore a listing on Singapore’s bourse 
– these are indeed concrete demonstrations of the close synergies between our two marketplaces. 
The stage is now set for an enduring relationship between Vietnam and Singapore that will last for 
years to come. I am confident that the Vietnam-Singapore Listing Preparatory Program will be but the 
first  of  many  other  initiatives  that  will  further  cement  the  growth  of  Vietnamese  companies  in 
Singapore. Let me now conclude by wishing all of you a fruitful and enriching conference ahead and a 
productive process tapping the international capital markets down the road. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2007
