Martín Redrado: Closing remarks at the conference “Monetary Policy under 
Uncertainty” 
Closing remarks by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the 2007 Money 
& Banking Conference "Monetary Policy Under Uncertainty", hosted by the Central Bank of Argentina, 
Buenos Aires, 4 June 2007. 
 After two days of intense discussions among policy makers and academics we may conclude that the 
challenges  faced  by  world  and,  particularly,  Latin  American  central  bankers  are  not  minor,  thus 
requiring prudence, consistency and gradualism.  
Changes  experienced  by  the  global  economy  stemming  from  financial  innovation  in  products  and 
players  that  Mario  Draghi,  Malcolm  Knight  and  José  Viñals  described  so  well,  have  substantially 
affected  not  only  the  capacity  but  also  the  stability  of  traditional  monetary  policy  transmission 
channels. The credit channel is less effective due to structured products, while asset price volatility is 
more pronounced. 
We have also heard from the various experiences shared that there is no one-size-fits-all. “God only 
knows what the right model is,” said my friend Vittorio Corbo this morning.  
Therefore, it should not come as a surprise that demand for “flexible policies” from us, central bankers, 
is high. This implies endowing the models with the value of our own judgment, seeking to understand 
changes, threats and opportunities.  
It  is  nothing  but  the  risk  management  approach  applied  to  monetary  policy  conduct  described 
yesterday afternoon by Joe Tracy, reflecting the Fed’s view. Or the Central Bank’s need to assess the 
source, magnitude and nature of the shocks stressed this morning by Otmar Issing, echoing the ECB 
stance. That is, to maximize the probability of achieving the goals we set, understanding the implicit 
risks  and  the  consequences  associated  with  each  risk,  and  focusing  on  the  distribution  of  possible 
outcomes. 
Under  this  approach,  robustness  may  be  preferable  to  optimality  –  taking  optimality  as  the  most 
efficient  policy  given  the  most  likely  scenario,  and  robustness  as  the  less  harmful  when  the  likely 
scenario fails to materialize. 
In Latin America, and particularly in Argentina, economic policymaking becomes especially hard due 
to the discredit caused by successive failures, which in many cases turned into independent sources 
of instability.  
In  our  region,  the  range  of  cyclical  fluctuations  and  the  recurrent  macroeconomic  volatility  have 
severely harmed the various economies’ long-term performance. This, in turn, resulted in poor welfare 
levels for the population at large. 
While in the developed economies cyclical fluctuations tend to be mild, in our region they have been 
generally characterized by their intensity and frequency. 
More  importantly,  in  my  view:  not  all  countries  in  the  region  are  in  the  same  situation.  There  are 
countries with economies approaching their long-term cruising speed. Others are heading that way. In 
others, however, the convergence process is still incipient.  
In our case, despite a notable recovery, several features of the current macroeconomic performance 
enable us to infer that the economy is still heading towards a new long-term equilibrium. Given the 
unprecedented size of the past crisis, many fundamental variables “overreacted” and are presumably 
converging  towards  new  long-term  values,  we  must  admit,  largely  unknown  to  us.  This  results,  for 
example, in nominal dynamics which are difficult to characterize ex ante as temporary or permanent, 
but which in certain circumstances might lead to diverging paths.  
In  addition,  despite  its  intensity,  the  recovery  of  financial  intermediation  is  still  incipient  and  term 
structure duration is short.  
And  this  is  crucial,  since,  as  pointed  out  by  Yaga  Reddy  from  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  these 
transition processes take time and raise enormous challenges. Thus, hasty diagnosis and simplistic 
comparisons among the various countries’ situations may lead to wrong recommendations. 
BIS Review 75/2007 
 1
Corbo’s presentation stressed the sequential process that the Chilean economy underwent to arrive to 
a situation of macroeconomic stability. Vittorio was very precise when describing the gradual phases 
followed  by  Chile  to  develop  the  current  monetary  regime.  Three  elements  have  been  of  utmost 
importance  in  this  process:  consolidating  fiscal  solvency  as  a  countercyclical  tool,  reestablishing 
external sustainability, restructuring liabilities, and rebuilding the financial system. Thus, in 15 years, 
Chile  managed  to  lead  inflation  from  around  30  percent  to  the  current  annual  2.9  percent,  after 
patiently  building  credibility  and  institutions.  Once  all  these  issues  were  addressed,  progress  was 
made  in  the consolidation  of  an  inflation  targeting  regime  that  is  nowadays highly  credible  and  has 
proven successful. That is, the transition to a full-fledged inflation targeting regime was achieved in 
coexistence with high inflation. It was a gradual and flexible regime in terms of the use of traditional 
policy instruments what allowed the economy to adjust to both domestic and external shocks.  
Russia  is  another  good  example  of  monetary  policy  conduct  in  a  transition  process.  Ignatiev 
highlighted  the  fact  that  their Central  Bank aims  to prevent a  sharp appreciation  of  the ruble,  while 
slowly  moving  to  an  inflation  targeting  regime,  which  is  not  easy  to  achieve  considering  Russia’s 
strong  dependency  on  oil  prices.  Meanwhile,  the  financial  system  is  being  developed  and  the 
economy dedollarized, but very cautiously and “trying to avoid radical changes”. 
Sharp foreign capital inflows have an impact on the economy that, in transitional situations such as 
this one, may be costly rather than beneficial. 
Dealing  with  the  current  trend  towards  exchange  rate  appreciation  appears  as  an  one  of  the  most 
critical  challenges  for  emerging  market  policy  makers.  One  of  the  lessons  learned  from  the 
convertibility era in Argentina is that there is nothing more procyclical that an appreciated domestic 
currency,  in  terms  of  both  public  and  private  consumption.  Currency  appreciation  fosters  current 
consumption at the expense of savings and, hence, investment and long-term economic growth. The 
paper  presented  by  Rajan  yesterday  is  quite  clear  in  this  regard:  overvaluation  caused  by  foreign 
capital leads to lower returns on investment and lower growth rates. 
Furthermore, for a country that has undergone three financial crises in the past twelve years, where 
macroeconomic volatility is perhaps the main factor for the low dynamism of the previous decades, 
preventing another crisis must be a priority economic policy objective. Within that framework, the role 
of  the  exchange  rate  as  a  trigger  of  a  crisis  should  be  considered:  currency  overvaluation  typically 
ends in a sharp devaluation with high costs for the economy.  
Besides,  it  is  essential  not  to  adjust  policy  to  temporary  trends: part  of  the current  pressure  for  the 
appreciation of emerging currencies relates to commodity prices (through the current account) and the 
investors’  risk  appetite  (through  the  capital  account),  which  may  clearly  be  temporary  instead  of 
permanent forces. 
Against this backdrop, it would be wrong to adjust monetary policy to these forces. On the contrary, it 
is prudent to try and prevent euphoria, taking these changes as temporary in nature. These factors 
may  lead  to  nominal  exchange  rate  overshooting,  which,  far  from  adjusting  towards  long-term 
equilibrium,  may  cause  excessive  volatility  and  hence  distort  relative  price  signals  for  savings, 
consumption and investment. 
Finally, we central bankers should never forget about the general equilibrium analysis, especially when 
assessing  the  impact  of  exchange  rate  volatility  on  the  set  of  macroeconomic  variables  in  a 
normalization phase. In my opinion, monetary policy should be conceived under a general equilibrium 
approach,  where  fiscal  solvency,  the  monetary  balance  and  external  sustainability  are  mutually 
determined. In this sense, the need for policy coordination is stronger in a post-crisis period, and sine 
qua non for long-term stability. 
Therefore in our case, the current context of transition towards a steady state, the classical economic 
policy dilemma of rules versus discretion cannot be solved with an extreme option. Both “unrestricted 
discretion” and a rigid “lock-in” rule lead us nowhere.  
In  contrast,  an  intermediate  scheme  –  the  monetary  aggregate  approach,  combining  a  dose  of 
flexibility  (such  as  indicative  inflation  targets),  with  simple  rules  on  the  growth  of  money  supply 
providing the adequate accountability by the policymakers – may gradually rebuild the credibility lost in 
the crisis without loosing the necessary discretion to address the contingencies inherent to this stage. 
We definitely cannot “take shortcuts”: we need to develop and calibrate the instruments with capacity 
to stabilize cyclical fluctuations and, in turn, reduce macroeconomic risks. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2007
One  of  these  tools  is  a  deep  domestic  financial  system  and  the  capital  market.  We  are  working  to 
rebuild credit to the private sector as a monetary policy transmission channel as our financial markets 
are  not  deep  enough  to  channel  large  capital  inflows.  Local  currency  debt  markets  are  still  in  their 
infancy, and secondary markets are not liquid enough. Yesterday afternoon, Rajan himself pointed out 
the financial systems’ inability to efficiently intermediate foreign savings as an obstacle for economic 
growth in emerging economies. 
The development of the market in domestic currency, as Malcolm Knight pointed out, allows a reduced 
dependence on capital flows, diminished currency mismatches, and a lesser concentration of risks in 
banking  systems.  But  here  we  should  also  be  cautious,  all  the  more  so  at  a  stage  when  monetary 
stability  and  confidence  in  the  local  currency  are  gradually  recovering,  so  as  to  avoid  reducing 
currency  mismatches at  the  expense of  assuming an  excessive  maturity  mismatch risk,  or  to  avoid 
flooding local investors with instruments that restrict the possibility of risk diversification. 
We applied strict guidelines to reduce financial system exposure to the public sector. Consequently, in 
the  past  years  the  share  of  credit  to  the  government  in  total  assets  decreased  by  20  percentage 
points, fast reversing the crowding-out process of credit to households and firms. In fact, these kinds 
of  financing  are  today  the  main  component  of  financial  institutions’  assets  and  the  focus  of  their 
business.  
Anyhow, we see that every country in the region is taking precautions. In our case, for an economy in 
transition  towards  its  long-term  cruising  speed,  foreign  reserve  accumulation  is  an  extremely  useful 
countercyclical policy.  
I have referred to monetary policy and uncertainty, but it is also worth noting the introduction of our 
central banks to the wider institutional system comprised by the national governance structure.  
This  morning,  Ron  McKinnon  and  Willem  Buiter  spoke  of  the  changing  doctrinal  perspectives  on 
central banks. I believe that there clearly emerges a positive development of the past decades, that is, 
granting autonomy to monetary authorities to decide on the best instruments to carry out our task. This 
development  has  been  coupled  with  a  higher  transparency  and  accountability  by  central  banks, 
something  that  only  a  decade  ago  was  not  as  widespread.  This  teaches  us  a  valuable  lesson:  the 
notions that we consider today as the most firmly established are the result of a specific institutional 
development rather than unchanging practices.  
We, as monetary authorities, must contribute to deepening the positive aspects of such development. 
Here, it does not seem adequate either to think of a single “universal institutional framework,” but of 
useful principles such as autonomy and accountability that should be adapted to the institutional reality 
of each individual country.  
In  the  past  years,  macroeconomic  discipline  has  been  strengthened  and  thus  the  region  is  better 
prepared to face adverse scenarios than in the past decade. However, there is still much work to do in 
order  to  reduce  potential  sources  of  vulnerability  in  our  economies.  This  entails  a  hard  duty. 
Agreement among public policymakers and analysts is not enough —there is a need for broad and 
lasting economic and institutional consensus to prevent policy reversal, which only leads to stagnation 
and frustration. 
Thank you very much and look forward to seeing you next year. 
BIS Review 75/2007 
 3
