Rakesh Mohan: First quarter review of monetary policy – underlying 
macroeconomics 
Valedictory address by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Workshop for Top Executives of Banks on Macroeconomic Issues and their Relevance to the 
Banking System organised by the State Bank of India, Mumbai, 3 August 2007.  
Assistance of M.D. Patra and Indranil Bhattacharya in preparing the speech is gratefully acknowledged. 
 Shri Bhatt and distinguished participants,  
I am deeply honoured to be invited to deliver the valedictory address at the High Powered 
Macroeconomic Workshop organised by the State Bank of India.  I am particularly gratified 
that  this  Workshop  has  become  a  reality,  since  its  genesis  is  in  the  extremely  useful 
discussions that we in the Reserve Bank of India had with the Indian Banks’ Association as 
part of pre-Annual Policy consultations held in April this year. 
The success of any monetary policy formulation is dependent on successful communication 
between the central bank and all market participants.  The effectiveness of communication 
would  be  greatly  enhanced  if  there  is  deeper  understanding  among  participants  of  all  the 
reasoning and the process that goes behind policy making.  So we greatly value this initiative 
that you have taken. 
On July 31, we set out our first quarter review of the annual policy and you are all aware of 
the  response  of 
to  our 
announcement.  Today, I propose to move away from the minutiae of the policy review and 
share  with  you  my  thoughts  on  the  underlying  macroeconomics  and  the  unfolding  of 
expectations for the period ahead. 
financial  markets  and 
the  banking  and 
financial  system 
I  propose  to  structure  my  address  by  beginning  with  an  overview  of  domestic  and  global 
macroeconomic developments that conditioned our assessment and response on July 31.  
My approach will be to compare the current situation with that prevailing in April 2007 i.e., at 
the time of the Annual Policy Statement, in order to highlight the changes that have taken 
place  within  the  Indian  economy  but  more  perceptibly,  in  the  international  environment.  
Against this backdrop, I will try to set out the key elements of our assessment of underlying 
developments,  the  complexities  and  the  challenges.  Finally,  I  will  draw  upon  the  rationale 
emerging from this assessment to explain the stance of the first quarter review. 
I. 
Overview of macroeconomic developments – then and now  
You will all recall that the Annual Policy Statement of April 2007 was formulated at a time 
when  the  Indian  economy  was  seen  to  be  facing  the  intensification  of  demand  pressures 
which,  coupled  with  supply  constraints,  were  showing  up  in  inflation  (as  measured  by  the 
Wholesale  Price  Index  (WPI)),  ruling  above  6  per  cent  through  the  preceding  quarter 
(January-March,  2007).  Consumer  price  inflation  was  even  higher.  There  was  also 
expectation  internationally  at  that  time  that  the  global  economy  was  moderating  after 
unusually high growth in the last few years. However, some volatility had been observed in 
international financial markets and there was some expectation of repricing of risks, and its 
potential  effects  on  financial  markets.  Overall,  while  prospects  for  growth  continued  to  be 
favourable, monetary authorities around the world were showing an inclination to be watchful 
about risks to price and financial stability. By late July, while the evolution of macroeconomic 
and financial developments was broadly on track, with some upward revisions about growth 
prospects,  there  are  some  incipient  shifts  taking  place  in  sentiment,  liquidity  and  market 
BIS Review 86/2007 
 1
conditions,  particularly  in  the  presence  of  some  volatility  in  financial  markets.  Policy 
responses of central banks across the world have acquired a tone of increased caution.     
Domestic developments  
(a) 
In February 2007 i.e., prior to the Annual Policy Statement, the CSO had placed real GDP 
growth  at  9.2  per  cent  in  2006-07.  By  the  time  of  the  first  quarter  review,  the  CSO  had 
revised  this  estimate  to  9.4  per  cent,  indicative  of  the  improvement  in  aggregate  supply 
conditions,  but  also  pointing  to  the  firming  up  of  demand  pressures.  In  the  first  quarter  of 
2007-08, some supply conditions seem to have improved. The arrival of the rabi harvest, a 
satisfactory  south-west  monsoon  so  far  and  a  slow  catch-up  in  kharif  sowing  provides 
grounds  for  optimism  regarding  agricultural  performance  this  year.  Activity  in  the  industrial 
and  services  sectors  has  continued  apace,  though  there  seems  to  have  been  some 
moderation  in  specific  sectors.  In  the  disposition  of  aggregate  demand,  however,  there 
appear  to  be  signs  of  some  shifts  underway.  Although  the  demand  for  consumer  non-
durables  has  picked  up,  the  coincident  high  growth  in  capital  goods  and  non-oil  imports, 
secondary effects on intermediate goods and stretched capacity utilisation together suggest 
that investment demand could be intensifying. There seems to be a general optimism about 
India’s  growth  prospects  in  projections  made  by  various  agencies;  some  agencies  have 
taken the lead in initiating upward revisions (Table 1). 
 
 
 2 
  BIS Review 86/2007
Within this overall picture of the real economy, headwinds to growth seem to be reshaping 
the  outlook.  While  corporate  performance  continues  to  be  buoyant  as  assessed  in  April, 
there is some deceleration in corporate sales and profitability growth on a year-on-year basis 
as  also  increases  in  input  and  staff  costs.   There  is  some  indication  of  a  turn  in  business 
sentiment with the optimism reflected in various surveys conducted at the time of the Annual 
Policy Statement having been moderated by rising cost expectations, strained capacities and 
the impact of recent exchange rate movements, particularly in IT, commercial vehicles, auto 
parts and cement.  
The key monetary and banking aggregates are exhibiting somewhat perging profiles. Money 
supply is running well above the indicative path given in the Annual Policy Statement in April, 
driven up by the expansion in reserve money and high growth in deposits. With banks having 
launched  aggressive  mobilisation  strategies,  presumably  in  response  to  the  high  credit 
demand  of  the  last  few  years,  there  has  been  high  growth  in  aggregate  deposits  in  the 
banking  system.  Consequent  to  the  lagged  and  cumulative  effects  of  monetary  measures 
taken  since  September  2004,  there  has  been  some  slackening  of  non-food  credit  growth. 
Banks  SLR  portfolios  (at  28.7  per  cent  of  NDTL  on  July  6)  have  increased.  This  will  help 
them  to  mitigate  balance  sheet  risks  and  also  allow  for  better  liquidity  management.   The 
deceleration in credit demand has been localised in the commercial real estate, housing and 
retail segments. On the other hand, the pick up in bank credit to agriculture and industry is 
favourable to sustaining the growth momentum (Table 2). 
 3
BIS Review 86/2007 
  
The  combination  of  rising  deposit  growth  and  moderation  of  non-food  credit  growth  is 
contributing to the prevalence of excess liquidity conditions in the financial markets. With the 
imposition of a ceiling of Rs.3,000 crore on daily LAF reverse repos since March 5, 2007, the 
summary measure of the liquidity overhang, i.e., the sum of LAF, MSS and outstanding cash 
balances of the government, did not fully capture the counterpart liquidity shifts in the market 
during this period as the net position in the LAF presents only a partial picture. A large part of 
the liquidity that would have otherwise been absorbed under the LAF is currently showing up 
in excess CRR balances and in banks’ investments in money market mutual funds.  On the 
other hand, the transfer of funds from the Government to the Reserve Bank on account of 
the sale of the Reserve Bank’s stake in the State Bank of India has had the indirect effect of 
impounding market liquidity on a temporary basis. Thus, new factors have been impinging 
the  assessment  of  liquidity  in  recent  weeks,  which  has  been  reflected  in  the  behaviour  of 
overnight market rates and in the Reserve Bank’s liquidity management operations (Table 3).  
In the financial markets, the shifts in liquidity flows between the first quarter of 2007-08 and 
the preceding quarter have imparted considerable volatility. Overnight rates have been close 
to zero for a prolonged period of time (Chart 1). These have been caused by the cumulative 
impact of the unwinding of government cash balances, excess capital flows, and high deposit 
growth.  In the Government securities market, there is reasonable stability but the yield curve 
seems  to  be  indicating  that  excess  liquidity  conditions  in  the  short  term  segment  was 
beginning to effect longer term yields.  The forex market is experiencing continuous upward 
pressures on the spot exchange rate and forward premia have declined across maturities.   
4 
 BIS Review 86/2007
 
The  most  important  change  between  April  and  now  is  in  inflation  conditions.  It  may  be 
recalled that in January 2007, the resolve of monetary policy was stated as returning inflation 
to within the policy tolerance threshold on a priority basis. Against the backdrop of the spike 
in  WPI  inflation  in  January  and  the  persistence  in  the  hardening  of  consumer  prices,  this 
stance was reinforced in April. The combination of monetary, fiscal and supply management 
measures appears to have had a salutary effect on inflation expectations and from end-May 
there has been a distinct easing of inflation in terms of the headline. Yet, inflation pressures 
appear  to  be  ruling  firmly.  Excluding  the  decline  in  energy  prices  since  February,  WPI 
inflation continues to be above 6 per cent. Excluding food and energy prices, inflation would 
still be above the headline. Inflation in terms of consumer prices is still in the range of 5.7-7.8 
per cent.  Besides, global prices of key food grains such as wheat and rice, and of oilseeds 
and livestock products are at historically elevated levels, igniting international concern on the 
effect of these prices on overall inflation. With food having a higher weight in price indices in 
developing  countries,  this  development  is  of  particular  concern  to  countries  such  as  ours. 
International crude prices are high and volatile with expectations that they would remain at 
these  levels  through  2007.  These  factors  would  have  a  definite  bearing  on  the  manner  in 
which  the  inflation  outlook  in  India  evolves  over  the  months  to  come.   Inflation  concerns 
remain  with  us  and  thus  our  vigil  on  inflation  must  continue.  There  are  no  grounds  for 
complacency on this account. 
The  balance  of  payments  outlook  remains  strong  and  resilient  between  April  and  now.  A 
sharper  than  expected  increase  in  non-oil  imports  has  resulted  in  a  widening  of  the 
merchandise  trade  deficit  in  the  early  months  of  2007-08.  The  key  difference  between 
expectations  and  outlook  relating  to  the  external  sector is the  magnitude  of  capital  inflows 
received so far. In reflection, the foreign exchange reserves have gone up by nearly US $ 23 
billion during April-July 20, which is already nearly half of the entire reserve accretion during 
the year 2006-07. By current indications, managing capital flows and consequently, liquidity 
will be the main challenge facing monetary policy in 2007-08. 
Global developments 
(b) 
The key change in the global outlook between April and July is the upward revision by the 
IMF  in  global  growth  forecasts  for  2007  and  2008  from  4.9  per  cent  to  5.2  per  cent.  This 
upward revision is expected to be shared by all major mature economies, barring the US, as 
well as the emerging market economies (EMEs), particularly China and India. In the EMEs 
which  are  progressively  increasing  their  contribution  to  global  growth,  the  prospects  are 
strong but embedded with risks of overheating, volatile crude prices, leveraged international 
financial markets and persisting global imbalances. In China, in particular, there have been 
BIS Review 86/2007 
 5
rising concerns, as stated by their highest authorities, that the growth process could have the 
potential of becoming unstable and unsustainable. Inflation concerns have become renewed 
on the back of the flare up of crude prices alongside elevated levels of food and metal prices 
(Table 4).  
 Global financial markets, which faced major episodes of turbulence in May-June, 2006 and 
again in February 2007, seem to be experiencing heightened volatility again in July due to 
the  fall  in  confidence  related  to  the  adverse  developments  in  the  US  subprime  mortgage 
market transmitted to other segments through the highly leveraged activities of hedge funds 
and private equity funds. Even as financial markets are repricing risks, there continues to be 
a  compression  of  risk  spreads  and  an  ever  widening  search  for  returns,  interrupted  by 
sporadic flights to safety. While there seem to be signs of some abatement in the carry trade, 
there are persisting uncertainties and EMEs, in particular, need to be on guard against the 
manner  in  which  carry  trades  unfold.   Perhaps,  the  most  volatile  segments  have  been 
currency and equity markets with increasing linkages and potential vulnerability to contagion 
effects.  
In response to these developments, several monetary authorities have continued to display a 
readiness to tighten monetary policy further in reinforcement of their stance in April.  Central 
banks in EMEs have supported the withdrawal of monetary accommodation with successive 
increases in cash reserve requirements and in the application of non-monetary measures.  In 
India and China, in particular, the use of cash reserve requirements has been more frequent 
than in other EMEs (Table 5). 
6 
 BIS Review 86/2007
 Thus, central banks across the world remain hawkish with respect to inflation and prepared 
to act against any signs of instability developing.  Where they have paused, as in the US, 
they have done so on the back of sustained prior action.  The outlook on inflation continues 
to drive the response of central banks (Table 6).  
One key issue that many of the key Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) are facing is the 
issue of excess forex flows, both because of a current account surplus in most cases, and 
additional capital flows. In this regard, the key difference between India and most of these 
economies  is  the  existence  of  a  current  account  deficit,  though  modest,  along  with  a 
significant merchandise trade deficit which is now in excess of 7 per cent of GDP. Most of 
these countries, along with us, have experienced significant real exchange rate appreciation 
over  the  last  year  or  two.  So  the  practice  of  monetary  management  has  encountered 
significant complexity in a number of EMEs. We are not alone. We may note that we have so 
far been managing this complexity relatively successfully within the context of high economic 
growth,  high  credit  growth,  a  reasonable  degree  of  price  stability  and  most  importantly 
maintenance of financial stability. The quality of bank balance sheets has been improving on 
a continuous basis, and we are hopeful that they will reach international best practice soon. It 
is interesting to observe that, just like us, many of these countries have been using the whole 
range of monetary instruments, including direct sterilisation through issuance of government 
or  central  bank  bonds,  increases  in  reserve  requirements,  and  different  means  of  capital 
account  management  to  manage  the  monetary  impact  of  excess  forex  flows.  The  overall 
problem  of  the  capital  flows,  both  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  monetary  management  of 
EMEs  and  reverse  capital  flows  to  industrialised  countries,  is  now  receiving  worldwide 
attention.  The  Committee  of  Global  Financial  System  (CGFS)  under  the  aegis  of  BIS  has 
also appointed a Working Group to look into these complex issues.  
BIS Review 86/2007 
 7
 Macroeconomics of policy assessment  
II. 
Domestic  macroeconomic  prospects  are  currently  seen  to  be  broadly  favourable,  with  the 
pace of growth being maintained and the inflation outlook softer. As already stated, however, 
the attendant risks from global developments relating to food, commodity, and energy prices 
remain and will have to be monitored carefully, and acted upon as necessary. In an overall 
perspective,  the  main  objective  of  policy  as  set  out  in  April,  is  to  manage  the  transition  to 
higher growth with price and financial stability. The key issues for the conduct of monetary 
policy in the context of this objective are a continuing emphasis on price stability and well 
anchored  inflation  expectations.  This  will  involve  managing  liquidity  in  the  presence  of  the 
pressures  from  high  deposit  growth,  shifts  in  government  cash  balances  and  continuing 
capital flows. The flux in global financial markets is a clear and present danger to stability for 
8 
 BIS Review 86/2007
which  policy  makers  and  all  stake  holders  have  to  be  well  prepared.  Exchange  rate 
movements  have  become  amplified  by  these  developments.  Going  forward,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  reinforce  the  commitment  to  financial  stability  alongside  the  containment  of 
inflation  so  as  to  support  growth.  The  Reserve  Bank's  Annual  Policy  statement  had 
announced the initiation of further development of financial markets, such as the work related 
to  currency  futures,  interest  rate  futures  and  credit  default  swaps.  Our  annual  publication, 
Report  on  Currency  and  Finance  has,  this  year,  paid  particular  attention  to  the  overall 
development  of  financial  markets  in  some  detail.  The  key  element  of  our  approach  is  the 
maintenance of financial stability, along with the continuous development of markets. 
Against this backdrop and a careful assessment of the balance of risks, the projection of real 
GDP growth for 2007-08 has been retained around at 8.5 per cent as in the Annual Policy 
Statement.  A  key  assumption  is  that  agriculture  will  post  a  return  to  trend  growth  and  the 
momentum will be maintained in industry and services. While the outlook for inflation remains 
unchanged, the policy priority in the first quarter review is to hold headline inflation within 5 
per cent in 2007-08 and within 4.0 - 4.5 per cent over the medium term. While money supply 
and aggregate deposits are currently high, moderating the growth of these key aggregates 
has assumed policy priority. Early indications suggest that the balance of payments position 
is  strong,  that  the  current  account  deficit  will  be  managed  within  sustainable  limits  but  the 
uncertainties and volatility associated with capital flows will test the evolving policy stance. 
While the domestic outlook is positive and should remain so with appropriate corrections in 
liquidity and financial market conditions to align them with the policy stance, it is the global 
outlook which presents the greatest threats to growth with stability in India. The conduct of 
monetary policy must ensure that the gains of strong macroeconomic performance are not 
lost in the cross currents of global financial markets and the periodic episodes of volatility of 
turbulence which have world wide ramifications. It is in this context that the Reserve Bank 
has reinforced the emphasis on price stability and financial stability in the first quarter review 
with a view to supporting growth by contributing stability. To sum up, therefore, inflation risks 
and  potential  dangers  of  financial  market  turbulence  dominate  the  macroeconomics  of 
current policy assessment. 
The policy response  
III. 
The  operating  framework  of  monetary  management  is  rendered  complex,  particularly  in  a 
developing economy such as ours which is undergoing significant financial deepening and 
structural  change.  The  relationship  between  real  economy  variables  such  as  GDP  growth 
and monetary aggregates is subject to constant change. Similarly, the relationships between 
different monetary aggregates themselves such as broad money (M3), narrow money (M1) 
and reserve money (M0) is also subject to continuous change. It is for this reason that we 
have  to  operate  policy  flexibly,  leading  to  some  impressions  of  lack  of  transparency.  Our 
overall job is to maintain price stability in the presence of the existing scenario of welcome 
accelerated growth, along with the maintenance of financial stability of the system. It is our 
firm judgement that low and stable inflation is essential to maintenance of the growth process 
and  we  are  determined  to  achieve  this  continuing  goal.  Similarly,  in  a  low  income  country 
such as ours, we also believe that the ability of market participants, ranging from far flung 
subsistence farmers to the ultra sophisticated financial market players, such as you, is much 
more varied than in a developed country. The costs of risks unfolding are asymmetric, so we 
have to place a higher weight on the maintenance of financial stability than in a developed 
country, as we pursue overall growth and associated financial market development. 
The  stance  of  monetary  policy  in  the  first  quarter  review  assigns  a  higher  priority  for 
managing appropriate liquidity in the financial markets while maintaining the intensive vigil on 
price  and  financial  stability.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  articulated  its  approach  to  liquidity 
management  in  the  form  of  “appropriate  use  of  CRR  stipulations,  open  market  operations 
BIS Review 86/2007 
 9
including MSS and LAF and all policy instruments at its disposal flexibly, as and when the 
situation warrants”. 
In view of the surplus conditions in the financial markets, the ceiling on daily reverse repos 
under  the  LAF  has  been  removed.  The  objective  is  to  absorb  excess  liquidity  and  align 
overnight rates with the prevailing monetary policy stance so that policy signals are efficiently 
and transparently passed through into the structure of interest rates, aggregate demand and 
thereby,  growth  and  stability.  The  restoration  of  the  informal  LAF  corridor  should  help  in 
stabilising  overnight  rates  and  smoothing  volatility.  The  key  policy  rates  have  been  kept 
unchanged. The cash reserve ratio has been raised by 50 basis points to 7 per cent in the 
first quarter review with a view to impounding liquidity generated by excessive deposit growth 
in the banking system. The CRR is expected to work in conjunction with the restoration of the 
LAF corridor to ensure appropriate liquidity conditions in the economy. The policy stance will 
be under careful and continuous review and the mix of instruments will be modulated by the 
evolving situation. To reflect the Reserve Bank’s point of view at the present time, the stance 
of policy for the period ahead has been enunciated as: 
• 
To reinforce the emphasis on price stability and well-anchored inflation expectations 
while  ensuring  a  monetary  and  interest  rate  environment  that  supports  export  and 
investment  demand  in  the  economy  so  as  to  enable  continuation  of  the  growth 
momentum. 
To re-emphasise credit quality and orderly conditions in financial markets for securing 
macroeconomic  and,  in  particular,  financial  stability  while  simultaneously  pursuing 
greater credit penetration and financial inclusion. 
To  respond  swiftly  with  all possible  measures as  appropriate  to  the  evolving  global 
and domestic situation impinging on inflation expectations, financial stability and the 
growth momentum. 
  Once  again,  I  congratulate  Shri  Bhatt  and  the  State  Bank  of  India  for  organising  this 
extremely useful and illuminating workshop.   
Thank you. 
10 
 BIS Review 86/2007
