Tiff Macklem: Global integration, monetary policy, and the international 
monetary system 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Winnipeg CFA Society, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, 21 June 2007. 
 Good afternoon. It's a pleasure to be in Winnipeg, and it's an honour to join you as you celebrate the 
CFA Institute's sixtieth anniversary. 
Today is the longest day of the year. But I don't want it to feel that long, so I'll get right to the point. I'd 
like  to  discuss  two  aspects  of  global  integration  –  how  it's  affecting  our  economy,  and  why  it 
underscores the need for a sound monetary framework, both at home and internationally.  
Now,  Manitoba  –  right  in  the  middle  of  our  vast  country  –  might  seem  an  odd  place  to  talk  about 
globalization.  But  this  province,  like  the  rest  of  Canada,  is  very  much  affected  by  global  economic 
forces. Some businesses – particularly in the manufacturing sector – are facing fierce competition from 
new suppliers in emerging Asia. Other businesses are benefiting from strong foreign demand and high 
prices for commodities. Most of Manitoba's exports go to the United States, so it might be tempting to 
think that what really matters is North American demand. But the prices of many of Manitoba's exports 
– both commodities and manufactured goods – are set in world markets, and thus influenced by the 
demand for, and the production of, these goods in Asian and other emerging-market economies. So, 
Manitoba, and Canada as a whole, are very much a part of the integrated world economy. 
I'll  start  by  highlighting  two  key  developments  in  the  global  economy  and  describe  how  they're 
affecting Manitoba and Canada. Then I'll discuss how monetary policy helps Canada to weather, and 
indeed to profit from, changes in the global economy. I'll wrap up by returning to the international stage 
and suggest that, in an increasingly integrated world economy, we all have a greater stake in a sound 
international monetary system.  
Developments in the global economy  
As  trade  barriers  have  come  down,  and  as  the  costs  of  transportation  and  communication  have 
diminished, international trade has grown and living standards have improved. Since 1970, trade as a 
share of GDP has risen from about 25 per cent to almost 45 per cent in industrialized countries. Over 
the same time period, trade in emerging-market economies has increased from less than 15 per cent 
of GDP to roughly 60 per cent. 
Much of the recent growth in trade has come as large emerging-market economies, such as China 
and India, have been integrating into the world economy. With this integration has come a significant 
increase  in  the  global  demand  for  commodities,  as  well  as  rapid  growth  in  the  production  of 
manufactured goods in Asia.  
That brings me to the first of the global developments I'd like to mention – a marked rise in the prices 
of commodities relative to those of manufactured goods. 
In the past five years, energy prices have risen by about 150 per cent, and non-energy commodity 
prices  have  increased  by  about  80  per  cent.  Over  the  same  time  period,  the  price  of  nickel  – 
Manitoba's biggest commodity export – has risen by about 500 per cent, and the price of copper has 
increased by more than 300 per cent.  
At the same time, the prices of many manufactured consumer goods, such as clothing, computers, 
entertainment equipment, and household appliances have decreased in many countries. In Canada, 
the prices of durable and semi-durable manufactured goods, excluding automobiles, have declined by 
about 1 to 2 per cent per year, on average, over the past five years (although more recently, prices for 
semi-durable  goods  have  strengthened).  Given  its  endowment  of  natural  resources,  Canada  has 
benefited greatly from strong commodity prices. But, just as clearly, new competition from China and 
other emerging Asian economies is posing some tough challenges for Canadian manufacturers.  
Global integration has also been affecting international savings and investment flows. Indeed, in the 
past  dozen  or  so  years,  what  is  sometimes  called  "financial  openness"  has  increased  significantly. 
Since 1995, the stock of cross-border investment in advanced countries has grown from about 40 per 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 1
cent of GDP to more than 120 per cent of GDP, and emerging markets have seen a similar increase, 
albeit from a lower base.  
This leads me to the second development I want to highlight. 
In recent years, desired global saving appears to have increased relative to desired global investment, 
which has made credit abundant and relatively cheap. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke has 
called this a global "saving glut." The International Monetary Fund has emphasized the weakness of 
global  investment  relative  to  global  growth.  But  whether  it's  high  saving  or  low  investment,  the  net 
effect is that large pools of internationally mobile capital have been searching for seemingly scarce 
investment  opportunities,  putting  downward  pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates.  As  investors  have 
searched for higher returns, risk spreads have narrowed, and interest in alternative investments and 
more innovative investment vehicles has expanded. 
While  there  are  several  reasons  for  this  abundance  of  global  credit,  global  integration  is  almost 
certainly an important part of the story. Saving rates in Asia are relatively high and exceed the region's 
investment needs. In addition, with the sharp rise in the price of oil in recent years, a number of the 
major oil-exporting countries have seen a large increase in their saving that has outstripped the growth 
of  their  investment  demand.  With  the  integration  of  these  economies  into  world  markets,  and  with 
investors seeking international diversification, new pools of capital have been injected into the global 
financial system.  
How is Canada faring?  
How  have  these  developments  been  affecting  the  Canadian  economy?  I'll  discuss  them  in  reverse 
order. 
The implications of abundant global credit are readily apparent. Long-term interest rates in Canada 
have been low. Even with some back-up in yields in recent weeks, yields on 30-year Government of 
Canada bonds remain well below 5 per cent. The Canadian stock market has been buoyant, and risk 
spreads on corporate debt are near historical lows. Household credit and money growth have been 
strong, and cross-border investment flows have accelerated. 
The rise in the prices of commodities relative to manufactured goods has reinforced many of these 
same  effects.  Since  Canada  is  a  net  exporter  of  commodities  and  a  net  importer  of  manufactured 
goods, the rise in commodity prices has made Canada wealthier as a nation. The increased value of 
Canada's  natural  resource  endowments  is  showing  up  in  higher  domestic  stock  market  prices  and 
increased  cross-border  investment  flows.  It  has  also  been  a  major  factor  supporting  robust 
consumption and investment growth in Canada. And of course it's showing up in a higher Canadian 
dollar.  
In the past five years, the Canadian dollar has gained about 45 per cent against the U.S. dollar. This 
appreciation since 2002 reflects a combination of factors, the most important of which is the significant 
increase in commodity prices. 
The other implication of the rise in the relative price of commodities is economic adjustment, by which I 
mean  the  reallocation  of  labour  and  capital  from  weaker  sectors  to  stronger  sectors.  The 
manufacturing sector, faced with higher costs for energy and other inputs, new sources of competition 
from Asia, and a stronger Canadian dollar, is going through a difficult adjustment. Our own surveys 
suggest that most manufacturers are responding to these challenges by making changes in the way 
they do business. Part of this adjustment has involved reducing employment. In the past three years, 
employment in manufacturing has declined by about 250,000 jobs. At the same time, the primary and 
service sectors have been expanding capacity and employment in response to strong demand. Over 
the past three years, employment in these sectors has increased by about 900,000 jobs, more than 
offsetting the reduction in manufacturing employment.  
Of course, this adjustment is not affecting all parts of the country in the same way. Growth in output, 
employment, and incomes has been fastest in Western Canada. Nevertheless, growth in Canada has 
been  broad  based.  Strength  in  domestic  demand  has  supported  solid  growth  of  output  and 
employment right across the country. Manitoba is in the middle of Canada in more ways than one. It 
has a well-diversified economy that closely resembles the structure of the Canadian economy. And in 
the past three years, GDP in Manitoba has grown by an average of 2.8 per cent, very close to the 
national average. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2007
Economic adjustment is always difficult, but it's necessary if we are to put capital and labour to work 
where they are most needed. This, in turn, helps to support rising living standards for Canadians. The 
main point here is that the Canadian economy has adjusted – and is continuing to adjust – to take 
advantage of our opportunities in an integrated global economy. 
Now let me turn to the role played by monetary policy.  
The role of monetary policy 
The Bank of Canada Act directs the Bank to "promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada." 
What  we've  learned  from  experience  is  that  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to 
Canada's economic and financial welfare is to maintain low, stable, and predictable inflation.  
Since 1991, Canada's monetary policy framework has consisted of two main elements – an inflation 
target and a flexible exchange rate. This framework has allowed Canada to pursue an independent 
monetary policy – a policy suited to our own circumstances. The two main elements work together and 
reinforce  each  other.  The  result  has  been  low  and  stable  inflation,  with  less  volatility  in  output  and 
employment. 
Let me elaborate on each of these elements. First, the inflation target.  
Since  1995,  the  target  for  inflation  has  been  the  2  per  cent  midpoint  of  a  1  to  3  per  cent  inflation-
control range. To keep inflation at 2 per cent, the Bank tries to keep a balance between the overall 
demand for and supply of goods and services in the Canadian economy. When overall demand and 
supply are in balance, the economy can operate at its full potential, and inflation is stable.  
Inflation control contributes to better economic performance in several ways, but let me highlight two 
that are particularly relevant in the current context. First, when inflation is low and stable, relative price 
signals  are  clear  and  readily  apparent,  and  this  helps  businesses  and  households  to  make  sound 
economic decisions. Second, meeting the inflation target helps to anchor inflation expectations to the 
target which, in turn, helps to keep inflation low and the economy more stable. 
In the 1970s, which was the last time Canada experienced a commodities boom on the scale of recent 
experience, monetary policy failed to anchor inflation expectations. So, when sharply higher oil prices 
pushed inflation up, workers and firms extrapolated this higher inflation forward, and prices and wages 
more  broadly  began  to  rise  more  quickly.  The  result  was  higher  and  more  variable  inflation,  and  a 
more painful economic adjustment.  
The  other  element  of  our  monetary  policy  framework  is  the  flexible  exchange  rate.  The  flexible 
exchange rate helps the economy to absorb shocks. Just as the Manitoba Floodway absorbs some of 
the  deluge  of  a  spring  flood,  the  floating  dollar  helps  the  economy  to  absorb  shocks  –  especially 
external  shocks  that  affect  our  economy  differently  than  those  of  our  major  trading  partners.  The 
flexible exchange rate also supports economic adjustment because it is much easier to have changes 
in the relative price of Canadian goods and services come through movements in the exchange rate 
than to require all domestic prices and wages to adjust. 
Now,  I  said  that  the  inflation  target  and  the  flexible  exchange  rate  work  together  to  promote  our 
economic  well-being.  What  this  means  in  concrete  terms  is  that  relative  prices  can  change  without 
spilling over into generalized inflation, and the economy can operate close to its potential. This means 
that  labour  and  capital  are  allocated  more  efficiently,  and  resources  that  move  out  of  contracting 
sectors  are  put  to  work  in  expanding  sectors.  And  that's  what  we've  been  seeing  in  Canada.  With 
unemployment at a 33-year low, it's clear that Canada has been going through this difficult process of 
adjustment with considerable success. Our job at the Bank of Canada is to continue to aim for 2 per 
cent inflation so that when some prices change, these are clearly relative price changes, and longer-
run inflation expectations remain anchored at the 2 per cent target.  
To  summarize,  our  monetary  policy  framework  has  served  us  well  in  maintaining  a  domestic 
environment of growth and stability. Together with other domestic policies, it has helped Canada to 
adjust to some significant changes in the global economy.  
But sound domestic policies are not sufficient to eliminate spillover effects from decisions and events 
on the other side of the world. And, while global integration creates new opportunities, it also poses 
certain risks. In particular, if other countries fail to pursue sound policies, we could see abrupt changes 
in  global  financial  conditions,  with  harmful  spillover  effects  in  Canada  and  elsewhere.  It  is  this 
possibility  that  points  to  the  need  for  a  global  table  where  countries  can  come  together  and  take 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 3
account  of  their  economic  and  financial  interdependence.  A  stable  global  economy  is  in  everyone's 
interest. 
The international dimension 
This is where the International Monetary Fund (IMF) fits in. It is the institution best placed to fulfill this 
role. With 185 member countries, the IMF truly spans the globe. And with a large, well-trained and 
very professional staff, the IMF has the "human capital" to analyze the increasingly complex linkages 
among economies. 
The IMF began operations 60 years ago – in fact, just as the predecessor of the CFA Institute came 
into being. The IMF's mandate was to promote international economic growth and financial stability. 
This  mandate  remains  relevant  today.  But  a  great  deal  has  changed  since  the  IMF  first  opened  its 
doors. The IMF was set up to oversee the global monetary system in an era of fixed exchange rates. 
Today,  flexible  exchange  rates  are  the  norm;  private  capital  flows  dwarf  IMF  resources;  financial 
markets  are  much  more  sophisticated  and  vastly  more  interconnected;  and  major  new  players  are 
integrating  into  the  global  economy.  To  be  effective  in  this  world,  the  IMF  must  change  the  way  it 
pursues its mandate.  
Recognizing this challenge, the IMF's managing director, Rodrigo de Rato, launched a strategic review 
of the Fund's role in 2004. The review covers a number of elements. The most critical is to decide 
exactly what the IMF should do to fulfill its mandate. I will focus my remaining comments on this issue. 
To be effective in a much larger and more integrated global economy, the IMF needs to become a 
more proactive institution, focused on limiting negative spillovers and preventing financial crises. And 
this  means  that  the  IMF  needs  to  strengthen  its  main  crisis-prevention  tool  –  surveillance  of  its 
member countries and of the global economy.  
We need IMF surveillance to help member countries set sound policies, and to provide all members 
with the assurance that everyone is playing by the rules of the game. We need the IMF to evaluate the 
coherence  of  policy  frameworks  across  countries,  to  assess  the  spillover  effects  of  one  country's 
policy  choices  on  other  countries,  and  to  speak  out  when  countries  thwart  adjustment  to  economic 
fundamentals to the detriment of other countries. And we need the IMF to be an effective global forum 
where members can come together to address international economic and financial issues.  
The groundwork for improved surveillance has been laid. As announced by Mr. de Rato three days 
ago in Montréal, the Fund and its members have just completed a revision of the guiding framework 
for surveillance. This is the first significant revision of the surveillance framework in 30 years, and it is 
a major accomplishment. The next step is to implement this framework. This will require establishing 
and periodically updating clear priorities and responsibilities for surveillance. Implementing the revised 
framework will improve the quality, the candour, and the even-handedness of IMF surveillance.  
Under  the  revised  guiding  framework,  surveillance  will  focus  on  the  four  pillars  of  macroeconomic 
policy  –  exchange  rate,  monetary,  fiscal,  and  financial  policies  –  as  they  affect  external  stability.  In 
implementing improved surveillance, it will be important to better integrate financial sector analysis and 
assessments  into  country  reviews,  and  to  take  a  broader,  multi-country  perspective.  It  is  also  very 
important that IMF surveillance be – and be seen to be – even-handed. This means that all members – 
not just those on fixed or managed exchange rates – should come equally under Fund surveillance. 
Improving  Fund  surveillance  by  applying  best  practices  universally  across  its  membership  would 
benefit all members. 
Conclusion 
I promised at the outset not to take advantage of this being the longest day of the year. So, allow me 
to conclude with three key points.  
First, adjusting to a changing world economy is difficult, but Canada is doing well by profiting from new 
opportunities  and  responding  to  new  global  realities.  Our  monetary  policy  framework  is  helping  the 
Canadian economy to absorb external shocks and to adjust to changing circumstances. 
Second,  sound  domestic  policies  are  central  to  maximizing  the  benefits  of  globalization,  while 
minimizing  the  risks.  But  as  global  markets  grow  and  broaden,  and  countries  become  more 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2007
interconnected,  we  have  an  increasing  stake  in  a  sound  international  monetary  system,  and  in  an 
institution to support it. 
Third, and finally, the IMF is best placed to be that institution. But to realize its potential, we need to 
modernize the way it pursues its mandate. A process of renewal is well under way, and it is important 
that the IMF and its members seize the opportunity to build an IMF for the 21st century. 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 5
