Durmuş Yilmaz: Economic governance – the Turkish case 
Opening remarks by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the Conference on Current Issues in Economic Governance, Ankara, 3 April 2007. 
 Ministers, academicians, bureaucrats, guests, 
It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  address  a  distinguished  audience  on  such  an  important  issue.  The 
conference will do much service by bringing forward the issue of “economic governance”, which we as 
the  Central  Bank  have  emphasized  at  numerous  occasions.  Let  me  thank  Bilkent  University  for 
creating such a productive environment. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  devote  some  time  to  highlighting  the  importance  of  principles  of  good 
governance  in  general  and  economic  governance  in  particular.  In  the  context  of  economic 
governance, I would also like to mention some issues on how to create good institutions. Then, I will 
proceed with the Turkish case and the Central Bank of Turkey. But first of all, I will start by outlining 
the basic definitions of the concepts I am going to use. 
Although the concept of governance is not new at all, in recent years it has started to be widely used 
in economics, especially in the development literature. While governance, or rather good governance, 
has  been  introduced  as  an  effective  tool  to  harness  globalisation,  it  is  not  easy  to  define  in  one 
sentence because of its many interacting elements. 
The definition that I found most meaningful is: irrespective of the size of system, whether it is a country 
or a small firm, good governance, as a concept, ensures that the rules of the system are equal, fair 
and clear to everyone. 
Although I will focus mainly on economic governance, let me briefly mention that in order to completely 
grasp  the  notion  of  good  governance,  one  has  to  look  at  its  subtitles.  Political  governance,  legal 
governance,  economic  governance,  and  corporate  governance  are  the  most  well  known  among 
several others. 
In fact, these subtitles overlap with each other. For example, political governance has common issues 
with economic governance, while economic governance has implications on corporate governance. 
Accordingly, economic governance is defined as the nature and practice of economic management, 
regulation  and  development;  or  the  institutional  environment  that  constraints  and  coordinates 
economic action. 
Distinguished guests, 
Another point associated with the analytic evaluation of governance is that good governance provides 
a very important set of pillars, which are effectual in the design of an economy. The four of them are 
the most useful ones for every economy: transparency, accountability, rule of law and participation1. 
First,  transparency  means  that  the  needed  and  the  necessary  information  is  freely  available  and 
directly accessible to those who will be affected by decisions and their enforcement2. 
Second,  accountability  is  a  mirror  image  of  the  responsibility  and  liability  of  an  organization  or 
institution for its decisions and actions to those who will be affected. In other words, the accountability 
is the price that institution pays for its independence. In democracies, every independent institution or 
organization is accountable to the public and to its institutional stakeholders3. 
Third, the participation principle ensures that every person in the system, in one way or the other, has 
a voice in the decision-making process4. 
                                                      
1   AusAID, (April, 2003). “Economic Governance and the Asian Crisis”. Quality Assurance Series. 
2   United Nations, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. “What is Good Governance” 
3  
4   AusAID, (April, 2003). “Economic Governance and the Asian Crisis”. Quality Assurance Series. 
Ibid. 
BIS Review 35/2007 
 1
And last but not least, good governance requires a fair legal framework and impartial enforcement of 
this legal system that protects property and individual rights and constitutes a strong base for prudent 
policy-making5. This legal structure assigns the principle of the rule of law. 
Distinguished guests, 
The  analysis  of  good  governance  brings  me  directly  to  the  question  of  why  good  governance  is 
important. 
The good governance provides key institutions and policies for the equitable and efficient allocation of 
resources, both labour and capital6. To put it differently, it allows an economy to yield higher growth 
rates by using the same amount of factors of production. 
The  strengthened  economic  governance  across  a  broad  spectrum  of  policy,  administrative  and 
institutional  issues,  is  now  widely  accepted  as  a  key  factor  in  rebuilding  domestic  and  international 
confidence in an economy7. 
The increase in the confidence in an economy generates more investment, which in turn leads to more 
production, more employment and increased welfare. 
In lending support to these claims the following empirical work can be cited as evidence: the World 
Bank  study  over  the  period  1964  to  1993  shows  that  economies  with  high  institutional  capability 
combined with good policies grew nearly eight times the rate of economies with low capability and bad 
policies8. 
The good governance is also essential for equitable distribution of income. High growth rates have an 
impact on poverty reduction by supplying more employment to the economy, but do not have direct 
effects on the redistribution of income. Indeed, good governance principles are the tools to redistribute 
income equitably, to produce policies for the provision of public health, infrastructure, education and 
other  public  goods  and  services  either  by  directly  government  or  by  the  private  sector  in  a  market, 
which is regulated and supervised by the government. 
Distinguished guests, 
However, in the vast literature on the subject, not all scholars think the same. There are some who 
disagree. They argue that the good governance is not a significant factor for economic growth and for 
an increase in the welfare of society. 
They  challenge  the  findings  of  empirical  studies  by  arguing  that  the  existence  of  principles  of  good 
governance in a country is impossible to quantify and hence it is hard to compare it with quantitative 
aggregates in the economy, such as growth, poverty, etc. 
There are also other challenges, technical in nature, against the importance of economic governance, 
such as causality problems and what is called the missing variable threats9. 
However, in the view of our experience in the Turkish economy during the last couple of years, these 
counter  arguments  do  not  provide  evidences  strong  enough  to  challenge  the  importance  of  good 
governance for economic and social prosperity. 
Distinguished guests, 
Until  recently,  Turkey  had  displayed  disappointing  performance  in  good  governance  principles 
compared to other emerging economies. In 2000, according to the World Bank’s calculations, Turkey 
ranked 134 among 193 countries in governance indicators. 
The thirty-years of high and chronic inflation, the macroeconomic instability and the subsequent crises, 
the delays in structural reforms, and the poor capability of institutions to deliver prudent policies and to 
initiate structural breakdown have all been the main determinants of this poor governance structure. 
                                                      
5   United Nations, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. “What is Good Governance” 
6  Brouwer, G. (December 2003). “Macroeconomics and Governance”, Treasury Working Paper. 2003-4. 
7  Australian Economic and Financial Management Initiative. “Economic Governance”. 
8   AusAID, (April, 2003). “Economic Governance and the Asian Crisis”. Quality Assurance Series. 
9   Avellaneda, S. D. (May 2006). “Good Governance, Institutions and Economic Development” 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2007
However, after 2001, Turkey has launched one of the largest structural changes in its economy and 
put  significant  efforts  into  implementing  good  governance  principles  and  searching  for  a  new 
institutional matrix. 
In the context of policymaking, the national programs, which have been supported by the international 
institutions  and  backed  by 
the  structural  reforms,  have  brought  about  rule-based  policy 
implementations. 
A major development in this regard has been the re-definition of the role of the public sector in the 
economy. 
The combination of the structural reforms and the prudent macroeconomic policies has also triggered 
efforts to reduce the size of the public sector in the economy. In the last five years, the private sector 
has been the engine of the economy and the main contributor of the high growth rates. 
The  Public  Fiscal  Management  and  Control  Law,  the  Public  Procurement  Law  and  the  multi-year 
budgetary framework have been put into practice in order to enhance the fiscal policy and the incomes 
policy of the public sector. 
Hence, this structure has created a reliable base for the tight fiscal policy involved high primary surplus 
targets that have been achieved and maintained since 2003. 
The Banking Sector Reform, the FDI Investment Law, and the Law on The Protection of Intellectual 
and Industrial Property Rights are on the list of structural reforms that have produced macroeconomic 
and financial stability and increased the resilience of the economy against external shocks. Now, the 
Turkish economy is not one that is crisis prone. 
Distinguished guests,  
The  good  governance  not  only  defines  the  rules  of  the  game  but  also  initiates  and  determines  the 
structure  of  institutions.  However  good  the  policies  may  be,  if  the  capacities  of  the  institutions 
implementing these policies are not matching the rigour of the policies, the policies will not be able to 
deliver what expected of them. 
If I am to repeat myself once more, in the light of the structural transformation in the Turkish economy 
during the last five years, I can easily say that Turkey is a clear example of the view that governments 
need  to  assume  a  leading  role  in  changing  and reforming  the  existing  institutions and  in setting  up 
brand new ones10. In this respect, newly established independent authorities charged with regulating 
markets  from  competition  to  public  procurement  and  to  energy  matters  might  be  cited  as  good 
examples. However it goes without saying that the most prominent institutional change that took place 
is the amendment of the Law of the Central Bank of Turkey, which made it independent. 
The manifestations of the independence of the Central Bank in the form of greater transparency and 
accountability together with the inflation-targeting regime contributed to the implementation of a rule-
based monetary policy. After the thirty-year period of high inflation, we have experienced single-digit 
inflation rates. 
An  independent  central  bank  has  constituted  and  will  continue  to  constitute  a  corner  stone  for  the 
structural transformation towards good governance and good institutions in Turkey. The Central Bank 
of  Turkey  aims  to  match  the  expectations  by  being  a  good  institution  through  its  independent, 
transparent  and  accountable  status,  policy  implementations  focused  on  its  sole  mandate  of  price 
stability and by practices to increase efficiency in institutional design. 
Distinguished guests, 
Turkey has decidedly taken a significant step in improving governance indicators since 2000. In 2005, 
it  advanced  to  rank  103  among  216  countries  in  the  governance  indicators  reported  by  the  World 
Bank. 
However,  the  continuation  of  this  performance  is  as  important  as  the  recorded  performance  so  far. 
Hence, we still have a significant way to go and every institution or organization in the economy has its 
own responsibility. 
                                                      
10   Ahrens,  J.  and  Meurers,  M.  “How  Governance  Affects  the  Quality  of  Policy  Reform  and  Economic  Performance:  New 
Evidence for Economies in Transition” 
BIS Review 35/2007 
 3
That is why it is essential that there should be a good level of cooperation of the policy makers and of 
the  economic  management  units  in  the  leading  role  of  the  public  sector  and  the  current  national 
program. Calls for policy coordination are based on the idea that individual policies, which affect one 
another,  should  take  each  others’  objectives  and  actions  into  account  in  order  to  yield  the  best 
possible outcome11. 
In this respect, for example, banks should play a special role in corporate governance in monitoring 
investments and leading corporate reorganizations.  
The  private  sector  should  establish  medium  and  long-term  strategies,  prepare  more  transparent 
balance sheets, give importance to modern risk management principles and pay attention to research 
and development activities in line with corporate governance. 
The public sector should assume a supervisory and regulatory role within the scope of the principles of 
good  governance  and  work  towards  creating  an  atmosphere  in  which  the  unregistered  economic 
activities and unfair competition are eliminated and thus the private sector can compete in international 
markets as equal partners. 
It is also worth to note that the sequence and prioritisation of reforms are also important. That is to 
say, one should bear in mind that achieving the best practice on governance in this dynamic economic 
environment requires a carefully planned long-term reform process. 
Finally,  I  would  like  once  more  to  remind  you  that  the  prerequisite  of  reaping  the  benefits  of  good 
governance is to maintain macroeconomic stability. That’s why, in every step that we will take in the 
future, we have to be sure to avoid jeopardizing the macroeconomic stability that we have achieved so 
far. 
Distinguished guests, 
Good governance principles serve as a blueprint for decision makers both at the economy-wide and 
firm specific levels to cope with the changing economic environment and the uncertainty that comes 
with it. 
As of today, Turkey is in a position to focus on structural and micro reforms and to improve its own 
governance structure in line with the European Union membership perspective. 
In  conclusion,  the  exchange  of  views  and  experiences  is  an  important  step  to  develop  a  coherent 
overall sense of economic identity. With this note, I would like to thank Bilkent University once again 
and wish a successful conference. 
Thank you. 
                                                      
11   Speech by Issing, O. (2004). “EMU and Economic Governance”. 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2007
