W A Wijewardena: Microfinance – a potent instrument of poverty alleviation 
Valedictory address by Mr W A Wijewardena, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at 
the Third Training Program on Microfinance Delivery System, College of Agricultural Banking, Reserve 
Bank of India, Pune, 16 March 2007. 
 It is indeed an honor for me to deliver the Valedictory Address on the occasion of the conclusion of the 
Third  Training  Program  on  Microfinance  Delivery  System  in  Pune.  The  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka 
made a request to the College of Agricultural Banking, a renowned training institute on microfinance, 
to  prepare  a  tailor-made  training  program  for  its  staff  and  microfinance  practitioners  engaged  in  its 
poverty alleviation projects. The College, popularly known as CAB, very kindly agreed to this. After the 
exchange of several correspondences between the two institutions, the training program was finally 
arranged.  Two  batches  of  trainees  have  already  followed  the  program  and  enjoyed  the  hospitality 
which CAB had offered them. Back at home, those trainees have spoken very high of the quality of the 
training imparted to them by CAB. I am sure that those who pass out today in this third program too 
will return to Sri Lanka with the same high opinion on CAB’s professional standards. 
Microfinance is a very potent instrument of poverty alleviation. It fills the gaps which normally arise in 
macro-type  poverty  reduction  policies  pursued  by  governments.  The  usual  strategy  adopted  by 
governments to attack poverty has been the attainment of a high economic growth continuously over 
the long run. With that growth, it is expected that the benefits of economic uplifting would trickle down 
to  lower  levels  of  the  society.  As  a  result,  the  overall  economic  conditions  of  all  segments  of  the 
population would elevate to a higher level. It will kill the absolute poverty levels. Some good examples 
are  countries  like  Malaysia  and  South  Korea.  Both  these  countries  were  able  to  reduce  absolute 
poverty from a very high level of over 50 percent to a very low level below 6 percent within about four 
decades. 
If macroeconomic growth can tackle poverty, the n why should one be bothered about microfinance? 
The reason is very clear. When macro-policies are adopted, there are certain gaps that are created in 
the alleviation of poverty. As a result, some segments of the society would experience a worsening of 
their situation. This is because all the people in a society are not capable of moving along with the 
market at the same speed. Some move faster than the market. They are the super-performers and 
stand  to  gain  more.  Some  move  at  the  same  rate  as  the  market.  They  attain  a  gain  more  or  less 
equivalent  to  the  market  performance.  There  is  no  problem  about  both  these  categories.  That  is 
because they have the capacity to look after themselves. The problem arises in the case of people 
who are unable to move forward at the speed of the market. They become laggards and are left out. 
Hence, there should be a special strategy to bring them to the mainstream of economic life. 
The normal strategy that had been adopted to address this issue has been the introduction of safety 
nets to capture them before they make a free fall to the ground. The safety nets so introduced have 
taken different forms depending on the era or the country. About five decades ago, the safety nets 
took the form of providing outright grants to the poor people. The objective of the grants was to provide 
some relief to them, so that they could at least meet their food requirements. The weaknesses in this 
type of strategies are well known. It encourages poor people to remain in the safety net forever. They 
have no incentive to move out of the net, because moving out would mean their having to work hard 
for a living. If at least the basic requirement of food is provided free of charge, then why would anyone 
want to work for the same? Economists have long named this problem “moral hazard” problem. This 
problem  simply  says  that,  when  one  helps  another,  the  person  being  helped  does  not  have  the 
incentive to adopt even the minimum safety measures. As a result, he increases the chance of the 
occurrence of the event which the helper desires to prevent. The consequence is that it imposes an 
additional burden on the helper. As a result, neither the helper nor the helped would be able to get out 
of the vicious circle in which the both parties would get trapped. 
The  moral  hazard  behavior  by  people  who  get  free  goods  is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  It  had  been 
known for many centuries. The Buddha has preached in one of the discourses titled Chakka Vatti 
Seehanaada Sutta how the king of a country was duped by the people who were given free capital to 
commence  self-employment  projects.  According  to  this  Sutta,  the  people  of  a  certain  country  had 
resorted, in large numbers, to theft and robbery. The king had consulted his wise advisors to find how 
to eliminate it. The advice given was that people had resorted to theft and robbery, because they had 
BIS Review 48/2007 
 1
no a way of earning a livelihood. Hence, to enable them to start self-employment projects, the king 
opened his treasury and allowed them to take whatever the money they needed for use as capital. 
After some time, the people realized that if they resorted to more theft and robbery, they could get 
more money from the king. As a result, instead of such felonies declining, they indeed started to rise in 
the kingdom. 
A similar example has been attributed to the Chinese philosopher, Confucius, who lived in the 5th 
century BC. One day, when he was returning from the river after a fishing expedition, a beggar, sitting 
by the side of the road, was reported to have asked him for a fish. “I’ll not give you a fish. Instead, I’ll 
tell you how you could catch a fish” Confucius is reported to have told the beggar. The moral of the 
story  was  that  if  the  beggar  was  given  a  fish,  he  would  get  used  to  the  free  fish  and  beg  for  it 
everyday.  Then,  it  would  have  been  a  severe  burden  on  Confucius.  So,  he  advised  the  beggar  to 
depend on himself rather than begging from others. 
The experience in poverty alleviation throughout the globe has shown that safety nets in the form of 
outright grants do not work in the long run. Hence, the safety nets that were introduced earlier were 
converted to “safety ropes”. Those safety ropes were expected to provide a means for the poor to 
hang onto and then climb upward with the support given to them. Thus came the era of microfinance 
which  indeed  was  a  safety  rope  through  which  the  poor  could  cross  the  poverty  line.  Such 
microfinance would help them to attain the goal of getting out of poverty, provided certain conditions 
are met. 
The  training  program  conducted  by  CAB  teaches  us  these  conditions  which  are  needed  for  the 
sustenance of microfinance schemes. The experience throughout the world tells us that microfinance 
alone  is  not  sufficient  to  eliminate  poverty.  This  is  because  microfinance  satisfies  only  the  funding 
requirements of micro-enterprises. But, funding is only one aspect of a micro-business. Prior to as well 
as subsequent to funding, there are a large number of other requirements that have to be satisfied. 
First and foremost, anyone desirous of starting a micro-business should have a good knowledge of the 
market in which he would sell his products. A feature of the market is that it is driven by the consumer 
who is considered the sovereign. If the consumer does not need a product, no one could force him to 
buy it, even when it is supplied free of charge. Hence, the goods and services that are produced by 
micro-businesses should always meet the requirements of the consumers. 
How can a micro-entrepreneur identify the market requirements? What proxies can he use for that, if 
he does not have direct information on the same? A problem which he would face in this respect is 
that he has to produce for the future. Hence, any information relating to the past may be a poor guide 
for that. This is not a problem unique only to micro-businesses. It is equally relevant to big producers 
as well. But the advantage for such big business firms is that they have the benefit of the results of 
consumer  preference  surveys  conducted  by  various  institutions.  Such  survey  results  are  expensive 
and beyond the financial capacity of micro-businesses. Yet, without the benefit of such results, it would 
be a pure gambling for a micro-business to get into the production of these goods and services. In a 
world where information is costly, this would be a serious blow to the potential micro-entrepreneurs. 
What this means is that if correct information is not available, micro-businesses are doomed to fail. 
Hence,  in  the  delivery  of  microfinance,  it  is  equally  important  to  arm  the  micro-entrepreneurs  with 
accurate market information regarding the consumer preferences. Though such information may be 
costly  to  a  single  user,  it  may  not  be  so  if  all  micro-entrepreneurs  get  together  and  acquire  the 
necessary information wholesale. Such information could be kept in an information bank maintained at 
microfinance institutions. Since it is not advisable to provide such information free of charge, due to 
the potential moral hazard problem, a fee should be charged from the users. In addition, microfinance 
institutions too could conduct such market research and disseminate the required information among 
their customers. That should also be provided at a price. 
Another important requirement of micro-businesses is the need for preparing micro-business plans. 
The necessary technical know-how for this is not available with the ordinary micro-entrepreneurs. It 
requires them to prepare the estimates of cash flows, market sales, funding requirements, legal and 
marketing  aspects  and  business  disaster  management  techniques  etc.  Once  they  are  put  into  a 
generally accepted format, then only they would be acceptable to the lending banks. It is necessary 
that all the potential micro-entrepreneurs should be knowledgeable of preparing such business plans. 
If  they  cannot  do  that,  they  could  engage  specifically  trained  business  plan  consultants  for  the 
preparation of those plans at a fee. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2007
This was experimented in one of the development projects implemented by the Central Bank of Sri 
Lanka.  In  this  particular  project,  bank  financing  was  available  for  both  micro and  small  businesses. 
One of the requirements of banks was the submission of a comprehensive business plan, acceptable 
to  the  banker,  by  the  prospective  micro-borrowers.  But,  none  of  the  borrowers  had  the  capacity  to 
prepare them. As a result, the utilization of the moneys in the project became a problem. As a solution, 
it was decided to outsource the function to some business development consultants at a cost to the 
borrowers.  Accordingly,  a  number  of  youth  who  had  studied  economics,  business  studies  and 
accounting  for  the  GCE  Advanced  Level  were  selected  for  training  as  business  consultants.  Then, 
they were appointed to provide consultancy services to potential entrepreneurs for a fee. The lending 
banks also paid a certain commission to them for services such as loan recovery and follow up work. 
The program worked well and a new generation of fee-based business consultants was developed by 
the  project.  At  the  end  of  the  project,  most  of  these  consultants,  having  used  their  own  expertise, 
started their own businesses. 
Another pertinent issue involved in microfinance delivery is how to reduce the transaction costs and 
make available the loans at the time they are needed by the borrowers. The transaction cost is simply 
the additional resources which a person has to spend, other than what is paid to the supplier, in order 
to complete a transaction. In the case of borrowing, transaction costs include any payment which the 
borrower has to make other than the payment of interest to the lender. Such costs, therefore, comprise 
legal fees, application fees, loan processing fees, any bribes or commissions payable, stamp duties 
and other taxes and, finally the opportunity cost of the time spent for pushing the application through 
bureaucracy and the waiting time. This can be compared with a village money lender who is alleged 
to be charging an exorbitantly high interest rate. Yet, the transaction costs involved in borrowing from 
a money lender is practically zero. Hence, from an efficiency point of view, a village money lender is 
preferable to a microfinance institution with a high transaction costs. 
In Sri Lanka, in late 1980s, the Central Bank ran an agricultural credit scheme of which the interest 
rate payable by the farmer had been fixed at 9 percent when the market interest rates amounted to 
about 20 per cent. The subsidy was intended to reduce the farmers’ cost of production and promote 
agriculture. A study conducted by ADB revealed that the effective interest rate paid by farmers, after 
taking  into  account  all  the  costs,  amounted  to  30  percent,  much  higher  than  even  the  free  market 
rates. The difference between the actual cost incurred by the farmer and the rate paid by him to the 
lending bank was wastage of resources. It had not been the income of anyone. Hence, such costs are 
known  as  deadweight  losses.  Microfinance  institutions  should,  therefore,  strive  to  keep  the 
transaction costs at a minimum and eliminate the possibility of incurring deadweight losses. 
The  on-time  delivery  of  microfinance  loans  is  also  a  very  important  requirement.  Most  of  the 
microfinance  projects  are  agriculture  based  businesses.  Hence,  there  is  a  necessity  for  meeting 
crucial expenses on-time. For instance, if a farmer has to apply fertilizer to his field, he has to do it on 
the  due  date.  For  him  to  buy  fertilizer,  he  needs  money  also  on  the  due  date.  This  requires  the 
microfinance institutions to release their loans on the due dates. Any undue delay would be immensely 
costly. 
A final word should also be said about the subsidization of the interest rates under microfinance credit 
schemes.  Such  subsidized  credit  is  demanded,  not  by  the  microfinance  borrowers,  but  by  urban 
based social workers and politicians. The problem with subsidized credit is that it flows not into the 
microfinance  projects  but  elsewhere.  What  microfinance  borrowers  need  is  not  cheap  credit.  They 
need credit on simple terms in time at zero transaction costs. When the credit is subsidized, it not only 
leads to wastage, but also goes into the hands of undeserving individuals. Most probably, middle class 
and lower middle class people would flock to appropriate such credit which they plan to use for other 
types of non-productive purposes. In this context, informal money lenders would definitely provide a 
role  model  for  microfinance  institutions.  Instead  of  trying  to  fight  the  money  lenders,  microfinance 
institutions should learn good management practices adopted by them. 
All in all, microfinance delivery is a very subtle subject which should be handled very carefully. The 
best practices of microfinance lending are common to all countries. But, there may be a necessity for 
such  countries  to  vary  the  actual  implementation  based  on  the  specific  country  requirements.  This 
arises from the famous dictum that one shoe will not fit all the feet. For the size and the variance of 
each and every foot, a different variety of a shoe has to be made. I hope that the participants of this 
training program have acquired this wisdom and would return to Sri Lanka armed with that wisdom. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 48/2007 
 3
