Irma Rosenberg: Monetary policy and the labour market 
Speech by Ms Irma Rosenberg, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Simra, Stockholm, 
22 May 2007.  
 Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation to come here! 
After the economic crisis and the changeover in economic policy at the beginning of the 1990s, the 
Swedish  economy  has  functioned  much  better  than  anyone could  have  imagined.  GDP  growth  has 
been higher than in the 1970s and 1980s, inflation has been low and more stable and real wages have 
increased much more quickly than during both of the previous decades. However, developments in the 
labour market have not been as favourable. Unemployment rose tangibly in connection with the crisis 
in the 1990s and has since then remained at a higher average level than before. 
Inflation has on average been slightly lower than the Riksbank’s inflation target since it was introduced 
in  1985.  During  the  years  2004-2005  inflation  was  noticeably  below  the  target.  It  may  therefore  be 
relevant to claim that the high unemployment is largely due to incorrectly balanced monetary policy. 
There are also debaters who have implied that an economic policy that aims at low inflation can in 
itself contribute to unemployment being higher than necessary. I intend to devote my speech today to 
explaining my views on this. I also intend to briefly comment on how I viewed the current situation in 
the labour market in connection with the monetary policy meeting in May and what significance this 
had for my stance at the meeting. However, I will not give any new monetary policy signals. 
But first I shall begin by providing some historical perspective on this issue by giving an account of the 
background to the economic policy change of regime at the beginning of the 1990s. 
From fine-tuning stabilisation policy to "stable game rules” 
Unemployment  is  currently  high  in  comparison  with  the  levels  that  prevailed  during  the  1970s  and 
1980s. Open unemployment at that time varied between 1.5 and 3.5 per cent. In the mid-1990s open 
unemployment went up to just over 8 per cent, while during recent years it has varied between 4 and 6 
per cent. However, the factors that contributed to holding down unemployment during earlier decades 
at the same time contributed to the economic crisis at the beginning of the 1990s and also to the need 
for an economic policy change of regime. 
From the 1950s up to the mid-1970s the authorities in Sweden attempted to conduct what is usually 
known as fine-tuning stabilisation policy. This involved trying to parry fluctuations in economic activity 
with an active fiscal policy. This policy was relatively successful up to around the mid-1960s. With the 
target of full employment in their line of vision, politicians were then tempted to conduct an economic 
policy that was on average too expansionary. It also contributed to a growing central government debt. 
The  economy  was  fuelled  during  economic  upturns,  which  led  to  overheating  and  inflation.  The 
Riksbank’s  task  was  to  try  to  defend  the  fixed  exchange  rate.  The  social  partners  were  instead  to 
contribute to low inflation by ensuring that wage increases were not too high. 
Soaring wage costs and poorer international competitiveness meant that the system broke down in the 
mid-1970s. To safeguard the objective of full employment, the krona was devalued by a total of around 
40 per cent on five different occasions between 1976 and 1982. Each devaluation held unemployment 
down  temporarily,  but  instead  contributed  to  kindle  the  inflation  fire  until  it  was  time  for  the  next 
devaluation. Unemployment was also held down in that the number of employees in the public sector 
increased substantially. The number of persons employed in the public sector increased from 15 to 30 
per  cent  between  1960  and  1980.  In  my  opinion,  unemployment  was  held  down  during  this  period 
using  methods  that  were  not  sustainable  in  the  long  term.  I  consider  this  to  be  the  first  important 
aspect  to  bear  in  mind when  discussing  why  unemployment  is  now  much  higher  than  it  was  in  the 
1970s and 1980s. 
Towards the end of the 1980s the situation became untenable. Everyone was then counting on the 
krona being devalued if the rate of increase in prices and wages rose too high. The driving forces for 
holding down prices and wages had thus disappeared. The speculations against the krona finally led 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 1
to the Riksbank, after using large interest rate increases to defend the krona, was forced to let the 
krona float in autumn 1992. We suffered a crisis and unemployment soared. An insight was gradually 
reached that a new economic policy approach was necessary. Earlier experiences and even research 
indicated  that  a  healthy  economic  policy  should  be  based  on  ”stable  game  rules”  in  the  form  of 
orderliness in public finances and low, stable inflation. These two principles became the mainstays of 
the  new  economic  policy  framework  produced  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  Fiscal  policy  was 
subjected  to  a  requirement  of  long-term  sustainability.  Monetary  policy  was  given  the  task  of 
safeguarding price stability. 
Monetary policy aims at price stability 
One may sometimes gain the impression in the general debate that the economic policy change of 
regime in the early 1990s meant that monetary policy was given responsibility for stabilisation policy in 
a broader sense. Those who argue that this is the case think that the Riksbank should give greater 
consideration to developments in the labour market. I therefore think it is important to point out that the 
objective  of  monetary  policy  is  low  and  stable  inflation.  This  was  made  clear  in  the  new  Sveriges 
Riksbank Act that came into force in 1999. 
The act states that the objective is to maintain price stability but this is not specified in greater detail. 
The Riksbank has therefore specified a target, whereby inflation should be 2 per cent. To emphasise 
that  it  is  not  possible  to  continuously  achieve  the  target  exactly,  the  Riksbank  has  also  specified  a 
tolerance interval around the target of plus/minus 1 percentage point. The Riksbank’s inflation target is 
well in line with the targets chosen by other central banks. 
The  fact  that  we  have  a  target  for  inflation  does  not  mean  that  we  disregard  developments  in 
employment  and  unemployment.  The  Riksbank  conducts  what  is  usually  called  flexible  inflation 
targeting.  This  means  that  we  take  real  economy  developments  into  consideration  when  making 
monetary policy decisions. If inflation for some reason deviates from the target, we must decide how 
quickly  inflation  should  be  brought  back  on  target.  This  depends  on  how,  among  other  things, 
unemployment is affected. This is also in line with the preliminary work to the Sveriges Riksbank Act. It 
is stated there that the Riksbank shall support the targets for general economic policy with a view to 
achieving sustainable growth and employment without prejudice to the objective of price stability. 
There is no simple correlation between inflation and unemployment 
Unemployment varies over the economic cycle. Normally, unemployment is below its so-called long-
term equilibrium level when economic activity is good. A high level of resource utilisation in the labour 
market normally also means that the pressure from wage increases is high. This in turn has the short-
term  effect  of  pushing  up  inflation.  In  economic  downturns,  however,  unemployment  is  high  and 
resource  utilisation  is  low.  This  usually  contributes  to  lower  wage  and  inflationary  pressures  in  the 
short term. The Riksbank therefore also closely follows resource utilisation in the labour market. 
In the short term, a central bank can to some extent lower unemployment by increasing demand and 
inflation  with  expansionary  monetary  policy  (in  the  Riksbank's  case,  by  cutting  the  repo  rate).  This 
leads to companies increasing production and taking on more employees. Using the same reasoning, 
unemployment would therefore rise if inflation was pushed down by tightening monetary policy. It is 
this  relationship  that  is  usually  described  with  the  aid  of  what  is  known  as  the  short-term  Phillips 
Curve. 
Some of the criticism aimed at monetary policy in recent years appears to be based on the assumption 
that there is a clear-cut long-term relationship between inflation and unemployment. However, it is not 
possible to buy lower unemployment in the longer term by allowing inflation to rise. Sooner or later 
wage-earners  will  require  compensation  for  the  higher  inflation  by  raising  their  wage  demands.  As 
prices and wages rise, the stimulating effect of monetary policy will wane. Demand will fall again and 
employment will decline. In the long term, unemployment will return to its long-term equilibrium level. A 
systematic, expansionary monetary policy would only have the consequence that inflation and inflation 
expectations would soar. This correlation is usually illustrated with the aid of the so-called long-term 
Phillips  curve.  There  is  currently  a  broad  consensus  on  this,  both  in  central  bank  circles  and  the 
academic world. In my opinion, it is therefore not possible to claim that an economic policy that aims 
for low and stable inflation would in itself lead to higher unemployment. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2007
Another  part  of  the  criticism  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  it  is  not  possible  to  buy  lower 
unemployment by pushing up inflation, although there is instead apparently an assumption that if only 
the  Riksbank  would  ensure  that  inflation  remains  at  2  per cent,  then  unemployment  would  stabilise 
around  its  long-term  equilibrium  level.  In  practice,  however,  there  is  no  such  simple  relationship 
between inflation and unemployment. Firstly, unemployment is affected by a number of factors other 
than inflation, most of which have nothing to do with monetary policy, such as productivity changes, 
changes in regulatory systems and various shocks that regularly impact on the economy. Similarly, 
inflation  is  affected  not  only  by  developments  in  the  labour  market,  but  by  many  other  factors. 
Empirical  studies  have  shown  that  unemployment  “explains”  a  relatively  small  percentage  of  total 
inflation.  This  means  that  inflation  developments  are  largely  “explained”  by  other  factors  than 
unemployment. Secondly, it has proved very difficult to assess what is a long-term equilibrium level for 
unemployment and moreover that this also varies over time. One conclusion of this is that even if the 
Riksbank were to always succeed in holding inflation at the target, this would be no guarantee that 
unemployment would be low and stable. Unemployment is instead determined in the long run by how 
well the labour market functions, for instance, with regard to matching unemployed persons and job 
vacancies. 
My  main  message  here  is  that  there  is  no  clear-cut  and  stable  relationship  between  inflation  and 
unemployment, either in the long term or the short term. Simplified relationships between inflation and 
unemployment,  such  as  the  short-term  and  long-term  Phillips  Curves,  may  function  as  pedagogical 
tools.  However,  this  type  of  simplified  relationship  is  not  practicable  in  determining  how  monetary 
policy  should  be  conducted.  Nor  can  such  simple  relationships  be  used  to  analyse  to  what  degree 
monetary policy has contributed to higher or lower unemployment. 
Monetary policy is based on forecasts 
Let me go on to the next issue I intend to take up, namely the conditions under which monetary policy 
is  conducted.  This  is  an  important  aspect  of  a  discussion  of  how  far  monetary  policy  can  be 
considered to have contributed to higher unemployment. 
As monetary policy has an impact on demand and inflation with a time lag, the Riksbank must base its 
interest rate decisions on a forecast of future economic developments. All forecasts are uncertain. One 
therefore cannot expect that the Riksbank will always be able to exactly predict what will happen in the 
economy. It is also difficult to quickly bring inflation back on target once a deviation has occurred. This 
may  also  be  unsuitable  for  real  economy  reasons.  It  means  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  evaluate 
monetary policy in the basis of the opinion that inflation must always be on target. One should rather 
assume  that  inflation  will  rarely  be  exactly  on  target.  In  addition,  the  Riksbank  deliberately  allows 
inflation to deviate from target during shorter periods. This has been the case, for instance, when there 
have been temporary changes in inflation that we have not considered to warrant being counteracted 
by monetary policy. For example, we assumed that inflation would be below target at the beginning of 
2004 due to energy prices having temporarily pushed up price in early 2003. However, inflation turned 
out to be even lower in 2004 than we had expected. But what I would like to say here is that one must 
expect inflation to deviate from target sometimes and that there are good reasons for this. I therefore 
consider  that  it  is  wrong  to  claim  that  monetary  policy  contributes  to  higher  unemployment  just 
because inflation is below target during a particular period. 
Another  thing  one  can  expect  from  the  Riksbank  is  that  we  should  make  the  best  forecasts  we 
possibly can. It is also important that our forecasts are evaluated. Last year our monetary policy was 
evaluated  by  two  external  professors,  Giavazzi  and  Mishkin.  They  considered  that  the  Riksbank’s 
forecasts for inflation compare favourably with those of other forecasters. However, for both 2004 and 
2005 both we and other analysts overestimated inflation. This leads me on to some other questions I 
intend to take up. Why did we overestimate inflation in our forecasts for those years? To what extent is 
the fact that inflation has undershot the target due to incorrectly formulated monetary policy, and what 
effects could this have on unemployment? 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 3
Why has inflation undershot the target? 
Between 1995 and 2006 CPI inflation was on average 1.3 per cent. Measured in terms of UND1X, 
which is what we normally base our monetary policy on, inflation amounted to an average of 1.7 per 
cent during the same period.1 One reason why CPI inflation has been lower than UND1X inflation is 
that the repo rate has been regularly cut during this period. Regardless of what measure is used, the 
legal objective of price stability has been achieved. However, inflation has on average undershot the 
target the Riksbank itself has set. 
During 2004-2005 inflation deviated substantially from the Riksbank’s target. Some debaters have, as 
I  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  claimed  that  this  has  to  a  large  degree  contributed  to  the  high 
unemployment in recent years. Of course, it is true that incorrectly formulated monetary policy could 
lead to unnecessarily high unemployment. But to be able to assess monetary policy in this regard, it is 
important to first find out why inflation has undershot the target. It is also important to examine what 
consequences these factors may have had for unemployment, in addition to the effects related to the 
formulation of monetary policy. 
The  analyses  made  of  why  inflation  has  been  so  low  in  recent  years  indicate  that  it  is  primarily 
unexpectedly  high  and  lasting  growth  in  productivity  that  is  the  explanation  and  not  contractionary 
monetary  policy.2  One  factor  that  supports  this  conclusion  is  that  inflation  has  been  low  despite 
demand and growth in the economy being relatively high. But the higher labour productivity has meant 
that companies have been able to increase their production without needing to raise their prices so 
much.  It  would  also  appear  that  it  has  contributed  to  companies  being  able  to  increase  production 
without needing to recruit new staff to a great extent. This may be an explanation to what is referred to 
in the debate as “jobless growth”. The high productivity growth has also contributed to the Riksbank 
being able to cut the interest rate to a historically low level. 
My conclusion is therefore that we have first and foremost overestimated inflation because we have 
underestimated the strength of productivity growth. Giavazzi and Mishkin observed in their evaluation 
of  monetary  policy  that  this  has  also  applied  to  most  other  forecasters.  We  have  therefore  not 
overestimated  inflation  because  we  have  failed  to  take  into  account  developments  in  the  labour 
market. Nor is it because our monetary policy decisions have been unreasonable. This was also noted 
by Giavazzi and Mishkin in their evaluation. 
Nevertheless, there is of course reason for the Riksbank to be self-critical. We must become better at 
understanding  the  driving  forces  behind  productivity  growth.  In  2005  we  started  a  project  at  the 
Riksbank that is aimed at increasing our understanding of the strong growth in productivity in Sweden 
in  recent  years.  More  specifically,  we  are  studying  the  relationship  between  IT  investments, 
organisational  changes,  internal  training  and  productivity.  At  the  beginning  of  May  this  year  we 
organised  a  seminar  where  economists  from  a  number  of  organisations  presented  their  views  on 
developments  in  productivity.  In  December  we  will  also  be  organising  a  workshop  where  external 
researchers  will  contribute  valuable  points  of  view.  Hopefully  this  will  make  us  wiser  with  regard  to 
developments in productivity growth. However, at the same time, one must have realistic expectations 
of what can be achieved here; it will probably always be difficult to assess future productivity growth. 
What significance would lower interest rates in recent years have had for unemployment? 
There  are  thus  natural  explanations  as  to  why  inflation  has  been  so  low  in  recent  years.  With  the 
picture we ourselves and most other forecasters had of inflation prospects during 2002-2003, it would 
probably have been difficult to motivate a much lower interest rate than we chose. With hindsight, it 
can of course be noted that the repo rate could have been cut more quickly. We have pointed this out 
ourselves in our own assessments.3 The question is what this could have meant for unemployment. 
                                                      
1   When one measures inflation with the aid of UND1X, one adjusts CPI for the direct effects of changes in indirect taxes and 
changes in mortgage interest costs. 
2   See Giavazzi, F. and F.S. Mishkin (2006), "An evaluation of Swedish monetary policy between 1995 and 2005”, Reports 
from  the  Riksdag  2006/07:RFR  1,  Committee  on  Finance.  See  also  Sveriges  Riksbank  (2006),  “Material  for  assessing 
monetary policy 2003-2005”, box in Inflation Report no. 1 and Sveriges Riksbank (2005), “Material for assessing monetary 
policy 2002-2004”, box in Inflation Report no. 1. 
3   See the references in note 2. 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2007
The Riksbank’s calculations imply, for example, that an interest rate a half a percentage point lower for 
six  months  would  have  led  to  lower  unemployment  corresponding  to  two  or  three  tenths  of  a 
percentage point. However, I would like to emphasise that this type of calculation is very uncertain. 
Given this, I believe that monetary policy cannot be said to have contributed significantly to the high 
unemployment. What other possible explanations are there? 
What can explain the rise in unemployment? 
As  I  mentioned  initially,  unemployment  was  held  down  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  with  an  economic 
policy  that  was  not  sustainable  in  the  long  term.  I  believe  that  this  could  have  concealed  structural 
problems  in  the  labour  market  that  only  became  visible  when  the  economic  policy  regime  was 
changed in the early 1990s. 
If one studies unemployment, particularly total unemployment, over a long period of time, one can see 
that it has shown a trend increase ever since the end of the 1960s. This also applies if one excludes 
the years after the change in economic policy regime. Open unemployment did not fall more than to 
around 4 per cent at the peak of the most recent economic upturn. This also indicates that there are 
structural problems in the labour market that have also increased over time. There are, for instance, 
signs  that  the  matching  of  unemployed  and  vacancies  has  deteriorated  after  the  1990s  crisis. 
Increased globalisation and stiffer international competition, and the ensuing structural transformation, 
may  also  have  played  a  role.  The  pressure  for  change  in  the  labour  market  has  been  strong  and 
adjustments have not been made as smoothly as might have been desirable. 
It is evident that the high unemployment that arose in connection with the crisis has to some extent 
been  persistent.  Research  shows  that  the  long-term  unemployment  level  may  be  affected by  major 
changes  in  actual  unemployment.  There  is  also  research  that  show  that  generous  unemployment 
insurances may contribute to the persistency of unemployment. Especially after major structural crises 
have occurred, such as the one in Sweden at the beginning of the 1990s.4
I shall not develop this further. The functioning of the labour market lies outside the Riksbank’s field of 
responsibility and there are others who are better qualified to discuss the problems in this area than I 
am. My main message is that there are many indications of considerable structural problems in the 
Swedish labour market which may explain the high level of unemployment. These problems cannot be 
solved by monetary policy. Monetary policy’s effects on unemployment are minor in relation to those 
due to structural problems. 
The current situation in the labour market 
Let me before I finish briefly comment on how I viewed the current situation in the labour market in 
connection with the monetary policy meeting in May. 
A  large  number  of  central  wage  agreements  are  being  renegotiated  this  year.  There  are  several 
factors governing how high wage costs can be expected to be in future. One important aspect is to 
what extent the social partners take into account the labour market situation in their wage bargaining 
rounds. Another is how well the labour market functions with regard to matching the demand for and 
supply of labour. 
The wage bargaining rounds have so far resulted in wage increases that appear to be slightly above 
what we had estimated in the February Monetary Policy Report. We pointed this out at the monetary 
policy meeting on 3 May. The labour market situation has strengthened and it is therefore reasonable 
to assume in future that there will be slightly higher wage increases than we have been used to in 
recent years. 
The information that we had access to at our monetary policy meeting in May indicated that resource 
utilisation in the labour capacity was slightly more strained than we anticipated in the February report. 
There were signs that the labour shortage in the business sector has continued to increase. However, 
                                                      
4   See,  for  example,  Ljungqvist,  L  and  T  J  Sargent  (2006),  ”How  Sweden’s  unemployment  became  more  like  Europe's”  in 
Freeman  R,  B  Swedenborg  and  R  Topel  (ed),  ”Reforming  the  welfare  state  –  American  perspectives  on  the  Swedish 
model”, SNS Förlag. 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 5
it is not exactly easy to assess the level of resource utilisation in the labour market. There are many 
indications  of  fairly  large  labour  reserves  in  total, although  this may  not  be reflected  in  the  recently 
agreed wage increases. 
Employment appeared to be developing in line with the forecast we made in February. However, the 
labour supply was showing weaker development than we had expected. Altogether, this means that 
unemployment has been slightly lower than we assessed in our forecasts in February and the labour 
market situation is therefore slightly more strained. 
Our assessment in May was that on the whole, the repo rate would need to be raised gradually and by 
more  during the  forecast period  than was  indicated  by  the  forecast  we  made  in  February.  I  did  not 
consider  the  changes  in  the  economic  outlook  to  be  so  great  that  they  required  an  immediate 
adjustment  in  the  repo  rate.  The  reason  for  this  was  that  inflation  is  low  and  there  are  still  factors 
holding it back. What we must do is to balance the pace of our interest rate increases so that inflation 
does not accelerate more quickly than expected, but so that growth in production and employment are 
not slowed down too soon. My proposal was therefore to keep the repo rate unchanged in May. 
What  significance  the  new  information  will  have  in  more  concrete  terms  for  monetary  policy  in  the 
future is something we will return to at our next monetary policy meeting in June. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by briefly summarising what I have said. I have mainly focussed on the debate on 
monetary policy and unemployment. I have also briefly described the current labour market situation, 
as I assessed it at the previous monetary policy meeting. 
I  think  it  is  good  and  necessary  that  a  debate  is  held  on  the  significance  of  monetary  policy  for 
unemployment.  But  I  consider  it  essential  that  this  debate  is  conducted  on  the  basis  of  reasonable 
expectations of what monetary policy can and should achieve. The fact that inflation has undershot the 
target in recent years is mainly due to unexpectedly high productivity growth. The high productivity has 
been beneficial as it has contributed to good growth. However, it may at the same time explain why 
employment has shown relatively weak development for some years. 
It is not because of monetary policy that unemployment now is much higher than it was in the decades 
immediately  prior  to  the  1990s  crisis.  There  are  many  indications  that  the  explanation  for  this  is 
structural problems in the Swedish labour market. Problems that have increased over time and were 
long concealed by the unsustainably expansionary economic policy conducted earlier. 
With regard to the more current developments in the labour market, unemployment looks to be slightly 
lower  and  wage  increases  to  be  slightly  higher  than  we  assumed  in  the  previous  Monetary  Policy 
Report in February. We will present a new assessment of economic activity and inflation prospects in 
our next Monetary Policy Report in June. This will also show our views on the labour market situation 
and what consequences this will have for monetary policy. 
Thank you for your attention! 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2007
