Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Corporate governance developments in Singapore 
and the region 
Speech by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, 
Minister for Education and Second Minister for Finance, at The OECD Asian Corporate Governance 
Roundtable, Singapore, 27 June 2007. 
 Introduction 
Good morning and a very warm welcome to Singapore. It gives me great pleasure to be here at the 
OECD Asian Corporate Governance Roundtable. The last time the Roundtable was held in Singapore 
was in 2001, and we are happy to be able to host this important international gathering once again. 
10 years after the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, this year’s Roundtable gives us a good opportunity to 
do a stock-take, to see where we are now and identify the areas where we must continue to move 
forward in the region. 
Avoiding complacency in a benign economic environment 
The macro picture amongst the Asian countries is vastly improved. The Asian economies are by and 
large showing strong growth, driven in large part by increased trade and investments both within Asia 
as well as with the rest of the world. Investor confidence is back. Capital inflows are back to the levels 
that  existed  before  the  Asian  crisis.  And  strong  inflows  of  portfolio  capital  and  foreign  direct 
investments  have  replaced  bank  lending  as  a  dominant  source  of  capital  inflows.  Last  year,  the 
ASEAN-5  countries,  for  example,  attracted  some  US$50  billion  of  foreign  direct  investment, 
significantly  greater  than  the  US$28  billion  seen  in  1997.  Institutional  investors  are  allocating  more 
funds  to  Asia,  in  search  of  higher  yields  and  to  benefit  from  the  strong  growth  in  the  region. 
Improvements in corporate governance are part of this story. 
But even in this positive climate, we must remain wary of risks. Terrorism and avian flu are not distant 
threats. The abundance of liquidity in global and Asian markets has also led to a narrowing of credit 
spreads that is unlikely to persist for long. The repricing of risk may be triggered by a variety of events, 
arising for example from a geopolitical disturbance, an unexpected setback in economic growth, or the 
failure of a major borrower in global financial markets. The repricing of risk, unwinding of spreads and 
contraction of liquidity in higher risk assets and markets may be sudden, and may not be orderly. 
On the positive side, the innovations we have seen in global financial markets, including the extensive 
securitization of assets and growth of the derivatives market, has parceled out risks more widely and 
perhaps more evenly in the system. But it also makes the system less predictable in the event that 
things go wrong. We cannot predict how contagion will spread in global markets. 
It  is  critical  that  the hard lessons on corporate  governance  learnt  during  the  fall  out  from  the  Asian 
crisis are not lost during the current period of benign economic growth and relatively easy availability 
of funds. When the flight to safety and quality occurs, it will be those countries and companies with 
robust standards of corporate governance that will be better placed to keep the loyalties of investors. 
Corporate governance developments in the region 
We  should  therefore  keep  up  the  momentum  of  progress.  Since  the  crisis,  the  Asian  Roundtable 
countries have indeed made substantial progress in important areas of corporate governance reform. I 
will run through two key areas of progress very briefly. 
Growth and strengthening of standard-setting bodies 
Institutions  matter.  Several  countries  in  Asia  have  established  national  committees  on  corporate 
governance since the crisis . The private sector has also strengthened its act. We have seen a number 
of  institutes  of  directors  set  up  in  many  countries,  including  China,  Hong  Kong,  Indonesia,  South 
Korea, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines. Minority shareholder watchdog groups are also now in 
place in countries such as Malaysia, South Korea and Taiwan. And Institutes of Directors, in particular, 
BIS Review 73/2007 
 1
now play a key role in developing training programmes for both directors and management. In some 
countries – for example, Malaysia and Thailand, such training programmes have become a mandatory 
prerequisite  for  directors  of  listed  companies.  So  we  have  seen  a  strengthening  of  both  public  and 
private bodies aimed at the common objective of scaling up standards of corporate governance. 
Corporate governance regulations and best practices 
We have seen considerable reform in the regulations and codes of corporate governance, as well as 
the  actual  practice  of  corporate  governance  in  the  Asian  Roundtable  economies.  For  instance, 
Pakistan, Chinese Taipei and Thailand all adopted new codes in 2002, while new or updated codes 
have  been  adopted  in  Bangladesh,  Hong  Kong,  Indonesia  and  Korea since  2003.  This  has  yielded 
visible benefits. There is greater clarity in many Asian economies regarding the fiduciary duties of the 
directors  of  listed  companies.  There  has  also  been  progress  made  in  terms  of  more  independent 
directors being introduced to the boards of listed companies in the Asian region . 
Accounting  rules  have  also  been  beefed  up  across  the  region.  Some  of  the  Asian  Roundtable 
countries  have  made  significant  moves  towards  convergence  with  international  standards  and  best 
practices  on  accounting.  China,  India,  Indonesia  and  Philippines,  have  for  example  revised  their 
accounting standards to bring them more in line with international standards. 
Corporate governance in Singapore 
Corporate governance in Singapore has similarly undergone evolution. I shall leave it to the speakers 
from the Singapore Institute of Directors and the Singapore Exchange to share on these more fully. I 
will talk briefly instead about our overall approach to corporate governance. 
Regulatory framework – balance of mandatory rules and best practices 
First, let me touch on the regulatory framework for corporate governance. In recent years, we have 
moved away from a merit-based approach towards a disclosure-based approach. The objective is to 
equip  market  participants  with  better  information,  let  them  take  responsibility  for  making  their  own 
decisions and to judge the quality of the corporate governance of companies. 
But a disclosure-based approach can only work well if it is backed up by a robust enforcement regime. 
This  is  key  to  maintaining  the  confidence  of  market  participants  in  the  disclosure-based  regime.  In 
recent  years,  our  regulatory  authorities  have  acted  decisively  in  the  face  of  breaches  by  market 
participants, such as in the cases of ACCS, Citiraya and China Aviation Oil. 
Equally  important  for  a  disclosure-based  regime  is  the  raising  of  the  bar  on  corporate  governance 
standards themselves. Singapore’s approach here is a flexible one, recognising the need to cater to a 
range  of  companies  of  different  sizes  and  resources.  It  comprises  a  balance  of  mandatory  rules, 
captured  in  our  legislation  and  listing  rules,  and  best  practice  recommendations  in  the  form  of  the 
Code  of  Corporate  Governance.  Listed  companies  are  required  to  either  adopt  the  best  practice 
recommendations or to disclose instances where they have not done so and provide explanations for 
these – in other words companies must “comply or explain”. 
We will keep both our legislation and best practice codes up to date through regular refinement, so 
that they stay relevant to a changing environment. We will also keep close watch on developments 
internationally, to see if they might be relevant to the Singapore environment. For example, the UK has 
enacted a new Companies Act 2006 in which the duties of directors have been codified. 
Recently,  there  have  been  discussions  between  the  Institute  of  Certified  Public  Accountants  of 
Singapore,  or  ICPAS,  and  the  Singapore  Institute  of  Directors,  or  SID,  regarding  directors’ 
responsibilities  for  the  internal  controls  and  accounting  policies  and  estimates  that  are  relevant  to 
companies’  financial  statements,  and  how  these  responsibilities  of  directors  should  be  reflected  in 
auditors’ reports. This recent issue illustrates the importance for clarity on directors’ duties amongst all 
stakeholders.  The  Accounting  &  Corporate  Regulatory  Authority,  or  ACRA,  will  lead  a  study  on  the 
duties of directors, taking into account of standards observed internationally as well as the corporate 
environment in Singapore. ACRA will work with the Singapore Institute of Directors, ICPAS, the MAS 
and SGX, and other stakeholders in this study. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2007
Corporate governance – enhancing performance 
A  sound  and  responsive  regulatory  framework  is  critical  to  corporate  governance.  But  it  is  worth 
reminding  ourselves  that  corporate  governance  is  not  merely  about  compliance  with  the  rules. 
Corporate  governance  is  in  the  wider  sense  about  how  the  business  and  affairs  of  a  company  are 
directed and managed in order to enhance corporate performance and long-term shareholder value. 
Good corporate governance is ultimately about performance and accountability to shareholders. 
This  relates  to  the  effective  functioning  of  the  board  –  how  it  draws  on  different  skill-sets  amongst 
directors, how it sets strategies, and how it interacts with senior management to build knowledge and 
make decisions in the interests of shareholders. 
Well-functioning  boards  aimed  at  sustained  performance  are  in  truth  work-in-progress  in  Singapore 
and elsewhere in Asia – we probably have more distance to cover in this regard than in compliance 
with rules. Many companies do not have a good mix of experience and skills amongst their directors. 
While some of the bigger companies may have the necessary resources and can seek outside help, 
there are a large number of companies that require help along this journey. We should therefore focus 
our  energies  not  just  on  formulating  sound  rules  and  best  practice  codes,  but  on  encouraging  and 
helping companies to address practical issues in making their boards effective and high-performing. 
Corporate governance study commissioned by MAS and SGX 
This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  MAS  and  SGX  jointly  commissioned  a  study  on  improving  the 
implementation  of  corporate  governance  practices  in  Singapore.  This  study  was  carried  out  by 
Associate Professor Mak Yuen Teen of the National University of Singapore’s Business School and 
the  Corporate  Governance  and  Financial  Reporting  Centre.  The  study  focused  on  assessing  the 
current  state  of  corporate  governance  practices  in  Singapore  and  proposing  practical  measures  to 
improve board effectiveness and governance. 
Details  of  the  study  can  be  found  in  the  report,  which  MAS  and  SGX  will  be  publishing  on  their 
websites later today. For now, let me highlight two particular areas of the study’s recommendations 
that we have started working on. 
Professional development and training of directors 
One area of improvement is in the training of directors. Having committed and skilled directors is a key 
component in the effective functioning of the board. Director training is particularly relevant for new or 
first-time directors, to assist them in understanding their roles and responsibilities, and to equip them 
with  the  necessary  skills.  Even  experienced  directors  need  to  continually  upgrade  their  skills,  to 
oversee and steer companies in today’s rapidly changing and globalised landscape. 
MAS has been in discussion with the Singapore Institute of Directors on how we can build on its very 
useful  work  to  date,  and  develop  a  comprehensive  and  sustained  approach  to  training  and 
development of directors in Singapore. MAS will help to fund a study that will help to operationalise 
this  comprehensive  approach  to  training.  The  study  will  cover  a  few  areas.  First,  it  will  look  into 
benchmarking directors’ training and development against best practices in other leading jurisdictions. 
A number of jurisdictions have in the last few years developed extensive structured training programs 
for  directors.  Secondly,  it  will  examine  possible  collaborative  arrangements  between  a  range  of 
organisations  and  training  providers.  Thirdly,  it  will  also  focus  on  how  best  such  training  initiatives 
should be financed. 
This is an important initiative to ensure our companies have skilled directors on their boards, who can 
help  them  to  grow  and  expand  in  the  region,  and  be  recognized  leaders  in  both  performance  and 
governance. 
Developing practical guides for listed companies and directors 
A second issue arising from the study has to do with developing practical guides for listed companies 
and directors. This is in line with helping companies help themselves on the path to better corporate 
governance,  MAS  will  work  with  industry  and  professional  bodies  on  practical  guides  on  areas  of 
interest to companies. 
BIS Review 73/2007 
 3
The  importance  of  an  effective  audit  committee  in  particular  was  highlighted  in  the  corporate 
governance study by Professor Mak. It noted that almost all corporate scandals involved some form of 
financial impropriety, with the audit committee often seen to be part of the governance failure. 
Some guidance on the roles, functions and skills required by an audit committee would be useful. We 
need to encourage well-qualified directors to take on the critical responsibility of being a member of an 
audit  committee.  Such  practical  guidance  notes  could  be  useful  in  helping  directors  on  audit 
committees to understand their roles relative to that of senior management. It could also provide better 
focus on how they can add value by enabling the important interaction between strategy and financial 
and  accounting  controls.  I  note  that  the  UK  has  issued  similar  guidance  on  Audit  Committees  – 
otherwise known as the Smith Guidance – to assist companies. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  The  Asian  Financial  Crisis  has  served  to  highlight  the  importance  of  corporate 
governance.  It  is  a  key  component  that  contributes  to  the  strength  of  our  markets  and  to  the 
performance  of  our  companies.  While  corporate  governance  practices  across  Asia  have  improved 
significantly,  we  cannot  lower  our  guard.  When  times  are  good,  we  should  press  ahead  and  gain 
momentum in our efforts to improve corporate governance. 
But good corporate governance, as we all know, goes beyond box-ticking. It must be focused on both 
the  spirit  and  substance  behind  corporate  governance  rules  and  guidelines.  It  is  important  that  we 
convince companies of  the  inherent  benefits of  good corporate  governance,  as a  tool  for  sustained 
corporate performance. 
Platforms  like  today’s  OECD  Asian  Corporate  Governance  Roundtable  are  invaluable  as  we  go 
forward.  This  is  how  we can  share  our  experience,  learn  from  each  other,  and  perhaps  do  a  bit  of 
nudging. 
I wish you fruitful and insightful discussions. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2007
