Toshiro Muto: Outlook for economic activity and prices and the conduct of 
monetary policy in Japan 
Summary of a speech by Mr Toshiro Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Keizai Club, 
Tokyo, 4 April 2007. 
 Introduction 
Today I would like to talk about the recent state of the economy and prices, as well as to explain the 
basic framework of, and thinking behind, the Bank of Japan's conduct of monetary policy, including the 
reasoning behind the policy adjustment at its Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) in February. 
I.  
The economy and prices – current situation and outlook 
Overseas economic developments 
A.  
Let me start with the current state of overseas economies and their future outlook. 
In  the  United  States,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  has  been  decelerating,  mainly  reflecting 
adjustments in the housing market. So far, however, the influence of the adjustments in the housing 
market  on  the  economy  has  been  limited.  Labor  market  conditions  remain  tight,  with  a  marginal 
slowdown in employment gains. In this situation, the pace of deceleration in private consumption has 
been  moderate,  supported  mainly  by  an  increase  in  household  income.  Developments  in  the  U.S. 
corporate sector are generally firm, since profits remain at high levels and business fixed investment, 
although  decelerating  somewhat,  is  maintaining  its  uptrend.  With  regard  to  housing  finance,  some 
people voice concern that the delinquency rate for mortgage loans to subprime borrowers (those with 
relatively low credit standing) has been rising recently, but the prevalent view is that this is unlikely to 
pose a threat to the overall economy or the financial market because the share of subprime loans in 
overall  mortgage  loans  is  not  very  large.  Nevertheless,  given  that  the  likely  extent  of  future 
adjustments in the housing market is still uncertain and the core consumer price index (CPI) continues 
to increase at a relatively rapid pace, attention should be paid to both the downside risk of a further 
economic slowdown and the upside risk of inflation. Taking all available data for the U.S. economy and 
prices into account, however, the economy is likely to realize a soft landing – that is, after experiencing 
a moderate slowdown for a while it will move onto a path of stable growth, at a rate near its potential, 
as adjustments in spending in the household sector abate. 
In  the  euro  area,  economic  recovery  continues  to  be  solid,  since  the  increase  in  production  and 
improvement  in  corporate  profits  have  led  to  recovery  in  business  fixed  investment  and  private 
consumption.  In  Germany,  the  value-added  tax  rate  was  increased  in  January  this  year.  This 
precipitated  some  last-minute  rises  in  the  consumption  of  certain  products,  which  subsequently  fell 
back again, and since January has also pushed up consumer prices to some extent; however, it has 
not so far had a significant impact on either consumption or any other part of the economy. In China, 
both  domestic  and  external  demand  continue  to  expand  strongly,  and  the  NIEs  and  ASEAN 
economies continue to expand at a moderate pace on the whole. 
Taking  these  developments  into  account,  overseas  economies  as  a  whole  are  likely  to  continue  to 
expand, with some possible slowdown in the U.S. economy offset by expansion elsewhere. 
With the plunge in the Shanghai stock market at the end of February, stock prices worldwide declined 
substantially.  In  corporate  bond  markets  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  for  example,  there  was 
some reassessment of credit risk, as seen in wider credit spreads between government bonds and 
corporate  bonds,  especially  those  with  low  credit  ratings.  In  foreign  exchange  markets,  the  yen 
appreciated against the U.S. dollar. In May-June 2006, there was a worldwide adjustment in financial 
markets,  the  so-called  "global  risk  reduction,"  but  this  was  followed  by  an  upturn  in  stock  prices,  a 
narrowing of credit spreads on corporate bonds, and a depreciation of the yen, all of which lasted up 
until  the  end  of  February.  The  most  recent  adjustments  can  be  considered  as  an  unwinding  of 
investments made during this period. Global investors' stance toward risk-taking may have become 
more assertive  in  the wake  of  their success  in  dealing  with  the  global  risk  reduction as well  as  the 
relatively  modest  volatility  in  financial  markets  seen  subsequently.  This  more  assertive  risk-taking 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 1
behavior  seems  to  have  been  modified  in  response  to  the  plunge  in  Chinese  stock  prices  and  the 
release of some weak data on the U.S. economy. As I have mentioned, there has been no significant 
change  in  the  fundamentals  of  the  global  economy,  but  we  will  continue  to  pay  close  attention  to 
developments in financial markets and any possible implications for economic activity. 
Economic developments in Japan 
B.  
Against  the  background  of  the  strong  growth  in  overseas  economies,  Japan's  economy  has  been 
experiencing  a  sustained  period  of  moderate  expansion.  The  current  economic  expansion,  which 
started in January 2002, is now in its sixth year. 
Developments in the corporate sector 
1.  
Reflecting the expansion of overseas economies, Japan's exports are likely to continue to increase. 
Business fixed investment is also expected to keep increasing on the back of strong corporate profits 
and steady demand at home and abroad. This favorable situation in the corporate sector is confirmed 
by the latest March Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan). Survey results in 
the March Tankan suggest that firms as a whole have made upward revisions to their projections for 
current profits for fiscal 2006 from the forecasts reported in the December Tankan. They are expecting 
profits for fiscal 2006 to have increased by 6.2 percent from the preceding fiscal year, posting a fifth 
consecutive year-on-year increase. Ratios of current profits to sales exceeded the levels posted during 
the  period  of  the  bubble  economy.  The  results  for  business  fixed  investment  suggest  that  firms  on 
aggregate are expecting their capital investment for fiscal 2006 to have grown by 9.5 percent from a 
year earlier, its fourth consecutive year of growth. Business fixed investment planned for fiscal 2007 is 
also at a relatively high level for the time of year, namely, the turning point in the fiscal calendar. It 
seems, however, that firms, seeking to boost production capacity so as not to miss the opportunity to 
increase profits in the global market, are maintaining their cautious scrutiny regarding the profitability 
of individual investment projects, having become more exposed to the discipline of the capital market. 
Against  this  background  of  growth  in  domestic  and  external  demand,  production  is  on  an  upward 
trend.  Although  production  has  been  decreasing  somewhat  since  January,  this  is  largely  due  to  a 
downward reaction to the high growth posted in the October-December quarter of 2006 as a result of 
increased automobile production. On average, production has been increasing by around 1 percent 
quarter  on  quarter.  Inventories  have  been  more  or  less  in  balance  with  shipments  in  the  industrial 
sector as a whole, but inventories of electronic parts and devices have been at elevated levels since 
the  second  half  of  2006  due  mainly  to  accelerated  production  leading  up  to  new  product  releases. 
Although  strong  demand  for  IT-related  goods  is  likely  to  prevent  sharp  adjustments  in  inventories, 
attention should continue to be paid to developments in inventories of IT-related products as the pace 
of increase in global production capacity in this sector is rapid. 
These  positive  developments  in  the  corporate  sector  are  reflected  in  firms'  view  of  business 
conditions. Although the diffusion index for business conditions in the March Tankan registered a slight 
decline  relative  to  the  previous  Tankan,  on  the  whole  it  is  still  at  a  favorable  level  considering  the 
adjustments that have been occurring in the financial market. 
Developments in the household sector 
2.  
The  positive  influence  of  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector  has  been  feeding  through  into  the 
household  sector  at  a  moderate  pace.  The  number  of  employees  continues  to  increase  steadily.  A 
closer look reveals that not only the number of part-time workers but also that of full-time employees is 
rising. A survey conducted by a private institute earlier this year indicated that more new graduates 
would be hired by firms in fiscal 2007 than in the previous year. 
Despite the strength in the corporate sector, however, it is often said that households are not getting a 
real sense that the economy is expanding, and this seems to be related to the wage situation. To be 
more specific, the increase in nominal wages per worker, which had been only moderate, has recently 
appeared to stagnate. Regular payments are particularly weak, remaining somewhat beneath the level 
recorded  last  year.  The  sluggish  growth  in  wages  despite  continued  high  corporate  profits  seems 
attributable to persistent labor cost restraint by firms, which feel the need to be more profit-conscious 
amid  intensifying  global  competition  and  greater  exposure  to  the  discipline  of  the  capital  market. 
Moreover,  employees'  preference  for  stable  employment  over  a  wage  increase  after  their  past 
experiences of a severe employment situation, as well as the retirement of baby-boomers whose wage 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2007
levels are relatively high, are also thought to share responsibility for the recent weak growth in nominal 
wages per worker. 
Meanwhile,  firms  are  increasingly  feeling  shortages  of  labor  as  shown  in  the  March  Tankan.  If  the 
number  of  employees  keeps  increasing  while  growth  in  the  population  of  those  aged  15  and  over 
peaks out, upward pressure on wages should be expected to increase over time. Although the focus 
of attention tends to be the weak growth in regular payments, the positive influence of the strength in 
the corporate sector should not be overlooked, as this is now feeding into the household sector via 
various  channels,  such  as  increases  in  the  number  of  employees,  the  wages  of  part-time  and 
temporary workers, and dividends. 
Although the pace at which the positive influence of the corporate sector has been filtering through 
into the household sector has been somewhat subdued, the gradual increase in household income is 
expected to continue, supported, for example, by growth in the number of employees on the back of 
continued high corporate profits. 
With household income increasing gradually, private consumption has been firm recently. In summer 
2006,  private  consumption  declined  temporarily  due  to  unfavorable  weather  conditions  and 
consumers' reluctance to buy before the introduction of new products; then from the autumn onward, 
sales at department stores and supermarkets were weak, weighed down by sluggish sales of winter 
apparel due to the unseasonably warm weather. However, sales data released since the turn of the 
year  have  been  favorable,  and  sales  of  spring  apparel  seem  to  be  strong.  Sales  of  electrical 
appliances are showing clearer upward momentum recently, with sales of digital appliances such as 
flat-panel  TVs  and  new  game  consoles  growing  steadily.  As  for  services  consumption,  sales  in  the 
food  service  industry  and  outlays  for  travel  have  generally  been  firm.  Looking  forward,  although 
unlikely  to  post  substantial  gains,  private  consumption  is  expected  to  be  on  a  gradual  uptrend, 
reflecting increases in household income. 
In sum, in fiscal 2007 Japan's economy is likely to continue to experience a sustained period of growth 
at a pace slightly higher than its potential, with the virtuous circle of production, income, and spending 
remaining  intact.  If  this  turns  out  to  be  the  case,  our  economy  will  have  been  growing  at  around  2 
percent  per  annum  since  fiscal  2003.  Such  a  sustained  period  of  growth  at  a  rate  above  the 
economy's potential, even though it coincides with a period of fiscal consolidation, is due to the strong 
expansion of overseas economies and the accommodative financial environment. 
Developments in prices 
3.  
I  would  now  like  to  talk  about  the  price  situation.  Recent  price  developments  in  Japan  have  been 
considerably  influenced  by  past  falls  in  the  prices  of  crude  oil  and  other  international  commodities. 
Crude oil prices have been experiencing declines since August last year, dropping sharply at the start 
of this year due to the unseasonably warm winter in the United States. Since then, however, they have 
bounced  back  somewhat,  reflecting  factors  such  as  a  cold  spell  in  North  America,  the  U.S.  policy 
decision  to  increase  its  strategic  petroleum  reserve,  and  geopolitical  risks,  thus  displaying  some 
considerable fluctuation. Prices of nonferrous metals, meanwhile, declined up to and during early 2007 
within elevated levels, with the decline most notable in copper. Recently, however, they have started 
to bounce back. 
Reflecting  the  fall  in  international  commodity  prices,  domestic  corporate  goods  prices  have  been 
somewhat weak recently. In the short run, they are expected to be somewhat weak or flat, again due 
to the fall in international commodity prices. 
As  for  consumer  prices,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food,  on  a 
nationwide basis) has been decelerating since autumn 2006, and the most recent data indicated that 
in February the CPI declined by 0.1 percent from a year earlier, posting negative growth for the first 
time  since  April  2006.  The  sluggishness  is  largely  attributed  to  developments  in  the  prices  of 
petroleum  products,  such  as  gasoline,  which  have  recently  declined  from  their  levels  the  previous 
year,  following  a  period  of  deceleration.  In  addition  to  this,  the  introduction  of  new  billing  plans  for 
cellular phones has also been placing downward pressure on the CPI recently. 
Judging from the basic environment surrounding prices, however, greater upward pressure on prices 
is expected. According to survey results reported in the March Tankan, the share of firms experiencing 
a shortage of production capacity exceeds the share of those feeling excess, and corporate managers 
are  increasingly  feeling  shortages  of  labor.  In  this  situation,  resource  utilization  rates  are  rising 
steadily, and estimates of the output gap continue to be positive. Furthermore, downward pressure on 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 3
prices from unit labor costs (labor costs per unit of output) is expected to weaken as the upward trend 
in wages becomes more distinct. In view of these developments in the underlying price environment, 
the CPI is expected, in the longer run, to trend upward. Nevertheless, it should be borne in mind that 
there  are  also  downside  risks,  which  could,  if  they  materialize,  make  it  harder  for  prices  to  swiftly 
regain  an  upward  trend:  an  example  is  the  progress  of  economic  globalization,  which  may  cause 
prices to respond less sensitively to changes in the output gap than hitherto, and cause wages to take 
longer to establish their recovery than projected. 
II. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
Framework for the conduct of monetary policy 
A.  
On the basis of this outlook for the economy and prices, the Bank decided on a policy adjustment at its 
MPM in February. The policy adjustment was decided in line with the framework for the conduct of 
monetary  policy  introduced  in  March  2006  and  was  the  second  such  adjustment  based  on  this 
framework, the first being the decision to bring to an end the zero interest rate environment in July 
2006. Let me explain the outline of the framework before elaborating on the background for the policy 
adjustment in February. 
The framework was introduced in March 2006 at the time the Bank terminated the quantitative easing 
policy and reinstated a policy of interest rate control. It consists of three elements. The first is to clarify 
what constitutes "price stability"; the second, to employ two perspectives for assessing the economic 
and  price  situation;  and  the  third,  to  outline  the  Bank's  thinking  on  the  future  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. 
Let me explain each element in turn. With respect to "price stability," the stated objective of monetary 
policy, the Bank interprets this to mean "a state where various economic agents such as households 
and  firms  may  make  decisions  regarding  such  economic  activities  as  consumption  and  investment 
without  being  concerned  about  the  fluctuations  in  the  general  price  level."  Furthermore,  we  have 
disclosed  the  amount  of  inflation  that  members  of  the  Policy  Board  understand,  when  conducting 
monetary policy, as being consistent with price stability over the medium to long term. This is released 
as the members' "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability." Expressed in terms of the 
rate  of  year-on-year  change  in  the  CPI,  this  "understanding"  takes  the  form  of  a  range,  between 
around  0  and  2  percent,  with  most  members'  median  figures  falling  on  one  side  or  the  other  of  1 
percent. It is this understanding of price stability that members have in mind when making monetary 
policy decisions. The "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" could change gradually in 
response  to  structural  changes  in  the  economy,  such  as  progress  in  economic  globalization  and  in 
information and communication technology. Therefore, the Bank will, in principle, review it annually. 
The second element is the employment of two clearly defined perspectives for assessing economic 
activity  and  prices  when  making  policy  decisions.  From  the  first  perspective,  we  will  examine  the 
prospects for economic activity and prices for one to two years ahead, assessing whether the most 
likely outlook is for the economy to follow a path of sustainable growth under price stability. Note that 
the focus is on the outlook. This is because it takes considerable time for monetary policy actions to 
filter through into the economy and prices. It is necessary, therefore, to conduct monetary policy in a 
forward-looking manner, taking into account expected economic and price developments. The key to 
achieving this is to establish what is the most likely outlook. The Bank thus produces a forecast for the 
economy  and  prices  for  about  one  and  a  half  to  two  years  ahead  and  publishes  it  in  the  April  and 
October issue of its Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report). Also at 
each MPM, we look to update our picture of the most likely outlook by carefully analyzing incoming 
data and other fresh information. In this sense, the careful analysis of incoming data, in other words, 
being  data  dependent,  does  not  contradict  the  idea  of  forward-looking  monetary  policy;  rather,  it 
constitutes a necessary ingredient. 
Although  we  take  the  utmost  pains  when  performing  our  analysis,  any  forecast  entails  a  degree  of 
uncertainty.  In  conducting  monetary  policy,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  possibility  that  our  most 
likely outlook for the economy and prices will not in fact materialize and to calculate the costs that this 
would  entail,  as  well  as  to  examine  risk  factors  that  may  influence  the  economy  and  prices  in  the 
medium  to  long  term,  in  other  words,  outside  of  the  projection  period.  The  second  perspective, 
therefore,  involves  examining,  over  a  longer  horizon,  the  various  risks  that  are  most  relevant  to 
conducting  monetary  policy  aimed  at  realizing  sustainable  growth  under  price  stability.  Since  the 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2007
second perspective looks at areas that are not covered in the first perspective, the two perspectives 
are  complementary  in  nature.  Moreover,  our  assessments  are  always  based  on  both  perspectives. 
Note, therefore, that it is not the case that policy decisions are based or rely heavily on one or the 
other of the two perspectives, depending on the circumstances. 
The third element is to outline, based on the above assessments, the Bank's thinking on the future 
conduct of monetary policy and to publish this in the Outlook Report. 
The policy adjustment in February 
B. 
At  the  February  MPM,  the  decision  to  raise  the  policy  interest  rate  was  taken  after  reviewing  the 
economy  and  prices  and  assessing  them  from  our  two  complementary  perspectives,  as  I  have 
described. 
First,  considering  the  prospects  for  the  Japanese  economy  from  the  first  perspective,  we  carefully 
analyzed  various  economic  data  released  since  the  January  MPM  in  addition  to  all  relevant 
information available prior to it. On the basis of this careful analysis and discussion at the MPM, we 
came to the conclusion that the economy was likely to continue to experience a moderate expansion 
with a virtuous circle of production, income, and spending in place. As referred to earlier, the world 
economy continues to expand, with growth more balanced as regional economies gain momentum. 
Indeed, this was the consensus view among delegates at the G-7 meeting in February. Domestically, 
newly  available  figures  for  the  fourth  quarter  of  2006  indicated  that  business  fixed  investment  was 
increasing on the back of high corporate profits. The sluggishness in private consumption seen last 
summer was judged a merely temporary phenomenon, and a gradual increasing trend was reaffirmed. 
Meanwhile  on  the  price  front,  it  was  considered  that  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI 
(excluding  fresh  food)  might  register  around  zero  in  the  short  run,  depending,  for  example,  on 
developments in the prices of crude oil. However, in the longer run, the CPI was judged likely to trend 
upward given increased resource utilization and the expected continuation of economic expansion. In 
other words, taking a forward-looking perspective on the economic and price situation for one to two 
years ahead, prices were judged likely to trend upward given the fundamentals behind the economy 
and prices, even if the rate of change in the CPI might temporarily fall into negative territory in the 
short  run.  Considering  this  forecast  for  the  economy  and  prices  in  the  light  of  the  Bank's 
"understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" referred to earlier, it was likely that sustainable 
growth under price stability would be achieved. 
This outlook is based on the assumption that private economic agents such as market participants and 
firms make decisions on economic activity by factoring in, to some extent, future policy changes. Thus, 
with  prospects  for  the  economy  and  prices  improving,  gradually  adjusting  the  level  of  the  policy 
interest rate as these anticipated improvements come to pass will facilitate the smooth realization of 
the outlook's favorable predictions and lead in turn to a long-lasting economic expansion. 
Second, turning to the longer horizon of the second perspective and examining the various risks most 
relevant in conducting monetary policy, it appeared likely that, with the prospects for the economy and 
prices improving, the stimulative effects of monetary policy would increase if the policy interest rate 
were left at its recent level. If the expectation were to take hold, in such a situation, that interest rates 
would  remain  low  for  a  long  time  regardless  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  then 
economic agents such as financial institutions and firms would behave accordingly. The result could 
well  be  a  misallocation  of  resources  in  the  long  run  as  agents  became  over-extended  in  financial 
markets  or  poured  funds  and  other  resources  into  inefficient  economic  activities.  This  could  then 
interfere with the sustained economic expansion. In the October Outlook Report, this was deemed one 
of the risk factors whose materialization, although not necessarily probable, would involve sufficient 
economic costs  that  it  should  be considered  a  "relevant"  risk  in  conducting monetary  policy.  I  must 
emphasize,  however,  that  this  risk  factor  involves  a putative  future  scenario;  it  does not  describe a 
situation that has already emerged. 
Picking up on the Bank's concern with this risk factor, some market participants have seen the recent 
policy action as an attempt to exert direct influence on the foreign exchange rate and yen carry trade. 
However,  considering  the  substance  of  the  Bank's  thinking,  as  I  have  explained  it  earlier,  makes  it 
clear  that  this  is  not  the  case.  Monetary  policy  is  conducted  with  the  aim  of  steering  the  Japanese 
economy toward sustainable growth under price stability, and careful examination of the economy and 
prices  is  carried  out  with  this  aim  in  mind.  The  Bank's  basic  view  is  that  developments  in  financial 
markets, including the foreign exchange market, are factors that may influence economic activity and 
prices and it is in this capacity that they come to the attention of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 5
At the February MPM, the Bank judged that for the economy and prices to follow a desirable path, we 
had reached an appropriate juncture to adjust the level of the interest rate. The operating target of the 
policy  interest  rate  (the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate)  was  therefore  raised  from  around  0.25 
percent to around 0.5 percent. 
At the same time, the basic loan rate applicable under the complementary lending facility was raised 
from 0.4 percent to 0.75 percent, widening the interest rate differential between the basic loan rate and 
the operating target of the uncollateralized overnight call rate from 0.15 percent to 0.25 percent. The 
interest rate under the complementary lending facility serves as an upper limit on the overnight call 
rate.  When  the  interest  rate  differential  between  the  interest  rate  under  the  complementary  lending 
facility  and  the  operating  target  of  the  call  rate  is  small,  the  call  rate  tends  to  diverge  less  from  its 
target, but the free formation of market interest rates is restricted. In view of the stability of the call rate 
since the zero interest rate environment was brought to an end in July last year as well as the gradual 
recovery in the functioning of the money market, it was judged that some widening of the interest rate 
differential will not hamper smooth interest rate control. 
The conduct of monetary policy in the near future 
C. 
With regard to the future course of monetary policy, the Bank intends, as previously stated, to "adjust 
the level of interest rates gradually in the light of developments in economic activity and prices, while 
maintaining  the  accommodative  financial  conditions  ensuing  from  very  low  interest  rates  for  some 
time." Actual policy actions will be decided through careful analysis of the prospects for the economy 
and  prices,  and  thorough  discussion  among  Policy  Board  members  at  each  MPM.  As  we  have 
repeatedly stated, we do not have a predetermined schedule regarding the future policy actions. 
We  have  often  been  asked  by  market  participants  and  the  press  whether  this  process  of  gradual 
interest  rate  adjustment  should  be  regarded  as  "normalization."  The  term  "normalization,"  however, 
carries  various  meanings.  If  the  term  "normalization"  is  being  used  to  imply  that  interest  rates  are 
adjusted toward a particular so-called "neutral" level in line with a predetermined schedule, then we 
should make clear that we have no such intention. The Bank's approach to the conduct of monetary 
policy, as I have previously stated, is to keep accommodative financial conditions ensuing from very 
low  interest  rates  for  some  time,  and  to  adjust  the  level  of  interest  rates  gradually  in  the  light  of 
developments in economic activity and prices. The views of all members are entirely consistent on this 
point.  Therefore,  adjustments  in  the  level  of  interest  rates  will  be  carried  out  in  the  light  of 
developments in economic activity and prices, and not in line with any predetermined schedule. If the 
term "normalization" can be used to describe such a process, then perhaps it would be fair enough to 
say  that  we  will  be  adjusting  the  level  of  interest  rates  gradually  in  light  of  the  "normalization"  of 
economic activity and prices. In any event, we think the least misleading option is for our basic thinking 
stated in the Outlook Report and in the press release accompanying the February policy action to be 
read exactly as stated. 
Communicating with the market 
D.  
In  connection  with  the  February  policy  change,  there  is  criticism  that  there  may  have  been  some 
confusion in the process of communicating with the market since the end of last year when the policy 
action  began  to  be  the  target  of  speculation.  We  accept  such  criticism  and  will  try  to  improve  the 
means of communication in the future. 
It may be productive, at this point, to summarize our approach to communication between the central 
bank and markets. Since monetary policy takes effect through financial markets and the behavior of 
financial institutions, ensuring its transparency is important not only in terms of accountability to the 
general public but also to improve the policy's effectiveness. 
Monetary policy needs to be transparent both with regard to the policy content and with regard to the 
means of conveying this content to the public. In terms of the latter, the Bank has employed various 
communicative  media,  such  as  the  Outlook  Report,  the  Monthly  Report  of  Recent  Economic  and 
Financial Developments, the minutes of the MPMs, and press conferences, all of which can be easily 
accessed by the general public. As far as the contents of the policy itself are concerned, we believe 
there  are  two  key  pieces  of  information  that  the  central  bank  needs  to  provide:  the  central  bank's 
assessment of  the  economic  and  price  situation;  and  its  basic  thinking  on  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy.  Market  participants  can  form  expectations  regarding  future  interest  rates  by  adjusting  their 
views of the economy and prices on the basis of such information, while central banks can deduce 
6 
 BIS Review 33/2007
market  participants'  views  regarding  the  economy  and  prices  from  market  interest  rates  and  yield 
curves. What we have in mind in terms of communicating with the market is such a two-way exchange 
of information. 
Hinting at the actual timing of the policy change is generally inadvisable. If such a hint were made, 
market participants would carry out transactions based not on their own views of the economy and 
prices  but  in  response  to  the  Bank's  hint,  and  this  would  result  in  a  breakdown  of  the  two-way 
exchange  of  information.  Furthermore,  at  many  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan,  policy 
decisions are made after thorough discussion among members of the policy meeting, culminating in a 
vote. In the absence of such discussion, to indicate whether or not a policy change will take place or to 
set a particular schedule for policy changes is inconceivable. 
Based on such an understanding of communication between the central bank and the markets, the 
Bank  will  stick  closely  to  its  principle  of  carefully  explaining  to  the  public  its  assessment  of  the 
economy and prices, and its basic thinking regarding the conduct of monetary policy. Meanwhile, to 
further facilitate meaningful communication with the market, we trust that the Bank's understanding in 
this regard will be widely recognized by market participants. 
Concluding remarks 
I have discussed the outlook for economic activity and prices, and our basic thinking on the conduct of 
monetary policy along with some issues related to communication with the market. 
The Bank will publish a new Outlook Report later this month in which our projections for the economy 
and prices up to fiscal 2008 will be released. In addition, the "understanding of medium- to long-term 
price  stability"  will  come  up  for  its  first  annual  reexamination  since  the  introduction  of  the  "New 
Framework for the Conduct of Monetary Policy." 
The Bank will take advantage of such opportunities to further refine this framework and will continue to 
contribute  to  the  achievement  of  sustainable  economic  growth  under  price  stability  through  the 
appropriate conduct of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 7
