Shamshad Akhtar: Building an effective Islamic financial system 
Speech  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Global  Islamic 
Financial  Forum,  Governor’s:  Financial  Regulators  Forum  in  Islamic  Finance,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
27 March 2007. 
 Surge in capital from oil rich economies may have spurred the activity in Islamic Finance (IF) but one 
should not assume that this phenomenon will be the sole catalyst to promote growth in IF industry. 
The  primary  driver  of  IF  growth  will  be  the  effectiveness  with  which  this  industry  is  consistently, 
persistently and substantively nurtured, groomed and developed and how successful the industry is in 
maintaining its robustness, soundness and governance as it grapples with some of the fundamental 
issues and challenges facing the industry in its evolving and growth phase. 
What is comforting and encouraging that Islamic world has collectively launched IF with a fair degree 
of commitment and fervor backed by adequate capital base. The process has been further supported 
by  the  right  mix  and  blend  of  institutional  frameworks  that  have  led  to  gradual  development  of 
internationally accepted architecture for regulatory and accounting frameworks for Islamic industry.  
There  is  further  an  intensive  effort  underway  to  aggressively  explore  and  exploit  the  virtues  and 
benefits of this discipline. As one unfolds the mysteries of Islamic tenets and ethical spirit in finance, it 
offers  opportunities  for  financial  innovation  and  flexibility  to  structure  different  types  of  financial 
products which, among others, would allow for a shift from debt based financial system more to equity 
and partnership based. What is further amazing is IFs has promising potential to channel wealth by 
offering  alternate  avenues  for  saving  and  investment,  while  dealing  with  the  problems  of  financial 
exclusion by extending riba free services to devout Muslims.  
Critical driver for effective development of IF industry, its growth and sustainability will depend on the 
ability of the  system to offer clients comfort that these financial services do conform to the Shariah 
injunctions and principles. It is this value addition that will help enhance the outreach and appeal to the 
larger Muslim population base in particular rural and poor that suffers from financial exclusion.  
It is equally critical that the IF emerges as a robust, competitive, efficient and well diversified segment 
of financial industry to be able to compete with the long standing conventional industry. To evolve and 
develop a strong, healthy and competitive system, IF industry has to  
(i) 
Further explore the depth and breadth of IF systems in order to fully unleash its uniqueness 
and potential,  
Develop and implement policies and regulatory frameworks for IF which are complementary 
to conventional banking system but which are tailored to capture the different types of risks 
associated with IF,  
Recognizing that IF offers an opportunity to diversify financial system to more equity based 
and better risk sharing instruments than offered by conventional system thereby helping the 
overall financial system to evolve in a more balanced way, and  
Better understand and appreciate the richness of IF which advocates a different liability and 
asset  approach  that  once  effectively  acknowledged  and  applied  will  offer  wide  range  of 
opportunities  for  financial  innovation  key  to  the  further  development  and  diversification  of 
overall financial system.  
 (ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
It is the recognition and implementation of the above goals and objectives that will the lay foundation 
for an effective financial system. I will now dwell on some of the key preconditions which are critical for 
laying the foundation for an effective IF system. 
First, it has to be recognized that depending on their circumstances, regulators have adopted 
varying  approaches  to  develop  IF  system.  At  this  stage,  it  is  too  early  to  pre-judge  which 
approach and model will be effective but success would be contingent on how effectively these 
institutions  are  nurtured  and  supervised.  In  some  jurisdictions  regulators  have  allowed  dual 
systems  whereby  it  issues  some  additional  policies  and  regulations  for  IFIs  over  and  above  the 
prudential regulatory framework for conventional banks. Within this category there are variations with 
regard to role of regulator in Shariah compliance. Some countries have declared the entire financial 
BIS Review 38/2007 
 1
system to be Islamic and in others no distinction is made between Islamic or conventional financial 
systems, and the decision to establish Islamic bank is with the owners, e.g. Saudi Arabia and UAE. As 
distinct  from  these,  there  is  now  a  wave  across  developed  financial  systems,  such  as  U.K  and 
Singapore, to introduce specific legislation and regulations to facilitate IF transactions.  
Depending  on  regulators’  adopted  policy  stance,  approaches  to  issuance  of  licensing  and  role  of 
regulator in Shariah compliance varies significantly. For instance, some regulators issue standard form 
of banking license (e.g. Saudi Arabia) for both Islamic and conventional institutions, while others issue 
separate Islamic banking licenses (e.g. Malaysia).  
When  regulators  apply  the  same  criteria  and  due  diligence  for  licensing  both  IFIs  and  conventional 
institutions, they strengthen the competitive forces. Use of a separate licensing criterion should be 
applied  carefully;  because  relatively  lax  criterion  for  IFIs  will  lower  industry  standards  and 
result in a protected non-competitive class of institutions. 
Second, for long term sustainability and confidence of IF sector, it is critical that clients and 
Islamic  banks  effectively  and  fully  exploit  Islamic  financial  intermediation  potential  and 
process  based  on  Shariah  principles.  Profit  sharing  is  the  cornerstone  of  Islamic  financial 
intermediation process, be it fund raising or funds used or lent among the depositors, banks and the 
businesses.  Lack  of  appreciation  of  this  and  reluctance  of  banks  to  experiment  and  expose 
themselves  to  different  types  of  transactions  and  risks  has  delayed  proper application  of IB  and  as 
such prevented the desired level of portfolio diversification that IB theoretically have potential for.1
On liabilities side, while money deposited as amanah is repayable on demand and is backed by 100% 
reserve  requirement,  the  money  held  under  investment  account  holders  (IAHs)  on  profit  and  loss 
sharing basis and deployed in riskier businesses is not guaranteed and is not strictly a liability. This, 
however,  is  not  fully  recognized  by  ordinary  customer  thereby  serving  as  a  limitation  to  business 
expansion and also carries unintended consequences for IAHs who may not appreciate the risks they 
are exposed to. 
While IFIs are now recognizing this liability distinction more and more, the problem emerges more on 
asset side. As businesses have evolved, IFIs have ended up largely depending on less risky trade and 
commodity  financing  which  typically  are  of  shorter  maturity  even  though  the  IF  allows  for  financial 
intermediaries to structure various transactions (including Musharakah, Mudarabaha, and Ijarah etc.) 
that allow adequate flexibility for portfolio and maturity diversification. However, high dependence on 
Murabahah and on short term transactions has limited the asset diversification potential of IFI and their 
portfolio ends up resembling conventional fixed income securities in terms of their risk-return profile. 
Islamic banks have been thus far less open to adoption of some profit-loss sharing instruments (i.e. 
musharaka or mudarabah) because of bank’s low appetite for risk, the associated costs of monitoring 
such  transaction,  lack of  transparency  in  markets within  which  Islamic banks are operating  and  the 
reluctance of the depositors/IAHs to take risks.  
Furthermore, in contrast to conventional banks who are obligated to offer fixed return to depositors, 
irrespective of the actual return on assets, IF inherently and potentially helps in asset: liabilities match 
in the balance sheet. All profits and losses on asset side are expected to be shared by the participants 
and there are no guaranteed returns to depositors or investors. Thus far IFIs have not fully exploited 
these real distinguishing characteristic and features of IF that assign it distinct edge and advantage 
relative to conventional banks. Despite the flexibility of the IF system, there is often lack of clarity and 
lack  of  differentiation  between  depositors  and  investors  (i.e.  those  serving  as  equity  holders  or 
partners in businesses) nor is there full appreciation of the profits and loss sharing arrangements that 
are  typically  backed  by  “pass  through”  arrangements  for  the  stakeholders.  Consequently,  the  IFIs 
continue  to  observe  asset-liability  mismatches  even  when  there  are  Islamic  products/structures 
available to address these. Continued partial and adhoc applications of IF-system relative to what it 
offers theoretically will hinder the effective development of IF system and over the period carries the 
risks of eroding confidence in the system. 
Third, to enhance effectiveness of IF it is important that IFIs recognize that the wide array of 
Islamic financial products do offer opportunities for asset and risk diversification both for the 
banks  balance  sheets  and  that  of  financial  system  at  large.  Proper  application  of  IF  alters 
                                                      
1   H. V. Greuning and Z. Iqbal (2007). “Banking and Risk Environment.” In S. Archer and R. A. A. Karim (edt.). 
Islamic Finance – The Regulatory Challenge. New York: Wiley Finance. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2007
inherently the balance sheet risks and has potentially inbuilt risk mitigation. On one hand, it brings to 
forefront different characteristics and types of risks, while making the risk identifiable and transparent. 
On the other hand, it provides a better framework for risk sharing and mitigation.  
What is critical for effective development of IF that both regulatory and supervisory regime recognizes 
the  risk  profile  of  IF  and  provides  adequate  guidance  on  exposures,  risk  weights  and  capital  to  be 
assigned so that there is uniform application of these standards by industry. There are several aspects 
that can be discussed and debated in this area, but I will offer only few perspectives:  
The regulatory regime should be open to providing adequate incentives for risk and profit sharing and 
the  IF  industry  needs  to  adopt  more  conformed  standards  to  enhance  system  predictability  and 
stability, while promoting greater awareness among fund suppliers about the terms and conditions of 
profit sharing under different contractual arrangements. For instance as illustrated and well articulated 
in one of the recent papers of V.V. Sundarajan (2007): for an IAH who largely provides funds on a 
mudarabah  basis  and  the  IFI  which  invests  these  funds  (often  commingled  with  shareholders’  and 
other funds) in various IF contracts (like salam, murabaha, ijara, istisna, musharaka etc.) the risk is the 
expected variance in the measure of profit distribution between IAH and bank. IFIs have to recognize 
that this uncertainty or Mudarabah risk can arise from a variety of factors both systemic as well as 
bank  specific.  Risk  mitigation  for  IAH  can  be  achieved  through  use  of  profit  equalization  reserves 
(PER), investment risk reserves (IRR) and by variation in modarib’s share.2
At  the  same  time  regulatory  regime,  needs  to  offer  perspectives  on  risk  determination  and  capital 
assignments for the high exposures IFI’s face because of their excessive reliance on Murabah and 
other trade and sales based transactions backed which are prone to higher degree of volatility and 
appropriate  weights  have  to  be  assigned  for  both  associated  commodity  pricing  and  counter  party 
risks. 
While adopting a suitable risk mitigation technique, comprehensive and transparent disclosure of “…… 
risk  profile,  risk-return  matrix,  and  internal  governance  is  critical.  Among  others,  this  requires 
coordination  of  supervisory  disclosure  rules,  and  accounting  standards,  and  proper  differentiations 
between  consumer  friendly  disclosures  to  assist  IAHs  and  market-oriented  disclosures  to  inform 
markets.”3
In  this  regard,  IFSB  Guiding  Principles  on  Risk  Management  has  served  a  good  purpose.  They 
provide  guidance  for  different  risks  to  which  IF  industry  is  exposed  and  offers  guidance  on  the 
methodology for credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk, operational risk, equity investment risk and rate 
of  return  risk  for  different  types  of  financial  transactions.  We  are  in  the  process  of  adapting  these 
guidelines for Islamic Banking Institutions in Pakistan. 
Finally, as the IF industry diversifies, it will face increasingly more diverse range of risks associated 
with  investment  banks,  mutual  insurance  (takaful),  and  investment  companies.  Islamic  banks, 
however, remain the core of the industry in many countries and offshore financial centers and account 
for  the  bulk of  financial  transactions  and  their soundness would  remain  a  key  concern  for systemic 
stability. In Islamic banking, the management of risks becomes more challenging due to its peculiar 
risk characteristics in line with the requirement for compliance to Shariah principles. While the Basel II 
initiatives on the identification of credit, market and operational risks can be assimilated into Islamic 
banking, the initiatives have to be complemented with consideration of the other dimensions of risks 
that are inherent in the IF transactions.  
Fourth, for effectiveness of IF development, it is desirable that eventually model legislation is 
developed  for  IFs  to  recognize  different  institutions  and  products.  This  will  facilitate 
development  of  contractual  frameworks  which  has  its  basis  on  approved  legal  framework, 
which  among  others  will  allow  for  proper  enforceability  of  contract.  Strictly  speaking  even  in 
Muslim-majority  jurisdictions,  Shariah  compliant  IFIs/products  and  services  are  not  explicitly 
recognized  in  the  relevant  laws  and  statutes.  As  such,  interpretation  and  recognition  of  financial 
products and enforceability of Islamic financial contracts may not be there in the laws and courts which 
                                                      
2   PER and IRR together adjusts for excessive volatility in profit payouts to investors by aligning the payouts to market rates on 
deposits and redistributing investment and profits remaining income over time to cover for losses that may emerge. See V. 
Sundarajan  (2007).  “Risk  Characteristics  of  Islamic  Products:  Implications  for  Risk  Measurement  and  Supervision.”  In  S. 
Archer and R. A. A. Karim (edt.). Islamic Finance – The Regulatory Challenge. New York: Wiley Finance. 
Ibid. 
3  
BIS Review 38/2007 
 3
have  traditionally  adopted  either  the  common  law  or  civil  law  framework.  For  example,  whereas 
Islamic  banks  main  activity  is  trading  (Murabahah)  and  participating  in  equities  (Musharakah  and 
Mudarabah), banking law and regulations in most jurisdictions forbids or allows restricted exposure of 
such activities.  
To address these issues, some counties have adopted separate Islamic Banking laws (e.g., Kuwait 
and  Malaysia),  while  in  others  IF  system  is  recognized  under  a  section  of  the  existing  banking  law 
(e.g.,  Bangladesh  and  Indonesia).  Pakistan  has  also  added  provisions  in  relevant  banking  laws  to 
support financial institutions involvement in Islamic finance transactions. 
Fifth there is need for dispute settlement and conflict resolution mechanism. In line with Islamic 
Laws  and  Statues,  an  effective  Dispute  Settlement  Institutions  that  recognizes  the  intricacies  of 
Shariah principles and contractual arrangements would be beneficial. Among others, this will facilitate 
resolution of disputes associated with cross border contractual arrangements that could involve more 
than  one  jurisdiction  each  offering  their  own  perspective.  Notwithstanding,  there  is  further  need  for 
harmonizing the Islamic rules related to financial dealings. While the courts can not be expected to 
change fast, formation of special bench that deals with, among others, Islamic financial transactions 
could be a solution. Malaysia has build some legal infrastructure institutions for IF industry and has 
dedicated high court judges to oversee litigations related to IF. To complement the court system, the 
Kuala  Lumpur  Regional  Centre  for  Arbitration  has  been  enhanced  to  deal  with  disputes  on  Islamic 
banking and finance for both domestic and international cases.  
Sixth, essential for effectiveness and sustainability of IF industry is need for encouraging this 
segment  to  enhance  corporate  governance  and  ethical  standards  in  banking.  In  line  with  the 
Shariah  rulings,  the  challenge  for  IFIs  is  how  to  balance  the  dual  objectives  of  achieving  economic 
gains,  while  ensuring  compliance  with  Islamic  faith.  Compliance  with  Islamic  faith  goes  beyond  the 
elimination of Riba to facilitate equitable distribution of economic resources and non-exploitation of any 
particular  segment  of  the  society.  In  more  concrete  terms,  IFIs  should  play  a  greater  role  in  micro 
finance,  SME  lending,  rural  development,  and  in  funding  more  socially  responsible  schemes.  IFSB 
should consider working on social responsibility guidelines for IF institutions, which would aim to foster 
the larger objectives of equity and non-exploitation. 
In conclusion, proper and sequenced development of IF would be critical for this industry to emerge as 
an  effective  channel  for  both  savers  and  financier’s.  Collectively  continued  efforts  are  warranted  to 
ensure  that  we  address  the  issues  and  challenges  raised  above  so  that  there  is  greater  national, 
regional,  and  global  acceptability  and  fast  integration  of  IF  with  conventional  industry.  Besides  the 
concerns and proposals suggested above there is need to strengthen capacity in IF both at regulator 
and industry level, while promoting financial literacy among public; develop new generation of Shariah 
scholars and other academic and special industry experts, and use more effectively standard setters 
and private sector to work together to helping align IF industry with appropriate enhancements with 
existing  international  standards  to  lend  more  confidence  and  allow  greater  international  integration. 
Finally, most critical is the standardization of Shariah rulings within the same jurisdictions and among 
various regions which currently offer divergent views and advice given the beliefs of different schools 
of thoughts on same issues.  
4 
 BIS Review 38/2007
