Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The 2006 BSP praise awards – a harvest of 
excellence  
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  2006  BSP  Praise  Awarding  Ceremony,  Manila, 
25 July 2007. 
 Members of the Monetary Board, Civil Service Commission Field Officer Eva Olmedillo, our 
2006 Bangko Sentral PRAISE Awardees, fellow central bankers, magandang umaga po sa 
inyong lahat!  
I am very pleased to know from Deputy Governor Andy Suratos and Director Dong Asperilla 
that this morning we have a total of 460 awardees under our 2006 Praise Program. These 
are  awardees  who  scaled  the  bar  of  excellence  within  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas! 
Ladies and gentlemen, let us congratulate and thank our awardees by giving them another 
well-deserved round of applause!  
Excellence is what we strive for at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. Excellence in the pursuit 
of our mandate to ensure stable prices and a sound banking system. Excellence in the way 
we do things. We should be conscious of this at all times, for our actions here at the Bangko 
Sentral affect the lives of millions of Filipinos. Filipinos we have pledged to serve to the best 
of our abilities.  
Arthur Schelesinger, Jr., the American historian and social critic, once said “excellence is the 
eternal quest. We achieve it by living up to our highest intellectual standards and our finest 
moral intuitions.” 
I hope therefore that excellence will be the constant standard at the Bangko Sentral. While 
the  Bangko  Sentral  is  consistently  regarded  as  a  top  performing  government  agency,  you 
and I know there are still many areas we can improve on. This is the focus of our ongoing 
strategic planning sessions.  
I  challenge  our  awardees  as  well  to  expand  the  circles  of  excellence  in  their  respective 
areas, to become good role models, and to serve as constant inspiration to their colleagues. 
Never lose sight of what your awards stand for: Bangko Sentral’s commitment to excellence 
in serving the Filipino people.  
Muli, bigyan po natin ng mainit na palakpakan ang ating mga awardees!  
Finally,  let  us  acknowledge  the  significant  contributions  of  the  following  to  the  continuing 
success of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas with a big round of applause: the members of our 
Monetary Board including Dr. Vicente Valdepenas, Jr.; Atty. Raul Boncan, Sr.; Mrs. Juanita 
Amatong;  Atty.  Nelly  Favis-Villafuerte;  Mr.  Alfredo  Antonio;  and  Socio-Economic  Planning 
Secretary Romy Neri. Let us also acknowledge our three hardworking Deputy Governors, in 
alphabetical  order  –  Nesting  Espenilla,  Diwa  Guinigundo  and  Andy  Suratos;  Assistant 
Governors Jun de Zuñiga, Vic Aquino, Dolly Yuvienco, Eve Avila, Tessie Hatta; and finally, 
all the other officers and staff of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas!  
You all make me proud to be a central banker! Marami pong salamat sa inyong lahat!  
Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas! 
BIS Review 90/2007 
 1
