W A Wijewardena: Why inflation tax is an evil? 
Article  by  Mr  W  A  Wijewardena,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  published  in 
Sunday Times on 10 June 2007. 
 A popular folk story talks of a villager making a chance meeting of a demon in the forest and using his 
craftiness  to  get  the  demon  to  work  for  him.  Understandably,  the  demon  being  an  untiring  person 
proves to be a marvelous worker. His contribution to the villager far exceeds that of even a thousand 
workers. According to the story, everything is well and good as long as the villager is able to keep the 
demon under his control. But, on the day the villager loses his grip over the demon, it would set upon 
the villager and devour him. So, though the villager would have a jolly-good life in the short run, he 
runs the great risk of losing everything, including his life, in the long run. 
Governments’ use of inflation as a tax to force-mobilize resources for funding government projects has 
been equated to the fate of the villager in that folk story. In the short run, a government could forget 
about all its fiscal problems and enjoy the temporary solace provided by it. But in the long run, when 
inflation becomes uncontrollable, it will have to sacrifice all its temporary gains. When an initially mild 
inflation degenerates into an uncontrollable hyper-inflation later, it has been termed as a mass killer. It 
would destroy the financial infrastructure and, through it, the entire social and economic infrastructure. 
Rebuilding a nation after this massive destruction would be a very painful and tedious challenge for 
everyone. 
What is meant by inflation tax? 
Modern governments have been given monopoly power by their respective societies to produce and 
supply currency with a single objective: maintaining its value to facilitate its use for transactions, use 
as  a  store  of  value  and  a  unit  of  account.  Governments  are  required  to  attain  this  objective  by 
responsibly  regulating  its  supply.  Governments,  when  performing  this  task  and  as  a  cost-effective 
measure,  have  resorted  to  the  habit  of  issuing  paper  currency  notes  and  debased  metallic  coins 
thereby  gaining  a  unique  advantage.  That  advantage  is  the  ability  to  produce  it  at  a  cost  which  is 
simply a fraction of its face value. For instance, a currency note may have a face value of 1000 units of 
money, but a government does not spend 1000 units of money to produce that note. The total printing 
cost of that note may be just a fraction, say, 5 units of money. So, in this case, by issuing a note to a 
value  of  1000,  the  government  makes  a  profit  of  995  units  of  money.  Such  profits  accrued  to  the 
government are known as “seigniorage”. 
Now suppose that the government uses this 1000 note to pay salaries to a teacher. The teacher is 
required to sacrifice eight hours of her time a day to get that 1000 note as her salary. Her sacrifice is a 
real  sacrifice,  because  she  could  have  enjoyed  that  time  for  her  own  pleasure.  In  contrast,  the 
government’s real sacrifice is just 5 units of money, the value of real resources it spent on producing 
the note. So the government enriches itself at the expense of the teacher who now has been given a 
note  with  real  sacrifice  of  5  units  for  getting  eight  hours  of  real  services.  This  type  of  an  unfair 
transaction is known in economics as an unequal exchange. 
Why should the teacher agree to this unequal exchange? That is because she is promised that she 
could acquire a real basket of goods and services worth of 1000 units of money with that paper. For 
instance, if a kilogram of rice is 1000 units, she is promised one kilo of rice in exchange for eight hours 
of  her  time.  If  this  promise  is  kept,  then,  there  is  no  problem.  But,  if  such  currency  is  excessively 
produced, too much money would chase after too little rice and the price of rice would go up in the 
market. As a result, when the teacher goes to the market, if the price of rice has risen to 2000 units of 
money, she could now buy only a half of a kilogram of rice. In other words, she has been forced to 
give up eight hours of her time for half a kilo of rice. 
The reduction in the basket of real goods she is now getting as a result of inflation is similar to a tax 
she has paid to the government. In this case, the tax is equivalent to four hours of her time. It is not 
different from a rule requiring the teacher to work four hours a day for the government for nothing! That 
rule  obviously  reduces  her  welfare.  She  undergoes  this  reduction  of  her  welfare  not  on  her  own 
accord, but involuntarily. Such involuntary reduction of welfare in favor of the government has been 
caused by inflation and, therefore, known as inflation tax. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 1
How is the inflation tax imposed? 
Governments have appointed either central banks or currency boards as their agents for producing 
and supplying currency. Unlike currency boards which have to maintain a hundred percent reserve of 
valuable  assets  (gold  and  hard  foreign  currencies  such  as  Dollars,  Euros  or  Sterling  Pounds)  for 
issuing  currency,  central  banks  are  peculiar  animals.  They  do  not  have  to  have  a  reserve  of  an 
equivalent amount and can issue currency simply by making book entries. In other words, they can 
acquire any asset by assuming a liability on account of the currency they have issued. For instance, if 
a central bank has to acquire a building, all it has to do is to open its vault and issue the required 
amount of currency to the seller of the building. After the transaction, the central bank has a building 
on the asset side of its balance sheet. But, at the same time, on the liability side, there is an equivalent 
amount representing the currency issue of the bank. 
Governments  impose  inflation  tax  on  the  society  by  borrowing  from  central  banks.  When  such 
borrowings are effected, the government would give the central bank a government security such as a 
treasury bill. The central bank, in return, permits the government to take away an equivalent amount of 
currency and spend it to make payments. So, on the asset side of the bank’s balance sheet, it has a 
treasury bill. On the liability side, this asset is matched by a new liability called currency issued by the 
bank. But, to acquire that asset, the central bank has to spend only a fraction of the face value of the 
asset enabling it to make a huge profit out of the transaction. 
Central  banks’  lending  to  governments  become  highly  inflationary  on  another  count.  That  happens 
when the commercial banks make use of this currency issued by the central banks as seed money to 
produce more bank money in the form of deposits. When governments spend the currency borrowed 
from  central  banks,  such  currency  finally  gets  back  to  commercial  banks  as  deposits  of  the  public. 
Commercial  banks,  in  turn,  use  such  deposits  to  create  more  deposits  and  credit.  They  create 
deposits and credit in multiple terms restricted only by the public’s preference for currency as against 
deposits and banks’ own need for keeping a safe cash reserve to meet public’s demand for cash. In 
Sri  Lanka,  commercial  banks  could  create  bank  money  five  times  higher  than  the  initial  amount  of 
currency issued by the central bank. Because of this ability to self-produce in multiple terms, (in Sri 
Lanka, that multiplier is 5), the seed or reserve money produced by central banks is also called “high 
powered money”. 
Thus, the total money in an economy would be much more than what a central bank would issue to 
the economy. When that money which is known as money supply chases after the limited availability 
of  goods  and  services,  the  general  price  level  would  elevate  to  a  higher  level.  If  it  happens 
continuously, inflation sets in an economy imposing an inflation tax on the society. 
Why is there a preference for inflation tax? 
There is a general preference for inflation tax for several reasons. 
First, it is easy, quick and convenient to borrow from the central bank, compared to conventional forms 
of taxes available to a government. Such conventional taxes need to be backed by legislation, take 
time to generate the tax revenue and have to be enforced by an elaborate tax administration. It also 
runs  the  risk  of  failing  to  generate  the  required  revenue  due  to  tax  evasion  and  avoidance.  But, 
borrowing from the central bank is just a single transaction and the Treasury could use it immediately 
for making payments. 
Second, because of the limitations of the tax bases in developing countries, there is resource paucity 
for governments to undertake much needed infrastructure projects. Hence, it has been argued that the 
governments  in  developing  countries  could  initiate  the  development  efforts  by  mobilizing  resources 
through  inflation.  The  initial  inflation  so  created  would  get  reversed  once  the  new  economic 
development  increases  the  production  of  goods  and  services  and  raises  the  market  supply.  So, 
inflation would become a self-destroying process and, therefore, it is argued that there is no danger of 
using inflation for economic development. 
Third, taxes are mandatory payments and therefore, there is resistance on the part of tax payers to 
pay  the  taxes.  Because  of  the  pressure  coming  from  the  lobbying  groups,  political  authorities  too 
sometimes are unwilling to raise the tax rates to generate higher tax revenue. However, the resistance 
of  the  citizens  to  inflation tax  is  virtually  nonexistent.  This  is  because  no  one  realizes  that  they  are 
paying a tax to the government, when the prices move up. Any resistance by them is not against the 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2007
inflation tax per se, but against the inflation. That again takes place after sometime when they have 
been very badly hit by inflation. 
Fourth, inflation is said to be bringing about some salutary effects to an economy from the point of 
view of its long term growth. It re-distributes income in favor of the rich people who normally save a 
greater proportion of their income than the poor people. So, a country would get the much needed 
savings as a result of inflationary redistribution. It makes available funds for investment and through 
investment, ensures long term sustainable growth. 
Due to the above reasons, inflation tax has been liberally used by many governments throughout the 
world. 
The evils of the use of inflation tax 
Though inflation tax has been preferred by many, it has been criticized on many grounds. 
The first criticism is leveled on the ground that, when governments learn of this easy way of funding 
budgets, they would tend to ignore the more solid and sustainable forms of raising revenue, namely, 
through taxation. This type of behavior is known in economics as “moral hazard” behavior. The danger 
of  that  behavior  is  that  it  deprives  the  society  of  the  opportunity  to  carry  out  public  expenditure 
programs based on a solid resource base. It would reduce the government to the same unfortunate 
position of a student who has passed all his examinations by cheating. Then, one day when he could 
no longer do so to pass an examination, he would painfully learn that he has no in-built capability to 
face it on his own strength. 
The  second  criticism  has  been  advanced  on  the  ground  of  the  evils  of  inflation.  They  could  be 
summarized as follows: 
• 
Inflation causes the market system to fail in its resource allocation function. This is because, 
inflation  raises  all  the  prices  together  and,  for  resource  allocation,  what  is  needed  is  the 
changes in the relative prices, i.e., the price of one commodity rises, but the price of another 
should fall to compensate the same. 
Inflation  discourages  exports  by  functioning  as  a  tax  on  exports.  At  the  same  time,  it 
encourages  imports  by  providing  a  subsidy.  The  end  result  is  a  continuous  shortage  of 
foreign exchange and pressure for exchange rate to fall in value. 
Inflation also taxes savers and subsidizes borrowers. This happens when interest rates are 
not adjusted to ensure a positive real rate of interest rate in the market. Hence, savers would 
find  that  the  real  value  of  their  savings  falling  and  borrowers  the  opposite,  along  with 
inflation. 
Inflation  also  causes  an  undesirable  change  in  assets  structure  by  favoring  unproductive 
assets  like  real  estate,  gems  and  jewelry  and  discouraging  the  much  needed  financial 
assets.  This  happens  when  interest  rates  are  negative  in  real  terms  due  to  the  non-
adjustment of the rates to reflect inflation. So, people would shift from value-falling financial 
assets to value-appreciating real assets. 
Inflation disadvantages the vulnerable groups with low bargaining power such as pensioners, 
housewives, students etc. It generates social disharmony and social tensions. 
Inflation also raises the costs of local enterprises by raising the prices of inputs and wages. 
This would adversely affect a country’s comparative advantage. 
Similarly,  inflation  also  puts  further  pressure  on  the  government  budget  by  raising  current 
expenditure due to increases in the prices of inputs and the salaries of employees. It also 
causes the revenue to fall behind the increases in the national income. 
      Therefore,  the  use  of  inflation  as  a  measure  for  funding  government  budgets  is  not  an  advisable 
strategy for any government. 
This  was  very  cogently  expressed  by  Dr.  Goh  Keng  Swee,  economic  pundit  behind  Singapore’s 
economic miracle, in his reminiscences of why Singapore chose to retain the currency board system, 
as follows: 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 3
“Financing  budget  deficits  through  Central  Bank  credit  creation  appeared  to  us  as  an  invitation  to 
disaster. There was no effective way of exchange control in an open trading economy like ours to deal 
with inevitable balance of payments troubles. 
……The way to better life was through hard work, first in schools, then in universities or polytechnics 
and then on the job in the work place. Diligence, education and skills will create wealth, not Central 
Bank credit.” 
There  is  no  better  explanation  of  the  evils  of  inflation  tax  than  the  above  statement  of  wisdom. 
Countries  which  did  not  have  this  wisdom  fell  through  the  line  and  were  gripped  by  uncontrollable 
hyper-inflation  in  their  economies.  The  most  recent  example  is  Zimbabwe  where  inflation  presently 
runs at mo re than 3700% p.a. Its Central Bank Governor, Mr. Gideon Gono, recently lamented by 
equating  his  country’s  hyper-inflation  to  an  economic  HIV,  an  epidemic  that  would  kill  people  on  a 
mass scale. 
Hence, using inflation to fund budgets is just like getting a demon to work for you. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2007
