Tarisa Watanagase: Emerging markets in financial globalization – 
striking the right balance for liberalization 
Luncheon  address  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
conference 
“Asian  Banking  –  Challenges  and  Opportunities”,  San  Francisco, 
6 September 2007. 
 Madam President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 
Distinguished Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here,  among  this  distinguished  gathering  of  policymakers,  financial 
experts,  and  keen  watchers  of  Asian  banking  developments,  to  deliver  a  message  on  the 
prospects  for  economic  growth  and  stability  in  Asia.  Given  Asia’s  diversity,  I  would  like  to 
focus my talk today on Asian emerging markets’ experience and challenges going forward. In 
particular,  I  would  like  to  highlight  to  you  the  near-term  challenges  of  coping  with  rapid 
exchange  rate  appreciation  and  volatile  capital  flows  and  the  need  for  a  more  flexible 
economy for better financial resiliency over the medium to long term. I will also touch on the 
implications  for  the  banking  sector,  which  is  the  predominant  financial  sector  in  most 
emerging markets. 
One  decade  after  the  crisis,  emerging  Asia  is  vibrant.  They  also  look  less  vulnerable  to 
financial  disturbances.  Asian  emerging  markets  are  learning  to  live  with  heightened 
uncertainty in the world where the extent and the whereabouts of the risks are unclear, and 
which necessitates that every player manages his  own risk better. In this highly integrated 
world,  small  open  Asian  economies  want  to  take  advantage  of  financial  globalization  to 
promote  sustained  increase  in  living  standards.  Over  time,  they  wish  to  move  from 
incomplete  financial  market  to  a  better  world  of  risk-sharing,  risk  absorption,  and 
diversification. But there is tension to be managed in the short run. Under Bretton Woods II, 
in which much of Asia is still tightly linked to the fortune of the US dollar, and in the context of 
ongoing “global imbalances,” emerging markets need to strike a balance between financial 
stability and financial development. In particular, when our markets and institutions are still 
developing, the struggle between financial integration and financial stability, enterprise and 
prudence, requires from us a deft balancing act. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
From  a  historical  perspective,  today’s  emerging  markets  are  unique  in  their  common 
experience.  This  uniqueness  is  twofold.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  quite  apparent  that  our 
openness  has  gained  us 
the 
phenomenon denied to advanced economies when they started off. At the same time, and as 
a  result  of  our  openness,  small  developing  economies  face  risks  and  volatilities  that 
accompany financial globalization, the scale of which advanced economies never had to face 
in their early stages. 
In fact, sustained increase in living standards is a relatively new economic phenomenon to 
emerging  markets.  Having  experienced  modern  economic  growth  after  1950,  we  are  late 
comers. And having much to benefit from being late, it took us a much shorter time to treble 
our  per-capita  income  than  today’s  advanced  economies  did  between  1800  and  1950.1 
Indeed,  international  difference  in  living  standards  has  declined  over  the  latter  half  of  the 
from  global  economic 
immense  benefit 
integration, 
                                                 
1   Parente  and  Prescott  (1999)  documents  the  evolution  of  international  income  and  growth  differences  and 
gives a list of growth facts before and after the industrial revolution. 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 1
twentieth century as a result of emerging markets’ fast-pace and sustained growth. During 
the past 20 years, the world’s income gap has narrowed even faster. It cannot be by sheer 
coincidence  that  this  period  has  also  witnessed  growing  international  trade  and  financial 
integration  and  the  entrance  of  China,  and  subsequently  India,  into  the  comity  of  trading 
nations. 
Along  these  high  growth  trajectories,  emerging  markets’  aggregate  real  income  and 
consumption  are  an  order  of  magnitude  more  volatile  than  advanced  economies  (both  in 
terms  of  levels  and  growth  rates).  Not  only  is  consumption  more  volatile  in  emerging 
markets,  but  it  is  also more  volatile  in  relation  to  income. In  fact,  over  the  business  cycle, 
consumption is around 40 percent more volatile than income for emerging markets, while it is 
less  volatile  than  income  for  advanced  economies.  The  unique  volatility  outcomes  can  be 
attributed to a distinct set of macroeconomic shocks which are specific to emerging markets 
or  their  propagation  mechanism,  or  both.2  I  think  that  the  extraordinary  volatility  in  real 
aggregate  consumption  and  income  can  be  partially  attributed  to  episodes  of  financial 
instability  that  occur  not  infrequently  in  emerging  markets.  In  fact,  these  bouts  of  extreme 
instability have disrupted the potential growth trends, which in some cases have taken years 
to  recover.  On  the  whole,  these  episodes  may  be  associated  with  too  much  financial 
liberalization too soon. 
The  unique  global  backdrop,  as  well  as  the  economic  outcomes  in  terms  of  growth  and 
volatility that I have just shared with you, presents a real dilemma and at times tension in 
emerging Asia. And nowhere is this tension more palpable than it is in the realm of exchange 
rate and capital account regimes. While benefits from trade integration are appreciated and 
shared by billions the world over, net benefits from international financial integration have not 
been  so  apparent  in  Asia  and  emerging  economies  in  general.  This  is  consistent  with  an 
observation that Asian emerging markets rely increasingly more on trade integration because 
it is judged to be a safer mode of risk-sharing with the world. As a result, while the pace of 
financial integration has far outstripped trade integration in advanced economies, it has only 
managed to keep pace with trade integration in emerging markets.3
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Asian  economies  and  policymakers  have  come  a  long  way  in  their  attitude  toward 
macroeconomic  risk  management  since  1997.  Countries  have  taken  unilateral  actions  to 
promote economic and financial resiliency. 
Having appreciated the evidence that macroeconomic stability provides an environment that 
is conducive for sustained growth, Asian emerging markets have continued to pursue fiscal 
discipline and more flexible exchange rates on the whole. 
The result is improved fiscal balances and better public debt structure, which is heavy toward 
longer  maturities  and  domestic-currency  denominated.  Monetary  policy’s  first  priority  is  to 
achieve long-term price stability, and in certain countries, Thailand included, central banks 
actively pursue explicit inflation targets. 
To  be  sure,  countries  have  made  efforts  to  ensure  stronger  prudential  regulation  and 
supervision of banks. The evidence is mixed on this front, but increasingly, more countries 
are adopting risk-based supervision and international accounting standards, including Basel 
II  and  IAS  39.  A  number  of  Asian  emerging  economies  have  also  achieved  significant 
                                                 
2   The same is true when comparing relative volatility in growth rates of consumption and income (Kose, Prasad, 
and Terrones, 2005). While this is a broad characterization of emerging markets, some countries, for example 
Thailand, have experienced a much less volatile consumption to income ratio. (Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007). 
3   From  the  new  External  Wealth  of  Nations  Mark  II  (EWN  II)  dataset,  compiled  by  Lane  and  Milesi-Ferretti 
(2006).  The  extent  of  financial  integration  is  measured  by  the  total  international  assets  and  liabilities  as  a 
percentage of GDP and the degree of trade integration is measured by exports plus imports over GDP. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2007
consolidation and modernization of their financial institutions. They have built up new legal 
and information infrastructure to strengthen the foundation for financial system capacity for 
crisis prevention and resolution. In some countries, new foreclosure laws, bankruptcy laws, 
debt restructuring mechanisms, and credit bureaus, which were absent before 1997, are now 
in  place.  Public  and  private  efforts  have  stepped  up  significantly  to  expand  the  capital 
markets  domestically  as  well  as  regionally.  Across  the  region,  policymakers  are  sharing 
knowledge  and  expertise  to  ensure  efficiency  and  pragmatism  in  the  implementation  of 
policy. 
Most  obviously,  Asian  countries  have  also  built  up  international  reserves  to  a  multiple  of 
short-term external debt or other traditional measures of potential claims on reserves. They 
have also relied less on foreign debt financing and shifted more toward equity securities and 
direct  investment.4  This  shift  in  the  pattern  of  capital  flows  demonstrates  to  some  extent 
advances in equity market development and corporate governance in the region. 
For a few countries, reserve accumulation partly constitutes a deterrent to the repeat of the 
last extreme episode of instability in 1997. As an added benefit, a relatively well-developed 
system  of  prudential  banking  regulation  has  also  helped  these  countries  avoid  speculative 
pressures on their exchange rates. 
As  far  as  financial  integration  is  concerned,  there  have  been  selective  and  timely  capital 
account restrictions and liberalization on both inflows and outflows over the years. Much of 
this  caution  derives  from  the  bitter  lessons  from  the  1990s.  But,  even  so,  it  is  worth 
mentioning that, measured by total foreign assets and liabilities as a percentage of GDP, the 
trend from Bangkok to Seoul is that of more financial integration over the past 20 years.5
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
These  changes  in  policies  and  risk  awareness  make  it  less  likely  that  financial  market 
disturbances will trigger a sharp and broad-based dent to real economic outcomes. 
But, it may be a slight overstatement to declare that Asia as a whole has become resilient to 
shocks  and  disturbances  today.  In  a  sense,  the  impressive  heights  of  Asian  international 
reserves  may  be  construed  less  as  an  indication  of  fundamental  strength  than  as  an 
indication for needed progress toward modern monetary policy framework. In addition to that, 
the size of accumulated global financial vulnerabilities that may unwind in the near future is 
by most measures unprecedented; the extent and the whereabouts of the risk concentration 
are  unclear.  And  as  a  result,  circumstances  of  greater  macroeconomic  adversity  may  yet 
again put to test emerging markets’ ability to adjust. 
The pressing and practical challenges emerging Asia faces in the near term are three-fold. 
Indeed, the three challenges are inter-related. They are “hot money” inflows and large inflows 
in general, pressure for rapid domestic currency appreciation, and finally, the potential loss of 
monetary autonomy in the sense of independent interest rate policy. 
Having done the right thing over the past 10 years, Asian emerging markets have become 
darlings of international investors and have had ample access to funds at favorable cost –
although the more powerful underlying reason may ironically be a medium-term flight from 
US dollar assets since 2002. With large capital inflow comes pressure for these currencies to 
appreciate. In this experience, some currencies appreciate faster than others. In fact, those 
that  surrender  most  of  their  monetary  autonomy  or  maintain  restrictions  on  cross-border 
capital  flows  need  not  feel  immediate  pressure  to  appreciate.  But  those  that  have  come 
further along the liberalization road have to face a different music. 
                                                 
4   From  the  new  External  Wealth  of  Nations  Mark  II  (EWN  II)  dataset,  compiled  by  Lane  and  Milesi-Ferretti 
(2006). 
Ibid. 
5  
BIS Review 99/2007 
 3
Rapid  appreciation  in  the  exchange  value  of  the  currency  renders  part  of  the  domestic 
industries  less  competitive  in  the  global  markets.  It  is  true  that  with  this  appreciation, 
commodity imports such as fuel and energy as well as metal and raw materials have become 
more affordable despite rising world price trends. But these benefits are spread-out while the 
cost  is  centered  on  labor-intensive,  high  domestic-content  primary  sectors,  such  as 
agriculture  and  low-end  manufacturing.  As  a  result,  even  for  net  primary  commodity 
importing  economies,  the  nature  of  the  problem  is  as  much  political  economy  as  it  is 
economic. There are strong and vocal constituencies in emerging markets that are averse to 
currency appreciation and part of them averse to variability in the exchange rate itself. 
Meanwhile,  hot  money,  or  indeed  large  inflows  in  general,  can  fuel  asset  prices  and 
encourage excessive risk-taking behavior. Central banks may wish to counter that excess in 
the interest of financial stability. If the central bank chooses to maintain a high interest rate 
stance, the pressure on the currency to appreciate will likely mount. 
Not  unlike  today’s  political  economy  in  advanced  countries,  emerging  market  politics  also 
risks being less favorable to openness, but more partial to protection of selected industries or 
protectionism in general. 
As such, I hope you appreciate that, when it comes to policy, there is risk in change as well 
as in inertia. This is the fundamental challenge we face. 
Since  the  challenge  going  forward  requires  significant  ability  for  emerging  economies  to 
adjust flexibly, what has brought us here may not deliver us safely to prosperity. 
Beyond  getting  the  fundamentals  right  and  strengthening  them,  the  solution  package  we 
seek  must  help  reduce  the  distortions  perpetuated  on  our  economies.  These  distortions 
impose  real  costs  and  hinder  our  chances  to  become  more  resilient  going  forward.  This 
solution package must by default and by design be broad-based. 
Allowing the competitive pressure and incentive to operate is undoubtedly the best way to 
foster investment in physical and human capital, as well as innovation and risk-taking, all of 
which  are  crucial  to  long-term  productivity  growth.  They  are  also  crucial  for  a  flexible  and 
resilient economy. But policy and regulations still have a role to play. The imperative here is 
to improve on policy and regulation design that can help deal with market excesses. 
On an appropriate degree of financial openness through time, there is little consensus today, 
even  among  leading  academic  economists.  The  key  here  is  prioritizing  liberalization  and 
reforms. But the right pacing and sequencing of capital account liberalization in one country 
may not be solution for the next. 
In order to outline capital account policy priority, I think policymakers in emerging economies 
should  underline  the  fact  that  big  market  events  that  pose  systemic  risks  tend  to  reflect 
collective mistakes in which most market participants are offside in the same direction. So, to 
reduce  the  chance  of  prolonged  financial  misalignment  with  economic  fundamentals,  the 
priority  for  emerging  markets  may  lie  in  improving  the  flows  and  quality  of  financial 
information,  corporate  and  public  governance,  as  well  as  legal  infrastructure  to  allow  in 
different players and views.6 With players of different views and risk appetites in the market, 
we  have  a  better  chance  that  the  financial  system  will  undergo  constant  self-correction. 
Crashes in asset price will also likely be less prolonged and the ensuing economic cost less 
devastating. 
                                                 
6   See Bannier (2005) for an articulation that large players need not make market responses more aggressive if 
the market does not uniformly believe that fundamentals are weak. And see Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003) 
for argument that the resilience of financial bubbles can stem from the inability of arbitrageurs to temporarily 
coordinate their selling strategies. 
4 
 BIS Review 99/2007
Emerging markets not only require stronger financial intermediaries and better supervisors, 
but also access to deeper and more liquid capital markets. Our own financial markets may 
not be deep enough soon enough, but those who are ready for it should not be encumbered 
from having access to the world financial markets. Emerging economies that can manage the 
risks have benefited from liberalized inflows in the past, but some of these economies may 
benefit  more  if  their  citizens  can  unload  domestic  systematic  risk  abroad.7  Timely  outflow 
liberalization  may  help  smooth  emerging  market’s  consumption  and  income,  a  significant 
welfare improvement. 
Set in this light, the immediate implications for Asian banks from the challenges that I have 
outlined earlier may initially be the deterioration in the quality of their loan portfolios, including 
potentially  higher  non-performing  loans.  But  over  time,  in  response  to  structural  changes 
undertaken  by  other  economic  sectors  as  well  as  increasing  disintermediation  and 
competition from both domestic and foreign players, we should observe stronger and more 
competitive  banks  in  emerging  markets.  This  transformed  well-supervised,  prudent  and 
enterprising banking sector will remain crucial to the dynamism of Asia. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Extraordinary  emerging  market  income  and  consumption  volatility  may  be  the  result  of 
macroeconomic  shocks,  their  propagation  mechanism  as  well  as  policy  and  institutional 
setup,  but  it  can  be  ameliorated  by  better  risk  sharing  with  the  world.  In  this  welfare-
enhancing  endeavor,  international  financial  integration  on  top  of  ongoing  trade  integration 
can play an important role. 
To  end  my  talk  today,  let  me  share  with  you  briefly  the  approach  taken  by  Thailand.  The 
Bank of Thailand has sought a balanced approach to managing capital flows under flexible 
exchange rate. We also undertake concomitant reforms in the area of financial system and 
market  development.  These  initiatives  are  closely  related  and  progress  in  one  requires 
progress in the others. 
In  building  a  resilient  economy,  prudent  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  does  help.  As  an 
automatic  stabilizer,  flexible  exchange  rate  also  helps.  But,  prudent  macroeconomic 
management alone will not raise people’s living standard in the long run. We need a balance 
between  prudence  and  enterprise  or  the  ability  to  take  risky  action  and  make  sound 
decisions  on  the  part  of  the  business  sector.  Otherwise,  we  risk  either  having  a  stagnant, 
inefficient  economy  or  building  a  fast-growing  one  on  a  bubble;  neither  of  which  we  can 
afford. 
Hence, the priority is the need to design a system that allows for constant self-correction – 
one that also lets the economy regain its strength quickly after a severe negative shock. That 
system should be underpinned by a strong link to the world economy, which will encourage 
innovation and efficiency. The competitive markets should operate under a clear rule of law 
with good governance. In support of them, we need an effective and honest government and 
supporting  institutions  that  focus  on  improving  resiliency  of  the  economy  and  sustainable 
long-term economic growth. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Advanced  economies  do  have  economic,  if  not  also  strategic,  interests  in  the  success  of 
Asian emerging markets. An Asia that is well-adjusted and integrated into the world markets 
will add prosperity and stability to the world economy for years to come. 
                                                 
7   See Henry (2006) for a critical review of the literature on theory and evidence of capital account liberalization. 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 5
References 
1.  Abreu,  D.  and  M.  Brunnermeier  (2003).  “Bubbles  and  Crashes”  Econometrica,  Vol.  71, 
No. 1, pp. 173-204. 
2. Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath (2007). “Emerging market business cycles: The cycle is the 
trend,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 115, pp. 69-102, February. 
3.  Bannier,  C.  E.  (2005).  “Big  elephants  in  small  ponds:  Do  large  traders  make  financial 
markets more aggressive?”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 52, No. 8, November, pp. 
1517-1531. 
4.  Henry,  P.  B.  (2006).  “Capital  account  liberalization:  Theory,  evidence  and  speculation,” 
NBER  Working  Paper  12698,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  Cambridge  MA, 
November. 
5.  Kose,  A.,  E.  Prasad,  and  M.  Terrones  (2005),  “Growth  and  Volatility  in  an  Era  of 
Globalization,”  IMF  Staff  Papers,  vol.  52,  pp.  31-63,  International  Monetary  Fund, 
Washington D.C.. 
6.  Lane,  P.  R.  and  G.  M.  Milesi-Ferretti  (2006).  “The  external  wealth  of  nations  Mark  II: 
Revised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970-2004”, Working Paper 
WP/06/09, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C. 
7. Parente, S. L. and E. C. Prescott (1999). Barriers to Riches, Third Walras-Pareto Lecture, 
University of Lausanne, Switzerland, October. 
6 
 BIS Review 99/2007
