Y V Reddy: Monetary policy developments in India – an overview 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Sveriges Riksbank, 
Stockholm, 7 September 2007. 
 Friends, 
I am honored by the kind invitation of Governor Stefan Ingves to visit Riksbank and give an 
address  at  the  central  bank.  It  is  a  great  privilege  to  address  an  august  gathering  in  the 
oldest  central  bank  in  the  world,  Riksbank.  I  came  in  close  contact  with  Governor  Ingves 
when he was working with the IMF. As a Director in the Executive Board of IMF, I have been 
an admirer of Mr. Ingves when he headed the Monetary and Exchange Affairs Department, 
which has now become the Monetary and Capital Markets Department. During his tenure in 
the IMF, he was instrumental in spearheading the Financial Sector Assessment Programme, 
which stands today as an important tool for crisis prevention. His comments in recent years 
on  various  fora  as  Governor  reflect  both  his  excellent  professionalism  and  proven 
pragmatism.  We,  in  the  Reserve  Bank,  look  forward  to  continued  collaboration  with 
Riksbank. Thank you Governor, for inviting me to your wonderful country, which I visited as a 
student on vacation in 1968. 
My  address  today  is  on  a  theme  traditionally  close  to  the  heart  of  any  central  banker.  A 
review of the recent developments in the Indian Economy would be done in the first section. 
Second, I would review the trends in monetary policy challenges globally and for emerging 
market  economies  (EMEs)  in  particular.  In  the  third  section,  I  would  explain  the  monetary 
policy framework in India. Some issues in the conduct of monetary policy in India would be 
covered in the fourth section followed by a few concluding observations. 
I.  
A review of outcomes 
Growth with stability 
The average growth rate of the Indian economy over a period of 25 years since 1980-81 has 
been impressive at about 6.0 per cent, which is a significant improvement over the previous 
three decades, when the annual growth rate was only 3.5 per cent. Over the last four years 
during  2003-07,  the  Indian  economy  has  entered  a  high  growth  phase,  averaging  8.6  per 
cent per annum. The acceleration of growth during this period has been accompanied by a 
moderation in volatility, especially in industry and services sectors. 
An important characteristic of the high growth phase of over a quarter of century is resilience 
to  shocks  and  considerable  degree  of  stability.  We  did  witness  one  serious  balance  of 
payments  crisis 
the  early  1990s.  Credible 
macroeconomic, structural and stabilization programme was undertaken in the wake of the 
crisis.  The  Indian  economy  in  later  years  could  successfully  avoid  any  adverse  contagion 
impact of shocks from the East Asian crisis, the Russian crisis during 1997-98, sanction like 
situation in post-Pokhran scenario, and border conflict during May-June 1999. Seen in this 
context,  this  robust  macroeconomic  performance,  in  the  face  of  recent  oil  as  well  as  food 
price shocks, demonstrates the vibrancy and resilience of the Indian economy.  
The  Reserve  Bank  projects  a  real  GDP  growth  at  around  8.5  per  cent  during  2007-08, 
barring domestic and external shocks. 
the  Gulf  war 
largely  by 
triggered 
in 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 1
Poverty and unemployment 
The  sustained  economic  growth  since  the  early  1990s  has  also  been  associated  with 
noticeable reduction in poverty. The proportion of people living below the poverty line (based 
on uniform recall period) declined from 36 per cent in 1993-94 to 27.8 per cent in 2004-05. 
There is also some evidence of pick-up in employment growth from 1.57 per cent per annum 
(1993-94 to 1999-2000) to 2.48 per cent (1999-2000 to 2004-05). 
Consumption and investment demand 
India's growth in recent years has been mainly driven by domestic consumption, contributing 
on  an  average  to  almost  two-thirds  of  the  overall  demand,  while  investment  and  export 
demand are also accelerating. Almost one-half of the incremental growth in real GDP during 
2006-07  was  on  account  of  final  consumption  demand,  while  around  42  per  cent  was  on 
account of the rise in real gross fixed capital formation. The investment boom has come from 
the creation of fixed assets and this phenomenon has been most pronounced in the private 
corporate sector, although fixed investment in the public sector also picked up in this period. 
According to an estimate by the Prime Minister’s Economic Advisory Council, the investment 
rate (provisional) crossed 35 per cent in 2006-07 from 33.8 per cent in 2005-06. 
A reasonable degree of price stability 
High growth in the last four years has been accompanied by a moderation of inflation. The 
headline inflation rate, in terms of the wholesale price index, has declined from an average of 
11.0 per cent during 1990-95 to 5.3 per cent during 1995-2000 and to 4.9 per cent during 
2003-07. The trending down of inflation has been associated with a significant reduction in 
inflation  volatility  which  is  indicative  of  well-anchored  inflation  expectations,  despite  the 
shocks of varied nature. Although, inflation based on the wholesale price index (WPI) initially 
rose to above 6.0 per cent in early April 2007 it eased to 3.79 per cent by August 25, 2007. 
Pre-emptive  monetary  measures  since  mid-2004,  accompanied  by  fiscal  and  supply-side 
measures, have helped in containing inflation in India.  
The  policy  preference  for  the  period  ahead  is strongly  in  favour  of  price  stability  and  well-
anchored inflation expectations with the endeavour being to contain inflation close to 5.0 per 
cent in 2007-08 and in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent over the medium-term. Monetary policy 
in  India  would  continue  to  be  vigilant  and  pro-active  in  the  context  of  any  accentuation  of 
global uncertainties that pose threats to growth and stability in the domestic economy. 
Improved fiscal performance 
Yet another positive outcome of developments in recent years is the marked improvement in 
the health of Government finances. The fiscal management in the country has significantly 
improved consistent with targeted reduction in fiscal deficit indicators after the adoption of the 
Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  (FRBM)  Act,  2003  by 
the  Central 
Government.  The  finances  of  the  State  Governments  have  also  exhibited  significant 
improvement since 2003-04 guided by the Fiscal Responsibility Legislations (FRLs).  
With  gross  fiscal  deficit  of  the  Central  Government  budgeted  at  3.3  per  cent  of  GDP  in 
2007-08, the FRBM target of 3.0 per cent by 2008-09 appears feasible. The revenue deficit is 
budgeted  at  1.5  per  cent  of  GDP  for  2007-08;  the  FRBM  path  envisages  elimination  of 
revenue deficit in 2008-09.  
External sector  
India’s linkages with the global economy are getting stronger, underpinned by the growing 
openness  of  the  economy  and  the  two  way  movement  in  financial  flows.  Merchandise 
exports  have  been  growing  at  an  average  rate  of  around  25  per  cent  during  the  last  four 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2007
years, with  a steady increase in global market share, reflecting the competitiveness of the 
Indian  industry.  Structural  shifts  in  services  exports,  led  by  software  and  other  business 
services,  and  remittances  have  imparted  stability  and  strength  to  India’s  balance  of 
payments. The net invisible surplus has offset a significant part of the expanding trade deficit 
and helped to contain the current account deficit to an average of one per cent of GDP since 
the  early  1990s.  Gross  current  receipts  (merchandise  exports  and  invisible  receipts)  and 
gross  current  payments  (merchandise  imports  and  invisible  payments)  taken  together,  at 
present,  constitute  more  than  one  half  of  GDP,  highlighting  the  significant  degree  of 
integration of the Indian economy with the global economy.  
Greater  integration  into  the  global  economy  has  enabled  the  Indian  corporates  to  access 
high-quality imports from abroad and also to expand their overseas assets, dynamically. The 
liberalised  external  payments  regime  is  facilitating  the  process  of  acquisition  of  foreign 
companies  by  Indian  corporates,  both  in  the  manufacturing  and  services  sectors,  with  the 
objectives of reaping economies of scale and capturing offshore markets to better face the 
global competition. Notwithstanding higher outflows, there has been a significant increase in 
capital inflows (net) to almost five per cent of GDP in 2006-07 from an average of two per 
cent  of  GDP  during  2000-01  to  2002-03.  Capital  inflows  (net)  have  remained  substantially 
above the current account deficit and have implications for the conduct of monetary policy 
and macroeconomic and financial stability.  
With the significant strengthening of the current and capital accounts, the foreign exchange 
reserves  have  more  than  doubled  from  US$  76  billion  at  the  end  of  March  2003  to  US  $ 
228.8 billion as on August 31, 2007. 
income 
Financial stability 
The Indian record on financial stability is noteworthy as the decade of the 1990s has been 
otherwise  turbulent  for  the  financial  sector  in  many  EMEs.  The  approach  towards  the 
financial sector in India has been to consistently upgrade it by adapting the international best 
practices through a consultative process. The Reserve Bank has endeavoured to establish 
an enabling regulatory framework with prompt and effective supervision, and development of 
legal,  technological  and  institutional  infrastructure.  The  regulatory  norms  with  respect  to 
capital  adequacy, 
recognition,  asset  classification  and  provisioning  have 
progressively moved towards convergence with the international best practices. The Basel II 
capital  adequacy  framework  is  being  implemented  in  a  phased  manner  with  effect  from 
March 2008. 
We have observed that the Indian banks’ balance sheets have strengthened considerably, 
financial  markets  have  deepened  and  widened  and,  with  the  introduction  of  the  real  time 
gross settlements (RTGS) system, the payment system has also become robust. Currently, 
all  scheduled  commercial  banks  are  compliant  with  the  minimum  capital  adequacy  ratio 
(CRAR) of 9 per cent. The overall CRAR for all scheduled commercial banks stood at 12.4 
per  cent  at  end-March  2006.  The  gross  non-performing  assets  of  scheduled  commercial 
banks has declined from 8.8 per cent of advances at end March 2003 to 3.3 per cent at end 
March 2006, while the net non-performing assets have declined from 4.0 per cent to 1.2 per 
cent during the same period. 
Financial markets 
Development  of  financial  markets  received  a  strong  impetus  from  financial  sector  reforms 
since  the  early  1990s. The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  engaged  in  developing,  widening  and 
deepening of money, government securities and foreign exchange markets combined with a 
robust payments and settlement system. A wide range of regulatory and institutional reforms 
were  introduced  in  a  planned  manner  over  a  period  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  these 
financial  markets.  These  included  development  of  market  micro  structure,  removal  of 
structural bottlenecks, introduction/ diversification of new players/instruments, free pricing of 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 3
financial assets, relaxation of quantitative restrictions, better regulatory systems, introduction 
of new technology, improvement in trading infrastructure, clearing and settlement practices 
and  greater  transparency.  Prudential  norms  were  introduced  early  in  the  reform  phase, 
followed by interest rate deregulation. These policies were supplemented by strengthening of 
institutions,  encouraging  good  market  practices,  rationalised  tax  structures  and  enabling 
legislative and accounting framework.  
A review of monetary policy challenges  
II.  
The conduct of monetary policy has become more challenging in recent years for a variety of 
reasons. Many of the challenges the central banks are facing are almost similar which could 
be summarized as follows: 
Challenges with globalisation  
First,  globalisation  has  brought  in  its  train  considerable  fuzziness  in  reading  underlying 
macroeconomic  and  financial  developments,  obscuring  signals  from  financial  prices  and 
clouding  the  monetary  authority’s  gauge  of  the  performance  of  the  real  economy.  The 
growing importance of assets and asset prices in a globally integrated economy complicates 
the conduct of monetary policy when it is focused on and equipped to address price stability 
issues. 
Second,  with  the  growing  integration  of  financial  markets  domestically  and  internationally, 
there is greater activism in liquidity management with a special focus on the short-end of the 
market spectrum. There is also a greater sophistication in the conduct of monetary policy and 
central  banks  are  consistently  engaged  in  refining  their  technical  and  managerial  skills  to 
deal with the complexities of financial markets. As liquidity management acquires overriding 
importance, the evolving solvency conditions of financial intermediaries may, on occasions, 
get  obscured  in  the  short  run.  No  doubt,  with  increasing  globalization,  there  is  greater 
coordination  between  central  banks,  fiscal  authorities  and  regulatory  bodies  governing 
financial markets.  
Third,  there  is  considerable  difficulty  faced  by  monetary  authorities  across  the  world  in 
detecting  and  measuring  inflation,  especially  inflation  expectations.  Recent  experience  in 
regard to impact of increases in oil prices, and more recently elevated food prices shows that 
ignoring the structural or permanent elements of what is traditionally treated as shocks may 
slow down appropriate monetary policy response especially if the focus is on "core inflation". 
Accounting for house rents/prices in inflation measurement has also gained attention in some 
countries.  The  central  banks  are  often  concerned  with  the  stability/variability  of  inflation 
rather than the level of prices. Inflation processes have become highly unclear and central 
banks  are  faced  with  the  need  to  recognise  the  importance  of  inflation  perceptions  and 
inflation  expectations,  as  distinct 
this  context,  credible 
communication  and  creative  engagement  with  the  market  and  economic  agents  have 
emerged as a critical channel of monetary transmission.  
indicators. 
inflation 
from 
In 
Challenges for emerging market economies  
It  is  essential  to  recognize  that  the  international  financial  markets  have  differing  ways  of 
judging macroeconomic developments in industrial and emerging market economies. Hence, 
the challenges and policy responses do differ. 
First,  the  EMEs  are  facing  the  dilemma  of  grappling  with  the  inherently  volatile  increasing 
capital  flows  relative  to  domestic  absorptive  capacity.  Consequently,  often  the  impossible 
trinity of fixed or managed exchange rates, open capital accounts and discretion in monetary 
policy  has  to  be  managed  in  what  could  be  termed  as  “fuzzy”  manner  rather  than 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2007
satisfactorily resolved – a problem that gets exacerbated due to huge uncertainties in global 
financial markets and possible consequences in the real sector. 
Second,  in  the  emerging  scenario  of  large  and  uncertain  capital  flows,  the  choice  of  the 
instruments for sterilization and other policy responses have been constrained by a number 
of factors such as the openness of the economy, the depth of the domestic bond market, the 
health of the financial sector, the health of the public finances, the country’s inflationary track 
record  and the  perception  about  the  credibility  and  consistency  in  macroeconomic  policies 
pursued  by  the  country.  Further  deepening  of  financial  markets  may  help  in  absorption  of 
large capital inflows in the medium term, but it may not give immediate succour at the current 
stage of financial sector development in many EMEs, particularly when speed and magnitude 
of flows are very high. Some of the EMEs are also subject to adverse current account shocks 
in view of elevated commodity prices. Going forward, global uncertainties in financial markets 
are  likely  to  dominate  the  concerns  of  all  monetary  authorities,  but,  for  the  EMEs,  the 
consequences of such macro or financial disturbances could be more serious. 
Third, the banking sector has been strengthened and non-banking intermediation expanded 
providing both stability and efficiency to the financial sector in many EMEs. Yet, sometimes, 
aligning  the  operations  of  large  financial  conglomerates  and  foreign  institutions  with  local 
public policy priorities remains a challenge for domestic financial regulators in many EMEs. 
Further, reaping full benefits of competition in financial sector is somewhat limited in many 
EMEs. Large players in developed economies compete with each other intensely, while it is 
possible that a few of them dominate in each of the EME's financial markets. A few of the 
financial intermediaries could thus wield dominant position in the financial markets of these 
countries, increasing the concentration risk. 
While it is extremely difficult to envision how the current disturbances in financial markets will 
resolve,  the  focus  of  many  EMEs  will  be  on  considering  various  scenarios  and  being  in 
readiness with appropriate policy strategies and contingency plans. Among the factors that 
are  carefully  monitored,  currency  markets,  liquidity  conditions,  globally  dominant  financial 
intermediaries, impact on real sector through credit channel and asset prices are significant, 
but the list is certainly not exhaustive. 
III.  
Monetary policy framework in India 
Objectives 
The  basic  objectives  of  monetary  policy,  namely  price  stability  and  ensuring  credit  flow  to 
support growth, have remained unchanged in India, but the underlying operating framework 
for monetary policy has undergone a significant transformation during the past two decades. 
The relative emphasis placed on price stability and economic growth is modulated according 
to the circumstances prevailing at a particular point in time and is clearly spelt out, from time 
to  time,  in  the  policy  statements  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  Of  late,  considerations  of 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  have  assumed  an  added  importance  in  view  of 
increasing openness of the Indian economy.  
Framework 
In India, the broad money (M3) emerged as the nominal anchor from the mid-1980s based on 
the premise of a stable relationship between money, output and prices. In the late 1990s, in 
view  of  ongoing  financial  openness  and  increasing  evidence  of  changes  in  underlying 
transmission mechanism with interest rates and exchange rates gaining in importance vis-à-
vis  quantity  variables,  it  was  felt  that  monetary  policy  exclusively  based  on  the  demand 
function  for  money  could  lack  precision.  The  Reserve  Bank,  therefore,  formally  adopted  a 
multiple indicator approach in April 1998 whereby interest rates or rates of return in different 
financial  markets  along  with  data  on  currency,  credit,  trade,  capital  flows,  fiscal  position, 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 5
inflation,  exchange  rate,  etc.,  are  juxtaposed  with  the  output  data  for  drawing  policy 
perspectives. Such a shift was gradual and a logical outcome of measures taken over the 
reform  period  since  the  early  1990s.  The  switchover  to  a  multiple  indicator  approach 
provided necessary flexibility to respond to changes in domestic and international economic 
environment and financial market conditions more effectively. Now, liquidity management in 
the  system  is  carried  out  through  open  market  operations  (OMO)  in  the  form  of  outright 
purchases/sales of government securities and daily reverse repo and repo operations under 
a Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) and repo and reverse repo rates have emerged as the 
main instruments for interest rate signalling in the Indian economy.  
The armoury of instruments to manage, in the context of large capital flows and sterilisation, 
has  been  strengthened  with  open  market  operations  through  Market  Stabilisation  Scheme 
(MSS), which was introduced in April 2004. Under the MSS, the Reserve Bank was allowed 
to issue government securities as part of liquidity sterilisation operations in the wake of large 
capital  inflows  and  surplus  liquidity  conditions.  While  these  issuances  do  not  provide 
budgetary  support,  interest  costs  are  borne  by  the  fisc;  as  far  as  Government  securities 
market is concerned, these securities are also traded in the secondary market, at par with 
the other government stock.  
While  the  preferred  instruments  are  indirect,  and  varied,  there  is  no  hesitation  in  taking 
recourse to direct instruments also, if circumstances so warrant. In fact, complex situations 
do warrant dynamics of different combination of direct and indirect instruments, in multiple 
forms, to suit the conditions affecting transmission mechanism. 
There are occasions when the medium-term goals, say reduction in cash reserve ratios for 
banks,  conflict  with  short-term  compulsions  of  monetary  management  requiring  actions  in 
both  directions.  Such  operations  do  warrant  attention  to  appropriate  articulation  to  ensure 
policy credibility. Drawing a distinction between medium term reform goals and flexibility in 
short-term  management  is  considered  something  critical  in  the  current  Indian  policy 
environment. 
Similarly,  while  there  is  considerable  merit  in  maintaining  a  broad  distinction  between 
monetary and prudential policies of the central bank, the Reserve Bank did not hesitate, as a 
complement  to  monetary  tightening,  to  enhance  the  provisioning  requirements  and  risk 
weights  for  select  categories  of  banking  assets,  namely  real  estate,  housing  and  capital 
market  exposures.  These  measures  were  needed  to  specifically  address  issues  of  rapidly 
escalating  asset  prices  and  the  possible  impact  on  banks’  balance  sheets  in  a  bank 
dominated financial sector. This combination, and more important, readiness of the Reserve 
Bank  to  use  all  instruments,  has  a  credible  impact,  without  undue  restraint  on  growth 
impulses. 
Some of the important factors that shaped the changes in monetary policy framework and 
operating procedures in India during the 1990s were the delinking of budget deficit from its 
automatic  monetization  by 
interest  rates,  and 
development of the financial markets with reduced segmentation through better linkages and 
development  of  appropriate 
trading,  payments  and  settlement  systems  along  with 
technological  infrastructure.  With  the  enactment  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget 
Management Act in 2003, the Reserve Bank has withdrawn from participating in the primary 
issues  of  Central  Government  securities  with  effect  from  April  2006.  The  recent  legislative 
amendments  enable  a  flexible  use  of  the  CRR  for  monetary  management,  without  being 
constrained  by  a  statutory  floor  or  ceiling  on  the  level  of  the  CRR.  The  amendments  also 
enable  the  lowering  of  the  Statutory  Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR)  to  the  levels  below  the  pre-
amendment statutory minimum of 25 per cent of net demand and time liabilities of banks – 
which would further improve the scope for flexible liquidity management.  
the  Reserve  Bank,  deregulation  of 
6 
 BIS Review 97/2007
Institutional mechanisms 
Monetary policy formulation is carried out by the Reserve Bank in a consultative manner. The 
Monetary Policy Department holds monthly meetings with select major banks and financial 
institutions,  which  provide  a  consultative  platform  for  issues  concerning  monetary,  credit, 
regulatory and supervisory policies of the Bank. Decisions on day-to-day market operations, 
including management of liquidity, are taken by a Financial Markets Committee (FMC), which 
includes senior officials of the Bank responsible for monetary policy and related operations in 
money,  government  securities  and  foreign  exchange  markets.  The  Deputy  Governor, 
Executive  Director(s)  and  heads  of  four  departments  in  charge  of  monetary  policy  and 
related market operations meet every  morning as financial markets open for trading. They 
also  meet  more  than  once  during  a  day,  if  such  a  need  arises.  In  addition,  a  Technical 
Advisory  Committee  on  Money,  Foreign  Exchange  and  Government  Securities  Markets 
comprising  academics  and  financial  market  experts,  including  those  from  depositories  and 
credit rating agencies, provides support to the consultative process. The Committee meets 
once a quarter and discusses proposals on instruments and institutional practices relating to 
financial  markets.  Besides  FMC  meetings,  Monetary  Policy  Strategy  Meetings  take  place 
regularly. The strategy meetings take a relatively medium-term view of the monetary policy 
and  consider  key  projections  and  parameters  that  can  affect  the  stance  of  the  monetary 
policy.  In  pursuance  of  the  objective  of  further  strengthening  the  consultative  process  in 
monetary policy, a Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) on Monetary Policy has been set up 
with  Governor  as  Chairman  and  Deputy  Governor  in  charge  of  monetary  policy  as  Vice 
Chairman, three Deputy Governors, two Members of the Committee of the Central Board and 
five  specialists  drawn  from  the  areas  of  monetary  economics,  central  banking,  financial 
markets and public finance, as Members. The TAC meets ahead of the Annual Policy and 
the  quarterly  reviews  of  annual  policy.  The  TAC  reviews  macroeconomic  and  monetary 
developments and advises on the stance of monetary policy.  
Some issues in the conduct of monetary policy in India 
IV.  
Let me now discuss some issues in the conduct of monetary policy in India, in the current 
context. 
First, one of the major challenges relates to managing the transition of Indian economy to 
high growth trajectory accompanied by a low and stable inflation and well anchored inflation 
expectations. There is growing evidence that the upward shift in growth trajectory in India is 
of  enduring  nature  as  it  is  supported  by  high  saving  and  investment  rates,  improved 
productivity  and  vast  potential  lying  by  way  of  demographic  dividend.  However,  it  is  still 
important for monetary policy formulation to identify the cyclical and structural components of 
growth achieved in recent years, despite this task being rendered somewhat difficult in an 
economy that is undergoing a rapid and deep structural transformation.  
Second,  a  situation  in  which  the  aggregate  supply  is  evidently  less  elastic  domestically 
imposes  an  additional  burden  on  monetary  policy.  While  open  trade  has  expanded  the 
supply  potential  of  several  economies,  significant  supply 
in-elasticities  do  persist 
domestically,  particularly  due  to  infrastructure  constraints.  Further,  persisting  impact  of 
supply shocks on prices of commodities and services, to which headline inflation is sensitive, 
can  therefore  exert  a  lasting  impact  on  inflation  expectations.  Faced  with  longer-term 
structural bottlenecks in supply with less than adequate assurance of timely, convincing and 
demonstrated resolution of these issues, monetary policy needs to respond appropriately.  
Third, some categories of interest rates are yet to be fully liberalised in the system, thereby 
muting at least partly, the impact of monetary policy actions on the structure of interest rates. 
Fourth, in the Indian context, it is recognized that monetary policy has to contend with large 
fiscal  deficits  and  high  levels  of  public  debt  by  international  standards.  While  the  recent 
improvements in the fiscal position of States and significant consolidation in the finances of 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 7
the  Centre  provided  greater  manoeuvrability,  monetary  policy  needs  to  closely  coordinate 
with cash and debt management of governments in a non-disruptive manner.  
Fifth, the operation of monetary policy has to be oriented around the predominantly public 
sector ownership of most of the banking system which plays a critical role in the transmission 
of  monetary  policy  to  the  extent  other  public  policy  considerations  dominate  their  overall 
operations.  
Finally, though India is essentially a bank-dominated economy, commercial credit penetration 
in the Indian economy is still relatively low. Concerns about credit to agriculture and small 
and medium enterprises usually relate to inadequacy, constraints on timely availability, high 
cost, neglect of small and marginal farmers, low credit-deposit ratios in several States and 
continued presence of informal credit markets with high interest rates. It is in this context that 
the Reserve Bank of India continues to address the need for ensuring financial inclusion of 
all  segments  of  population,  protecting  interests  of  depositors  and  promoting  a  conducive 
credit  culture.  These  considerations  invite  the  attention  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  even  while 
monetary policy aims at financial stability by moderating excess volatility in financial markets.  
Concluding observations 
V.  
In the current environment, monetary policy in India would continue to be vigilant and pro-
active in the context of any accentuation of global uncertainties that pose threats to growth 
and stability in the domestic economy. The domestic outlook continues to be favorable and 
would dominate the dynamic setting of monetary policy in the period ahead. It is important to 
design monetary policy such that it promotes growth by contributing to the maintenance of 
financial and price stability. Accordingly, while the stance of monetary policy would continue 
to  reinforce  the  emphasis  on  price  stability  and  well-anchored  inflation  expectations  and 
thereby  sustain  the  growth  momentum,  contextually,  financial  stability  assumes  greater 
importance at the current juncture. 
Friends,  before  concluding,  I  want  to  emphasize  that  several  transitions  and  structural 
transformation  are  taking  place  in  the  diverse  and  large  society  that  is  India.  These 
encompass social, political, cultural and of course economic factors. Monetary policy is but 
one element in the complex web of challenges to public policy and there may be occasions 
when  purely  technical  responses  to  monetary  policy  challenges  would  be  less  than 
appropriate.  Public  policy,  including  monetary  policy,  has  to  reckon  with  the  complexity  of 
managing these multiple transitions. We are fortunate that we have a supportive and stable 
political  system  and  well  functioning  public  institutions.  We,  in  the  Reserve  Bank,  are 
conscious of these complexities and approach issues in a flexible manner with a sense of 
humility. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 97/2007
