Mervyn King: The MPC ten years on  
Lecture by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Society of Business Economists, 
London, 2 May 2007. 
I am indebted to Alex Brazier, Iain de Weymarn, Richard Harrison, James Proudman, Chris Salmon, Tim Taylor and Ryland 
Thomas who have worked closely with me on this lecture. 
 Not long before his untimely death, David Walton invited me to deliver this lecture. Anyone who knew 
David  will  be  desperately  sad  not  only  that  he  is  no  longer  with  us  to  ask  important  questions  and 
make  us  smile  at  his  dry  humour,  but  even  more  so  that  he  is  unable  to  take  his  place  at  the 
deliberations of the Monetary Policy Committee to which he contributed so much in such a short space 
of  time.  David  had  a  wonderfully  clear  mind,  an  independence  of  thought,  and  was  a  warm  and 
generous colleague. He is, and will continue to be, deeply missed. David asked me to look back on the 
experience of the first ten years of life with the MPC and to try to learn from that experience. So, in his 
memory, that is my aim this evening. 
Although  the  announcement  in  1997 of  independence  for  the  Bank of  England  was  a  bolt  from  the 
blue, it was a long time in the making. During the 1970s inflation in the United Kingdom averaged 13% 
a  year  and  peaked  at  27%.  Only  towards  the  end  of  that  decade,  with  first  a  Labour  and  then  a 
Conservative  Government  recognising  that  the  control  of  inflation  was  the  first  step  towards  any 
semblance of a coherent macroeconomic policy, did the transition from the Great Inflation to the Great 
Stability begin. But the first steps were faltering. It took two painful recessions and sterling’s exit from 
the Exchange Rate Mechanism in September 1992 to reach the goal of low inflation. Even then, the 
long-term  commitment  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  low  inflation  was  not  fully  believed  by  financial 
markets. Granting independence to the Bank of England was the dramatic constitutional change that 
convinced  financial  markets  of  the  United  Kingdom’s  conversion  to  stability  as  the  basis  of 
macroeconomic policy. 
Next Sunday is the tenth anniversary of the historic announcement on the morning of Tuesday 6 May 
1997  that  the  Bank  of  England  would  be  granted  independence.  Although  that  decision  was  both 
unexpected  and  far-reaching,  we  had  been  preparing  to  implement  the  manifesto  commitment  to 
introduce a monetary policy committee to help the Bank formulate its advice to the Chancellor in the 
context of the previous regime, in which the Chancellor decided on the level of interest rates following 
a meeting with the Governor. 
On the very day that Gordon Brown and Ed Balls entered the Treasury carrying a draft letter to the 
Governor setting out proposals for Bank of England independence, the Bank completed a paper for 
the  incoming  team  setting  out  proposals  for  how  an  advisory  committee  might  operate.  It 
recommended  a  fixed  timetable  for  meetings  between  Chancellor  and  Governor  and  for  the 
announcement of decisions on interest rates. Many of the recommendations were carried over to the 
independent MPC that followed. The optimal time for meetings was thought to be the end of the first 
week of the month, and with minor changes the timetable of a two-day meeting culminating with an 
immediate announcement of the decision at noon on Thursday was adopted within a couple of weeks. 
The key difference was that a purely advisory committee would not have published minutes of its own 
deliberations – only the minutes of the meetings between the Chancellor and Governor would have 
been made public – and voting was not an agreed feature of such a committee. 
My predecessor – Eddie George – was informed of the new and enhanced role for the Bank early on 
the morning prior to the announcement – a Bank Holiday Monday. Returning from the tennis court, I 
received a call from Eddie asking me to meet him in the Bank as soon as possible. That was the last I 
saw of the sun for quite a time. We sat in his office with a sense of excitement that now we really did 
have a chance to show what the Bank of England and price stability could do for this country. Eddie 
charged  me  with  the  task  of  preparing  ideas  on  how  the  new  committee  –  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee – would decide and set the level of interest rates, and to draft the speaking note for the 
very  last  Chancellor-Governor  meeting  which  was  brought  forward  from  Wednesday  to  8am  on  the 
Tuesday. 
By  the  next  morning when  the  public announcement  was  made,  a  paper was  ready setting  out  the 
questions that the Bank would have to answer on how the new Committee would operate. We had a 
script but, at this stage, the cast was incomplete. Only four of the five internal and none of the external 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 1
members were in place. With the support and hard work of some extraordinarily talented young Bank 
economists,  the  new  arrangements  were  designed  and  put  in  place  in  not  much  more  than  three 
weeks. They included the arrangements for briefing the Committee, the pre-MPC meetings, the format 
of the decision-making meetings of the MPC, practical matters such as the ordering of a sound system 
so that, in a break with tradition, it was actually possible to hear what was said in the Bank’s older 
meeting rooms, and rehearsals of the meetings and voting procedures with staff members playing the 
roles of the MPC members. So short was the time available that some of the dress rehearsals came 
after  the  first  night  of  other  parts  of  the  policy  process.  Such  was  the  adrenalin  flow  that  at  one 
rehearsal a row broke out about how a decision would be reached if the Committee split three-ways in 
equal numbers. Needless to say, such an eventuality has not occurred.1 But all was resolved and the 
show opened on Wednesday 4 June. At that first meeting the MPC raised interest rates by 25 basis 
points, as it did at its two subsequent meetings. 
A decade is a long time for any show to run. How has it fared? On the face of it UK macroeconomic 
performance has improved with the creation of the new monetary framework. The MPC arrived on the 
scene midway through what I have described as the nice (non-inflationary consistently expansionary) 
decade, and continued into the not-so-bad decade.2 Since the MPC was set up economic growth has 
averaged 2.8% a year – a little above the post-war average rate – and there has not been a single 
quarter of negative growth. The average deviation of inflation from target has been just minus 0.08 
percentage points. 
Let me stress that the Committee does not dwell on the past. But an important question for all of us is 
whether our new found stability will persist. That is not a new question. On the tenth anniversary of the 
MPC we should remember that this is also the fiftieth anniversary of Harold Macmillan’s famous claim 
that  we  had  “never  had  it  so  good”.  But  let  me  remind  you  too  of  the  full  text  of  his  remarks.  In  a 
speech  on  economic  prospects  in  July  1957,  the  former  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  who  had 
recently  become  Prime  Minister  after  the  resignation  of  his  predecessor  following  an  unsuccessful 
military excursion in the Middle East, said: 
“Indeed, let us be frank about it: most of our people have never had it so good. Go around the country, go to the 
industrial towns, go to the farms, and you will see a state of prosperity such as we have never had in my lifetime – 
nor indeed ever in the history of this country. What is beginning to worry some of us is, is it too good to be true? – 
or perhaps I should say, is it too good to last? … Our constant concern today is, can prices be steadied while at 
the  same  time  we  maintain  full  employment  in  an  expanding  economy?  Can  we  control  inflation?  This  is  the 
problem of our time”.3 
Some of you may think that it is the problem of our time too. CPI inflation has now risen above 3%, the 
highest rate since the MPC was set up. Although I believe we are better equipped to maintain stability 
now than fifty years ago, largely because we have a monetary framework based on an inflation target 
and clearly defined responsibilities for the Bank of England, we should perhaps look in more detail at 
how the MPC has worked before coming to a final judgement on the likelihood of continued success. 
First, I want to look at the changes in the behaviour of the UK economy in recent years. How far is the 
improvement  attributable  to  the  MPC?  Second,  I  want  to  review  how  the  MPC  has  operated  as  a 
decision-making  body.  Has  the  process  lived  up  to  its  billing  as  the  most  effective  way  of  reaching 
technical judgements on the level of Bank Rate? Third, and most important of all, I want to consider 
the challenges to the MPC for the next ten years. What can we learn from the experience of the first 
decade that may help us to improve over the next? 
Changes in the UK economy 
1. 
In examining the first ten years of the MPC a natural starting point is to ask what has been its impact 
on the UK economy since 1997. The objective of the MPC is, of course, to meet its inflation target. 
Chart 1 shows that since the mid-1990s, inflation in the UK has been lower than for a generation. And 
                                                      
1   How a decision would be reached in such unlikely circumstances is explained in King (2002a). 
2   Not-so-bad is an acronym for the “not of the same order but also desirable” decade. See King (2004). 
3 
I am indebted to Professor Peter Hennessy who, in his admirable book Never Had It So Good: Britain in the 1950s, drew 
attention to the context of Macmillan’s remarks which were made in a speech in Bedford on 20 July 1957. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2007
there have been significant changes in the dynamics of inflation since the MPC was set up.4 Table 1 
shows  the  mean,  standard  deviation  and  persistence  of  inflation  over  various  periods.  Inflation  has 
been significantly lower on average, less variable, and fluctuations in inflation have tended to be less 
persistent. 
More  generally,  the  impact  of  the  MPC  is  revealed  by  what  I  have  called  the  “Performance”  and 
“Stability” charts – charts 2 and 3. In terms of average rates of output growth per head and of inflation, 
charts 2a and 2b show the relative position of the UK economy among the G7 as a whole both before 
(taken here to be the period 1950 to 1996) and after (1997-2006) the creation of the MPC. Ideally, a 
good performance means that a country would be towards the top right hand corner of the charts – 
inflation is plotted on an inverted scale. The average record on growth and inflation over the period 
1950-96 (chart 2a) was not good relative to the rest of the G7. Indeed it was arguably the worst. In 
contrast, after the MPC was set up the United Kingdom performed better than most if not all of the G7 
countries.  So  although  changes  in  the  world  economy  may  have  proved  helpful  to  achieving  lower 
inflation, the fact that the UK improved not only its absolute but also its relative performance – moving 
from last to first in the G7 league table – is encouraging. 
The stability charts – 3a and 3b – show the stability of growth and inflation in the G7 countries in the 
two time periods. In these charts a good performance is to be near the origin of the axes, close to the 
bottom left hand corner of the chart. The rather poor performance of the United Kingdom prior to 1997 
is evident, as is the remarkable degree of stability in the United Kingdom relative to the rest of the G7 
after that date. 
Of course, correlation does not imply causation. And there is little reason to suppose that the MPC is 
responsible  for  the  higher  average  growth  rate  over  the  past  decade.  That  more  likely  reflects 
structural changes in the UK economy, associated with other policy reforms. It is the stability of the UK 
economy  which  appears  to  be  the  most  marked  contribution  of  the  MPC.  That  is  a  surprise.  The 
conventional wisdom is that, although there is no long-run trade-off between the levels of inflation and 
output growth, there is a trade-off between the stability of inflation and of output growth. Inflation can 
be kept closer to the target only by larger changes in interest rates and bigger fluctuations in output 
growth.  Policy-makers  thus  face  a  choice  between  different  combinations  of  inflation  and  output 
growth  volatility,  which,  when  plotted  on  a  chart,  describe  a  “stability  possibility  frontier”.5  They  can 
choose a point on that frontier depending on the relative importance they place on stabilising inflation 
and output growth, but they cannot move inside it. That is, they cannot reduce the volatility of both 
inflation and output growth. 
An  example  of  that  “stability  possibility  frontier”  is  shown  in  chart  4.  Points  B  and  C  represent 
alternative  choices  by  central  banks  with  different  reaction  functions,  corresponding  to  the  different 
weights  they  attach  to  the  costs  of  volatility  in  inflation  and  output.  Central  bank  B  tends  to  bring 
inflation  back  to  target  more  slowly  than  central  bank  C.  So  the  real  surprise  is  that,  over  the  past 
decade,  we  have  moved  not  along  the  frontier,  say  from  point  B  to  point  C,  but  instead  to  A.  The 
frontier itself has moved significantly inwards.6 The conventional wisdom has been overturned. Was 
that the result of luck: an absence of shocks and favourable structural changes in the economy? Or 
has the new monetary framework itself played a role? 
How might the MPC have been lucky over its first decade? First, there might have been unusually few 
significant economic shocks to which the Committee had to respond. Output and inflation would have 
been more stable even without a change in the monetary framework. Second, when shocks did occur 
the economy might itself have responded in a self-regulating manner. 
On the first, it is difficult to argue that there have been no major economic shocks since 1997. At the 
outset, the Committee had to confront the consequences of a 25% rise in the effective exchange rate 
and the resulting fall in import prices. Between 1996 and 1998 import prices fell by 20% relative to 
overall consumer prices – the biggest fall over any two year period since the early 1950s. That was 
                                                      
4   Some of these changes in the inflation dynamics date from 1992 when the inflation target was introduced, although the fall 
in inflation expectations occurred in 1997. 
5   This is known in the academic literature as the ‘Taylor Curve’. See Taylor (1979). 
6  
I  have  defined  the  frontier  for  a  given  set  of  monetary  policy  arrangements  –  technically,  for  a  given  distribution  of  the 
inflation target. If the frontier is instead defined as corresponding to an optimal policy where the inflation target is believed 
with certainty then the movement from B to A is a move onto the frontier from a point outside it. 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 3
shortly followed by the Asian financial crisis and the Russian default and devaluation in 1998 which led 
to  concerns  about  the  stability  of  US  and  other  financial  markets.  Later  there  was  the  world  IT-led 
slowdown  in  late  2000  and  2001,  and  sharp  falls  in  equity  prices.  The  share  of  government  final 
consumption  in  nominal  GDP  rose  by  4  percentage  points  between  1998  and  2005  –  the  biggest 
continuous  expansion  since  1945  –  and  the  share  of  taxes  in  total  income  rose.  More  recently,  oil 
prices more than doubled and the labour force expanded by 1 ½% in 2006, a rate exceeded only once 
in the past 35 years. And the terrorist attacks on September 11 2001, and the wars in Afghanistan and 
Iraq, added to uncertainty. 
So the environment in which the MPC has had to operate has not been without excitement. But did the 
economy respond to that excitement in a self-regulating way? It is clear from the performance chart 
that  the  supply  side  of  the  UK  economy  has  undergone  substantial  change  –  the  average  rate  of 
growth  of  output  per  head  has  increased  from  2.1%  between  1950  and  1996  to  2.4%  in  the  past 
decade. It could be argued that the structural reforms of recent decades have made the UK economy 
and, in particular, the labour market, more flexible. Greater flexibility has enabled unemployment (and 
its natural rate) to fall steadily. 
Structural  reforms  also  led  to  more  stable  growth  of  employment  and  output.  If  businesses  are  to 
stabilise employment in the face of changes in costs, employees must accept fluctuations in the real 
value of their take-home pay. When import prices fell sharply, employees benefited from rapid growth 
in  real  take-home  pay.  More  recently,  however,  businesses  have  faced  higher  energy  costs  and 
employees have accepted somewhat weaker growth of real take-home pay. 
The acceptance of necessary adjustment in real take-home pay has helped to stabilise employment 
growth  which,  over  the  past  decade,  has  been  four  times  less  variable  than  over  the  previous  five 
decades.  That  has  shifted  the  “stability  possibility  frontier”  faced  by  the  MPC  inwards,  enabling  the 
MPC to keep inflation more stable than in the past. 
Structural improvements in the labour market are, however, unlikely to explain the full improvement in 
the  stability  of  inflation  and  output.  They  cannot  explain  the  low  and  stable  level  of  inflation 
expectations.  Changes  in  the  yields  on  government  bonds  indicate  that  investors’  expectations  of 
inflation  over  the  medium-term  –  and  the  premium  they  require  to  compensate  them  for  the  risk  of 
future inflation – have also fallen significantly. Chart 5 shows the sharp fall in expected inflation that 
resulted from the actual announcement of independence for the Bank of England in 1997. 
It seems to me likely that the new framework for monetary policy has been a key, though not the only, 
driver in moving the frontier inwards. By eliminating uncertainty about the inflation target and ensuring 
that  the  objective  of  low  and  stable  inflation  is  well  understood  and  credible,  the  change  in  the 
framework in 1997 helped to anchor expectations of inflation in the medium term. By doing so, it has 
made it possible for the MPC to keep inflation closer to target with smaller changes in monetary policy, 
and hence fluctuations in output, than would otherwise have been the case. 
The  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  has  changed  the  way  businesses  respond  to  unexpected 
shocks. Faced with changes in their costs stemming from, for example, changes in import or energy 
prices,  businesses  can  respond  in  two  ways,  each  consistent  with  the  necessary  change  in 
employees’ real take-home pay. They can pass those cost changes forwards to prices or backwards to 
money wages. With inflation expectations well-anchored to the target, companies have restricted the 
pass-through  of  changes  in  costs  to  prices.  The  necessary  adjustment  of  real  take-home  pay  has 
taken place more through fluctuations in money wages than prices. 
In short, the behaviour of the UK economy has improved over the past decade, both in terms of its 
performance  and  its  stability,  and  that  improvement  has  been  more  marked  in  the  United  Kingdom 
than in the rest of the G-7. Although structural reforms to the economy over several decades have 
made the economy better able to respond to economic shocks, the new monetary framework has also 
played a key role. Inflation expectations have been successfully anchored to the target. And that has 
meant that cost changes have affected wages and profits rather than prices. As a result, inflation and 
output growth have been remarkably stable. 
The change in monetary policy decision making 
2.  
It appears then that the success of the framework in anchoring inflation expectations has played a key 
role in the economic stability of the past decade. What was it about the framework that accounted for 
that? 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2007
Since  its  inception,  the  MPC  has  met  120  times.7  At  those  meetings  it  raised  Bank  Rate  17  times, 
lowered it on 17 occasions, and left it unchanged 86 times.8 Bank Rate has varied between 3.5% and 
7.5%. The MPC has changed interest rates at just over a quarter (28% in fact) of its monthly meetings. 
Companies,  households,  trade  unions  and  financial  market  participants  can  see  that  we  change 
interest rates in response to news about the inflation outlook. That anchors inflation expectations. In 
the  jargon  of  economists,  people  understand  that  we  have  a  “reaction  function”  –  we  react  to  the 
economic data in order to keep inflation on track to meet the target. 
If  the  economics  profession  could  agree  on  a  model  which  described  exactly  how  the  economy 
behaved, then it would be possible to set up a Royal Commission of the country’s leading economists 
to  determine the  optimal “reaction  function”  for  the  Bank of  England  to  follow. It  would specify  how 
interest rates should respond to the unfolding of economic data. It could even be implemented by a 
computer  without  any  need  for  a  Monetary  Policy  Committee  at  all.  That  sounds  quite  attractive 
(especially when you’ve attended 120 meetings!). 
So why don’t we set up a Royal Commission? As members of the SBE know only too well, none of us 
knows the true structure of the economy or all the shocks that might occur. How long do you think it 
would  be  before  some  other  economists  would  argue,  undoubtedly  persuasively,  that  their  own 
research  had  made  the  findings  of  the  Royal  Commission  redundant?  Who  would  have  thought  in 
1997  that  monetary  policy  would  have  to  respond  to  the  challenges  posed  by  the  largest  inflow  of 
migrant labour and the fastest fall in import prices since Harold Macmillan was Prime Minister? 
Uncertainty is at the heart of practical monetary policy making. The best that we – as economists – 
can do is continually to learn about the changing nature of the economy. It is impossible to write down 
any stable “reaction function”. Even if we could identify the shocks hitting the economy, judgement as 
to how we should react to each of them cannot be set in stone. The structure of the economy changes 
through  time  as  does  our  knowledge  of  the  way  it  works.  The  MPC  is  there  to  exercise  discretion 
about  how  to  react  to  shocks.  Central  to  the  design  of  a  framework  for  monetary  policy  is  our 
ignorance and uncertainty about how monetary policy works. The MPC is an institutional response to 
that ignorance.9 
The best way to make technical judgements under uncertainty is by making use of the accumulated 
wisdom  of  a  committee  whose  members  can  pool  their  knowledge  and  expertise.  This  is  the 
motivation behind the MPC and explains its two key features.10 
First, it is a committee of experts who, before making their decision, discuss their interpretation of the 
economic data and learn from each other.11 Our Wednesday afternoon discussions take the form of a 
debate, not a series of presentations. And on Thursday mornings when the time comes to go round 
the table and make a decision, it is common, as, for example, happened at our most recent meeting in 
April, for members to want to listen to the views of other members before making up their mind which 
way to vote. That is why no-one is forced to cast their vote for a particular level of Bank Rate until they 
have heard the views of the whole Committee. As a result, there is often some suspense as to the final 
outcome. In January, for example, when the Committee raised Bank Rate by five votes to four, that 
outcome  looked  unlikely  when  at  one  stage  opinion  was  four  to  two  for  no  change  with  only  three 
people to speak. 
The greatest debate among the Committee usually occurs during the quarterly forecast round which 
often stimulates fresh thinking. So it is perhaps not surprising that this is when many, but by no means 
all,  changes  in  interest  rates  are  decided  –  see  chart  6.  Changes  have  been  twice  as  frequent  in 
Inflation Report months as in other months. But it is changes in economic conditions which are more 
important in determining the timing of our decisions. 
Including one emergency meeting following the events of September 11 2001. 
                                                      
7 
8   On 20 occasions the MPC has met with fewer than the full complement of nine members. 12 of those occasions were before 
the Bank of England Act came in to effect and the ninth member could be appointed. Since June 1998 it has also been short 
of its full complement on 8 occasions. 
9   The role of uncertainty and learning in monetary policy was discussed in my 2005 Mais Lecture. See King (2005). 
10   See, for example, Blinder (2004), Blinder and Morgan (2000) and Lombardelli et al (2005). 
11   The arguments for delegating decisions on interest rates to a committee of experts were discussed in my May 2002 lecture 
to the Society of Business Economists. See King (2002a). 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 5
Second,  members  of  the  Committee  are  individually  and  publicly  accountable  for  their  votes. 
Disagreement  among  the  Committee  is  inevitable;  it  is  also  desirable  because  it  represents  the 
individual judgements of members, rather than an attempt to create a false consensus. It is a source of 
strength. Over the past ten years, there have been 153 dissenting votes, on average more than one 
per meeting. 
This institutional encouragement of open debate is in contrast to many other central banks. We don’t 
“do consensus”, as one former member put it. Dissent is more frequent than on other central bank 
committees  which  publish  individual  votes,  and  is  not  just  token.  Table  2  reports  the  proportion  of 
dissenting votes in four central banks during the period since the MPC was set up. Not only is the 
number of dissenting votes greater on the MPC, the frequency of more substantive disagreement – 
where one quarter or more of the voters dissented – is markedly greater. 
Voting patterns on the MPC reflect the distribution of views about how to interpret the economic data, 
not a hint about where rates will go. Voting is certainly not used as a signal by the Committee. That is 
why you can discount claims that disagreements can be used reliably to predict future movements in 
rates. Sometimes they do, sometimes they don’t. 
Much  of  the  commentary  on  the  MPC  has  been  subject  to  what  I  call  the  “small  sample”  problem. 
Descriptions of diversity of view within the MPC have ranged from the Committee allegedly acting as 
“the North Korean politburo” during periods when most of the votes were unanimous, to the view that it 
was “a bunch of squabbling senior common room academics” during an earlier period when split votes 
predominated.  In  fact,  as  chart  7  shows,  there  is  no  obvious  pattern  over  the  lifetime  of  the  MPC. 
There are times when the state of the economy is difficult to read and there are naturally differences of 
interpretation leading to split votes. Equally, there are times when the nature of the economic shocks 
is not in dispute and the response of the MPC is agreed by all members. For example, a sequence of 
nine unanimous decisions starting in the summer of 2004 reflected a shared view within the MPC that 
Bank Rate at 4% was too low and that some of the monetary stimulus it provided should be withdrawn. 
Differences of view tell you more about the nature of the uncertainty confronting the MPC than the 
nature of the MPC itself. 
Similar arguments apply to the question of whether the MPC has become more or less “activist”. Large 
committees  can  be  subject  to  inertia.  At  its  very  first  meeting  the  Committee  debated  the  merits  of 
“gradualism” in adjusting interest rates. Although the debate attracted some interest, looking back over 
ten  years  it  is  hard  to  see  that  it  had  any  practical  impact.  As  chart  8  shows,  there  is  no  obvious 
persistent trend in the frequency of rate changes over the lifetime of the MPC. Economic conditions 
have determined the number and direction of rate changes. There is some indication that the number 
of changes was lower in the second than in the first five year period. But that reflected the size and 
nature of the shocks over the respective periods, and also the building of credibility which meant that 
market anticipations of future actions allowed the Committee to offset shocks by smaller changes in 
interest rates. It is striking that the MPC is in the middle of the ranking of the major central banks by 
the number of interest rate changes a year – see table 3. 
My view, therefore, is that it is the economic data which lie behind the debate and decisions of the 
MPC.  Do  you  agree?  To answer  that question  the Bank of  England  asked  the  Society  of  Business 
Economists  (SBE)  to  carry  out  a  survey  of  its  members.  The  aim  was  to  discover  what  kind  of 
information  was  of  most  use  to  private sector economists  in  trying  to  understand  the  future  path  of 
interest rates at different horizons, and how the communications of the MPC were perceived as part of 
that process. The survey consisted of an electronic questionnaire sent to 354 members of the SBE. 
141 replies were received, a response rate of 40%.12 Over 85% of respondents said that forming a 
view of interest rate prospects was important to them. 
For those of us who have continually argued that the news on interest rates stems from developments 
in the economy rather than meetings of the MPC, it is heartening that, collectively, you place more 
weight on economic data than on MPC communications in forming a view of interest rate prospects. 
Respondents were asked to allocate a total of 100 points across the categories of information in terms 
of how useful they were in forming such a view. Twice as many points were given to economic data as 
to MPC communications, especially at the longer horizons – see chart 9. And the weight on data was 
divided roughly equally between financial data, official data on real activity, official figures for costs and 
                                                      
12   The full survey is to be published in the next issue of the SBE’s journal, the Business Economist. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2007
prices,  and  business  and  consumer  surveys.  So  the  argument  that  the  MPC  responds  to 
developments in the economy has been largely understood. This is welcome news for those of us who 
wish to be boring. 
So far I have talked only about the past – the performance of the UK economy and the behaviour of 
the MPC since 1997. What of the future? 
Challenges for the next decade 
3.  
I want to devote the remainder of this lecture to the challenges facing the Monetary Policy Committee 
over the next ten years. That is not because I see major fault lines in the present arrangements. On 
the contrary, the careful institutional design that lay behind the construction of the MPC has proved its 
worth.  Nor  is  it  because  I  share  some  commentators’  boredom  with  a  system  that  has  remained 
largely unchanged for a decade. After all, in the area of macroeconomic policy, boredom is a good 
thing.  Rather,  it  is  a  conviction  that  to  remain  successful  the  MPC  must  always  be  engaged  in  a 
process of continuous improvement. 
The anchoring of inflation expectations has been central to the stability enjoyed by the UK economy 
over  the  past  decade.  The  key  lesson  from  economic  theory  is  not  to  take  those  expectations  for 
granted – they depend on the actions of the MPC. Inflation expectations have been anchored because 
the MPC has responded to events that have pushed the outlook for inflation away from target, and 
households, businesses and financial markets have understood and anticipated our responses. 
So the main challenge facing the MPC is to keep doing whatever is necessary to keep inflation on 
track to meet the target. In modern models of inflation, monetary policy is represented by a “reaction 
function” that is sufficient, in that model, to pin down inflation and, therefore, inflation expectations. 
But  that  just  assumes  away  the  challenge  facing  us.  How  do  we  know,  in  an  uncertain  and  ever-
changing world, what precise path of interest rates is necessary to stabilise inflation in the medium 
term? That raises questions about both what we do and what we say. 
What we do: The role of money and the nominal anchor 
(a)  
Let me start with what we do and how we provide an anchor to the price level in the long run. With a 
paper currency, expectations that the future price level will remain stable are an article of faith. Such 
expectations are the basis of the trust without which people will not willingly use paper money. They 
reflect  beliefs  about  how  the central bank will react to  events.  Given  our current  arrangements,  the 
anchor for expectations of the future price level is the judgement and character of the men and women 
who  currently,  and  will  in  the  future,  serve  on  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee.  That  is  a  crucial 
difference between money as a standard of value, where its value is determined by the judgement of a 
group  of  experts,  and  the  standards  of  weights  and  measures,  such  as  the  metre,  kilo  or  second, 
which are based on objective scientific measurement. I hope that one day the Governor of the Bank of 
England will be regarded as occupying a position similar to that of the Chief Executive of the National 
Weights  and  Measures  Laboratory.13  For  the  time  being  the  value  of  money  will  depend  upon  the 
discretionary judgements of the MPC. 
For  those  judgements  to  command  respect,  it  is  vital  that  the  Committee  demonstrate  their 
determination to react to all signals about the outlook for inflation. It is common – both in the press and 
within central banks around the world – for discussion of the inflation outlook to be dominated by an 
analysis  of  so-called  real  changes  in  the  economy  such  as  movements  in  demand  or  supply  and 
changes in the relative prices of imports or energy. It is true that, in trying to stabilise inflation in the 
short-term,  the  MPC  will  take  those  events  into  account.  But  we  know  that,  beyond  the  short-term 
forecasting horizon of up to around three years, inflation has nothing to do with these developments. It 
is, in the old adage, the result of too much money chasing too few goods. 
That is why money growth rates and inflation rates are well correlated across countries and over long 
time  horizons.  Many  of  the  great  economists  of  the  past  from  David  Hume  to  Milton  Friedman 
emphasised the link between money and the price level in the long run. 
                                                      
13   At present the Chief Executive is Jeff Llewellyn. 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 7
Why, then, does money not play a more prominent role in discussions of the outlook for inflation and 
monetary policy? Monetary developments can reflect two different causes: changes in the demand for 
money  and  changes  in  the  supply  of  money.  They  have  very  different  implications  for  inflation. 
Movements in the demand for broad money, relative to spending in the economy, reflecting changes in 
the way different assets and liabilities are used in transactions or shifts in portfolio preferences, have 
no  implications  for  spending  in  the  economy  or  the  path  of  inflation.  They  make  the  relationship 
between  money  growth  and  inflation  unpredictable.  That  contributed  to  the  poor  outcomes  when 
explicit money supply targets were used to guide monetary policy in the late 1970s and early 1980s. 
Changes in the supply of broad money, however, will lead to an imbalance in the relationship between 
money and prices. Either spending and the price level will adjust or the central bank will have to alter 
its policy rate to eliminate the change in the supply of money. 
The practical problem facing all central banks is how to distinguish between shocks to the demand for 
money and shocks to its supply. After a period of rapid financial innovation during which shocks are 
predominantly  to  the  demand  for  money,  it  is  understandable,  though  unfortunate,  if  monetary 
developments are given insufficient attention in the analysis of the inflation outlook. 
How should a policymaker respond to developments in money and credit? One approach is to ignore 
them on the grounds that they contain no incremental information about the outlook for inflation. This 
approach – which is compatible with many modern models of inflation – may well appear appropriate 
when  money  growth  is  associated  with  shocks  to  the  demand  for  money  that  have  few,  if  any, 
implications for spending and inflation. Ignoring developments in money and credit would, however, be 
a mistake when there are shocks to the supply of money. 
What can generate such shocks to the supply of money? Modern models of monetary policy tend to 
be  silent  on  this  point.  Economic  theorists  continue  to  struggle  to  develop  microeconomic 
underpinnings  of  the  roles  of  money,  both  as  a  medium  of  exchange  and  a  store  of  value.  This 
explains why money is often hidden. By construction, models often ignore the role played by banks 
that  extend  credit  to  borrowers  and,  in  the  process,  create  liabilities  that  serve  as  money.  In  those 
models nominal interest rates are set according to a “reaction function” that always returns inflation to 
the target. The implicit assumption is that the supply of money passively and instantly adjusts to that 
warranted by the demand for money. 
In reality, of course, our ignorance about the economy is such that we can never be sure that the level 
of  Bank  Rate  at  any  point  in  time  is  consistent  with  bringing  inflation  back  to  the  target  over  the 
medium  term.  And  developments  in  the  banking  sector  can  lead  to  an  expansion  of  the  supply  of 
broad money and credit even while Bank Rate remains constant. It is quite possible, in the real world, 
for  there  to  be  unwarranted  money  supply  shocks  –  whether  stimulus  or  restraint.  The  MPC  must 
always be looking for warning signals of this. 
The trap is falsely to conclude that, because some economic models contain no explicit reference to it, 
money cannot be one of those signals. The conventional riposte is that, if monetary policy were set 
incorrectly,  warning  signals  would  also  be  observed  contemporaneously  in  other  indicators  such  as 
measures of inflation expectations, demand or interest rates. I would not want to rely on that for three 
reasons, which together imply that the growth of money and credit may signal in advance of other 
indicators that Bank Rate is set at a level inconsistent with bringing inflation back to the target in the 
medium term. 
First, we do not have good indicators of the expectations of businesses and employees and, in looking 
at  measures  of  expectations  in  financial  markets,  we  must  be  alert  to  the  possibility  that  those 
expectations are formed by people falling into the same trap. 
Second, the spending of many households and businesses is constrained by the need to use money 
in transactions and by the availability of credit.14 For these households and businesses, changes in the 
availability of money and credit lead changes in their spending intentions. 
Thirdly,  official  interest  rates  are  not  a  sufficient  statistic  for  the  array  of  effective  interest  rates 
confronting  borrowers  and  lenders  –  risk  premia  which  reflect  the  creditworthiness  of  the  borrower 
                                                      
14   Goodhart (2007). 
8 
 BIS Review 43/2007
alter effective interest rates. Since many of those rates are unobservable by the MPC, money, credit 
and asset prices may contain valuable information about the likely outlook for spending.15 
As chart 10 shows, there are times when monetary developments have represented shocks that have 
affected  the  supply  of  money  and  proved  a  warning  sign  of  inflationary  risks.  At  other  times,  its 
movements have been dominated by changes in the demand for money. 
In 1973, for example, broad money growth had picked up sharply but inflation was subdued. Yields on 
gilts provided no indication that a rise in inflation was expected by financial markets. But the rise in 
money growth, which looked at first to be another instance of a change in the demand for money, was 
in fact an increase in supply and led to faster expansion of spending in the economy and, by 1975, 
higher inflation. 
The 1980s illustrate shocks to both money demand and supply. The first part of the decade was a 
period of large structural change in financial markets. The demand for money rose sharply relative to 
spending in the economy so, for a time, broad money growth was rapid and inflation was falling. That 
structural change probably continued into the second half of the decade. But it now seems that there 
was also some unwarranted expansion of the supply of money. For a time, that shock was disguised 
as further structural change in the demand for money but, in 1988, inflation began to rise. 
It is easy to be wise after the event. And it is never easy to distinguish between demand and supply 
shocks to money. But that is true for shocks to many economic variables and is no reason to assume 
that money supply shocks are simply absent. When we look at output data, we routinely ask ourselves 
the question: is it a demand shock or is it a supply shock? We do not rely on the simple correlation in 
the  past  between  output  and  inflation.  It  was  important  for  the  Federal  Reserve  to  identify  output 
movements in the late 1990s as the result of a supply (productivity) shock rather than an increase in 
demand. The challenge is to carry this level of interrogation and questioning of the data to our analysis 
of money and credit. We are trying to develop models that help us to distinguish between demand and 
supply  shocks  to  money  and  we  shall  be  devoting  more  resources  to  this  task,  including  our  new 
Credit Conditions Survey. 
What we say: central bank communications 
(b)  
In recent years, a great deal has been written about how and why central banks communicate with 
financial markets and the public more generally. Communications are crucial to a central bank’s ability 
to  anchor  inflation  expectations.  Only  two  questions  really  matter.  What  are  central  banks  trying  to 
communicate and to whom? 
The  first  task  for  a  central  bank  is  to  communicate  the  case  for  price  stability  in  a  simple  and 
straightforward  way  to  as  wide  an  audience  as  possible.  With  our  range  of  publications,  films,  the 
competition for schools Target 2.0, and our programme of regular regional visits, the Bank of England 
invests a good deal of resources in achieving this objective. We also monitor progress using opinion 
polls and report regularly their findings. Building a large constituency for price stability is an essential 
part of convincing people that low and stable inflation will be at the heart of macroeconomic policy for 
the  indefinite  future.  For  the  MPC,  there  is  the  specific  task  of  explaining  that  by  price  stability  we 
mean our target of 2% inflation as measured by the CPI. 
The second task relates to communication about the reasons for monetary policy decisions to financial 
markets,  households  and  businesses.  No  communications  strategy  can  ignore  the  fact  that  the 
Monetary Policy Committee was set up precisely because there is no timeless “reaction function” to be 
communicated to the public. It is as important to explain what we don’t know as what we do know. We 
are trying to get across the fruits of our learning about the economy, not a static view of the world. Our 
aim  is  to  help  people  understand  the  thinking  behind  the  Committee’s  decisions,  the  various 
hypotheses that the Committee entertains about the current conjuncture and the data that we shall be 
examining in order to discriminate among them. That should help people work out how we are likely to 
react to future data as they come in. And it is why we place importance on the minutes of our monthly 
meetings and the quarterly Inflation Report to convey a full explanation of our thinking. 
Explaining our analysis at some length is a richer source of information for markets than code words or 
statements  about  the  future  path  of  interest  rates.  Less  weight  should  be  placed  on  the  short 
                                                      
15   See my discussion of money and risk premia in King (2002b). 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 9
statements that are published with the announcements of our decisions because such statements, as 
we have seen elsewhere, run the risk of becoming monetary policy by code word. They do not help 
markets understand how we are likely to react to future data. 
A number of academics have suggested that the MPC publish forecasts for the path of Bank Rate. 
Several central banks now do so, noticeably the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Norges Bank and 
the Riksbank. Although there is some superficial attraction in such a move, there are four points that 
suggest the need for caution. 
First, what markets need more than anything is not an unconditional forecast of where interest rates 
might  go,  but  an  idea  of  our  contingent  response  to  data  as  they  evolve.  That  is  not  easily 
communicated by a path – even when shown as a fan chart – for future interest rates. It requires a 
careful  reading  of  the  Inflation  Report,  the  minutes  of  our  monthly  meetings  and  speeches  by 
members of the MPC. 
Second, there is little evidence that financial markets have in fact been particularly uncertain about the 
yield curve in the UK. Indeed, a survey of Goldman Sachs traders by their own economists showed 
that they thought, at longer horizons, interest rates were more predictable in the UK than in the euro 
area or United States.16 We are less predictable one month ahead for the very good reason, which I 
have  explained  before,  that  we  are  unable  to  pre-announce  or  signal  the  results  of  meetings  the 
outcome of which may sometimes be unclear to MPC members themselves until well into the second 
day. 
Third,  a  key  principle  of  our  present  arrangements  is  that  decisions  on  Bank  Rate  are  taken  by 
majority vote of the members of the MPC. That is possible because they are voting on a single number 
– today’s Bank Rate. But there is no equivalent voting procedure which can map from individual views 
on an entire future path of interest rates to an overall path in a sensible manner.17 It might, or might 
not, be possible to find a consensus. But how would that square with making decisions on today’s rate 
by  majority  voting?  The  problem  illustrates  the  important  principle  that  communication  cannot  be 
divorced from the way decisions are made. 
Fourth, the Bank of England has tried extremely hard to ensure that forecasts are seen as probabilistic 
statements. The Bank of England has been publishing fan charts for inflation and output growth for 
more than a decade. Yet there are many commentators who still refer only to the central path. It would 
be extremely dangerous to start publishing fan charts for future interest rates unless we were confident 
that  all  commentators  would  understand  the  probabilistic  nature  of  such  statements.  When  the 
Riksbank first published a fan chart for its future policy rate in February this year, an article written by 
one of the most sophisticated investment banks totally ignored the probabilistic nature of the exercise. 
Against  that  background,  would  we  be  able  to  convince  the  media’s  huge  audiences  for  personal 
finance advice that they should not base their decisions on our central projections for interest rates 
because they will almost certainly not come to pass? 
Overall,  then,  I  do  not  think  that  a  compelling  case  has  yet  been  made  for  the  MPC  to  publish  a 
forecast  of  the  path  for  Bank  Rate.  But  we  must  certainly  provide  the  information  necessary  for 
financial market participants to form their own view as to the likely path of interest rates, and we must 
always be trying to improve the quality of that information. We shall also keep in close touch with our 
colleagues in central banks that do publish forecasts of policy rates to see what we can learn from 
their experience. If we feel that there are net benefits from following their example, then we will do so. 
                                                      
16   See Goldman Sachs (2006). 
17   There are many ways of aggregating individual votes on paths of interest rates, but none is particularly attractive. Svensson 
(2003) has proposed that each MPC member declares a preferred path for Bank Rate. The collective path is formed by 
taking the median value of Bank Rate at each date in the future. In general this collective path is not the path preferred by 
any single MPC member and does not reflect an internally consistent set of views, posing a considerable communications 
challenge.  The  least  bad  idea  my  staff  in  the  Bank  have  been  able  to  come  up  with  is  one  that  aims  to  balance  the 
preferences  of  all  committee  members  –  that  is  to  maximise  the  Committee’s  overall  satisfaction  with  the  outcome.  To 
operationalise this, there could be two rounds of voting. In the first, each Committee member would propose a preferred 
path for interest rates. In the second round, Committee members would vote on the paths proposed by the other members. 
This vote could be structured in a number of ways, for example: a simple ranking (with transferable votes to break ties); 
allocating  a  fixed  number  of  points  over  the  alternative  paths  (again  with  transferable  votes  to  resolve  ties);  or  an 
arrangement like the current one where, after discussion, the Governor proposes a motion which is likely to command a 
majority. How all this would be communicated to the public I leave as an exercise for the interested reader. 
10 
 BIS Review 43/2007
How successful are the MPC’s communications to financial markets and business more generally, and 
should  the  Committee  be  considering  other  changes?  The  survey  of  SBE  members  I  have  already 
described is interesting in this respect. 
The first, and most striking, result is that, although the survey was conducted in the weeks immediately 
following our “surprise” increase in Bank Rate in January, the response overall is very positive. Almost 
90% of respondents found communications by the MPC to be either helpful or very helpful. But the 
interest in the survey lies in the more detailed responses. 
There  are  some  important  differences  in  the  types  of  MPC  communications  that  are  thought  to  be 
useful in forming a view of interest rate prospects at different time horizons. They are summarised in 
chart 11. At shorter horizons, such as three months, the voting pattern on the MPC, together with the 
minutes of meetings and the statement published when interest rates change, are thought to be more 
informative  than  when  forming  a  view  of  interest  rate  prospects  over  a  time  horizon  of  12  to  18 
months.  At  those  longer  horizons,  it  is  the  judgements  contained  in  the  Inflation  Report  that  are 
thought  to  be  more  useful.  It  seems  to  be  that  differences  of  view  among  committee  members  are 
more relevant to assessing near-term interest rate prospects than the MPC’s collective assessment 
which carries more weight at longer time horizons. 
MPC communications were thought to be helpful in understanding how the MPC interpreted the latest 
data  and  also  in  forming  a  view  as  to  the  prospects  for  interest  rates.  Over  60%  of  respondents 
thought that the balance of MPC communication was “about right”, although around 20% felt that too 
much commentary was devoted to the central view of prospects rather than to the balance of risks. 
Given  the  emphasis  which  the  MPC  places  on  the  fan  chart  as  a  means  of  conveying  information 
about  forecasts,  it  is  striking  that  there  is  a  demand  for  even  more  information  about  the  risks 
surrounding the central projection rather than the central projection itself. There is, perhaps, a lesson 
here  in  the  need  to  redress  the  balance  of  discussion  in  the  Inflation  Report  towards  the  risks  and 
away from the central projection. The view of respondents – largely City economists – in this respect 
seems to me entirely rational, but in marked contrast to the pressure on us from the press. 
Some of the words of respondents to the survey convey the flavour of their views. Several commented 
on the benefits of more information about the range of views on the Committee. For example, “MPC 
members could do more speeches, interviews and meetings to explain their individual views on the 
macroeconomic outlook”. And “the key difficulty in framing the communications is that they are clearly 
meant to convey the views of a group of people rather than one individual. At times when there is a 
broad consensus this may not be a problem but if there is a difference of views the reports do not 
always clearly convey the extent of this difference and how many people are in the various camps”. 
Such comments reflect the inherent difficulty of communications by a committee with individual voting. 
It is important that everyone understands the distinction between those forms of communication which 
focus  on  individual  views,  such  as  the  minutes,  and  those  which  present  a  collective  viewpoint 
explaining decisions of the Committee as a whole, such as the Inflation Report. 
As I said in my lecture to this Society five years ago, “it should be clear that there are both benefits 
and costs to a group decision-making process. The transparency and accountability of individual views 
helps to make better decisions. But it also complicates the communication of the decision to a wider 
audience, whose expectations of inflation matter for economic behaviour. The avoidance of confusion 
requires  some  forbearance  by  individual  members  of  the  Committee,  and  a  clear  understanding  of 
which forms of communication are appropriate to explain individual views and which forms are suitable 
for explaining the reasons for a collective decision”. Or, as Alan Blinder has put it in a discussion of 
individualistic policy-making committees, “a central bank that speaks with a cacophony of voices may 
in effect have no voice at all”. 
The  results  of  the  survey  are  broadly  consistent  with  the  propositions  I  put  forward  in  my  Mansion 
House  speech  last  year.  The  inflation  target  and  the  MPC’s  response  to  data  are  well  understood. 
Economists  in  the  City  know  that  economic  data  are  the  most  useful  source  of  information  when 
forming  judgements  about  future  interest  rates.  And  the  most  useful  form  of  communication  for 
economists when thinking about interest rates more than one year ahead is the Inflation Report. There 
is little indication that respondents are looking for publication of an interest rate path – either in the 
form of a central projection or a fan chart. 
But there is room for improvement in the way we communicate. There seems to be an appetite for 
more  information  about  the  way  policy  actions  are  linked  to  economic  data  and  for  more  forward-
looking analysis of risks to the outlook. In other words, we should talk more about what lies behind the 
fan chart and how we might change our thinking in response to developments in the data. We could, 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 11
for example, provide more guidance on the sort of data that might influence the Committee’s thinking 
on  whether  second-round  effects  from  higher  oil  prices  and  national  insurance  contributions  were 
materialising. 
In thinking about its future communications strategy, the Committee is conscious that there are more 
or less sophisticated audiences to whom it is speaking. Inevitably, that will colour its judgements on 
how to communicate its thinking. But the results of the survey provide food for thought. And I am very 
grateful to all those who took the time and trouble to respond. 
Conclusions 
4.  
There has been a sea change in the way monetary policy is conducted in the UK. That is evident in 
the  changing  dynamics  of  inflation  and  in  the  stability  of  the  economy  more  generally.  It  is  not,  I 
believe, credible to dismiss that solely as the result of luck. Our monetary policy regime is firmly based 
on  an  explicit  target  for  inflation,  a  floating  exchange  rate,  and  clear  institutional  arrangements  for 
decisions on interest rates which are decided by majority vote of the Monetary Policy Committee with 
individual accountability of its members. The MPC operates on a regular and pre-announced decision-
making  cycle  which  respects  the  principle  of  individual  and  accountable  voting  –  there  is  no  hiding 
place on the MPC. All this amounts to a revolution in the way decisions on interest rates are made in 
this country. As I said to this audience five years ago, “the MPC has proved to be one of those rare 
“instantly invented precedents” that seem to have worked”. It is hard now to imagine policy being set 
any other way. 
The  crucial  achievement  of  the  MPC  is  to  have  anchored  inflation  expectations.  But,  as  the  saying 
goes, we are only as good as our last meeting. We fully recognise that we must keep our eye on the 
ball if we are to continue to anchor inflation expectations on the 2% target. I have talked tonight about 
some  of  the  challenges  facing  the  MPC  over  the  next  ten  years.  But  there  is  no  more  important 
challenge than keeping inflation and inflation expectations anchored on the target. I have enjoyed the 
opportunity to look back over the past ten years, but, as the saying continues, the only meeting that 
matters is the next one. 
When Eddie George and I sat in the Governor’s office on that sunny Bank Holiday morning in 1997, 
we knew we had been given an opportunity to change monetary policy for the better. We had to grab it 
with both hands. That is exactly what the Bank has done. 
References 
Blinder, A S (2004), The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press. 
Blinder,  A  S  and  Morgan,  R  (2000),  “Are  two  heads  better  than  one?  An  experimental  analysis  of 
group vs individual decision making”, NBER working paper no 7909, September. 
Goldman Sachs Economic Research (2006), “Should the MPC Have Pre-Announced the Hike?”, UK 
Economics Analyst, 6, 9. 
Goodhart, C A E (2007), “Whatever Became of the Monetary Aggregates?”, Peston Lecture at Queen 
Mary College, London. 
Hennessy, P (2007), Having It So Good: Britain in the Fifties, Penguin. 
King,  M  A  (2002a),  “The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  Five  Years  On”,  Speech  to  the  Society  of 
Business Economists, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2002. 
King, M A (2002b), “No Money, No Inflation: The Role of Money in the Economy”, Bank of England 
Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2002. 
King,  M  A 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2004/speech229.pdf. 
King, M A (2005), “Monetary Policy: Practice Ahead of Theory”, Mais Lecture at the Cass Business 
School, London, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2005. 
Lombardelli, C, Proudman, A J and Talbot, J (2005), “Committees Versus Individuals: An Experimental 
Analysis of Monetary Policy Decision Making”, International Journal of Central Banking, 1, 5. 
the  Eden  Project,  Cornwall”, 
available 
“Speech 
(2004), 
at: 
at 
12 
 BIS Review 43/2007
Svensson,  L  E  O  (2003),  “The  Inflation  Forecast  and  the  Loss  Function”,  in  Mizen  (ed.),  Central 
Banking,  Monetary  Theory  and  Practice:  Essays  in  honour  of  Charles  Goodhart,  London:  Edward 
Elgar. 
Taylor, J B (1979), “Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational Expectations”, 
Econometrica, 47, 5. 
    BIS Review 43/2007 
 13
   14 
 BIS Review 43/2007
   15
BIS Review 43/2007 
   16 
 BIS Review 43/2007
