Shamshad Akhtar: Basel II implementation issues, challenges and implications 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the 56th Annual General 
Meeting of the Institute of Bankers Pakistan, Karachi, 12 September 2006.  
 The implementation of Basel II is a subject which has gripped a lot of interest both internationally and 
within Pakistan. Different efforts are underway within the country and across the globe to ensure an 
effective adoption of this new international regulatory and supervisory architecture.  
In  my  remarks  this  morning  I  would  like  to  briefly  talk  about  the  significance  of  ‘risk  management’ 
underlying this framework. I would then like to discuss the important contributions of this architecture, 
and  finally  conclude  with  the  issues,  challenges  and  implications  pertaining  to  its  implementation.  I 
would also like to touch briefly on where the region and the world is in the adoption of Basel II.  
It has to be acknowledged at the outset that one cannot dispute the inevitability of risks, and different 
types  of  risks,  in  bank  operations.  With  growing  complexity  of  operations  and  product  innovations, 
financial institutions have progressively become more exposed to a diverse set of risks. These risks 
stretch  from  credit  risk  to  interest  rate  risk,  liquidity  risk,  foreign  currency  risk,  strategic  risk, 
compliance risk, reputational risk, country risk and operational risk. The menu continues to become 
larger with each passing day, and with the developments in financial markets. These risks stretch quite 
far and deep, and have the inherent potential to significantly undermine the viability of the financial 
and  corporate  system,  as  well  as  that  of  the  concerned  institutions.  There  is  a  very  high  cost 
associated with what we believe are the uncalculated risks. These arise largely because of a number 
of  issues,  ranging  from  the  inadequacy  of  internal  controls  and  inadequate  use  of  Information 
Technology, to the weak professional management of the institutions.  
Such  a  large  and  diverse  portfolio  of  risks  gives  a  vivid  description  of  the  complexity  of  risk 
management  as  a  subject.  Yet  these  risks  are  far  from  being  independent  and  require  a  holistic 
approach for their mitigation and management. It is both the financial institutions’ and the regulators’ 
responsibility to achieve an optimal management of these risks. We have an intrinsic interest in the 
financial health of each institution because all these institutions together define the financial stability, 
smooth functioning of the payment system, and eventually promote economic growth.  
The past two decades have witnessed significant developments in the field of risk management. While 
financial  institutions, dominated  mainly by  the  large banking  organizations, have  invested heavily  in 
strengthening their key internal processes to manage and measure risks, bank supervisors have been 
equally  upto  the  task  of  devising  more  responsive  and  sophisticated  solutions  to  the  emerging 
challenges.  
Let  me  highlight  the  fact  that  the  entire  process  of  development  of  the  theoretical  and  practical 
literature on banking regulations and supervision owes its origin to the Basel Capital Accord which was 
introduced  around  20  years  ago.  We  all  need  to  thank  this  innovation  because  it  has  served  the 
banking industry well in the two last decades or so. But with the advent of the Asian financial crises in 
particular, and a number of other crises, the Latin American, the Russian, etc., the banking industry as 
a whole has come to recognize that Basel I fails to properly align capital with the actual risk profiles of 
the  banks.  It  has  created  a  wide  gap  between  regulatory  and  economic  capital  and  there  are 
perceptions  governing  the  dead-weight  cost  of  regulations  that  have  gotten  stronger  with  the  rapid 
pace of innovations. This cost is now impeding the efficient functioning of markets. This has laid the 
foundations of a very long-drawn process for Basel II, which recognizes the perceived shortcomings of 
Basel  I  and  progressively  addresses  its  inherent  weaknesses,  while  gearing  the  risk  management 
framework for the emerging financial engineering and innovation.  
Basel II Accord, first of all, aims to align banks’ capital with their basic risk profiles. It is very elaborate 
and  far  superior  in  terms  of  its  coverage  and  details.  It  exploits  effectively  the  new  frontiers  of  risk 
management. It seeks to give impetus to the development of a sound risk management system which 
hopefully will promote a more efficient, equitable and prudent allocation of resources. It is perceived to 
be the harbinger of the future disposition of bank supervision, and an evolutionary path for the banking 
industry. It is a product of a long, arduous, exhaustive consultative process. Not only has the Bank for 
International  Settlements  (BIS)  produced  a  voluminous  document  which  has  been  revised  several 
times,  incorporating  comments  of  the  various  stakeholders,  but  every  jurisdiction  in  the  world  has 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 1
produced  an  equivalent  amount  of  documentation  to  define  the  ground  rules  for  its  own 
implementation.  
In  my  view,  what  is  important  to  acknowledge  is  that  Basel  II  has  fundamentally  altered  the 
conventional rule-based and reactive approaches to designing a regulatory framework, to a superior 
and relevant regulatory and supervisory mechanism which is today more comprehensively assessing 
the various types of risks which I have mentioned and is inherently proactive. There are three pillars of 
this  architecture.  The  first  pillar  refers  to  the  minimum  capital  requirement,  which  includes  an 
acknowledgement  of  the  variety  of  risks  and  treatment  of  those  risks.  The  second  pillar  is  the 
supervisory  review,  and  the  third,  market  discipline.  All  the  three  pillars  complement  and  mutually 
reinforce each other.  
I would now like to turn to discussing briefly where I think some of the important regional economies 
are  in  terms  of  their  preparation  for  Basel  II  before  I  conclude  by  discussing  the  issues  and  the 
challenges for its implementation.  
Let me first talk about Pakistan. Whereas the State Bank of Pakistan has chalked out a roadmap for 
the  transition  of  the  banking  system  to  this  new  capital  regime,  we  intend  to,  like  so  many  other 
economies, first adopt the standardized approach to credit risk and operational risk from January 1, 
2008  and  then  move  forward  with  the  adoption  of  the  internal  ratings  based  (IRB)  approach  from 
January  1,  2010,  subject  to  due  diligence  of  the  banks  with  international  presence.  Once  SBP  is 
satisfied  that  commercial  banks  have  the  appropriate  models  and  risk  management  capacities, 
permission will then be granted for them to proceed with the IRB approach.  
With respect to this game plan, the first phase of a parallel run involving relatively simple approaches 
has already taken off from July 1, 2006 and will continue for one and a half year. Similarly, the second 
phase for the adoption of advanced approaches will begin in January 2008 and will last for two years. 
The transitional period is expected to provide the banks and the supervisors, hopefully ample time to 
fine  tune  and  strengthen  their  systems,  and  hone  their  technical  and  human  resource  capabilities. 
Among others, we rely on IBP to help in this process.  
IRB approaches present an incentive to all banks, including Pakistani banks, to economize on capital. 
The  large  banks  are  expected  to  become  more  inclined  towards  this.  However,  as  I  stated  earlier, 
State Bank would like to ensure adequate preparedness of the industry before we endorse the move 
towards IRB, and before we declare victory on this important subject.  
All other countries of South Asia like India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka etc. have issued their plans along 
similar  lines.  There  are,  of  course,  some  differences  regarding  the  pace  and  sequencing  of  the 
timetable depending on financial conditions and the type of banking activities in these countries. East 
Asian  countries,  including  Malaysia,  Indonesia  and  the  Philippines,  which  are  broadly  implementing 
initially the simple approaches followed by a gradual transition to IRB approaches, have adopted their 
own course, depending on the prevailing situation.  
I know also that the extent of adherence to the existing regulatory framework differs from country to 
country in these regions. What is, however, different from the South Asian and some of the middle 
income East Asian economies, is that some of these economies, such as Japan, Hongkong, Taiwan, 
Singapore  and  Korea  have  large  financial  sectors,  given  their  state  of  development,  and  have 
proceeded  with  a  swifter  adoption  of  IRB  approaches,  almost  consistent  with  the  implementation 
schedule of Basel II. But again, the process of implementation is dependent on the state of technology 
prevalent  in  the  banks  in  these  countries.  China  has  been  pursuing  a  very  cautious  and  steady 
approach in respect of Basel II, and it plans to put in place first of all International Accounting Systems 
and then a robust risk management system before it graduates to Basel II.  
Let me now turn to the issues, challenges and the implications of Basel II. In some senses Basel II is a 
revolution  in  regulation  and  risk  management.  According  to  the  KPMG  international  whitepaper, 
depending  on  its  current  risk  management  processes,  size,  customers,  portfolio  and  markets,  a 
particular bank is likely to experience varying effects of Basel II on at least four levels, namely internal 
processes, customers, businesses and global interaction. However, it is not just the banks that will be 
impacted in the Basel II environment. I believe this accord would also affect the behavior of a number 
of  other  industries,  including  credit  rating  agencies,  external  auditors,  banks’  customers,  regulators 
and finally the corporate sector at large.  
What are some of the key challenges pertaining to the Basel II Accord ? The list that I am about to 
cover  is  by  no  means  an  exhaustive  one.  First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  underscore  that  there  is  an 
absolute  need  to  instill  a  well  functioning,  integrated  and  efficient  risk  management  system  at  the 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2007
macro  level  by  the  supervisors  and  by  the  institutions.  Second,  we  need  absolute  accuracy  and 
reliability  of  information.  Third,  we  need  asymmetry  in  supervision;  we  need  to  recognize  that  the 
markets are imperfect. Fourth, industries face pro-cyclicality which needs to be recognized and due 
consideration needs to be given to incorporating this phenomenon. Also, there are serious implications 
for access to finance for certain sectors, groups and the disadvantaged segments of the population, 
given  that  there  is  going  to  be  a  huge  operational  cost  for  the  banks  and  the  regulator  with  the 
implementation of Basel II. And lastly, there will be cross-border challenges for not only Pakistan but a 
number of other jurisdictions, including the developed countries.  
Let me first briefly touch upon the risk management aspect. I think it would be fair to say that there has 
been,  as  I  said,  a  revolution  led  by  innovation  in  the  risk  management  field.  Not  only  have  we 
identified, quantified and developed various models in risk management but we have also nurtured the 
aspect of risk management in a number of institutions all over the world. So I don’t see it as being an 
impossible task for economies. There are complications in its implementation where there are inherent 
weaknesses  of  different  types.  We  all  know  that  the  world  has  suffered  repeatedly  from  the 
accumulated huge portfolio of non-performing loans. And the non-performing loans would be a reality 
even  if  we  were  to  absolutely  eliminate  the  vested  interests  from  the  banking  system  which 
encourages  willful  default,  a  factor  quite  familiar  to  us.  Defaults  are  inevitable  because  of  the 
conventional corporate risks as well as the business cycles that industries face. What is important in 
going forward is to be able to define and capture these risks effectively, and to appropriately weigh 
these risks and make effective provisions. It is really in this context that Basel II defines and lays the 
ground rules for risk management.  
Banks all over the world have been more cautious in their credit appraisal and monitoring system and 
in  assessing  the  gaps  in  their  risk  management  systems.  I  think  the  most  important  factor  in 
positioning  ourselves  effectively  is  education,  which  alone  will  help  us  to  understand  what  the  risk 
management architecture is all about.  
Let me now talk briefly about the second item. The success of Basel II depends exclusively on the 
accuracy  and  reliability  of  good  quality  data.  We  need  adoption  of  the  international  financial 
accounting  and  reporting  systems.  We  need  to  assess  the  risks  accurately.  And  there  has  to  be 
intellectual honesty in reporting all this. Besides the internal assessment of the reliability of information 
from a regulator’s point of view, the requisite comfort will be achieved only if an independent agency is 
able to do a due diligence of the company and its inherent risks. Within Pakistan there are only two 
credit rating agencies and I am not sure that with the universe that they capture, whether we are well 
positioned  to  go  forward  in  even  adopting  the  standardized  approach  effectively.  In  addition  to  the 
credit rating institutions, we need to exploit more effectively the role of the auditors of the borrowing 
entity. It has to be acknowledged that the data stream currently available is not fully comprehensive to 
serve our requirements. So it is not just about developing information flows; it’s about changing the 
quality and the timely reporting of this data.  
Another  important  aspect  of  reliability  is  business  continuity  planning  and  sophistication  of  the  IT 
resources, both in the State Bank as well in the banking industry. And again, we need to cover a lot of 
ground here.  
The  third  item  which  I  mentioned  is  asymmetry  of  supervision,  which  occurs  when  different  market 
participants  are  regulated  by  separate  supervisors.  This  makes  it  difficult  for  us  to  maintain 
comparable  levels  of  vigilance  and  quality  of  objectives  in  policy  formulation.  The  asymmetric 
regulatory regime can be within the country, for example between banks and securities firms, as well 
as at cross-border levels. The Basel Accord provides an excellent opportunity for developing common 
standards. Yet it requires much closer cooperation, information-sharing and coordination of policies. In 
many  developing  countries  only  the  banks  are  required  to  comply  with  Basel  II,  and  not  the  other 
financial services providers. This carries the risk of promoting regulatory arbitrage. In the context of 
Pakistan, it is important that the coordination of policies at the regulators’ level i.e. SECP and SBP, be 
pursued actively. This will be part of our deliberations with our co-regulator.  
Let  me  now  talk  about  the  fourth  item,  i.e.  imperfect  markets  and  the  challenges  they  pose.  The 
functioning of the risk assessment systems of banks is clearly affected by the nature of innumerable 
types of distortions in the markets. In Pakistan, like everywhere else, there are several problems that 
can create these distortions. These can pertain to the dominance of large players, or they could be 
related to the high asymmetry of information or the lack of market depth and so on and so forth. Price 
manipulation  by  significant  market  players  can  also  distort  the  true  market  value  of  the  securities 
portfolio.  To  make  any  meaningful  assessment  of  market  risks  and  encourage  market  discipline, 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 3
market imperfections have to be first of all recognized and then it is the job of the policy-makers to 
ensure that it puts in place a legal and regulatory framework which could minimize these distortions. 
Clearly  the  banking sector  has a  role  to  play  in  this  regard as a  responsible citizen  of  the  financial 
services industry itself. The regulator also has to do a lot of work in this area. It has to be capable of 
assessing the price risk and identifying situations in which market values of portfolios have been over- 
or  under-stated  by  the  regulated  institutions  through  price  manipulations.  In  this  context,  market 
surveillance by the regulator needs to be enhanced, an area which is clearly a shortcoming currently.  
The fifth item relates to business and economic cycles and their behavior. The basic criticism on Basel 
II  from  all  quarters  is  related  to  pro-cyclicality.  The  new  accord  makes  the  business  cycle  in  an 
economy  much  more  pronounced.  It  can  create  problems  for  policy-makers  and  also  for  economic 
stability. The arguments suggest that in times of recession as the borrower’s credit risk increases, as 
measured by either of the approaches, the banks will curtail lending, while in a booming economy they 
will expand lending. The proponents of Basel II, however, have argued that under the new accord the 
deterioration of a portfolio should begin to be reflected in a bank’s capital adequacy itself at a much 
earlier stage and no further deterioration should ideally occur in the capital adequacy ratio when it is 
recognized as an accounting loss. Several options have been proposed for this purpose. For example, 
discretionary powers granted to supervisors under pillar II, such as the ability to demand a buffer of 
additional capital during a business cycle expansion, is one way of addressing pro-cyclicality. Another 
is  to  adjust  the  value  of  the  probability  of  default  in  the  internal  ratings  approach  or  advance 
approaches which draw on the historical trend analysis of the business cycle. Whatever we do, we 
have to somehow come to grips with this phenomenon.  
The  sixth  point  is  how  does  Basel  II  introduce  complications  for  access  to  finance.  This  is  an  area 
where we have to be careful because there is a lot of scope to enhance funding to the desired sectors 
and  to  specific  groups  of  individuals  which  are  currently  under-served.  First  of  all  it  has  to  be 
recognized that the banks do have to enhance business and coverage in these vulnerable sectors and 
vulnerable segments of population. So will this mean that they would require higher capital allocation 
for assuming what has got to be a higher credit risk? Yes, of course, but this will clearly and hopefully 
not  be  a  deterrent  in  encouraging  credit  flows  to  the  small  businesses  and  poor  segments  of  the 
society, because we have to somehow accommodate this through better credit appraisal and credit 
vigilance rather than by adding excessive capital. One aspect which has been clearly underdeveloped 
in this architecture is how should the credit scoring mechanism be adopted for the small companies? 
Some advancement has been made in this area in Latin America, and SBP will have to actually look at 
this area quite closely. I am not advocating a fundamental deviation from Basel II, but rather proposing 
to find a robust and a workable solution to what I believe is a daunting problem.  
Another aspect that I will touch upon is the operational cost of Basel II. As we know, the installation of 
the risk assessment system, the cost of the IT system, hiring of new, technically more competent staff, 
etc., entails a heavy cost for banks as a pre-requisite for the adoption of Basel II.  
In Europe, the cost of Basel II implementation was estimated to be over US$ 15 million for some large 
jurisdictions  alone.  It  is  this  phenomenal  cost  which  has  deterred  the  United  States;  it  is  still 
deliberating on how to adopt Basel II and has declared that it will adopt a variant of Basel II for its own 
banks.  
Finally, my last point is about the cross-border challenges and with this I would like to conclude. The 
challenges discussed so far become more pronounced when we have free cross-border capital flows. 
One of the main areas of concern which has been studied extensively, relates to the higher capital 
requirements  in  the  advanced  countries  due  to  the  flows  that  they  have  towards  the  developing 
countries. The conclusion derived from the empirical evidence was that there will be a decline in the 
banking  flows  from  international  centres  to  the  developing  countries  because  of  the  higher  risk 
perception of their financial systems, and lack of appropriate rating and risk management systems. If 
not effectively addressed, this will be clearly a deterrent for the western economies to actually send 
flows to these jurisdictions.  
The  issue  surrounding  cross-border  flows  pertains  to  the  difficulty  in  information-sharing  across 
sectors  and  across  borders.  Lack  of  complete  accessibility  to  information  or  sharing  poor  quality 
information  will  restrict  the  credit  flows  from  banks  of  developed  countries  into  the  emerging 
economies. The most basic step is to ensure that no matter what the stage of development is vis-à-vis 
Basel II implementation, we should at least ensure accurate information disclosure in accordance with 
the  rules  defined  in  pillar  III.  This  would  help,  along  with  the  regulators’  strong  approach  to  this 
architecture, in building the confidence level of the foreign donors and the banks.  
4 
 BIS Review 4/2007
In  my  recent  meetings  with  various  banks,  I  have  observed  that  they  are  taking  some  important 
initiatives with respect to the implementation roadmap of Basle II. But clearly the quality and level of 
these  initiatives  varies  from  institution  to  institution.  Large  banks  that  today  have  more  resources, 
thanks to high profitability, are moving forward progressively. The small banks clearly do not have the 
capacity and will have to benefit from the learning and the architecture being developed by the large 
banks which they can adopt with some modifications to suit their requirements.  
In conclusion, I would like to urge banks to make speedier and concerted capacity building measures 
for training human resources in targeted fields. IBP and NIBAF will have to transform themselves to 
actually come up to the challenge of the requirements of Basel II. Banks will have to develop internal 
risk  models  and  advance  risk  management  systems.  But  most  importantly,  I  implore  banks  to 
strengthen  their  internal  control  systems,  which  are  generally  substantially  weak.  We  also  have  to 
encourage better coordination with our fellow regulator of the securities market. We have to bring in 
more competition in the credit rating business and in the auditing field. Simply put, we have to set new 
standards and work hand in glove with the financial industry.  
BIS Review 4/2007 
 5
