Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Closing remarks at the Financial 
Markets Development Stakeholders’ Workshop 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
cocktail  of  the  stakeholders’  workshop  on  developing  the  5-year  Financial  Markets 
Development Plan, Kampala, 15 August 2007. 
 Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  taking  part  in  the  workshop  to  map  out  priority  areas  for 
Uganda’s 5-year financial markets development plan. The results of this workshop will go a 
long  way  in  helping  us to  achieve  an  integrated  financial market  that  is  sound, stable  and 
supportive in the efficient mobilisation and allocation of resources for economic growth and 
sustainable development. 
The Bank of Uganda has maintained prudent monetary policy which has resulted in a lot of 
developments in the economy including ensuring price stability, a vibrant and sound banking 
system. Amongst other things, this has resulted into strong portfolio flows into this economy. 
Emerging markets have become increasingly attractive to foreign investors and the only way 
to sustain this attractiveness is through deepening and widening the financial markets and 
managing  the  economy  in  a  prudent  manner  through  avoidance  of  policy  reversals  and 
maintaining transparency in economic management. 
The Band of Uganda shall continue to commit itself to consolidating the successes that have 
been achieved over time. You as stakeholders have a big role as practitioners and regulators 
to  make  your  individual  contributions  in  your  various  sectors  towards  attainment  of  the 
benchmarks that you have set for yourselves, while we provide the enabling environment. 
I would like to urge those of you who have been selected to represent the various sectors to 
the Financial Markets Development Committee to dedicate yourselves to the task ahead of 
you to enable us to come up with the 5-year plan as soon as possible. This will enable us to 
find time to liaise with our sister central banks in the region that are also going through the 
same exercise in order to arrive at a harmonised and consolidated East African Community 
regional 5-year market development plan. 
Finally, I would like to thank all the participants again for your deliberations and to single out 
GTZ/Sida for the technical assistance that they have provided to Uganda over the years in 
forging ahead with financial sector development programmes. 
Thank you for your participation and for listening to me. 
BIS Review 93/2007 
 1
