Zhou Xiaochuan: Supporting the efforts of energy conservation and 
reduction of pollutant emissions through financial markets 
Abstract  of  an  article  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China, 
published in Green Leave Magazine. 
 Energy  Conservation  and  eco-environment  protection  were  basic  conditions  for  a  healthy 
and  sustainable  economic  development,  an  important  content  of  promoting  harmonious 
relations between the human beings and the nature and establishing a socialist harmonious 
society  as  well  as  a  reflection  of  the  principles  of  “put  the  people  first”  and  scientific 
development approach.  
The Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee and State Council attached great 
importance to the work of energy conservation and reduction of pollutant emission by making 
a series of important policies and arrangements. In May 2007, the State Council issued the 
Comprehensive Work Plan for Energy Conservation and Reduction of Pollutant Emission to 
stress the importance of the work and focus on relevant policy implementation. In June, the 
State  Council  established  a  leadership  group  on  energy  conservation  and  reduction  of 
pollutant emission, headed by Premier Wen Jiabao. It shows that energy conservation and 
reduction of pollutant emission has become a top priority for our work.  
Financial industry should improve financial services to energy conservation and reduction of 
pollutant  emission  and  carry  out  the  instructions  laid  in  the  videoconference  of  the  State 
Council. Additionally, financial industry should strengthen awareness of social responsibility 
and  risk  prevention,  establish  effective  information  mechanism,  provide  market  and  policy 
support  to  production  capacity  allocation  appropriate  with  environment  endurance,  reduce 
price  distortion  so  that  market  can  play  a  fundamental  role  and  encourage  industrial 
structural upgrading and a shift of economic growth model through financial market. 
I.  
Highlight financial industry’s social responsibility and risk prevention 
awareness in environment protection, energy conservation and reduction of 
pollutant emission  
In spite of rapid economic growth and magnificent achievements in economic development in 
recent years, we have paid high costs in terms of resources and environmental degradation, 
conflicts  between  economic  development  and  resource  and  environment  have  become 
increasingly poignant and people have strong complaints about environment pollution. 
This is directly related with unreasonable economic structure and extensive growth mode. If 
we  don’t  accelerate  economic  restructuring,  shift  economic  growth  mode,  the  economic 
development will be unsustainable. In the Global Compact, proposed by Secretary General 
Mr.  Koffi  Annan  and  initiated  by  the  UN  in  2000,  social  responsibilities  of  enterprises  on 
environment  were  clearly  stressed  and  enterprises  should  prepare  for  environmental 
challenges  and  share  more  responsibilities  in  regard  of  environment  protection,  and 
encourage application of environment-friendly technologies. 
At  present,  the  whole  society  has  reached  broad  consensus  in  protecting  environment, 
establishing  a  harmonious  society  and  realizing  sustainable  development.  The  financial 
industry should fully realize the importance of energy conservation and reduction of pollutant 
emission  and  take  social  responsibilities  in  environment  protection.  The  financial  markets 
should  guide  financial  institutions  to  play  an  active  role  in  the  establishment  of  an  energy 
conservation  and  environment-friendly  society  and  promote  economic  restructuring  and  a 
shift of economic growth mode. 
BIS Review 93/2007 
 1
Commercial  financial  institutions  should  establish  risk  awareness  when  their  clients  have 
problems in environment protection, energy consumption and reduction of pollutant emission. 
In the first quarter of 2007, industries with high energy consumption and heavy pollution grew 
relatively fast. Six industries, that is electricity, steel, non-ferrous metal, construction material, 
oil  chemistry  and  chemistry  industries,  accounting  for  70  percent  of  the  total  energy 
consumption and emission of sulfur dioxide, grew by 20.6 percent, up 6.6 percentage points. 
The State Council has since required to restrain the relatively fast growth of industries with 
high energy consumption and heavy pollution. With policy guidance, sound legal system and 
enhanced  supervision,  industries  and  enterprises  that  cannot  meet  requirements  in 
environment  protection,  energy  conservation  and  reduction  of  pollutant  emission  will  face 
more  stringent  policy  environment.  The  financial  institutions  should  establish  policy  risk 
awareness and stand vigilant to credit risks from companies with high energy consumption, 
heave pollution and high pollutant emission from the point of increasing credit assets’ quality. 
II.  
Establish information mechanism that benefits environment protection, 
energy conservation and reduction of pollutant emission 
First,  “window  guidance”  of  credit  policy  should  be  strengthened.  To  carry  out  the 
Comprehensive  Work  Plan  for  Energy  Conservation  and  Reduction  of  Pollutant 
Emission, the PBC, relevant supervisory authorities and the China’s Associations of Banks 
should enhance their guidance, and remind financial institutions to consider, when they issue 
credits,  how  to  effectively  control  high  energy  consumption  and  heavy  pollutant  industries’ 
excessively rapid growth, accelerate the removal of obsolete production capacities, promote 
technology advancement in energy conservation and reduction of pollutant emission, assist 
the development of recycling economy and earnestly enhance the quality of credit assets. 
Second, information related to the illegal activities of enterprises in environment protection 
and  pollutant  emission  should  be  included  in  the  enterprises’  credit  registration  system.  In 
recent  years,  the  credit  registration  system  has  broadened  its  coverage  of  information  by 
including enterprises’ and individuals credit information and other relevant information and it 
will  include  enterprises’  environment  protection  information  in  the  future.  The  credit 
registration  system  will  further  strengthen  its  tracking  of  the  key  enterprises  in  energy 
conservation  and  reduction  of  pollutant  emission  so  that  it  can  provide  more  services  to 
financial  institutions  and  increase  their  assets  quality.  Additionally,  the  credit  registration 
system will allow enterprises and individuals to inquire information from the system and help 
strengthen law enforcement in environment protection. 
III.  
Financial markets should support the reallocation of production capacity that 
is commensurate with environment endurance.  
In recent years, due to the rapid development of manufacturing industry, some east coastal 
regions have reached their limits in environment endurance. At the same time, western areas 
are  suffering  from  under-development  and  lack  of  capitals.  From  the  perspective  of  global 
experiences,  undeveloped  countries  and  regions  also  extremely  need  support  from 
international industrial relocation. Accordingly, it is very urgent to promote industrial structure 
upgrading and reallocation of production capacities according to environment endurance. Of 
course, in the process, we should avoid repeating the past practice of polluting environment 
first by addressing environmental problems.  
In  this  process,  financial  markets  and  financial  policy  can  provide  support  through 
broadening  financing  channels,  improving  foreign  exchange  management,  enhancing 
insurance  protection,  supporting  enterprises  to  identify  and  take  their  relative  advantages, 
providing hybrid loans, syndicate loans, assets securitization, stocks, bonds, project finance 
and other financial instruments and continuously deepening foreign exchange administration 
reform for overseas investments.  
2 
 BIS Review 93/2007
IV.  
Reduce price distortion in resource and environment and help market 
mechanism to properly function. 
First, the role of price mechanism should be strengthened. Through price reform in resource 
products and relaxation of price control, the price distortion in coal, oil products, natural gas, 
water,  electricity,  mineral  resources  will  be  reduced.  Through  increasing  the  collection 
standard  of  pollutant  emission  charges  and  the  relative  price  effect,  heavy  pollutant,  high 
energy consumption and emission projects will be constrained while new technologies that 
meet  environment  requirements  and  help  energy  conservation  and  reduction  of  pollutant 
emission will be promoted. 
Second, efforts should be made to learn from the international carbon trading mechanism, 
explore the implementation of emission quota mechanism and develop the emission quota 
trading market. Since international investors have increasingly more interests in carbon trade 
and the establishment of many climate exchanges, carbon trade may become an effective 
way.  
At present, there are three kinds of mechanisms in carbon trading in the world, namely CDM 
(Clear Development Mechanism), JI (Joint Implementation) and ET (Emission Trading). For 
instance,  in  the  European  Union,  according  to  the  reduction  plan  of  greenhouse  gas 
emission,  member  countries  should  grant  emission  license  with  certain  emission  quota  to 
relevant companies, and the companies can only emit greenhouse gas within their quotas. If 
a company wouldn’t meet the emission quota requirements, it could purchase extra emission 
quota from other companies that achieved good performance in greenhouse gas emission, 
or help developing countries to promote clean energy program as well as exchange for extra 
“credit quota” through planting trees.  
In  China,  we  should  learn  from  the  international  carbon  trading  mechanism  to  study  the 
emission quota system and develop emission quota trading market. Through price-discovery 
function  of  the  financial  markets,  different  economic  entities  can  adjust  their  interests  and 
fulfill  the  target  of  environment  protection,  energy  conservation  and  reduction  of  pollutant 
emission.  The  emission  quota  trading  system  could  also  provide  a  new  market-based 
compensation mechanism for the protective cultivation of farmland. 
In  summary,  financial  institutions  should  fully  recognize  the  importance  and  urgency  of 
energy conservation and reduction of pollutant emission, take effective measures earnestly 
to promote the realization of targets set for energy conservation and reduction of pollutant 
emission  in  the  11th  Five-year  plan  period  as  well  as  a  harmonious  and  sustainable 
economic and social development. 
BIS Review 93/2007 
 3
