Jean-Claude Trichet: Financial stability risks 
Intervention  by  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  International 
Monetary Conference Central Bankers panel, Frankfurt am Main, 5 June 2007. 
 In  my  intervention  I  would  like  to  focus  on  financial  stability  risks,  based  on  the  ECB  Governing 
Council’s  most  recent  assessment.  We  have  been  pleased  to  observe  that  the  external  macro-
financial environment for the euro area financial system is robust and it is also projected to continue to 
develop  rather  favourably.  Credit  quality  in  the  euro  area  remains  high,  and  it  should  be  further 
underpinned by the favourable economic outlook. Although pockets of vulnerability in the euro area 
household  and  corporate  sectors  have  increased,  on  average  financial  positions  remain  sound. 
Finally,  financial  institutions,  including  banks  and  insurance  companies,  have  shown  improving 
financial results and market participants expect profitability to remain strong also in the foreseeable 
future.  
In late February and early March of the current year, the financial system has absorbed smoothly the 
third significant burst of market volatility in the past two years. This high degree of resilience of the 
financial  system  can  be  attributed  also  to  the  continuous  improvement  in  the  risk  management 
practices  of  financial  firms.  All  in  all,  recent  developments  and  forward-looking  indicators  together 
allow  us  to  conclude  that  the  main  scenario  for  the  euro  area  financial  stability  remains  favourable 
going forward.  
The  fact  that  the  global  and  euro  area  financial  systems  have  so  far  proven resilient  to  a  series  of 
adverse disturbances, while comforting, does not provide any ground for complacency. The episodes 
of  market  volatility  throughout  the  past  two  years  were  triggered  by  relatively  small  and  transitory 
disturbances in an environment of strong macroeconomic fundamentals and abundant financial market 
liquidity.  Therefore,  it  is  unlikely  that  these  episodes  would  provide  sufficient  guidance  on  how  the 
financial  system  would  perform  in  the  event  of  larger  shocks  that  could  trigger  a  more  material 
reappraisal of risks, or a change in risk appetite, at a less favourable stage of the credit cycle. For 
instance, vulnerabilities could be quickly unearthed if market liquidity – hard to measure but currently 
seen by many market observers as more abundant than ever – were abruptly and sharply to decline, 
for example as a result of an unexpected deterioration in investors’ risk appetite.  
I would like to highlight briefly three issues that we currently see as important in assessing future risks 
to financial system stability: hedge funds, private equity sponsored buy-out activity and the markets for 
credit risk transfer. Starting from hedge funds, the industry has both grown (US$ 1.4 trillion of total 
assets managed at the end-2006, in accordance with some sources) and developed in sophistication 
considerably over the past decade. While we all recognize that the growth of hedge funds has had 
clearly a positive impact on the efficient functioning of financial markets, it can also pose threats to the 
stability of the financial system. These risks can take two main forms. First, hedge funds are a direct 
source  of  counterparty  credit  risk  for  a  number  of  large  banks  for  which  hedge  funds  are  also  an 
increasing source of revenues. Second, hedge funds have become, through active trading, important 
drivers of liquidity in a number of markets, including credit and derivative markets, and it is uncertain 
whether this could make these markets less stable in some circumstances. A suitable way to address 
these risks remains a close scrutiny of hedge funds by their counterparties and investors. Therefore, I 
fully support the recommendations put forward in a report by the Financial Stability Forum, which are 
addressed  to  supervisors,  hedge  funds’  counterparties  and  investors  and  the  hedge  fund  industry 
itself. On the latter aspect, I strongly believe that the hedge fund industry should review and enhance 
sound practices benchmarks as recommended in the report by the FSF, and that a set of principles 
voluntarily prepared by the industry itself under its own responsibility could be a suitable tool to pursue 
this objective.  
Over  the  past  couple of  years, leveraged buy-out  (LBO)  activity  has  intensified  considerably,  both 
globally and in the euro area. As in any fast-growing markets, and particularly in circumstances where 
credit  market  fundamentals  are  very  strong  and  market  liquidity  is  seen  as  abundant,  the  rapid 
expansion could raise some concerns from the financial stability point of view. In particular, risks could 
be building up if regulated financial institutions, which provide the debt financing to LBO undertakings, 
softened  their  lending  standards  in  the  pursuit  of  market  share  and  fee  income.  While  available 
evidence suggests that lenders are managing their risks broadly appropriately, it cannot be excluded 
BIS Review 60/2007 
 1
that  some  of  the  pricing  models  and  risk  management  techniques  currently  applied  could  rely  on 
overly  benign  assumptions.  Moreover,  some  of  the  features  of  the  recent  LBO  financing 
arrangements, such as loan contracts where covenant clauses have been all but eliminated, may limit 
the ability of creditors to intervene in the businesses of the LBO target firms even in case where there 
is a material change in the capability of the firm to service its debt. 
A  new  characteristic  of  today’s  financial  markets  is  that  hedge  funds,  private  equity  firms  and  the 
banks  financing  these  institutions  all  strongly  rely  on  techniques  for  credit  risk  transfer  (CRT)  to 
manage  their  risks.  While  CRT  markets  have  obvious  benefits  in  terms  of  allowing  effective  risk 
sharing in the financial system, excessive reliance on the functioning of such mechanisms can lead to 
complacency on risks. In addition, CRT markets operate in a rather opaque manner which does not 
allow for monitoring of concentration and counterparty risks by other market participants or by public 
authorities.  Moreover,  the  growing  spreading  of  more  complex  structured  credit  products  raises  the 
issue that investors in such instruments may not be able to properly assess the risks they assume. 
Unanticipated changes in the macro-financial environment can cause model assumptions to fail and 
this may contribute to pricing dislocations and market liquidity problems if many investors decide to 
exit their positions simultaneously. All in all, I see scope for further cooperation between public and 
private  sector  entities  to  gather  information  on  the  CRT  market  to  improve  the  ability  to  assess 
potential systemic risks.  
The state  of the  fundamentals  in  the credit  markets,  CRT  and  unregulated  financial  institutions can 
together be described as a potential “triangle of vulnerability” in that a shock at any corner of this 
triangle could have implications for the other two. For instance, a significant turn in the credit cycle 
could  mean  that  credit  protection-sellers,  such  as  hedge  funds,  could  become  unable  to  make  due 
payments to banks. Similarly, if widespread problems were to emerge at hedge funds or private equity 
firms which are active in CRT markets, this could even spark a downturn in the credit cycle, if it were 
to impair the “originate and distribute” business model adopted by many banks involving securitisation 
and hedging of lending exposures.  
Let me conclude by saying that ultimately the triggers for any potential adjustment cannot be predicted 
with any degree of certainty. All that we know is that the present state of global finance – where we are 
observing a level of risk pricing which is historically low – is not necessarily sustainable in the long run. 
All parties concerned should therefore contribute to an orderly and smooth adjustment, when the time 
comes, and avoid an abrupt and sharp adjustment which would be adverse for the global economy. All 
parties  concerned,  public  and  private,  have  in  this  respect  a  very  important  shared  responsibility.  I 
thank you for your attention.  
2 
 BIS Review 60/2007
