Stefan Ingves: The relationship between the Swedish Riksbank and the 
Riksdag 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Sveriges Riksdag (Swedish 
parliament), Stockholm, 8 June 2007. 
 Independence and opportunities for evaluation and accountability 
Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to today’s conference. Of course it is both an honour 
and an inspiration to have the opportunity to discuss in such knowledgeable company the Riksbank’s 
relationship to the Riksdag (the Swedish parliament) and what this means for monetary policy.  
In  recent  decades  many  central  banks  have  become  increasingly  independent  in  relation  to  the 
political system. This also applies to the Riksbank. At the same time, these institutions, which have 
often  been  fairly  closed  and  secretive,  have  become  more  open  and  clear  with  regard  to  their 
objectives, motives and means. Many central banks now conduct monetary policy with more or less 
explicit price stability targets and the Riksbank was one of the first to introduce this type of quantified 
target  for  inflation  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  Both  our  price  stability  objective  and  our 
independence have been written in the law since 1999. This contributes to strengthening the credibility 
of monetary policy. 
The  fact  that  increased  independence  has  gone  hand  in  hand  with  greater  openness  and  clarity  – 
what  is  usually  called  transparency  in  central  bank  language  –  is  not  particularly  strange.  For  an 
independent authority to gain general acceptance and legitimacy, there must be good opportunities for 
evaluation and accountability. A necessary condition for this is openness and clarity!  
But there are also other important reasons why most central banks, and not least the Riksbank, have 
moved towards greater transparency. One reason is that the effectiveness of monetary policy depends 
on  how  well  we  succeed  in  communicating  our  intentions  to  the  financial  markets  and  the  general 
public. By being open and clear, the possibility to influence interest rate-setting in the way we desire 
increases, both in the short term and the slightly longer term. This gives better conditions for achieving 
the price stability objective which the Swedish people, via the Riksdag, have allocated to us. 
The Riksbank’s ambition is of course to live up to, in the best manner possible, the requirements of 
openness  and  clarity  made  of  us,  both  in  our  role  as  public  authority  and  in  our  dealings  with  the 
financial markets and the general public. But the fact that the world around us is constantly changing 
leads to new demands. In practice, it means that we must be constantly developing and improving our 
ways  of  working.  One  expression  of  this  is,  for  example,  that  we  have  begun  to  publish  our  own 
forecasts  for the  development  of  the  policy  rate.  And it  is  probably  difficult  for a  central  bank  to  be 
clearer than this with regard to its monetary policy intentions – we actually say what we consider to be 
a well-balanced monetary policy in the coming period.  
So allow me to briefly pause here and explain clearly my own intentions with regard to the next half-
hour. The theme of my speech here today is how the Riksbank’s independent position, together with a 
high degree of transparency and efficient communication, contributes to long-term target fulfilment and 
credibility for monetary policy. Key words in this context are evaluation and accountability. It is these 
different pieces of the puzzle that I now wish to discuss in more detail. 
The Riksbank’s position – from bank crisis in the 17th century to independent central bank 
The fact that we are in this room today is actually rather appropriate. I can tell you an interesting fact 
here – that the Riksbank and the Riksdag had a fairly intimate relationship, in geographical terms, for 
over  70  years,  from  the  early  20th  century  up  until  1976.  The  Riksbank  was  then  located  in  the 
building across the street, where the Riksdag now has its assembly hall. Riksbank officials thus sat 
almost side by side with the people’s elected representatives. Now I do not believe one should draw 
any  far-reaching  conclusions  on  the  degree  of  independence  for  monetary  policy  on  the  basis  of 
geographical location – other factors decide this. But for those who have any doubts, I can point out 
that the Riksbank is now at a more “suitable” walking distance from the Riksdag, a few blocks away. 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 1
The Riksbank is formally an authority under the Riksdag. It is stated in the Instrument of Government, 
Chapter 9, paragraph 13 that “the Riksbank is the central bank of the Realm and an authority under 
the  Riksdag.  The  Riksbank  is  responsible  for  monetary  policy.  No  authority  may  determine  the 
decisions made by the Riksbank on issues relating to monetary policy.” We have a statutory task to 
maintain price stability and thus a statutory, independent position.  
The  fact  that  the  central  bank  is  directly  accountable  to  a  country’s  parliament  and  not  to  its 
government  can  to  some  extent  be  interpreted  as  an  ambition  to  provide  additional  weight  to  its 
independent position. And the fact that there has been a need to do so over the years is witnessed by 
several  episodes  from  the  Riksbank’s  own  339-year  history.  I  would  therefore  now  like  to  take  you 
back in time for a few minutes. 
Ideas regarding the Riksbank’s position many years ago… 
The Riksbank, or "the Bank” as it was then known, was given a position back when it was founded in 
1668 directly under the four estates – what roughly constituted that time’s equivalent of the Riksdag. 
The reason was probably the way in which the precursor to the Bank, Stockholm Banco, had rather 
dramatically gone bankrupt. As in most bank crises, then as now, Stockholm Banco had lent too much 
money to people with low creditworthiness and with too little collateral. For various reasons there had 
been deficiencies in management and control. 
Stockholms  Banco was  an  imitation  of  foreign commercial  banks  and  the  idea  was  originally  that  it 
would be a private company. But instead it became a state-owned institution that was managed by 
officials appointed by the Government. The fact that it went bankrupt created scepticism regarding this 
type of operation, but there was nevertheless general agreement that a bank was needed. With the 
bank crisis fresh in their memories, the Government handed over to the estates of the realm at the 
1668 parliament the task of deciding how banking operations could be maintained and strengthened. 
At the request of the four estates, the Government provided “an assurance…. on certain terms and 
advantages  to  the  Bank’s  best”.  This  meant  that  all  legislatory  and  regulatory  power  regarding  the 
bank, as well as its management, was handed over to the estates. 
The Riksbank’s relationship to the political system has changed quite substantially over the course of 
the years. Different parts of the political system, the King, the Riksdag and the Government have all at 
various times wanted to gain control over the central bank. One telling example is the period around 
the mid-18th century. The so-called "Hat party” came to power in 1738-1739 and began to conduct a 
very expansionary economic policy. The Bank then became – in its capacity as the bank to the general 
government and the cash-office for the public authorities – a tool for business subsidies and, not least, 
the funding of a war which was a total failure. The expansionary credit policy, combined with monetary 
financing of large general government deficits in turn put foreign exchange and monetary policy under 
considerable  strain.  The  result  was  hardly  surprisingly  inflation  and  a  depreciation  of  Sweden’s 
currency. 
Today  the  time  when  Sweden’s  central  bank  could  be  forced  to  finance  war  efforts  in  far-away 
countries seems very distant. Of course, the financial system was also entirely different a couple of 
hundred  years  ago.  But  the  fundamental  principles  for  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  and  that  it 
should not be possible to use the central bank for “short-term” purposes, remain largely the same. 
…and experiences closer to our time. 
There are also examples of the importance of a clear framework for economic policy even in modern 
times.  At  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  Sweden  underwent  the  deepest  economic  crisis  since  the 
Depression  of  the  1930s. This  also came  to  be  a  rather  dramatic  conclusion to  almost  20 years of 
stabilisation policy problems.  
The economic policy conducted in the 1970s and 1980s was for various reasons overly expansionary 
and not compatible with the monetary policy objective of the time – to maintain a fixed exchange rate. 
Price  and  wage  developments  repeatedly  came  on  a  collision  course  with  the  fixed  exchange  rate 
target and Sweden suffered cost crises. As a temporary solution the krona was devalued when the 
situation became acute – a strategy they adopted on no less than five occasions in just seven years. 
But the depreciation of the krona did not solve the fundamental problem. Swedish prices and wages 
continued  rising  much  too  fast.  The  credibility  of  the  exchange  rate  target  had  been  gradually 
undermined  and  finally  it  was  lost  completely.  In  November  1992  the  Riksbank  was  forced,  under 
great  drama  –  with  high  interest  rates  and  in  principle  the  entire  foreign  exchange  reserve  sold  on 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2007
forward contracts – to let the krona float. The anchor that was supposed to secure expectations of low 
and stable inflation had been let go. 
The  seriousness  of  the  situation  probably  contributed  to  a  broad  support  for  powerful  measures 
needed to bring the Swedish economy onto a better track. The framework for economic policy was in 
principle redefined from scratch. We were also given a clearer allocation of roles between monetary 
policy and fiscal policy. 
Fiscal  policy  had  previously  often  been  overly  expansionary  and  contributed  to  excessively  high 
inflation. Now it was subjected to requirements for long-term stability and durability in public finances. 
A floating krona meant that the main task of monetary policy was to directly act to ensure that inflation 
remained at a low and stable rate. And the change in regime that was later implemented – with an 
explicit  inflation  target  for  monetary  policy  and  a  clear  regulatory  framework  for  fiscal  policy  –  has 
gratifyingly made economic policy more long-term and stable.  
It  is  difficult  with  hindsight  to  say  anything  other  than  that  inflation  targeting  with  an  independent 
Riksbank has been a success. But I would like to point out that the reforms in the fiscal policy area 
have  also  been  very  important.  The  relatively  good  central  government  finances  over  the  past  ten 
years have undoubtedly been a source of strength for the Swedish economy. If we had instead had 
large  budget  deficits,  a  large  national  debt  and  unclear  regulations  in  the  fiscal  policy  field  it  would 
probably have been difficult to win credibility for monetary policy. 
In this context it may be worth mentioning that the Riksbank actually had some experience earlier of 
conducting  monetary  policy  with  an  inflation  target.  We  were  the  first  central  bank  in  the  world  to 
introduce  a  price  stability  target  for  monetary  policy  after  abandoning  the  gold  standard  at  the 
beginning  of  the  1930s.  The  Riksdag  supported  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  programme  and 
evaluated the policy conducted in a modern manner on several occasions during the 1930s. The price 
stability target contributed to anchoring inflation expectations, which probably helped Sweden manage 
the 1930s crisis better than, for instance, the United States. But after this we had many decades with a 
fixed exchange rate and the episodes I have just described.  
The Riksbank’s inflation target and legal position 
In January 1993 the Riksbank made its target of low and stable inflation more concrete. The annual 
rate of change in the consumer price index, CPI, should be 2 per cent, with a tolerance for deviations 
of ± 1 percentage point. The target would formally apply with effect from 1995. This created a new 
norm  for  monetary  policy.  Sweden  then  became  one  of  the  first  countries  in  the  world  to  conduct 
monetary policy with a floating exchange rate and an explicit inflation target. 
The decision to word the monetary policy target in terms of a particular figure was made for several 
reasons. Perhaps the most important reason was to create an anchor that everyone would recognise 
and on which they could base their expectations. A clear target would also make it easier to evaluate 
the  Riksbank’s  operations and  to  hold it  accountable.  As  I  said,  this  is particularly  important as  the 
Riksbank has such a high degree of independence. 
In 1999 the target of low and stable inflation was written into the Sveriges Riksbank Act. In connection 
with  this,  the  Riksbank was  also  given  greater  independence,  for  instance,  in  that  decisions  on  the 
repo rate would be taken by an Executive Board consisting of six members. Interest rate decisions 
were previously made by the Governing Board, whose successor, the General Council, now has the 
main task of appointing the members of the Executive Board. The six members of the Executive Board 
are also forbidden by law to seek or take instructions when making monetary policy decisions. The 
legislation is largely in line with the applicable legislation in other parts of the EU.  
These  changes  have  contributed  to  further  strengthening  our  credibility.  The  fact  that  the  political 
system in a democracy chooses to delegate such an important task as monetary policy to an authority 
with  such  a  high  degree  of  independence  as  the  Riksbank  is  not  in  principle  completely 
uncontroversial. But as I implied earlier, there are good reasons why one, with a clear majority has 
chosen to do so. I will like to take the opportunity to develop this point.  
Why has monetary policy been delegated? 
One could say that the Riksbank is at the end of a delegation chain. The Swedish people have elected 
a  parliament  which  has  in  turn  legislated  on  the  Riksbank’s  objective  and  appointed  the  General 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 3
Council  of  the  Riksbank.  The  General  Council  in  turn  appoints  the  six  members  of  the  Executive 
Board, who take the monetary policy decisions.  
The  fact  that  some  tasks  in  society,  such  as  monetary  policy,  are  delegated  in  this  way  may  be 
appropriate  for  several  reasons.  This  applies  perhaps  mainly  when  there  is  a  risk  that  political 
decisions might be taken with too short a time horizon. This problem is dealt with in monetary policy by 
the  Riksbank  having  a  high  degree  of  independence  and  a  clear  statutory  task.  Our  independent 
position is thus an important – perhaps even an essential – condition for being able to maintain low 
and stable inflation in the long term. It is a necessary condition for credible monetary policy. 
A further example connected with the same argument concerns the delegation of the management of 
the state finances to the Swedish National Debt Office – the state’s own internal bank. That "allocation 
of responsibility” is also important for monetary policy. I spoke earlier about occasions long ago when 
the central bank was forced to use its banknote printing presses to finance government deficits that for 
various  reasons  had  got  out  of  hand.  This  type  of  behaviour  is  of  course  incompatible  with  price 
stability. It is therefore important for the credibility of monetary policy that there are rules for how state 
borrowing  should  be  handled  and  that  monetary  financing  is  forbidden.  According  to  the  law,  the 
Riksbank shall not "…extend credit to or purchase debt instruments directly from the state, another 
public body or an institution of the European Union.”1 In Sweden it is another authority, the Swedish 
National Debt Office, that finances the national debt and grants state guarantees and loans. 
Another  reason  why  the  political  system  has  delegated  monetary  policy  to  an  organisation  with 
expertise in this field, is that it in many ways concerns technically complicated operations. This has 
also been done in the case of many other authorities, which are responsible for technical issues that 
are important to society. And this is in itself natural. Most of us probably think, for example, that the 
decisions regarding the length of the runway at an airport should be taken by experts at the Swedish 
Civil  Aviation  Authority  and  that  the  approval  of  new  drugs  should  be  managed  by  the  Medical 
Products Agency, rather than by political voting. 
But as I mentioned earlier, the delegation of an important social issue such as monetary policy also 
requires evaluation and accountability – necessary conditions for public support and legitimacy. This, 
and the need for openness in this context, is something I will now discuss in a little more detail. 
The need for openness and clarity 
Independence makes demands of evaluation and accountability 
Some of the demands made of us on the basis of our role as authority are fairly self-evident. We must, 
for instance, to the best of our ability try to meet the price stability target we have been allocated. In 
addition, we must also be able to explain to the general public in a suitable manner the motives behind 
our decisions. The Riksbank’s independence and the requirement for legitimacy also mean that it must 
be possible, not least from the point of view of democracy, to evaluate our work – how we have done – 
and to hold us accountable. How does this work? 
In formal terms, the General Council may only severe a member of the Executive Board from his or 
her appointment if “…he no longer meets the requirements which are made on him to be able to carry 
out  his  duties  or  if  he  has  been  guilty  of  serious  misconduct.”2  The  legislation  strengthens  the 
Riksbank’s independence and credibility for monetary policy. For example, it should not be possible for 
those in power to be able to groundlessly dismiss a member of the Executive Board for the purpose of 
appointing their “own” decision-makers. 
As the question of accountability is stated in law, it is not actually the Riksbank’s task to take a stand 
on how this should be achieved. However, what we can do – and also strive for – is to create the best 
possible conditions for accountability. We do this by being as open and clear as we can. This makes it 
easier for outsiders to critically examine how monetary policy is conducted and how well we live up to 
our principles. 
                                                      
1   Sveriges Riksbank Act (1983:1385), Chapter 8, Article 1. 
2   The Instrument of Government, Chapter 9, Article 13. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2007
is  something 
There are also certain formal requirements for providing information to our principal. Our tasks include, 
for instance, presenting a written report on monetary policy to the Riksdag Committee on Finance at 
least  twice  a  year.  In  connection  with  this,  the  Committee  also  holds  a  hearing  with  the  Riksbank 
Governor.  
I would like to add that it should also be possible to examine the areas of our work that are not directly 
concerned  with  monetary  policy.  Openness 
that  permeates  Swedish  public 
administration and is one of the keystones of our principle of free public access to official documents. 
It means that the authorities’ activities should as far as possible be carried out in an open form. This 
also applies to the Riksbank, of course.  
But  there  are  other  types  of  more  "informal”  accountability  that  are  facilitated  by  our  openness, 
credibility and independent position. The information from the Riksbank also makes easier the often 
fairly lively debate on monetary policy conducted in the media. Through our independent position and 
our openness, we create very good conditions for a debate without any great risk that our credibility 
will be chipped away. The possibilities for accountability even in this more informal way are thus fairly 
large. 
The Riksbank’s responsibility as an authority also makes other demands on our actions. This applies, 
for instance, to the forms for how we make our interest rate decisions and how we communicate our 
monetary policy intentions – what is usually called “signalling” in central bank language. Our interest 
rate decisions must be taken in what I would like to call a "correct procedure” and it is important that 
our  principal  –  ultimately  the  general  public  –  has  insight  into  the  decision-making  process.  This  is 
why,  for  instance,  the  minutes  taken  at  the  monetary  policy  meetings  are  normally  published  two 
weeks after the meetings. In addition, the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the General Council have 
the  right,  according  to  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act,  to  attend  the  meetings  of  the  Executive  Board, 
which  they  normally  make  use  of.3  The  purpose  of  this  is  in  principle  that  they  are  monitoring  that 
things are done correctly, on behalf of the Riksdag and the general public. We decided only a couple 
of weeks ago to make some changes in these areas. I shall return to this shortly. But let me first state 
another aspect as to why openness and clarity are so important to us.  
Target fulfilment – openness and clarity contribute to efficiency 
There are not merely democratic reasons as to why central banks have become more open and clear. 
Many  central  banks  have  seen  greater  transparency  as  a  means  of  more  easily  attaining  their 
objectives and of making monetary policy more efficient. Openness and clarity can even here enable 
us to better meet the requirements made by our principal. 
Firstly,  openness  and  clarity  regarding  monetary  policy  make  it  easier  for  economic  agents  to  be 
convinced that the interest rate decisions made are really intended to attain low and stable inflation. 
This contributes to greater credibility and to anchoring expectations around the target. And this was an 
important  reason  why  the  Riksbank  began  to  publish  its  forecasts  and  other  material  on  which 
decisions  were  based  early  on  in  the  new  inflation-targeting  regime.  Building  up  confidence  in  the 
price stability target as quickly as we actually did would probably have been very difficult if we had not 
been as open as we were with regard to our work and our decisions. 
Secondly, openness and clarity are nowadays an important part of monetary policy in itself. According 
to economic theory, there is a correlation between interest rates with different times to maturity. And 
expectations of short-term interest rates, which the central bank governs, are important to the long-
term  interest  rates.  By  influencing  expectations  of  short-term  interest  rates,  a  central  bank  can 
therefore  also  indirectly  affect  interest  rates  with  longer  maturities.  Greater  influence  over  interest-
setting for all maturities – the yield curve – means that the impact of monetary policy is more effective. 
This is often called conducting monetary policy by “management-of-expectations”. And the best way to 
do this is to provide good information.  
A third reason for working to achieve greater openness and clarity “outwards” is that it can help us to 
work  more  efficiently  within  the  Riksbank’s  walls.  And  this  is  an  argument  I  do  not  think  should  be 
underestimated. Openness quite simply increases the incentives for us to do a good job as it makes it 
easier for others to evaluate how well monetary policy functions. 
                                                      
3   Sveriges Riksbank Act (1983:1385), Chapter 3, Article 3. 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 5
Changes for more efficient communication  
Ever since the inflation target was introduced, openness and clarity have been guiding principles for 
us. We have gradually implemented changes to become more transparent and more efficient in our 
communication. In February we presented for the first time our own forecast of the development of the 
policy rate over the coming years, something that our colleagues in Norway and New Zealand have 
also done. And as I mentioned earlier – a central bank can hardly be much more open and clear with 
regard  to  its  monetary  policy  intentions.  This  increases  the  opportunities  for  evaluation  and 
accountability. It has also become easier for us to explain our decisions and forecasts and to outline 
alternative scenarios for the interest rate. We are better able to live up to the requirements made in our 
interaction with the general public and the financial markets.  
There are also other examples of measures taken to increase our openness. Here I am thinking about 
the publication of minutes from the monetary policy meetings, our monetary policy reports, the many 
speeches  held  by  Executive  Board  members  every  year  and  the  hearings  of  the  Governor  by  the 
Riksdag Committee on Finance.  
Clarity, not just openness – quality, not just quantity 
But efficient communication is not merely about quantity, it also concerns quality. Publishing a lot of 
information  and  doing  so  very  often  does  not  necessarily  make  the  message  clearer  and  the 
communication more efficient. It is not enough to merely be open. One might say that it is a question 
of  giving  the  right  information  at  the  right  time  and  about  expressing  oneself  clearly.  This  is  an 
important aspect that ties in with a survey of central banks recently made by JP Morgan. There the 
Riksbank was ranked as the most open central bank. But the main message of the study was that a 
central bank, once it had passed a particular degree of openness, perhaps did not become much more 
predictable by providing even more information. And I believe there is some truth in this. At least if the 
central bank is already very open, the quality of the communication may be more important than the 
quantity. And we are consciously working all the time to become even better with regard to clarity and 
efficiency in our communication. As recently as a couple of weeks ago, we Executive Board members 
decided to take a few further steps in this direction.  
To begin with, the public minutes of the monetary policy meetings will now state which of the Board 
members has said what in the general discussion. This means that we have both a correct decision-
making procedure and everyone will be able to follow the reasoning of the individual Executive Board 
members with regard to each interest rate decision. Stating the names in the minutes will make us 
even more open and clear. It will provide better opportunities for evaluation and accountability. 
The second change is that we will now hold press conferences in connection with all of the monetary 
policy meetings, and not, as before, only when we have adjusted the interest rate. The motives for 
keeping the interest rate unchanged are just as important as the motives for adjusting it. Together with 
publishing our own interest rate forecasts, press conferences after each monetary policy meeting will 
provide better and more regular information on the considerations we make. 
Finally,  we  Executive  Board  members  will  normally  avoid  implying  prior  to  a  meeting  what  interest 
decision might be made there, what is known as signalling. And by this I mean signalling above the 
interest rate forecast, press releases and minutes of meetings that have earlier been published. The 
actual need for signalling has declined, not least with the publication of our own interest rate path. Our 
assessment  is  that  it  is  enough  to  communicate  our intentions clearly  in  connection  with  the  seven 
monetary  policy  meetings  held  every  year.  Moreover,  we  publish  our  own  interest  rate  forecasts  in 
connection with three of these meetings, when a Monetary Policy Report is published. On the other 
four occasions we will report a qualitative assessment of how the most recently published interest rate 
forecast relates to the new information received.  
I would like to point out that the individual members of the Executive Board will continue to express 
their own opinions in public. But this will above all be a question of afterwards clarifying and explaining 
personal deliberations made in connection with the monetary policy meetings. Differences of opinion 
within the Executive Board will also be clear from the minutes, possibly even more so than before. 
These changes will in my opinion help us to better live up to the requirements for making decisions in 
the correct manner as required of us as a public authority. The purpose is also to attain more efficient 
communication with the financial markets and the general public. 
6 
 BIS Review 62/2007
Conclusion 
When  the  inflation  target  was  introduced,  after the Riksbank  had  been  forced  to  abandon  the  fixed 
exchange rate at the beginning of the 1990s, under great drama, many people probably doubted that 
the policy would succeed. But confidence in the Riksbank’s ability to maintain low and stable inflation 
in the long-term gradually increased.  
And  there  are  several  factors  that  have  been  decisive  so  that  we  could  achieve  the  credibility  of 
monetary policy that we currently enjoy. The change of regime implemented after the severe economic 
crisis  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  –  with  an  explicit  inflation  target  for  monetary  policy  and  clear 
regulations for fiscal policy – has given economic policy as a whole a more long-term character and 
greater stability. Closely linked to this is our independent position as written into the law in 1999 and 
the shaping of our role as public authority. And I am fairly certain that this is to a great extent due to 
the  fact  that  we  have  purposefully  worked  to  attain  greater  openness  and  clarity.  This  provides 
prerequisites  for  evaluation,  accountability  and  thus  creates  legitimacy.  All  of  these  factors  have 
contributed to winning confidence in our monetary policy. 
But the process does not stop here. It is not possible to "rest on one’s laurels” when one works with 
monetary policy. No, we must keep on adapting to new requirements; we must develop and refine our 
methods. One expression of this is that we have recently made several changes to become clearer 
and more efficient in our communication. The fact that we always have these ambitions is something 
that the general public and our principal, the Riksdag, as well as agents in the financial markets can 
demand of us. 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 7
