Torben Nielsen: Financial stability, the Danish perspective 
Speech by Mr Torben Nielsen, Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank, arranged by the Bank of Finland, 
Ivalo, 23 March 2007. 
Thank you for inviting me to talk about financial stability from a Danish perspective. 
 Speech by 
Governor Torbenielsen 
I  will  start  out  giving  an  outline  of  the  Danish  financial  system  and  the  changing  Nordic  banking 
landscape. 
I will then talk about the role of Danmarks Nationalbank in safeguarding financial stability. 
Looking ahead, one of our priority areas is stress testing of the Danish financial system. Our ambition 
is to learn more about how the banks affect each other and the economy in stress situations. 
Finally,  I  will touch  upon  a  topical  issue,  namely  lending  to  households,  household  debt  and  house 
prices. 
The Danish financial system and the changing Nordic banking landscape 
The  Danish  banking  sector  is  very  heterogeneous  and  is  dominated  by  two  large  banking  groups, 
Danske Bank and Nordea, which covers more than 45 percent of the Danish banking market. There 
are a small number of medium-sized institutions, Jyske Bank, Sydbank, Nykredit Bank and FIH, with a 
total market share of almost 20 percent. And we have more than 150 small banks sharing the residual 
market share of 35 percent. 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 1
 Compared  to  the  other  Nordic  countries,  the  concentration  ratio  in  Denmark  –  measured  by  the 
concentration ratio CR5 – does not stand out. 
However, the Nordic banking markets are amongst the most consolidated in Europe – similar to other 
smaller European economies. In larger countries like Germany and UK we find concentration ratios 
around 20 and 35 percent, respectively. 
The  bulk  of  banking  consolidation  in  the  Nordic  countries  took  place  just  before  –  in  the  case  of 
Denmark – and shortly after the banking crises in Finland, Norway and Sweden in the early 1990s. We 
experienced a second wave around the turn of the century with the formation of Nordea as the most 
spectacular  case.  And  the  most  recent  event  was  Danske  Banks  purchase  of  Sampo  Bank  last 
autumn. 
 
 
There is a significant presence of foreign banks in Denmark dominated by Nordea. Foreign banks and 
subsidiaries  hold  around  30  percent  of  total  assets.  Expansion  of  foreign  banks  in  Denmark  has 
typically  not  stemmed  from  organic  growth  via  new  branches  or  subsidiaries,  but  has  instead  been 
accomplished via mergers and acquisitions. 
 2 
 BIS Review 31/2007
The  presence  of  foreign  banks  in  Denmark  is  comparable  to  Norway  and  Sweden.  The  Finnish 
situation is exceptional, since Nordea Bank Finland is counted as a Swedish subsidiary and Sampo 
Bank as a Danish subsidiary. 
With Danske Banks acquisition of Sampo Bank, the two biggest players in the Nordic-Baltic banking 
markets  are  Danske  Bank  and  Nordea.  Danske  Bank  is  the  largest  in  terms  of  lending  and  total 
assets, while Nordea is greater as regards equity and market value. 
The role of Danmarks Nationalbank in safeguarding financial stability 
Danmarks Nationalbank is monitoring and assessing financial stability in Denmark. 
The Danmarks Nationalbank Act from 1936 states that Danmarks Nationalbank shall ”maintain a safe 
and secure currency system in this country, and […] facilitate and regulate the traffic in money and the 
extension of credit”. 
The approach in Danmarks Nationalbank is to consider the general risks to the financial system rather 
than  the  risks  to  the  individual  financial  institutions.  The  latter  is  the  task  of  the  Danish  Financial 
Supervisory Authority. 
 
 At  Danmarks  Nationalbank  we  have  defined  financial  stability  to  be  a  state  that  exits:  "When  the 
financial system is robust enough for any problems experienced within the sector not to spread and 
prevent the financial markets from functioning as providers of capital and financial services." 
And how do we actually solve our tasks in relation to financial stability? 
Firstly, we seek to analyse the key risks to the financial sector. This includes situations that are very 
unlikely to arise, but which could potentially involve high costs to society. We perform stress tests on 
the financial system in order to calculate how large an adverse impact the existing buffers are able to 
absorb. We have been publishing these analyses in our annual Financial Stability report since 2002. 
Denmark has now, for some years, been enjoying favourable economic conditions, which benefit the 
financial sector, and the Danish banking institutions show record-high earnings. Overall, the financial 
institutions in our latest financial stability report were found to be robust, and there still seems to be no 
black clouds in the horizon that could threaten financial stability in Denmark. 
Another task for Danmarks Nationalbank in relation to financial stability is to ensure that Denmark has 
a  secure  and  effective  financial  infrastructure  that  can  safely  be  used  for  settlement  of  payments, 
securities  trading  and  other  financial  transactions.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  now  has  a  statutory 
obligation to oversee payment and settlement systems in Denmark. 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 3
Part of the IMF's Financial Sector Assessment Program of the Danish financial sector in 2005-06 was 
to assess the core elements of the Danish financial infrastructure in relation to international standards. 
The IMF recommended a few changes. Danmarks Nationalbank will work with those responsible for 
the  systems  to  ensure  that  the  necessary  improvements  are  made.  However,  we  will  not  blindly 
adhere to all recommendations. 
 
  
For  example,  the  IMF  recommends  that  we  establish  a  buffer  pool  to  ensure  the  settlement  of 
securities  transactions  and  retail  payments  even  if  the  largest  participant  is  not  able  to  settle  its 
payment  obligations.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  finds  that  the  best  safeguard  is  to  ensure  that 
participants have easy and flexible access to liquidity, combined with participants' large portfolios of 
securities that can be pledged as collateral for loans from Danmarks Nationalbank. The figure shows 
the  largest  Danish  banking  institutions’  maximum  net  outgoing  payments  as  a  ratio  of  their  liquidity 
reserves  in  2005  where  on  each  day  the  banking  institution  with  the  largest  payment  obligation  is 
excluded from the settlement. The figure shows that Danish banks have plenty of liquidity reserves 
even when the largest bank fails to settle. Consequently, we do not currently see any need for special 
measures to ensure settlement in the Danish systems. 
A  third  area  that  we  are  looking  at  is  situations  where  the  financial  system  is  affected  by  dramatic 
external events. These could be acts of terrorism, widespread epidemics, natural disasters or other 
situations  where  the  financial  system  threatens  to  collapse.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  chairs  a  task 
force with participation of the Financial Supervisory Authority and sector representatives that later this 
spring  will  present  suggestions  on  how  to  ensure  coordination  of  the  financial  institutions'  business 
continuity plans in such situations. 
Finally,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  acts  as  lender  of  last  resort  to  the  Danish  banks.  Danmarks 
Nationalbank  can  extend  loans  to  a  bank  that  urgently  needs  liquidity  and  cannot  procure  it  in  the 
market, even though the bank is solvent. Fortunately, we are rarely called on to do that. 
Should  a  situation  occur  where  it  is  necessary  to  rescue  an  ailing  bank,  Danmarks  Nationalbank's 
position  is  that  a  market-based  solution  should  be  found.  Nothing  definite  can  be  said  beforehand 
about Danmarks Nationalbank's role. It would depend on a concrete assessment of the situation and 
the – direct or indirect – consequences for the Danish banking system and Danish society. 
 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2007
Stress testing 
As  I  mentioned  before,  IMF  visited  Denmark  in  connection  with  its  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Program. The overall conclusion of the FSAP was that Denmark's financial systems are resilient and 
well supervised and that the financial sector shows a high degree of compliance with the international 
standards. 
Part  of  the  FSAP  was  stress  testing  based  on  "bottom-up"  and  "top-down"  approaches.  For  the 
bottom-up" approach, the largest banking institutions in Denmark were asked by the Danish FSA to 
estimate  the  effect  of  certain  macroeconomic  stress  scenarios  against  the  background  of  the 
institutions' own data and models. The results were compared to the "top-down" approach, prepared 
by  the  IMF  and  Danmarks  Nationalbank,  which  focused  on  overall  patterns  in  the  banking  sector's 
losses on loans and guarantees on the basis of model calculations. 
The next slide shows result of the "top-down" analyses performed by Danmarks Nationalbank. 
 
  
Historically,  a  correlation  can  be  observed  between  the  development  in  unemployment,  domestic 
lending  as  a  ratio  of  GDP  and  the  banking  sector's  losses  on  loans  and  guarantees.  Danmarks 
Nationalbank has estimated a simple model which makes use of this correlation in the projection of the 
banking sector's total losses on loans and guarantees in given scenarios. 
The blue line represents the actual, historical losses to the banks, while the yellow line shows modeled 
calculations  of  the  historical  development.  The  broken  lines  show  the  expected  development  in  the 
different stress scenarios. 
3 stress scenarios with increasing severity were used. In the most severe scenario a slowdown in the 
domestic economy is exacerbated by a tightening of the ECB's monetary policy. This scenario implies 
a 30 per cent drop in housing prices in Denmark and a decrease in GDP by 3 per cent over three 
years. 
The result of the stress test is that the banking institutions' losses on loans and guarantees will rise by 
almost 1.5 percentage points over the 3 year period. This is somewhat lower than actual losses in the 
early 1990s where losses and provisions reached 2.5 percent on average. 
 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 5
Looking  ahead  we  have  decided  to  further  develop  our  stress  testing  abilities  at  Danmarks 
Nationalbank. Our ambition is to learn more about how the banks affect each other and the economy 
in stress situations. 
The work on stress testing is still in its infancy. We are trying to define a stress testing architecture and 
in this process we are among other things taking a close look at developments in other central banks. 
SLIDE 9 shows our stress test architecture. 
 
   Lending to households, household debt and house prices 
The economic conditions of homeowners in Denmark are underpined by a strong housing market, and 
housing prices have accelerated in recent years. Lately, price increases have leveled off, c.f. SLIDE 
10. 
 
6 
 BIS Review 31/2007
 The  recent  rising  house  prices  especially  reflect  improvement  in  the  economic  fundamentals.  The 
Danish  economy  is  growing  strongly,  interest  rates  remain  low,  unemployment  is  falling,  and 
disposable  incomes  are  increasing.  At  the  same  time,  the  introduction  of  new  loan  types,  e.g. 
deferred-amortisation, has helped to sustain price increases. The freezing of property taxes has also 
affected prices. 
Lending growth is high in Denmark. SLIDE 11 shows the lending growth of big banks, medium sized 
banks  and  small  banks.  Growth  in  lending  to  households  accounts  for  almost  half  of  total  lending 
growth, and 60 per cent of the household element stems from lending for home-financing purposes. 
On top of that we have seen lending growth of mortgage credit institutions to households of around 10 
percent. 
 
Danish households hold large gross debt compared to households in other countries. SLIDE 12 shows 
the debt as a ratio of GDP. Households in countries such as the Netherlands and the UK also have 
high levels of indebtedness. 
 
 BIS Review 31/2007 
 7
 The debt has increased during the last decade, but the development in the debt of Danish households 
does not differ significantly from other countries. The level of debt is thus high, but the development 
during the last 10 years is not extraordinary in a European context. 
The high gross debt ratio, combined with a shift to an extensive use of adjustable-rate mortgage-credit 
loans instead of fixed rate mortgages, makes the households more vulnerable to rising interest rates. 
We have calculated the households’ additional mortgage interest burden if interest rates rise (SLIDE 
13). On average, mortgage interest expenses will increase by 1.2 percent of the house-hold’s gross 
income  if  interest  rates  rise  by  1  percentage  point,  but  there  are  considerable  variations.  Some 
households will be financially challenged if interest rates increase by a few percentage points. This 
could impose losses on banks and mortgage-credit institutes. Nevertheless, our overall assessment is 
that  the  development  in  homeowners’  exposure  to  rising  interest  rates  does  not  threaten  the 
functioning of the financial system – or financial stability. To put it bluntly, the failure of a number of 
households  to  meet  their  obligations  to  their  credit  institutions  is  not  necessarily  a  financial  stability 
problem. 
 
 8 
  BIS Review 31/2007
The banking institutions have gained market shares from the mortgage-credit institutions by offering 
mortgage loans ("prioritetslån", loans collateralised by real estate). Often the excess liquid proceeds 
for  the  customer  are  placed  in  a  deposit  account  subject  to  the  same  interest  terms  as  the  loan. 
Against  this  background,  a  proportion  of  the  banking  institutions'  lending  growth  is  reflected  in 
increased deposits. 
The increase in lending has been stronger than the increase in deposits from the non-financial sector. 
This  has  eroded  the  traditional  deposit  surplus  in  Denmark,  obliging  the  banks  to  resort  to  other 
sources of funding to make up for the difference, e.g. by issuing bonds and borrowing from other credit 
institutions, c.f. SLIDE 14. 
 
 We are in these weeks in the process of finalising the implementation of covered bonds legislation in 
Denmark according to the Capital Adequacy Directive. 
Previously,  only  mortgage-credit  institutions  have  been  allowed  to  issue  mortgage  credit  bonds  in 
Denmark. 
But  as  a  consequence  of  the  new  legislation,  this  sole  and  exclusive  right  of  mortgage  credit 
institutions will be abolished and banks will be able to fund mortgage loans by issuing covered bonds 
(in Danish "særligt dækkede obligationer) on a level playing field with the mortgage credit institutions. 
The new legislation will introduce a new possibility for banks to fund their deposit deficit and possibly 
thereby benefit financial stability in Denmark. 
Covered  bonds  are  expected  to  benefit  competition  between  the  banking  institutions  and  the 
mortgage-credit institutions. 
Looking ahead, there is no reason to expect a downturn in the housing market in Denmark in view of 
the  currently  very  strong Danish  economy.  In  certain  regions,  downward  price  correction cannot  be 
ruled out, however. For homeowners that purchased when prices peaked, a potential drop in prices 
would be a setback, but is hardly likely to threaten the economy or financial stability in Denmark. 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 9
