Shyamala Gopinath: Special features of financial sector reforms in India 
Inaugural address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
18th Annual National Conference of Forex Association of India, Bangkok, 6 April 2007. 
 Ms. Nitaya Pibulratanagit, Asst. Governor Bank of Thailand, Mr. Appiah Chairman Forex Association 
of India, Mr. Lamba Secretary Forex Association of India, delegates from India and Asia/Middle East, 
ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  inaugurate  the  18th  annual  conference  of  the  Forex 
Association of India which is affiliated to ACI in this historical city of Bangkok. I understand FIMMDA 
had held a similar conference in Bangkok in 2003 which was inaugurated by my senior colleague Dr. 
Rakesh Mohan. India and Thailand share a close association dating back to many centuries, which 
continues even in the present times, both culturally as well as economically. The past few years have 
witnessed  increasing  economic  and  commercial  links  and  the  signing  of  a  number  of  Agreements 
leading to a further intensification of relations.  
The economies of the Asian region are emerging as the new engines of growth in the global economy 
and I am sure in this year’s conference many speakers will focus on the theme of the conference. For 
my address today, I intend to reflect upon the special features of financial sector reforms in India since 
the initiation of the reform process in early nineties covering banking sector and financial markets and 
certain  actions  taken  and  contemplated.  There  have  been  innumerable  evaluations  of  the  financial 
sector reforms undertaken by India, some of which critical of the pace but the results achieved are 
acknowledged by all. It is important to understand and appreciate the circumstances under which the 
entire process was guided through balancing the given systemic imperatives with the need for bringing 
about changes in a non-disruptive manner.  
Financial  sector  reforms  in  India  introduced  as  a  part  of  the  structural  adjustment  and  economic 
reforms programme in the early 1990s have had a profound impact on the functioning of the financial 
institutions,  especially  banks.  The  principal  objective  of  financial  sector  reforms  was  to  improve  the 
allocative  efficiency  of  resources,  ensure  financial  stability  and  maintain  confidence  in  the  financial 
system by enhancing its soundness and efficiency. At the same time, reforms were also undertaken in 
various segments of financial markets, to enable the banking sector to perform its intermediation role 
in an efficient manner. With a view to making the reform measures mutually reinforcing, the reform 
process was carried forward through analysis and recommendations by various Committees/Working 
Groups and extensive consultations with experts and market participants.  
I.  
• 
   Special features of the reforms in the financial sector 
The reforms were not driven by any banking crisis nor were they an outcome of any external 
support package. They were undertaken much before the importance of the financial sector 
to prevent crisis was recognized by international agencies and other countries in early 1990s 
before the Asian financial crisis.  
The  reforms  were  carefully  sequenced  in  terms  of  instruments  and  objectives.  Thus, 
prudential norms and supervisory strengthening were introduced early in the reform cycle, 
followed by interest rate deregulation and gradually lowering of statutory preemptions. The 
more  complex  aspects  of  legal  and  accounting  measures  were  ushered  in  subsequently 
when  the  basic  tenets  of  the  reforms  were  already  in  place.  More  recently,  the  regulatory 
framework has also focused on ensuring good governance through "fit and proper" owners, 
directors  and  senior  managers  of  the  banks.  The  preference  has  been  for  diversified 
ownership.  
While the focus of the first generation of reforms was to create an efficient, productive and 
profitable financial services industry, the second phase of financial sector reforms, beginning 
from the second-half of the 1990s, was aimed at strengthening of the financial system and 
introduction of structural improvements  
The need to prepare the financial system in a more globalised environment and to promote 
financial  stability  in  the  face  of  domestic  and  external  shocks  was  on  top  of  agenda  of 
reforms. With increasing globalisation of the Indian economy, the reform process witnessed 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 1
a significant move towards adoption of international best practices in several crucial areas of 
importance  such  as  prudential  norms,  banking  supervision,  data  dissemination  and 
corporate governance.  
With a view to increasing competition in the banking sector new private sector banks were 
licensed.  A  prerequisite  for  grant  of  the  licence  was  that  these  banks  had  to  be  fully 
automated  from  day  one.  The  results  are  self-evident  as  these  banks  have  become  high-
tech  banks. This has  had  a  "demonstration"  effect on  the  entire  system.  The  Government 
ownership  in  nationalized  and  State  Bank  of  India  was  brought  down  by  allowing  them  to 
raise capital from the equity market up to 49/45 per cent of paid-up capital.  
A unique feature of the reform of public sector banks, which dominated the Indian banking 
sector,  was  the  process  of  financial  restructuring.  Banks  were  recapitalised  by  the 
government  to  meet  prudential  norms  through  recapitalisation  bonds.  The  mechanism  of 
hiving  off  bad  loans  to  a  separate  government  asset  management  company  was  not 
considered appropriate in view of the moral hazard. The overhang of non-performing loans 
had to be managed by the banks themselves.  
The  subsequent  divestment  of  equity  and  offer  to  private  shareholders  was  undertaken 
through  a  public  offer  and  not  by  sale  to  strategic  investors.  Consequently,  all  the  public 
sector  banks,  which  issued  shares  to  private  shareholders,  have  been  listed  on  the 
exchanges and are subject to the same disclosure and market discipline standards as other 
listed entities.  
The cost of recapitalization to GDP has been low relative to experience in other countries. 
On  a  cumulative  basis  it  worked  out  to  about  one  percent  of  the  GDP.  Furthermore,  the 
market value of equity held by Government now far exceeds the recapitalization cost. With a 
view  to  carry  the  reform  process  further,  as  announced  in  the  Budget  last  year  the 
Government decided to convert the recap bonds issued as special securities (basically non-
negotiable)  to  marketable  securities  indistinguishable  from  other  Government  securities  . 
The  process  has  already  started  and  in  2006-07  the  Government  converted  nearly  Rs  80 
billion to SLR securities. The balance special securities will be phased out over a period.  
Banks were also allowed to diversify into various financial services and are now offering a 
whole range of financial products like universal banks.  
Active steps were also taken to improve the institutional arrangements, including the legal 
framework  and  technological  system.  To  tackle  the  issue  of  high  level  of  non-performing 
assets  (NPAs),  Debt  Recovery  Tribunals  were  established  consequent  to  the  passing  of 
Recovery  of  Debts  Due  to  Banks  and  Financial  Institutions  Act,  1993.  To  provide  a 
significant  impetus  to  banks  to  ensure  sustained  recovery,  the  Securitisation  and 
Reconstruction  of  Financial  Assets  and  Enforcement  of  Security  Interest  (SARFAESI)  Act 
was passed in 2002.  
While  transfer  of  NPAs  of  public  sector  banks  to  separate  asset  management  companies 
was not considered, an institutional mechanism to deal with distressed assets of banks and 
financial institutions has been created. Asset Reconstruction Companies have been allowed 
to be set up which are in the private sector and operate as independent commercial entities 
to acquire non-performing assets from any financial entity and restructure and rehabilitate or 
liquidate them within a definite time frame. This has created a market for distressed assets in 
India.  
The  government  securities  money  and  forex  markets  have  significant  public  policy 
implications  for  an  emerging  market  economy.  These  have  developed  during  the  reform 
period with impressive diversification of participants and instruments.  
The smooth functioning of the payment and settlement system is a pre-requisite for financial 
stability.  The  introduction  of  RTGS  and  setting  up  of  the  CCIL  which  acts  as  a  central 
counterparty  for  securities  and  forex  transactions  and  guarantees  both  the  securities  and 
funds legs of the transaction have enhanced the efficiency of the payments mechanism.  
In terms of the processes also, certain interesting features of the reforms are in evidence. 
The first has been its gradualism, wherein reforms were undertaken only after a process of 
close and continuous consultation with all stakeholders. This participative process with wider 
involvement  not  only  encouraged  a  more  informed  evaluation  of  underlying  content  of 
BIS Review 33/2007
          2 
 policies  but  also  enhanced  the  credibility  of  policies  and  generated  expectations  among 
economic agents about the process being enduring in nature.  
There has been a constant rebalancing of reform priorities predicated upon the domestic and global 
business environment, institution of prudential practices, upgradation of the regulatory and supervisory 
framework, institution of appropriate institutional and legal reforms and the state of openness of the 
economy.  
Impact of reforms in the banking sector 
Performance indicators 
(i)  
Various  measures  initiated  over  the  last  decade-and-a  half  have  significantly  strengthened  the 
commercial banking sector in terms of profitability, asset quality and capital position. The soundness 
parameters of the banking system, in particular, have shown sustained improvement. 
The asset quality of the Indian banking system has improved significantly over the past one decade. 
The NPAs of all SCBs, which stood at 15.7 per cent of gross advances and 7.0 per cent of total assets 
in 1995-96, declined to 3.3 per cent of gross advances and 1.9 per cent of total assets in 2005-06 
(Table  1).  Similar  trend  can  also  be seen  in  the  net  NPAs  ratios during  the  same  period,  reflecting 
better recoveries by banks and better allocation of funds. There has been a distinct improvement in 
the recovery climate in recent years facilitated by strong macroeconomic performance and institutional 
measures initiated by the Reserve Bank/Government. It is also significant to note that the asset quality 
of public sector banks has been better than private sector banks – both old and new – in terms of net 
NPL (i.e., net of provisioning).  
 
  The  financial  performance  of  SCBs  had  also  improved  during  the  recent  past  as  reflected  in  their 
profitability. The operating profit to assets ratio of SCBs, which was 1.69 in 1995-96, increased to 2.03 
in 2005-06 (Table 2). Net profit to assets of SCBs remained in the range of 0.47 to 1.13 during the 
period 1995-96 to 2005-06. The impact of greater competition and improved efficiency of the Indian 
banking system could also be seen from the significant reduction in interest spread over the reform 
period. 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 3
 
One  of  the  major  objectives  of  banking  sector  reforms  was  to  enhance  efficiency  and  productivity 
through increased competition. That the competition has intensified could be gauged from the decline 
in  the  share  of  public  sector  banks  in  the  total  income,  expenditure  and  assets  of  the  commercial 
banking system since the mid-1990s, and increase in the share of new private sector banks (Table 3).  
 
  4 
 BIS Review 33/2007
Comparison with other countries 
Several balance sheet and profitability indicators suggest that the Indian banking sector indicators are 
moving towards global benchmarks (Table 4).  
 
 Resolution of NPAs  
(ii) 
The  Narasimham  Committee  I  had  suggested  the  creation  of  an  Asset  Creation  Fund  to  which  the 
public  sector  banks  would  transfer  the  non-performing  assets  with  certain  safeguards.  After 
deliberations it was decided not to adopt this approach. Instead banks were required to deal with all 
the non-performing assets themselves and it is clear from the performance indicators above that this 
strategy has been effective. Fiscal support has not been burdensome and legacy problems such as 
non-performing  loans  have  been  absorbed  by  banks  and  not  transferred  to  fisc.  Although 
subsequently  the  Government  passed  a  legislation  to  create  a  new  category  of  companies  called 
Asset reconstruction companies, it must be noted that these entities are private commercial entities 
and  work  on  a  commercial  basis  to  deal  with  distressed  assets.  These  institutions  as  well  as 
guidelines  that  permit  banks  to  purchase  and  sell  NPAs  and  the  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring 
mechanism  have  enabled  banks  to  deal  with  the  "flow"  and  not  merely  the  stock  of  NPAs.  These 
measures enable the banks to deal with the NPAs on an ongoing basis.  
Ownership structure 
(iii)  
Since public sector banks could divest only by accessing the stock markets except for a few banks all 
the others are now listed on the stock exchanges. The Government holding in these banks range from 
51 percent (OBC, Dena) to 76 percent (BOM). Of the privately held equity, significant portion (15 to 20 
percent) was held by foreign investors in quite a few public sector banks as on 30 September 2006. All 
new private banks are listed and there is considerable foreign investment (both FDI and FII) in these 
banks. In five of the existing eight banks foreign shareholding had crossed 50 percent. Even among 
the old private banks all significant banks are listed. 
Consolidation 
(iv)  
The process of consolidation has also been taking place in India. Since 1990, 19 mergers have taken 
place  in  the  commercial  banking  sector.  Bank  mergers  have  taken  place  in  India  mostly  with  the 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 5
objective to synergise the strength of the merging institutions. Broad guidelines have been laid down 
by RBI for mergers for private sector banks from a regulatory and prudential perspective and these 
guidelines apply to public sector banks mutatis mutandis and to the extent relevant.  
Extension of coverage of reform process 
(v)  
The  reform  process  initially  focused  on  commercial  banks.  However,  after  significant  progress  was 
made  to  transform  commercial  banks  into  sound  institutions,  the  reform  process  was  extended  to 
encompass  other  institutions  such  as  regional  rural  banks  (RRBs),  cooperative  banks,  All-India 
financial institutions (AIFIs) and non-banking financial companies (NBFCs). The regional rural banks, 
urban co-operative banks and rural co-operative credit institutions can play a major role in financial 
inclusion and deepening of the financial sector, particularly in the rural areas. The co-operative credit 
institutions, both urban and rural, are now placed on the path of revival through a consultative method 
of policy formulation, ensuring a workable regulatory arrangement to overcome the incentive problems 
and financial support wherever necessary. The strategy has started showing results which is crucial 
for sustaining their role in financial intermediation among the rural and urban poor and small savers.  
Recent initiatives  
Supervision of financial conglomerates 
(i)  
Financial conglomerates (FC) pose certain risks to the financial system which could be detrimental to 
the overall financial stability. These risks relate to the moral hazard associated with the “Too-Big-To-
Fail” position of many financial conglomerates, the fact that financial difficulties in one subsidiary in a 
segment could have contagion or reputation effects on another subsidiary in a different segment on 
account  of  the  “holding  out”  phenomenon,  especially  when  using  the  same  brand  name,  and  the 
concerns  about  regulatory  arbitrage,  non-arm’s  length  dealings,  etc.  arising  out  of  Intra-group 
Transactions & Exposures (ITEs) – both financial and non-financial. The financial sector in India has 
undergone significant liberalisation in all the four segments – banking, non-banking finance, securities 
and  insurance  and  each  of  these  sectors  has  grown  significantly  accompanied  by  a  process  of 
restructuring among the market intermediaries. The financial landscape is increasingly witnessing (i) 
entry of some of the bigger banks into other financial segments like merchant banking, insurance, etc. 
which has made them financial “conglomerates”; (ii) emergence of several new players with diversified 
presence  across  major  segments  and  (iii)  possibility  of  some  of  the  non-banking  institutions  in  the 
financial sector acquiring large enough proportions to have a systemic impact. In view of the above, a 
Working Group had gone into all the issues and had laid down criteria for a group being identified as a 
financial  conglomerate.  Accordingly  a  system  has  been  put  in  place  for  all  the  identified  financial 
conglomerates whereby a designated entity within the conglomerate reports to its Lead Regulator. In 
order to monitor the intra group transactions and exposures, information from the designated entities 
of each FC is obtained by the principal regulators and a system for exchange of information among the 
regulators  has  been  put  in  place.  In  addition,  periodical  discussions  are  held  with  the  CEO  of  the 
designated  entity  in  the  FC  by  the  Lead  Regulator,  along  with  other  regulators,  on  the  basis  of 
available information for review and addressing concerns, if any. It is also necessary to back-test the 
efficacy  of  the  reporting  format  in  capturing  the  meaningful  intra-group  transactions/exposures  and 
other  “material”  information  and  also  enhance  the  regulatory  understanding  of  the  affairs  of  the 
conglomerates. Further work is being undertaken in this direction in consultation with other regulators. 
The inter-regulatory forum has also observed a need for the principal regulator to engage in dialogue 
with the principal auditors of the group. This could provide useful information on the impact of changes 
in the accounting standards and practices on the core earnings of the conglomerates and the likely 
trend  in  the  future.  The  modalities  for  this  purpose  are  being  worked  out  in  consultation  with  other 
regulators.  
New capital instruments  
(ii)  
In Jan 2006, RBI allowed Indian banks to augment their capital funds by issue of innovative perpetual 
debt instruments eligible for inclusion as Tier I capital; debt capital instruments eligible for inclusion as 
Upper Tier II capital; perpetual non-cumulative preference shares eligible for inclusion as Tier I capital 
and  redeemable  cumulative  preference  shares  eligible  for  inclusion  as  Tier  II  capital.  A  number  of 
banks have issued these instruments both in India and overseas to shore up capital 
6 
 BIS Review 33/2007
Procyclical prudential provisioning 
(iii)  
Traditionally, banks’ loans and advances portfolio is pro-cyclical and tends to grow faster during an 
expansionary phase and grows slowly during a recessionary phase. During times of expansion and 
accelerated  credit  growth,  there  is  a  tendency  to  underestimate  the  level  of  inherent  risk  and  the 
converse  holds  good  during  times  of  recession.  This  tendency  is  not  effectively  addressed  by  the 
above mentioned prudential specific provisioning requirements since they capture risk ex post but not 
ex  ante.  The  various  options  available  for  reducing  the  element  of  pro-cyclicality  include,  among 
others, adoption of objective methodologies for dynamic provisioning requirements, as is being done 
by a few countries, by estimating the requirements over a business cycle rather than a year on the 
basis  of  the  riskiness  of  the  assets,  establishment  of  a  linkage  between  the  prudential  capital 
requirements  and  through-the-cycle  ratings  instead  of  point-in-time  ratings  and  establishment  of  a 
flexible  loan-to-value  (LTV)  ratio  requirements  where  the  LTV  ratio  would  be  directly  related  to  the 
movement of asset values. 
The above aspect was first taken on board in the Monetary Policy announcement in October 2005 and 
since then, various measures have been announced. 
In  order  to  ensure  that  asset  quality  is  maintained  in  the  light  of  high  credit  growth,  the  general 
provisioning  requirement  on  standard  advances  in  certain  specific  sensitive  sectors  have  been 
increased as also the risk weights. For instance the risk weight on personal loans (including credit card 
receivables) is 125% and the general provision is 2 percent. Similarly the general provisions for real 
estate loans is 2 percent and the risk weight 150 percent. The objective is to build cushions or buffers 
in upswings without taking a view on the future evolution of asset quality in these asset classes.  
Credit information companies 
(iv) 
An efficient credit information system enhances the quality of credit decisions and improves the asset 
quality of banks, apart from facilitating faster credit delivery. Accordingly, a scheme for disclosure of 
information regarding defaulting borrowers of banks and financial institutions was introduced. In order 
to facilitate sharing of information related to credit matters, a Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited 
(CIBIL) was set up in 2000. With a view to strengthening the legal mechanism and facilitating credit 
information bureaus to collect, process and share credit information on borrowers of banks and FIs, 
the Credit Information Act was passed in May 2005. The rules and regulations have also been notified. 
The RBI is now framing detailed guidelines on the basis of which it would consider applications from 
Credit Information companies. This will facilitate setting up of a few more credit information companies 
in India.  
Financial inclusion 
(v) 
Recognising the concerns with regard to the banking practices that tend to exclude rather than attract 
vast sections of population, the Reserve Bank has urged banks to review their existing practices with a 
view  to  aligning  them  with  the  objective  of  financial  inclusion.  All  banks  were  advised  in  November 
2005  to  make  available  a  basic  banking  “no-frills”  account  either  with  “nil”  or  very  low  minimum 
balances as well as charges that would make such accounts accessible to vast sections of population. 
With  a  view  to  encourage  financial  inclusion  the  KYC  procedure  for  opening  small  accounts  were 
simplified. Banks are allowed to use the services of NGOs/ SHGs, MFIs and CSOs as intermediaries 
in providing financial and banking services through the use of business facilitator and correspondents. 
Future work program 
Draft guidelines on accounting aspects 
(i) 
Recognising  the  importance  of  a  robust  accounting  framework  in  the  banking  sector,  the  Reserve 
Bank had undertaken an exercise a few years back (in 2001) to assess the gaps in compliance by 
banks with the accounting standards issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. With 
the issue of relevant guidelines thereafter, the audited financial statements of banks are found to be in 
compliance with the relevant accounting standards. With a view to take things further in this direction, 
the  Reserve  Bank  has  taken  the  initiative  to  introduce  the  various  elements  of  IAS  39  into  the 
guidelines for accounting of the investment portfolio and the derivative portfolios of banks. We do not 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 7
have a corresponding accounting standard to IAS 39 in India as yet. The ICAI is presently engaged in 
the  process  of  issue  of  this  standard  and  that  process  is  likely  to  take  some more  time,  hence  the 
initiative from the Reserve Bank of India. The Reserve Bank has issued draft guidelines on the above 
two aspects, which are in the process of finalisation on the basis of the feedback received from banks 
and other market players. 
Derivatives – comprehensive guidelines 
(ii)  
Derivatives play a critical role in shaping the overall risk profile of banks. Over the years, banks have 
been increasingly using derivatives for managing risks and have also been offering these products to 
corporates. The Reserve Bank has issued several guidelines to banks from time to time on various 
derivative instruments. In view of the growing complexity, diversity and volume of derivatives used by 
banks, an Internal Group has been constituted by the Reserve Bank to review the existing guidelines 
on derivatives and formulate comprehensive guidelines on derivatives for banks. These guidelines are 
intended to cover broad generic principles for undertaking derivative transactions, management of risk 
and  sound  corporate  governance  requirements.  The  draft  guidelines  were  placed  on  the  Reserve 
Bank's website in December, 2006. The feedback received on the guidelines is being examined by the 
Internal Group and the draft guidelines are in the process of finalisation. 
Draft guidelines on stress testing 
(iii)  
Risk  management  practices  in  banks  in  India  have  undergone  considerable  improvement  over  the 
past few years with the introduction of the financial sector liberalization process in the mid nineties. 
The process gained momentum with the issue of regulatory guidelines and guidance notes on asset 
liability management and management of credit risk, market risk and operational risk by the Reserve 
Bank  since  1999.  Further,  the  announcement  of  implementation  of  the  revised  capital  adequacy 
framework in India with effect from March 31, 2007 has brought the risk management capabilities of 
banks into greater focus. 
Globally,  banks  are  increasingly  relying  on  statistical  models  to  measure  and  manage  the  financial 
risks  to  which  they  are  exposed.  These  models  are  gaining  credibility  because  they  provide  a 
framework  for  identifying,  analyzing,  measuring,  communicating  and  managing  these  risks.  Since 
models  cannot  incorporate  all  possible  risk  outcomes  and  generally  are  not  capable  of  capturing 
“event risks” and sudden / dramatic changes, banks need to supplement models with “stress tests”. 
Internationally, stress testing has become an integral part of banks’ risk management systems and is 
used  to  evaluate  the  potential  vulnerability  to  certain  unlikely  but  plausible  events  or  movements  in 
financial variables. There are broadly two categories of stress tests used in banks viz. sensitivity tests 
and scenario tests. These may be used either separately or in conjunction with each other.  
Banks  in  India  are  beginning  to  use  statistical  models  to  measure  and  manage  risks.  Further,  the 
supervisory  review  process  under  Pillar  2  of  Basel  II  framework  is  intended not  only  to  ensure  that 
banks have adequate capital to support all the risks in their business, but also to encourage banks to 
develop and use better risk management techniques in monitoring and managing their risks. Banks 
must demonstrate, under the internal capital adequacy assessment process prescribed by Pillar 2, that 
they have enough capital to not only meet the minimum capital requirements but also to withstand a 
range of severe but plausible shocks. In the above background, the need for banks in India to adopt 
“stress tests” as a risk management tool is being emphasised by RBI.  
Basel II 
(iv)  
The  Reserve  Bank  and  the  commercial  banks  have  been  preparing  to  implement  Basel  II.  The 
Reserve Bank had earlier intended in June 2005 that by March 31, 2007 all commercial banks would 
comply with Basel II. However, taking into account the state of preparedness of the banking system, it 
was decided in October 2006 to provide banks some more time to put in place appropriate systems so 
as to ensure full compliance with Basel II. According to the new schedule, foreign banks operating in 
India and Indian banks having presence outside India are to migrate to the standardised approach for 
credit risk and the basic indicator approach for operational risk under Basel II with effect from March 
31,  2008.  All  other  scheduled  commercial  banks  are  encouraged  to  migrate  to  these  approaches 
under Basel II in alignment with them but in any case not later than March 31, 2009.  
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) had undertaken the Fifth Quantitative Impact 
Study  (QIS-5)  to  assess  the  impact  of  adoption  of  the  revised  Framework.  Eleven  Indian  banks, 
8 
 BIS Review 33/2007
accounting for about 50 per cent of market share (by assets), participated in the QIS-5 exercise. An 
empirical analysis indicates that the combined capital adequacy ratio of these banks is expected to 
come  down  by  about  100  basis  points  when  these  banks  apply  Basel  II  norms  for  standardised 
approach for credit risk and basic indicator approach for operational risk. Although none of the banks 
which participated in the exercise would be breaching the minimum capital adequacy ratio under the 
new framework, the net impact reflects a wide range. The draft guidelines on Basel II implementation 
has  been  placed  in  public  domain  but  meanwhile  RBI  has  asked  the  banks  to  undertake  parallel 
calculation of the CAR based on the Standardised Approach on a quarterly basis from December 2006 
and  report  it  to  RBI.  These  would  enable  RBI  to  assess  the  impact  of  the  revised  guidelines  and 
enable banks to also assess /calibrate the capital requirements.  
Mortgage guarantee companies 
(v)  
As  announced  in  the  Budget  RBI  has  now  placed  in  public  domain  draft  guidelines  on  mortgage 
guarantee companies. These will be a new category under the NBFC sector and the activities will be 
in the nature of mortgage guarantees and not mortgage insurance. Mortgage insurance falls within the 
jurisdiction of the Insurance regulator. 
FSAP – self assessment 
(vi)  
A  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment  to  undertake  a  self-assessment  of  financial  sector 
stability  and development has  been constituted.  For  the  purpose  of  carrying out  the  task under  the 
terms  of  reference,  the  Committee  has  decided  to  set  up  four  Advisory  Panels  which  would  be 
assisting the Committee in its assessment exercise and would be drawn from non-Official experts in 
relevant  areas  related  to  financial  stability  assessment  and  stress  testing,  transparency  standards, 
financial  regulation  and  supervision,  and  institutions  and  market  structure  respectively.  To  provide 
necessary inputs to the Advisory Panels, it has been decided to set up Technical Groups comprising 
mainly of Officials directly working in respective areas of regulatory institutions.  
Finally a few comments on reforms in financial markets 
Well developed financial markets enable the central bank to effectively conduct monetary policy and 
help  in  improving  the  allocative  efficiency  of  resources.  Interest  rates  on  benchmark  Government 
securities facilitate appropriate pricing of other financial assets. It has, therefore, been the endeavour 
of  the  Reserve  Bank  to  promote  development  of  all  the  segments  of  financial  market  under  its 
regulatory  provision.  This  is  sought  to  be  achieved  by  easing  restrictions  on  transactions,  reducing 
transaction costs, increasing the width and depth of the market and introducing trading and settlement 
systems in line with international best practices.  
In  the  money  market,  there  has  been  a  significant  transformation  after  the  introduction  of  financial 
sector reforms in terms of instruments, participants and technological infrastructure and transparency. 
Various reform measures have resulted in a relatively deep liquid and vibrant money market. Further 
development of the market depends among others on better ALM practices by banks.  
In  the  Government  securities  market,  several  measures  have  been  initiated  since  1990s  including 
guaranteed settlement in respect of all government securities trade through the RBI and I do not want 
to go into each of them. However from the fiscal year 2006-07, as per the provisions under the Fiscal 
Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  (FRBM)  Act  2003,  the  Reserve  Bank's  participation  in  the 
primary market for Central Government securities stands withdrawn. This has necessitated significant 
changes  in  the  setting  and  operating  framework  of  monetary,  debt  management  and  regulatory 
policies of the Reserve Bank.  
One of the initiatives taken in this regard is broad basing of Primary Dealership system: Till last year, 
primary dealer activity was confined to Primary Dealer institutions. In order to broad base the activity, 
the  structure  of  Primary  Dealership  business  was  expanded  to  include  all  Scheduled  Commercial 
Banks  (excluding RRBs), which  fulfill  certain  minimum  eligibility  criteria.  An option  was  given  to  the 
existing  Primary  Dealer  entities  to  fold  back  the  PD  business  into  their  parent  bank  or  group 
companies. Consequently, the configuration of the PD system changed from 17 standalone entities at 
the  beginning  of  the  year  to  8  standalone  entities  and  10  banks  undertaking  PD  business 
departmentally by the end of year 2006-07.  
BIS Review 33/2007 
 9
Reserve  Bank  has  been  undertaking  passive  consolidation  of  securities  by  reissuing  the  existing 
securities to build up stock at key maturities. During 2006-07, the reissues accounted for 91% of the 
total issuances made. Since passive consolidation takes longer time to make an impact on enhancing 
the  liquidity,  Active  consolidation  was  proposed  by  way  of  buying  back  illiquid  bonds  and  reissuing 
liquid bonds. The Scheme has been finalized in consultation with the Government and the budgetary 
provision of Rs. 25 billion has also been made in this regard. Further action is being taken by RBI.  
To  create  and  enhance  market  liquidity  even  during  the  phases  of  falling  prices,  select  participants 
have been permitted to short sell securities in G-sec markets. The short sales were initially permitted 
(February  28,  2006)  on  an  intra-day  basis  where  the  participant  can  short  during  the  day  but  was 
required to cover it by the end of the day. After assessing the market feedback and after consultations 
with  the  participants,  the  short  sales  have  been  extended  to  five  day  period  there  by  permitting 
participants  to  carry  forward  their  short  positions  beyond  the  settlement  cycles.  To  enable  delivery 
against  the  short positions,  the sale  of repoed  stock  has also  been  permitted.  With  the participants 
gradually putting in place internal systems to undertake short sales with the approval of the respective 
Board, it is expected that the liquidity in markets would increase.  
The primary issuance framework required revamping in the light of RBI’s withdrawal from the primary 
issuances  of  Central  Government  effective  April  01,  2006.  Along  with  the  restructuring  of  the 
underwriting commitments of PDs to ensure 100% underwriting and permitting PDs to diversify their 
businesses, “WI” trading has been introduced to enable better distribution of auctioned stock and also 
more  efficient  price  discovery.  “WI”  trading  was  initially  permitted  in  reissued  securities  (May  2006) 
and the same has subsequently been extended to newly issued securities (Nov 2006) which would be 
operationalised after the necessary software modifications which is at an advanced stage. 
The enactment of the Government Securities Act 2006 has enabled introduction of "STRIPS" in India. 
The  RBI  is  taking  steps  for  developing  a  market  in  STRIPS.  The  implementation  of  STRIPS  would 
facilitate creation of a series of benchmark rates and enable evolution of a market structure for selling 
the  securities  in  retail.  Apart  from  expanding  the  investor  base,  introduction  of  STRIPS  would  also 
enable  developing  a  proper  yield  curve.  Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Working  Group  on 
STRIPS  submitted  in  July  2004,  an  implementation  team  is  working  on  the  fine  print  for  the 
introduction  of  STRIPS  and  is  also  looking  at  the  international  experience  in  this  regard  which  has 
been varied. The RBI has consulted market participants on the operational issues such as the model, 
securities  eligible  for  stripping,  whether  exclusivity  should  be  granted  to  PDs  etc.  In  regard  to 
securities  to  be  made  eligible  for  stripping  two  pairs  of  coupon  dates  i.e.,  02  January/02  July  &  16 
April/16 October have been identified with all securities having their coupon dates as any of the above 
being eligible for stripping. In future, to improve liquidity of STRIPS, securities both re-issues as well 
as fresh issues may have to be aligned with these dates. Simultaneously, the RBI is dealing with the 
issue of system changes.  
The  securitised  debt  market  in  India  is  also  growing  and  increasingly  banks  will  need  to  consider 
securitisation of their debt to meet growing credit requirements and manage capital efficiently. The RBI 
regulatory framework provides a sound basis for the growth of this market.  
The approach to liberalisation of forex market in India has remained cautious with a clear emphasis on 
the  need  to  safeguards  against  potential  financial  instability  that  could  arise  due  to  excessive 
speculation  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  The  reforms  were  carefully  sequenced  in  respect  to 
instruments and objectives. Although the access to forex markets by non-banks is predicated on the 
underlying commercial transactions, over a period considerable flexibility is available to cover these 
transactions on a dynamic basis for both trade and non-trade transactions. The impact of the reform 
initiatives is clearly discernible in terms of depth and efficiency of the market in all segments. Average 
daily gross turnover in the forex market has steadily increased to USD 28.6 billion as of January 31, 
2007.  
The  RBI  has  proposed  a  further  expansion  of  the  access  to  the  options  market  for  corporates  by 
allowing  covered  options.  This  will  be  part  of  the  overall  final  derivatives  policy.  Similarly,  we  are 
examining  the  request  of  certain  commodity  companies  to  hedge  their  economic  exposures  in 
overseas exchanges which was also recommended by the Technical Group on Forex Markets.  
Finally since this is a body of forex professionals I would like to stress the need to provide efficient and 
competitive  service  to  individuals  and  small  enterprises.  With  increasing  globalisation  the  foreign 
exchange requirements of these categories of persons are also growing. With this objective, RBI has 
allowed entities which meet certain criteria to act as a limited authorised dealer (Category II) for certain 
non-trade current account transactions. Existing FFMCs, UCBs, and RRBs are also eligible for such 
10 
 BIS Review 33/2007
licences. Individuals and small enterprises do not have adequate access to competitive and efficient 
service  on  foreign  exchange.  The  exporters  particularly  smaller  exporters  and  there  are  a  large 
number of them do need better advice on hedging their currency exposures. Banks should consider 
devising  products  for  the  SME  sector  which  will  reduce  transaction  costs  on  foreign  exchange 
transactions.  
I wish the Conference all success in its deliberations. 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 11
