Petar Goshev: Problems in measuring inflation 
Opening speech by Mr Petar Goshev, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, at 
the  workshop  “Problems  in  measuring  inflation”  organized  by  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, Skopje, 22 May 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear friends, 
Please allow me to welcome you on behalf of the Central Bank, to thank you for your participation in 
today's workshop, and to wish a fruitful day for all of us present here today. 
This is the third workshop in the past two years, organized, or as it is now the case, co-organized by 
the Central Bank, which along with the international conferences and seminars on expert level, which 
increase  in  number,  have  been  our  new  component  of  activities  aimed  at:  increasing  our  own 
professional  capacity,  opening  of  the  National  Bank  to  the  domestic  and  international  expert 
community for the purpose of mutual improvement of the abilities to identify and solve the problems in 
the area of macroeconomics and for increasing the transparency in our communication with the public. 
Today's workshop has been organized in cooperation with the State Statistical Office, and the topic of 
discussion are the problems related to measuring of inflation. I do not think it is necessary to explain 
why the State Statistical Office: the State Statistical Office produces the data on inflation, while the 
National Bank is one of the main users of those data. 
Why this subject – problems in measuring inflation? Because inflation remains to be one of the most 
exciting, most important macro-economic phenomena, tackling the life of the communities and of the 
separate entities and individuals in the most concrete way. We all find it important to know what are 
the real values that are at our disposal. What are the real values that we produce. What is the real 
progress of the economy, what is the real growth or decline in our income, what is the real growth or 
decline in our living standard and well-being. Inflation is one of the obstacles on the way to those real 
values,  important  from  several  viewpoints  of  our  life  and  our  behavior.  Therefore,  macroeconomic 
analyses  are  commonly  based  on  values  in  real  terms,  i.e.  values  adjusted  by  the  increase  in  the 
prices  with  the  single  objective  –  to  obtain  realistic  picture  of  the  macro-economic  developments. 
Therefore good investment and business plans of companies, inter alia, do not miss the opportunity to 
grasp and incorporate the expectations about the future movement of the inflation, as they are aware 
that it will have an effect on their profit in the future. Therefore, labor unions are interested in inflation 
when they negotiate wages, therefore each of us is interested in the information about the current and 
future inflation, i.e. increase in the prices, when we consider what to do with our savings. 
Why is the Central Bank preoccupied with the inflation and its accurate measurement, perception of 
inflation and expectations about its movement in the future? It is because the main objective of the 
monetary  policy  is  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  economy,  which  is  considered  to  be  the  main 
prerequisite  for  acceleration  of  the  economic  activity  and  for  accomplishing  sustainable  economic 
growth. Hence, the adequate measurement of inflation, which is an issue that has been interesting for 
the  central  banks  for  years,  and  which  is  even  more  important  when  inflation  rates  are  low,  is  so 
challenging and crucial for the central banks, i.e. for the monetary policy decisions. 
Non-expert public listens to the information about the inflation indicators. It neither wants nor it is able 
to go into the numerous statistical problems when measuring inflation. However, it senses the possible 
discrepancies between the officially announced indicators and the real ones since that public confronts 
its nominal and real purchasing power on a daily basis. On the basis of that confrontation and daily 
market-based  check-up  of  the  official  statistical  information,  confidence  or  lack  of  confidence  in  the 
authorized  institutions  is  created,  influencing  positively  or  negatively  the  behavior  of  all  market 
participants.  The  authorized  institutions  are  responsible  for  making  precise  the  differences  between 
the nominal and the real aggregates, for selection of more precise statistical methods and techniques 
for  measuring  inflation,  simultaneously  as  transparent  and  as  understandable  as  possible  for  all 
market  participants.  The  participation  of  representatives  of  the  two  most  relevant  institutions  in  the 
country for this issue and the participation of the distinguished domestic experts and experts of the 
relevant  international  institutions,  Eurostat  and  BIS,  ensure  that  today  we  will  enjoy  an  exciting 
intellectual debate on the topic we selected, i.e. which inflation indices are the most persuasive, which 
structure and which compilation methods could give us the best picture of the basic components and 
BIS Review 54/2007 
 1
their contribution to the movement of the inflation; how much is the so-called core inflation relevant for 
us and in what is the best way to determine it, is the inflation index appropriate with respect to the 
scope and the structure, does it represent the consumer basket realistically, does it change along with 
the changes in the consumption, does it overestimate, underestimate or realistically show the actual 
inflation.  Furthermore,  do  we  move  along  with  the  international  experience,  here  I  refer  to  the  best 
practices, where do we lag behind, what and how long does it take to narrow or eliminate the lag. The 
responses and measures for better solutions are not given to us indefinitely. The current lags affect 
our current decisions. Now, they affect the quality of comparability of our conditions with those of the 
countries we seek to integrate with.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
On the 8th of May this year, only 15 days ago, Macedonia had the honor to represent its first pre-
accession economic program at the ministerial dialog between the ministries of economy and finance 
of the EU and the candidate countries in Brussels. The adopted conclusions that refer to our country, 
amongst  other  things,  state  that  "generally,  the  document  suffers  from  a  lack  of  reliable  statistics, 
impeding the analyses of the position of the country regarding the growth cycle...", which, you would 
all agree, has to do with the reliability, in such situation, with inflation calculations, particularly of the 
expected  one.  Furthermore,  page  4  says  that  "in  the  area  of  economic  statistics,  top  priority  for 
Macedonia is to establish a capacity for regular production and submission of annual and sub-annual 
statistics", but, also, not failing to notice that "a certain progress has been made in the annual national 
accounts, following the ESA 95 concepts", and that we should move on in that area. Page 5 says that 
Croatia and Macedonia have been invited to intensify their efforts to conform with HICP (harmonized 
index of consumer prices), and that with respect to the monetary and financial statistics, the central 
banks of the candidate countries (and therefore our central bank), will be legally bound to start with the 
harmonization, which is necessary to bring the statistics in compliance with those of the ECB, as a 
legal requirement, once they are admitted to the ECB, and that it is desirable to start earlier to prepare 
for the membership in the European System of Central Banks. And finally, that the candidate countries 
have  been  invited  to  intensify  urgently  their  efforts  in  this  respect  and  that  the  EFC  (Economic-
Financial  Committee)  should  keep  on  directly  monitoring  the  progress  on  the  basis  of  the  annual 
Progress Report on the Action Plan".  
Consequently, we and those we want to be with are aware that we should strengthen our endeavors 
to make our statistics better, and hence, I consider that this workshop will make a positive contribution 
from this aspect, as well. 
Thank you for your attention, and once again I wish you a nice day on the premises of the Central 
Bank. 
I  would  conclude  here  and  I  would  kindly  invite  Ms.  Blagica  Novkovska,  Manager  of  the  State 
Statistical Office, to give her address. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2007
