Rakesh Mohan: Recent financial market developments and implications 
for monetary policy 
Valedictory address by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Institute  of  International  Finance’s  inaugural  Asia  Regional  Economic  Forum,  Mumbai, 
20 September 2007. 
Assistance of M.D. Patra and Indranil Bhattacharya in preparing the speech is gratefully acknowledged.  
 Shri Bhatt, Mr Horiguchi, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am honoured to be invited to deliver the valedictory address at the Asia Regional Economic 
Forum. The relationship between India and the Institute of International Finance (IIF) goes 
back a long way to the early 1990s. Therefore, it is only befitting that the IIF has chosen to 
inaugurate the Asia Regional Economic Forum in Mumbai as an opportunity for the informal 
exchange of ideas and views on the region and the global economy, with emphasis on key 
issues relating to India. I observe from the proceedings of the forum that there has been a 
timely  focus  on  and  comprehensive  coverage  of  developments  in  global  and  regional 
financial  and  commodity  markets,  the  financial  system  at  large  and  issues  relevant  for 
emerging Asia.  
Over the last two months, a good deal of our collective attention has been focused on the 
turmoil in financial markets in the United States and Europe and the sudden plunge in credit 
market confidence triggered by emerging risks to exposures to the US sub-prime mortgage 
crisis. Even as every passing day unravels a little more of the underlying forces at work – the 
complex nature of the derivatives used; the high degree of leveraging on poor, light or even 
absent  collateral;  the  underestimation  of  risk  pervading  financial  markets;  the  surprisingly 
sizeable  exposures  of  large  financial  institutions  to  some  of  the  debt  instruments  and 
derivatives  in  question;  and  the  speed  of  contagion  –  I  believe  that  we  still  have  to  travel 
much  further  before  we  understand  the  full  import  of  these  recent  events  in  terms  of  both 
information and analysis. Consequently, there is considerable uncertainty surrounding both 
debt  and  credit  markets  as  of  now.  Quite  justifiably,  regulators,  monetary  authorities  and 
finance ministries are all engaged in containing the risks posed by these developments. In 
my  address,  I  thought  I  would  take  this  opportunity  to  stand  back  from  the  actual  play  of 
events and try to gain an understanding of the nature of the turbulence, why it happened, 
where it happened, and the implications for central banks. In the rest of my address, I will 
reflect  on  some  overarching  forces  that  led  up  to  and  characterized  the  recent  spate  of 
events, the specific responses of central banks and some challenges that are likely to face 
them as the future unfolds.  
What is going on? 
I. 
Perhaps  the  most  defining  feature  of  the  global  economy  over  the  last  three  decades  has 
been what has been termed as the “Great Moderation” – the sustained decline in inflation 
and in inflation volatility. A comparison of the period since the Asian financial crisis i.e., 1998-
2007  and  the  30  years  preceding  the  crisis  (1970-97)  shows  that  in  the  recent  period, 
inflation (CPI) in advanced economies has averaged 1.9 per cent, down from 5.8 per cent in 
the  earlier  period.  Over  the  same  period,  inflation  in  developing  economies  declined  from 
31.0 per cent to 7.0 per cent. Over the same time span, inflation volatility measured in terms 
of coefficient of variation has fallen from 0.55 to 0.20 in advanced economies and from 0.54 
to 0.32 in developing economies. Consequently, average nominal interest rates (LIBOR rates 
on the US dollar) have also moderated from 8.3 per cent in the previous period to 3.8 per 
cent in the recent period. This feature has also been reflected in some decline in real interest 
rates  as  well,  from  2.5  per  cent  to 1.9  per  cent.  The  secular  lowering  of  nominal  and  real 
BIS Review 104/2007 
 1
interest rates across the world has enhanced the appetite for risk even as pricing of risk has 
become increasingly difficult.  
The second important feature of recent global developments which could have had a direct 
bearing  on  the  current  crisis  is  the  role  of  monetary  policy.  Since  the  technology  stocks 
meltdown  in  2000,  there  has  been  significant  monetary  accommodation  by  the  major 
economies – the US, Euro area and Japan – and it is estimated that between one-half and 
two-thirds of US currency supply is held outside the US. Growth in monetary aggregates has 
been higher than the rates of growth that would have been expected hitherto in relation to 
real economic growth. Yet inflation has been contained at low levels. There is evidence of 
abundant excess liquidity in financial markets which is also reflected in the macro imbalances 
between the US and Asia. Consequently, there have been sizeable currency misalignments 
and carry trades, compression of risk spreads, mispricing of widely diffused risks and even 
real  sector  implications  for  several  emerging  economies.  The  strong  macroeconomic 
performance  of  Asia  has  also  contributed  to  the  relentless  search  for  yields  and  the 
increasing appetite for risk. In fact, in the annual economic symposium on “Housing, Housing 
Finance and Monetary Policy” held by the Federal Reserve of Kansas City at Jackson Hole 
during  August  30-September  1,  2007,  Professor  John  Taylor  (of  Taylor  rule  fame)  argued 
that the Fed had followed an excessively loose monetary policy between 2002-2006.  
The combination of sustained low inflation accompanied by accommodative monetary policy 
worldwide  could  have  generated  excessive  confidence  in  the  ability  of  central  banks  and 
monetary  policy  to  keep  inflation  rates  and  interest  rates  low  indefinitely,  leading  to  under 
pricing  of  risk  and  hence  excessive  risk  taking.  This  result  is  analogous  to  the  excessive 
foreign borrowing undertaken by private sector borrowers and banks in East Asian countries 
when exchange rates were seen as relatively fixed, and hence their risk perceptions were 
low. It may be ironic that the perceived success of central banks and increased credibility of 
monetary policy, giving rise to enhanced expectations with regard to stability in both inflation 
and interest rates, could have led to the mispricing of risk and hence enhanced risk taking. 
Yet  another  view  is  that  more  than  success  or  failure  of  central  banks,  the  repeated 
assurances  of  stability  and  guidance  to  markets  about  the  future  path  of  interest  rates, 
coupled with the availability of ample liquidity was an invitation to markets to underprice risks. 
This view, consequently, puts the blame on those central banks who failed to give space to 
markets  to  assess  risks  by  eschewing  surprise  elements  in  policy.  It  is  possible  that  with 
increased globalisation resulting in the containment of prices of tradable goods during this 
period and hence of measured inflation, the excess liquidity has shown up in elevated asset 
prices worldwide, along with increased cross border capital flows in search of yields. Easy 
monetary policy itself may have generated a search for yields that resulted in a dilution of 
standards  in  assessing  credit  risk.  The  desirability  of  using  monetary  policy  tools,  and 
judgements  regarding  the  adequacy  of  such  tools,  to  meet  asset  price  movements  is  yet 
another relevant factor in this regard, in so far as most central banks did not address this 
issue.  As  some  withdrawal  of  monetary  accommodation  commenced  in  response  to 
perceived or visible inflationary pressures, the sub-prime crisis revealed these vulnerabilities 
starkly  as  confidence  plunged,  markets  froze  and  triggered  off  panic  among  investors  and 
lenders  regarding  their  inability  to  value  complex  risky  assets  and  structured  derivative 
products.  With  the  deterioration  in  credit  confidence,  banks  have  been  forced  to  advance 
loans  to  their  off-balance  sheet  "special  investment  vehicles  (SIVs)"  which  uses  up  their 
capital thereby rendering other borrowers credit constrained.  
Thus,  it  can  be  argued  that  it  is  the  combination  of  low  real  and  nominal  interest  rates 
brought  about  by  the  lowering  of  inflation,  accompanied  by  the  abundance  of  liquidity 
induced by accommodative monetary policy which lies at the roots of the current crisis. In 
this sense, the sub-prime is a symptom rather than a cause. Arguably, the outcome could 
have  been  quite  different  if,  for  instance,  interest  rates  declined  on  the  back  of  ebbing 
inflation  but  there  was  no  accommodation  in  monetary  policy  and  therefore  no  excess 
liquidity.  
2 
 BIS Review 104/2007
Whereas this view has been put forward by many commentators and analysts, there is also a 
persuasive opposite view, as best articulated by Alan Greenspan in a recent interview on the 
occasion of the release of his book (Financial Times, September 17, 2007). He argues that 
the great moderation in inflation could be attributed to real economy phenomenon in addition 
to  any  monetary  policy  measures.  First,  the  long  run  of  productivity  growth  that  has  been 
observed  in  the  US  in  the  late  1990s  and  till  recently  in  this  decade  has  clearly  been  an 
important factor dampening inflation. Second, globalization and the addition of a billion new 
workers  in  China  and  India  have  dampened  wage  growth  worldwide  and  hence  inflation. 
Whereas he agrees that the fall in long term rates provided the initial gain in house prices, he 
does not accept that these low long term interest rates can be attributed to the extended US 
Fed policy of low policy interest rates. As evidence, he points to the absence of any effect on 
long term interest rates when short term policy interest rates were indeed raised. So the jury 
is  out  on  the  extent  of  monetary  policy  effects  on  extended  long  term  interest  rates  and 
hence elevated housing prices. As an aside, it will be interesting to explore as to whether the 
low  interest  rate  regime  was  fully  justified.  Critics  argue  that  the  Fed  should  have  tried 
harder,  raising  rates  sooner  and  faster.  In  his  response,  Mr.  Greenspan  is  quoted  in  the 
Financial Times (September 17, 2007) as saying that such a policy response would not have 
been acceptable "to the political establishment" given the very low rate of inflation and "the 
presumption that we were fully independent and have full discretion was false". 
One issue that confronts us is why has the turmoil originated in the credit market and then 
spread to money markets and debt markets with such great rapidity. It is widely understood 
that  the  credit  market  is  characterized  by  information  asymmetry.  Borrowers  have  much 
greater information on their own credit quality than do the lenders and it is this asymmetry 
that  has  traditionally  meant  that  the  creditor  has  to  have  an  enduring  relationship  with  the 
borrower  so  that  his  or  her  credit  quality  can  be  monitored  on  a  continuous  basis.  Banks 
therefore have traditionally had to invest considerable resources in performing this function. 
They have  had the incentive to do so since they had borne the credit risk on their books. 
However, in many countries, from being originators of loans and bearers of risk, banks have 
become mere originators of loans and distributors of risk, because the traditional view of the 
role of banks has changed considerably in recent years. First, the availability of information 
technology  has  reduced  the  cost  of  information  collection  and  maintenance  considerably. 
Thus,  a  widespread  belief  has  arisen  that  information  on  credit  quality  of  small  borrowers 
who  may  be  widely  dispersed  across  jurisdictions  can  be  made  impersonal,  packaged, 
processed,  and  sold.  Second,  with  the  availability  of  such  technology,  and  the  belief  that 
such  information  was  available  on  a  structured  basis,  a  great  deal  of  financial  innovation 
could take place which essentially enabled the investor or risk taker to become progressively 
remote from the ultimate borrowers where the actual risks lay. A whole host of intermediaries 
in the form of mortgage brokers, mortgage companies, societies and the like were then able 
to package their mortgage assets including non conforming loans and sell down to different 
categories of investors, including Special Investment Vehicles (SIVs), hedge funds and the 
like, most of whom were not regulated. The guiding principle behind this activity was that it is 
feasible for credit rating agencies to have enough information on a continuous basis to rate 
the  instruments  that  had  been  packaged.  It  can  certainly  be  argued  that  this  is  not  a  new 
development  since  mortgage  backed  securities  (MBS)  and  asset  backed  securities  (ABS) 
have  been  with  us  for  some  time  and  have  been  successful  in  providing  liquidity  to  credit 
markets on a continuous basis without any accidents. The difference perhaps is that MBS 
packaged  by  the  government  sponsored  entities  (GSEs)  were  subject  to  certain  relatively 
well  enforced  norms  that  presumably  reduced  the  potential  risk  embedded  in  these 
instruments. 
These considerations lead to the third set of issues that relate to the role of effective financial 
regulation and supervision. Has the recent crisis underscored the need for strengthening of 
oversight  of  advanced  financial  markets?  Traditionally,  financial  surveillance  has  placed 
relatively more emphasis on banking regulation. Banks are highly leveraged financial entities 
who  are  also  effective  trustees  of  public  money  by  virtue  of  holding  deposits.  Hence,  they 
BIS Review 104/2007 
 3
links  between  banks  and  non  bank 
have to be effectively regulated and supervised in order to maintain public confidence in the 
banking system and depositors have to be protected from excessive risk-taking by banks. On 
the other hand, investors in hedge funds are high net worth individuals who do not need such 
protection. They are informed investors who are able to exploit the information efficiency of 
markets  and,  therefore,  should  be  able  to  understand  the  risks  implied  by  information 
asymmetry.  The  current  crisis  was,  however,  triggered  by  the  difficulties  encountered  by 
these  investors  who  had  taken  large  exposures  to  sub-prime  related  investments  without 
having accounted for the potential risks embedded in these instruments. There have been a 
host of ills underlying these transactions, which are now coming to light. We need, however, 
to abstract from the details of all the malpractices that have led to the current situation and 
reflect  on  the  incentive  structure  that  led  to  these  malpractices.  In  the  event,  even  bank 
depositors have got exposed and as soon as information asymmetries became evident and 
credit ratings came to be regarded as inadequate, markets got frozen resulting in illiquidity 
for  banks  and  erosion  in  depositor  confidence  with  its  consequential  impact  on  financial 
markets,  and  monetary  policy.  The 
financial 
intermediaries,  and  other  off  balance  sheet  exposures  were  not  adequately  recognised  or 
recorded by banking supervisors. 
In the context of recent events, it is important to recognise that there is a need to understand 
better  the  process  of  transmission  of  risk  information  through  various  segments  of  the 
financial markets in order to address the crisis of collateral in the credit market. How much of 
the  specialized  information  that  rests  with  lenders  can  be  systematized,  packaged  and 
transmitted to markets as credit ratings. The principle underlying securitisation is based on 
the lender having this specialized information which can be unbundled and sold in the market 
separately in tradable sizes. A large part of the market for structured finance products is over 
the counter. Can these products be further standardized so that they can be traded on an 
exchange  which  enables  greater  transparency  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  investor?  Are 
there better ways of generating more objective information on the market value of collaterals, 
especially  in  situations  where  collaterals  are  not  fully  marked  to  market  since  such 
information  may  not  be  available  on  ongoing  basis?  Are  there  limits  to  marking  to  market 
certain kinds of assets whose values are not available on a high frequency basis?  
Changes  in  housing  prices  are  dependent  on  a  whole  vector  of  factors,  ranging  from 
changes  in  local  zoning  and  land  laws,  demand  and  supply  balances  in  local  areas,  to 
changes in monetary policy. It is difficult to devise land price or housing price systems that 
are high frequency enough to transmit quickly through credit ratings and the like. However, 
improvements  could  be  envisaged  in  terms  of  reforms  in  the  land  pricing  systems, 
improvements  in  the  functioning  of  laws  and  procedures  for  foreclosure,  bankruptcy  and 
rehabilitation.  Efficient  functioning  of  such  processes  and  functioning  of  legal  systems  is 
essential if collateral is to have a marketable value that is observable and hence susceptible 
to  systemization  in  terms  of  information  that  can  then  become  transparent.  When  the 
presumed  value  behind  collateral  is  not  either  observable  or  realizable,  securitization 
markets break down. And this is what seems to have happened in financial markets today.  
The lesson of the current financial market crisis goes both ways. On the one hand, market 
innovation has indeed helped in bringing financial markets closer to those who need credit 
and  did  not  have  access  to  it  earlier.  Despite  all  the  problems  associated  with  sub-prime 
borrowers, it must be recognized that almost 10 million borrowers benefited from this market 
and were enabled access to housing finance, which had not been deemed possible earlier. 
With about 20 per cent of these borrowers reported to be delinquent, and in difficulty, it still 
means that about 8 million people clearly benefited from this market. On the other hand, the 
difficulties encountered draw attention to the kind of issues that can arise when the speed of 
innovation  and  incentive  structures  are  flawed  such  that  malpractices  occur,  and  intrinsic 
difficulties  arise  in  capturing  and  commoditizing  information  that  is  perhaps  not  yet 
susceptible to such commoditization.  
4 
 BIS Review 104/2007
From  our  point  of  view,  we  need  to  recognise  the  positive  contributions  that  financial 
innovations make to enhance the efficiency of financial intermediation. At the same time, the 
Reserve  Bank  considers,  in  a  dynamic  setting,  appropriate  safeguards  to  ensure  stability, 
taking  account  of  the  prevailing  governance  standards,  risk  management  systems  and 
incentive  frameworks  in  the  foreign,  public,  private  and  cooperative  banks  as  also  related 
non-banks.  Overall,  these  progressive  but  cautious  policies  have  contributed  to  both 
efficiency and stability of the financial system and enables current growth momentum in an 
environment of macro stability. 
is 
[this]  view 
inflation.  But  while 
theoretically  rigorous,  reality 
Response of the monetary authorities 
II.  
A key question that has emerged from the current developments in financial markets relates 
to the role of monetary authorities in the context of such a crisis. This issue is of concern to 
all of us in central banking. Over the last decade or two, it would appear that the focus of 
central  banks  has  been  narrowing  relative  to  the  more  complex  responsibilities  that  they 
have traditionally shouldered. A great deal has been written on this issue, a great deal has 
changed in terms of practices and, in some countries, the regulatory structure itself has been 
altered to move central banks to being relatively pure monetary authorities. According to this 
view, central banks should focus largely on keeping inflation low and stable, and in doing this 
also  contribute  to  financial  stability.  To  quote  Harvard  economist  Kenneth  Rogoff:  “Indeed 
many  economists  believe  that  central  bankers  could  perfectly  well  be  replaced  with  a 
computer programmed to implement a simple rule that adjusts interest rates in response to 
output  and 
is  not” 
(Businessworld, September 17, 2007) Although some central banks, such as the US Federal 
Reserve, have an explicit mandate to also promote growth, a good deal of thinking in recent 
times  tends  to  argue  that  inflation  control  by  itself  would  promote  growth  and  that  central 
banks would be better off to concentrate on this objective alone.  
It  is  instructive  to  examine  what  central  banks  have  done  in  the  current  context.  The 
responses  of  the  central  banks  to  the  recent  events  in  financial  markets  have  shown  that 
concerns  for  financial  stability  can  assume  overriding  importance,  irrespective  of  the 
legislative mandate handed down to central banks as part of ongoing reforms. This is evident 
in  the  fact  that  central  banks  initially  reacted  by  the  injection  of  liquidity,  including  through 
special  facilities  and  the  expansion  of  eligible  securities  for  collateral,  rather  than  through 
interest  rate  cuts.  Discussions  involving  central  bankers  in  various  fora  indicate  their 
willingness to consider other courses of action in favour of protecting growth. As we all know, 
the US Federal Reserve has gone further this week in cutting interest rates to promote both 
growth and in the interest of financial stability. And the U.K. authorities have had to provide 
liquidity to a specific institution, while giving a blanket guarantee to depositors on the safety 
of  their  deposits.  Accordingly,  it  is  becoming  evident  that  central  banks  do  have  a  role 
beyond  inflation  targeting.  Evidently,  both  growth  and  financial  stability  matter  for  central 
banks.  
When  it  comes  to  the  crunch,  in  their  roles  as  lenders  of  last  resort  (LOLR),  and  in 
discharging  their  responsibilities  as  the  guardians  of  financial  stability,  they  do  need  to 
perform functions that are more complex. Should central banks be lenders of last resort to 
the system as a whole by injecting systemic liquidity through open market operations only, or 
should  they  also  provide  liquidity  to  individual  financial  institutions  that  are  judged  to  be 
solvent  but  illiquid?  How  do  they  arrive  at  such  judgments  if  they  do  not  have  adequate 
information  on  individual  institutions?  Can  they  have  such  detailed  information  without 
ongoing responsibilities for regulation and supervision? This issue is not dissimilar, in terms 
of the existence of asymmetric information to that of the problem of adequate transparency of 
information related to the value of collateral underlying asset backed securities.  
Banks  and  financial  institutions  are  typically  highly  leveraged  institutions:  thus  judgements 
related to their solvency depend on the valuation of their assets at the time when difficulties 
BIS Review 104/2007 
 5
arise.  In  the  current  case,  banks  have  invested  through  a  chain  of  vehicles  in  securities 
whose values are in doubt. When providing LOLR liquidity support, how is the central bank to 
make  a  judgement  on  the  solvency  of  institutions  to  whom  it  is  providing  liquidity?  As  a 
greater recognition and appreciation of the appropriate role of central banks gains ground, it 
is possible that this will result in further rethinking on the functioning of central banks. A case 
in point is the separation of financial regulation and supervision from monetary policy which 
could have resulted in ineffective and inadequate surveillance in the context of the current 
crisis.  There  is  a  view  that  problems  of  information  asymmetry  might  have  got  further 
aggravated with banks reporting both to the monetary authority and the regulatory body in 
charge of banking supervision.  
In reviewing the evolution of central banks, one is struck by the constant evolutionary change 
that  they  have  undergone  over  time,  and  the differences in  their  functions  across  different 
countries.  Their  functions  have  changed  almost  continuously  in  response  to  evolving 
circumstances. In fact, it is the occurrence of financial instability that led to the formation of 
some central banks, most notably, the founding of the US Federal Reserve after the 1907 
financial crisis in the United States. Thus, it will be interesting to see how thinking evolves as 
a result of the current crisis. Reams are already being written in the thoughtful financial press 
and much more is to come. 
We  had  begun  to  forget  the  danger  of  contagion  and  the  speed  with  which  it  takes  place 
when it does occur. The current developments which began in a relatively minor segment of 
the financial market, viz., the sub-prime mortgage segment, have spread far and wide across 
continents. Similarly, problems arising in one financial institution have led to the suspicion of 
similar problems in other institutions leading to conditions similar to bank runs. The smooth 
running of banks, financial institutions and financial markets depends crucially on trust and 
credibility along with the availability of transparent information. Hence the legitimate role of 
central banks in maintaining financial stability can inevitably lead to unconventional actions 
that  do  indeed  restore  financial  stability  when  there  is  a  probability  of  the  opposite  taking 
place.  What  is  most  instructive  in  the  current  crisis  is  that  small  problems  or  problems  in 
small institutions can cause financial instability through contagion. In this context, things do 
not appear to have changed much for a century. The 1907 financial panic that also travelled 
across continents started with difficulties in a relatively small New York financial institution, 
the Knickerbocker Trust Company! Systemic risks do not necessarily originate in institutions 
judged to be too big to fail. 
Assessment of the future 
III.  
At  the  current  juncture,  the  likely  evolution  of  the  current  financial  market  turmoil  and  its 
implications  for  the  future  has  evoked  mixed  assessments.  On  one  plane,  the  spread  of 
contagion is drawing considerable concern, first, in view of the level of leverage; and second, 
on account of the nature of the vehicles that have created the leverage. On another plane, 
there  is  a  view  that  turbulence  would  be  restricted  to  the  credit  market  and  its  impact  on 
consumer spending and overall economic growth may be muted as credit worthiness would 
remain intact if, for instance, leveraged mortgage backed securities are held to maturity and 
not sold in distress.  
First, according to the IMF’s assessment, the systemic consequences of the turmoil are likely 
to be manageable with the fundamentals supporting strong global growth. The repricing of 
credit risks that is underway is a healthy correction and should not lead to a more serious 
market crash. The IMF expects that the reestablishment of credit discipline due to the recent 
prompt  action  by  a  number  of  central  banks  should  help  to  ensure  that  the  adjustment 
process  occurs  in  an  orderly  manner.  Long  term  investors  tend  to  support  this  view.  The 
ongoing flight to quality (US Treasuries) and into global equity funds suggests a continuing 
faith in strong fundamentals of the global economy.  
6 
 BIS Review 104/2007
Second, recent developments carry implications in the form of heightened market discipline 
and  a  stricter  regulation  of  financial  markets.  Investors  who  relied  on  credit  ratings  of 
Collateralised  Debt  Obligations  (CDOs)  and  Collateralised  Loans  Obligations  (CLOs)  are 
likely to question the value of ratings in other markets. Moreover, leveraged buy-out activity 
is likely to wind down. While this could cause worries about equity valuations, it is expected 
that such concerns would eventually recede so long as corporate profitability remains strong. 
Furthermore, it is argued that carry trade, which has been a source of financial flows, may 
moderate and may even go through an abrupt unwinding and this would help in maintaining 
global financial stability.  
In this vein, it is also argued that the recent developments will have a positive impact on the 
outlook  for  EMEs  as  a  consequence  of  the  diversification  of  portfolios  of  international 
investors and would further incentivise the maintenance of good macroeconomic policies in 
these countries. At the current juncture, it is expected that the fall out from the US sub prime 
crisis  is  likely  to  be  limited  for  Asian  banks  and  can  easily  be  accommodated  within  their 
current rating positions. According to Moody’s, exposures of Asian banks have book values 
that  do  not  exceed  10-35  per  cent  of  annual  pre-tax  pre-provision  profits.  The  mortgage 
backed securities and CDO tranches held by these banks are usually senior and therefore 
losses,  if  at  all,  would  be  substantially  below  100  per  cent.  The  bulk  of  foreign  currency 
investments by Asian banks (barring those in Japan, China, Korea and Singapore) continue 
to  be  in  highly  rated  government  and  corporate  bonds.  Policy  makers  need  to  work  with 
rather than against the grain of markets by continuing to enable financial innovations. They 
should, however, be vigilant for any signs of disorderly global rebalancing. Looking ahead, 
entrenching  financial  stability  into  the  future  would  depend  upon  bolstering  market 
confidence.  
In  the  overall  assessment,  the  adverse  consequences  of  the  US  sub  prime  turmoil  could 
weigh  heavily  on  the  future  stability  of  financial  markets  and  have  the  potential  to  have  a 
wider impact on global growth with particular concerns centred on the prospects for EMEs. If 
credit conditions tighten, EMEs could become particularly vulnerable to reversals of capital 
flows with serious implications for their future prospects. A slowing down of the US economy, 
in combination with capital reversals, could also have adverse consequences for growth on a 
prolonged basis by affecting exports of manufactures and services, depending on the extent 
of  linkage  with  the  US  economy.  On  the  other  hand,  the  flight  of  capital  to  safety  through 
diversification  could  even  enhance  capital  flows  to  these  countries.  This  could  further 
complicate the conduct of monetary policy. We will have to wait and watch. In general, recent 
financial  markets  developments  are  indicative  of  evolving  uncertainties  for  EMEs  with 
significant challenges for the conduct of monetary policy and for ensuring financial stability in 
their economies. As central bankers, we will have to enhance our vigilance. 
Challenges for monetary policy 
IV.  
Recent financial developments have drawn attention to the trying challenges facing central 
banks  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  in  particular,  the  limitations  imposed  by  financial 
markets.  These  developments  highlight  the  dynamic  and  complex  links  between  central 
banks and financial markets. While the dynamics of financial markets are being driven by a 
combination of a global search for yields, complacency about risks, financial innovations and 
unprecedented  liquidity,  the  spread  of  more  independent,  rule-based  central  banks  has 
facilitated  risk  taking  through  perception  of  a  low  probability  of  short  term  management  or 
“intervention risk”. This is set against the background of a shift in the balance of economic 
power within the global system, in particular, in favour of emerging Asia.  
While taking a view on the debate, it is important to recognise the changes in the landscape 
of financial markets – transformation in structure, process and products of financial markets, 
consolidation  in  banking,  increased  electronic  data  flow  and  dramatic  rise  in  volumes  and 
volatility.  The  key  issue  for  central  banks  is  to  differentiate  between  providing  short  term 
BIS Review 104/2007 
 7
liquidity  and  operating  medium  term  monetary  policy  and  communicate  the  difference 
credibly.  
The conduct of monetary policy is also complicated by a host of factors which seem to be 
simultaneously at work: risk of sustained contagion; global capacity constraints; rising food 
prices; record high international crude oil prices; tensions in inflation expectations; evolution 
of sovereign pools of foreign exchange reserves; extent of effectiveness of monetary policy; 
surveillance  and  risk  monitoring  systems;  and  downgrade  risks.  In  this  evolving  scenario, 
central banks may find it necessary to blend the traditional setting of monetary policy with 
some  rethinking  and  non-traditional  policy  options  which  could  include  coordinated 
interventions,  assurances  of  liquidity,  backed  by  timely  and  credible  action;  emergency 
liquidity  plans,  business  continuity  plans  and  disaster  management  strategies.  Admittedly, 
heightened  uncertainties  continue,  even  after  taking  into  account  the  recent  central  bank 
activities in key jurisdictions. It is not even clear whether all the related issues have come to 
the surface for us to make meaningful assessment.  
I  expect  that  I  can't  conclude  this  address  without  saying  a  few  words  on  the  domestic 
situation in India. The best way of doing this is to quote the Governor from his recent speech 
in Mexico city.  
"Available information indicates continuation of the growth momentum during 2007-08 so far 
at a strong pace with the impulses of growth getting more broad-based. Steady increases in 
the  rate  of  gross  domestic  saving  and  investment,  consumption  demand,  addition  of  new 
capacity as well as more intensive and efficient utilisation/capitalisation of existing capacity 
are expected to provide support to growth during 2007-08. The recent gains in bringing down 
inflation  and  in  stabilizing  inflation  expectations  should  support  the  current  expansionary 
phase  of  growth  cycle.  It  is,  however,  necessary  to  continuously  assess  the  risks  to  the 
inflation outlook emanating from high and volatile international crude prices, the continuing 
firmness  in  key  food  prices  and  uncertainties  surrounding  the  evolution  of  demand-supply 
gaps  globally,  as  well  as  in  India.  Risks  from  global  developments  continue  to  persist, 
especially in the form of inflationary pressures, re-pricing of risks by financial markets and 
danger  of  downturn  in  some  asset  classes.  Excessive  leveraging  has  enhanced  the 
vulnerability  of  the  global  financial  system.  Large  changes  in  liquidity  conditions  are 
obscuring  assessment  of  risks,  with  attendant  uncertainty.  Given  the  flux  associated  with 
both  financial  markets  and  monetary  policy  settings  globally,  India  cannot  be  immune  to 
these developments. The policy challenge for Reserve Bank, now, is to manage the current 
transition  to  a  higher  growth  path  while  containing  inflationary  pressures  and  focusing  on 
financial stability. Contextually, we in the Reserve Bank are, therefore, maintaining enhanced 
vigilance  to  be  able  to  respond  appropriately  to  the  prevailing  heightened  uncertainties  in 
global financial, as well as, monetary conditions". 
8 
 BIS Review 104/2007
