Ranee Jayamaha: Policy framework for regional cooperation and the role of the 
central banks 
Speech by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 6 July 2007. 
 Thank  you  for  this  opportunity  to  share  some  thoughts  on  the  need  for  cooperation  to 
develop a regional payment initiative and the role of the central banks in that endeavour. 
Background 
1.  
As  articulated  by  the  Governor,  the  SAARC  region’s  trade  and  financial  services  are 
developing at a faster rate, with India achieving a rapid growth of around 8-9%. Most of the 
SAARC Group of countries, including India, have opened up or are considering to open their 
capital accounts in keeping up with global trends and the regional needs. Accordingly, trade 
and investment flows and demand for financial services will exceed the present levels over 
the next couple of years. Hence, payment system gains much importance as it is a critical 
facilitator in cross-border flows, as well as domestic transactions. It should be able to cater 
not only to the present needs, but also the future demands. 
For  purposes  of  this  presentation,  the  payment  system  is  treated  in  a  broader  sense  to 
encompass the payments, clearing and settlement systems. At a national level, some of the 
SAARC  and  ACU  countries  have  already  reformed  or  are  about  to  reform  their  payment 
systems to minimize risks and increase safety and efficiency, although the degree of such 
reforms vary widely. Sri Lanka, India and Iran have completed their Stage I payment reforms. 
Pakistan is in the process of completing Stage I, while the other SAARC countries are now 
taking steps to modernize their payment systems. 
The  maintenance  of  a  safe,  sound  and  efficient  payment  system  is  a  responsibility  of  the 
central bank as many of our central banks have increased focus on wider financial system 
stability  as  one  of  their  core  objectives.  In  that  context,  central  banks  are  called  upon  to 
coordinate payment initiatives at national, regional and global levels to ensure that there are 
appropriate mechanisms for smooth payment flows. 
Why payment systems are critical to regional development? 
2.  
Payment  services  are  highly  integrated  and  interdependent  systems  comprising  payers, 
payees, payment instruments, financial intermediaries, markets, service providers, technical 
infrastructure, legal and regulatory systems and organizational structures. The public policy 
objectives  common  to  all  stakeholders  are  to  enhance  public  confidence,  safety,  integrity, 
access to finance and efficiency of payment systems. Therefore, we need to facilitate cross 
border  trade  and  investment  flows  through  appropriate  payment  instruments,  clearing 
mechanisms and settlement systems. 
In  a  globalized  and  highly  integrated  world,  financial  sector  development  is  closely 
associated  with  cross  border  flows,  including  foreign  direct  investment  which  is  critical  to 
developing economies. Most of us in the SAARC region are FDI recipients. Although it is a 
Herculean  task,  establishing  an  acceptable  level  of  regional  coordination  to  generate  and 
facilitate  trade  and  investment  and  ensuring  that  cross  border  flows  take  place  safely  and 
efficiently, without disrupting the national financial systems is an imperative. 
The  rapidly  changing  global  payment  system  infrastructure  is  challenging  the  existence  of 
domestic and regional payment systems that are lagging behind in the pace of development 
of technology, communications and globalization. Each country has to reform their payment 
BIS Review 79/2007 
 1
systems to keep up with advanced technologies and complex processes. Given the nature of 
cross border transactions, the need to mitigate risks involved in them and the high cost of 
quality  infrastructure,  it  is  advantageous  for  countries  in  the  region  to  undertake  reforms 
collectively  in  coordination  with  each  other.  A  regional  payment  group  can  attract  rich 
intellectual and resource capacity for payment system development in the region. Within the 
framework of a common payment initiative, all members can create productive and collective 
working  relationships  to  address  issues  relating  to  the  common  quest  for  developing  the 
national  and  regional  payment  systems.  In  this  regard,  the  central  banks  should  promote 
close  coordination  among  experts  in  the  region  to  strengthen  the  payment  system 
infrastructure. 
Case for a SAARC region payment initiative 
3.  
The  SAARC  region-wide  payment  system  has  a  long  way  to  go  in  improving  its 
performances, as many others have organized themselves better for the task. The Southern 
African  Development  Community  (SADC)  payment  system,  led  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
South  Africa,  was  launched  in  1996.  Following  the  initiatives  by  the  World  Bank  and  the 
Center  for  Latin  American  Monetary  Authorities  (CEMLA),  the  Western  Hemisphere 
Payments & Securities Settlement Initiative was launched in 1999. In 2004, the World Bank 
and the regional central banks launched the Commonwealth Independent States Payments 
and  Securities  Initiative  to  develop  the  payment  systems  in  the  former  Soviet  Union 
countries. In 2005, the Arab Payments and Securities Settlement Initiative was launched with 
the cooperation of 22 members and with the support of the Arab Fund. These are some of 
the successful regional initiatives. 
All  these  initiatives  have  a  common  vision  to  ensure  that  reforms  result  in  efficient  and 
effective payment systems built on international best practice. Within that vision, they assist 
individual  member  countries  to  prepare  domestic  payment  system  development  strategies 
and  define  a  coordinated  regional  approach  to  ensure  safe  cross  border  payments,  taking 
into  consideration  the  implications  for  trade  and  investment  activities.  Another  common 
feature  of  these  initiatives  is  the  availability  of  well  functioning  real  time  gross  settlement 
systems operated either by central banks or, in some cases, by other operators. This is the 
platform that links the central banks in the group. These regional initiatives have also built 
institutional  capacities  within  the  national  economies,  as  well  as  in  the  region,  to  sustain 
continued  payment  system  development.  Several  of  these  initiatives  have  taken  on  the 
challenging task of linking regional payment systems on appropriate technological platforms, 
thus  ensuring  resilience  and  safety  of  common  payment  systems.  With  peer  pressure, 
significant  reforms  have  been  introduced  in  payment  instruments,  payment  mechanisms, 
infrastructure systems, clearing processes, cross-border clearing and settlement systems in 
individual countries. 
To  ensure  efficiency  and  safety  and  achieve  common  goals,  there  should  be  a  clear 
commitment by all member countries, which can be clearly displayed by working together as 
a  group.  A  collective  effort  and  cooperative  agenda  should  support  self-help  mechanisms 
and  also  complement  the  coordination  and  cooperation  with  other  regional  initiatives  and 
international  institutions.  As  a  group,  we  can  mobilize  and optimize  technical  support  from 
other regional initiatives and international bodies like the World Bank, IMF and CPSS of the 
BIS. 
A logical conclusion of some of these payment initiatives would be to work towards a single 
payment mechanism like the Single Euro Payment Area (SEPA). This is obviously a long-
term objective for the SAARC region and we need to be very cautious in taking a decision 
towards a single payment mechanism. At the moment, there is no visible political or official 
commitment towards such a move, but it is worth examining the processes that have taken 
place  in  Europe  to  learn  some  valuable  lessons  and  avoid  potential  pitfalls  in  working 
towards a single payment space. Since 1999, the European Union has been using a single 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2007
currency,  the  euro,  as  the  common  currency  within  the  Union.  The  current  move  through 
SEPA is to  establish an integrated non-cash  payments system throughout the Union. This 
means that individuals, banks and financial institutions, corporations and all other entities in 
the  Euro  region  will  be  able  to  make  cashless  payments  throughout  the  Euro  area  from  a 
single  payment  account  anywhere,  from  any  country,  using  a  single  set  of  payment 
instruments, easily, efficiently and safely on the same way that they make payments at the 
national level. 
Lessons learned 
4.  
It  is  worth  mentioning  some  of  the  challenges  and  problems  encountered  in  the  SEPA 
process  in  order  to  avoid  similar  problems  that  may  come  up  in  establishing  a  SAARC 
payment initiative, or to remember them if and when SAARC countries wish to move towards 
a single payment area at a future date. It also highlights the need for a committed leadership 
when undertaking sophisticated region-wide projects like SEPA. From the beginning, when 
the SEPA policy framework was set by the authorities in the EU area, it was shared with the 
market led by banks and financial institutions which were entrusted to implement it. 
However,  due  to  lack  of  high-level  commitment,  the  difficulties  encountered  in  the 
coordination  of  the  diverse  interests  of  the  banking  and  financial  service  industry  and  the 
severe  competition  among  service  providers  have  caused  delays  in  implementing  this 
project. When the implementation was slow, at the end of 2003, the European Central Bank 
(ECB) intervened to speed up the process outlining to the banking community a defined and 
stringent timetable and requiring greater commitment from the banking industry in delivering 
SEPA. The governance of SEPA has also been entrusted to banks and banking associations 
implying  the  need  for  extra  regulatory  processing.  This  move  too  failed  and  resulted  in 
unsatisfactory outcomes. Similarly, product development has not been advantageous to the 
users  as  expected  earlier.  Another  problem  encountered  by  SEPA  was  that  some  of  the 
SEPA instruments were seen as too basic to fit both the user requirements and the efficiency 
improvement  in  the  European  payment  system.  A  market  driven  migration  from  existing 
national  non-cash  payment  products  to  the  new  Euro  area-wide  SEPA  products  have  not 
been able to provide the same minimum service levels that exist in individual countries. In 
order  to  ensure  that  the  new  Euro  area–wide  products  use  technology  developments  and 
produce future oriented or forward looking payment instruments, the ECB had to intervene 
and caution product developers. 
SEPA  is  an  example  which  illustrates  the  consequences  of  leaving  matters  with  a  group 
which is not fully committed to the task, without appropriate leadership. The ECB has to step-
in to ensure successful completion of the initiative and to move the project on a time target. 
This episode indicates that the selection of a catalyst and a responsible leader is essential 
for  national  as  well  as  regional  payment  reforms.  In  many  instances,  the  payment  system 
development leaders or catalysts have been the central banks, but we should recognize that 
a central bank’s core objectives should prevail when they are required to make a choice. 
Role of central banks in leading regional payments initiatives 
5.  
From  the  central  banks’  point  of  view,  the  development  of  a  safe  and  efficient  national 
payment system has relevance for monetary policy, financial stability and overall economic 
development  interests.  Central  banks,  therefore,  monitor  developments  in  the  payment 
systems  to  assess  their  impact  on  the  demand  for  money,  monetary  policy  and  financial 
system  stability.  In  many  of  the  SAARC  countries  and  elsewhere,  the  central  banks  have 
been  playing  multifaceted  roles  like  operators,  owners,  facilitators,  regulators,  overseers, 
users and service providers of their national payment systems. Through these roles, central 
banks  have  acquired  expertise,  skills  and  in-depth  knowledge  on  the  role  of  the  payment 
mechanisms  in  the  financial  system  and  the  economy.  We  need  to  make  use  of  this 
BIS Review 79/2007 
 3
expertise and share it with others in the region and elsewhere. A regional payment initiative 
would be a vehicle which would help to achieve this objective. Central banks can advise on 
payment  related  financial  policy  and  act  as  effective  catalysts,  together  with  private  sector 
organizations,  in  initiating,  promoting  and  contributing  to  payment  system  reforms.  By  and 
large, payment reforms, be it national or regional, have been promoted and led by central 
banks,  except  in  few  countries  like  Canada  where  the  private  sector  initiative  has  been 
significant. 
The central banks in the SAARC region also have the ability to play the leadership or catalyst 
role  by  providing  policy  directions,  preparing  roadmaps 
in  consultation  with  other 
stakeholders  and  guiding  national  and  regional  payment  system  reforms  and  taking  the 
responsibility to develop a common payment policy framework acceptable to all countries in 
the region. 
We  need  to  pay  attention  to  the  existing  regional  clearing  mechanisms  as  well.  As  in  the 
case  of  the  Asian  Clearing  Union  (ACU),  if  there  are  delays  in  processing  payment 
instruments, combined with official accounting practices for payments that give rise to a float 
on the balance sheets of the central banks, that will contribute to inefficiency and uncertainty 
in  the  payment  process.  It  is  significant  to  note  that  such  inefficiencies  can  extend  to  the 
central bank’s monetary operations and liquidity estimates as floating ACU balances cannot 
be treated as part of the international reserves of member central banks. Lack of clarity about 
rights  and  responsibilities  regarding  funds  on  the  move  is  another  shortcoming,  especially 
where processing systems and accounting procedures result in long delays between the time 
a payment instruction is issued and the time it is cleared and settled. 
Both  at  national  and  regional  level,  supervision  and  oversight  of  payment  systems  have 
always  received  less  attention  compared  to  the  supervision  of  banks  and  financial 
institutions.  When  there  are  cross  border  payments  and  common  clearing  and  settlement 
mechanisms, it is important to ensure that there is a well-designed supervisory system. The 
supervisors  should  focus  on  interbank  credit  and  liquidity  risks  and  system-wide  risks  that 
can arise in cross border fund transfer processes and multi-currency transactions and take 
action to mitigate such risks. In general, consumer protection concerns may be an important 
consideration  if  relationships  are  not  well-defined  and  imperfections  in  the  operational 
environment  provide  opportunities  for  intermediaries  and  service  providers  to  benefit  from 
inefficiencies relating to customer transfers. 
Central  banks  in  the  SAARC  region  should  also  concentrate  on  the  legal  and  regulatory 
aspects of common clearing and settlement mechanisms. The fundamental purpose of rules 
governing payment relationships in a market is to define clearly the rights and obligations of 
each party to a payment transaction, be it domestic or cross border. This includes the payer, 
payee and banking intermediaries. In this regard, the SAARC region needs comprehensive 
governing  laws  which  (a)  provide  certainty  and  predictability  with  respect  to  the  rights  and 
duties of parties to a payment transaction; (b) ensure that payments are made efficiently, at 
low cost, and with adequate security; (c) minimize credit, liquidity and systemic risks; and (d) 
support  commercial  transactions  in  the  region.  Of  special  concern  is  that  payment  laws 
should  provide  clarity  as  to  how  credit  exposures  arising  in  connection  with  payments  are 
resolved when a counterparty fails to perform or other types of losses are incurred. 
All  of  the  above  potential  sources  of  trouble  in  the  payment  system,  i.e.  operational 
inefficiency,  poorly  designed  accounting  practices,  legal  uncertainty  and  inadequate 
supervision, can degrade the performance of national as well as regional financial markets, 
frustrate exporters, importers and businesses. Further, these conditions can lead to dramatic 
manifestations of inefficiency and abuse, and challenge the credibility of the central banks in 
our countries. When the SAARC region trade and investment flows increase, we will not be 
able  to  reform  the  clearing  mechanism  urgently  to  accommodate  cross  border  flows.  The 
ACU  has  reached  crossroads,  requiring  urgent  reforms,  if  member  countries  are  still 
interested in maintaining the long-established goodwill and regional cooperation through it. 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2007
Outline of a policy framework 
6.  
It  is  hard  to  come  up  with  a  blue  print  or  reference  framework  for  establishing  a  regional 
payments  group  without  deliberating  the  topic  with  the  SAARC  member  central  banks. 
Nevertheless, I wish to outline the key elements of such a framework and a road map which 
can be developed further by task forces or a working group appointed for the purpose. First 
and foremost, it is necessary to get the commitment and consent of central banks in forming 
the regional payment initiative. Second, it is necessary to engage in a stocktaking exercise 
to  gauge  the  effectiveness  and  appropriateness  of  the  existing  payment  instruments, 
payment systems, clearing mechanisms, settlement systems and infrastructure in the region 
to identify their weaknesses, inefficiencies, safety levels and risks. We need to assess these 
systems  against  some  benchmarks  or  international  norms  which  would  help  to  increase 
efficiency, safety and the integrity at national and regional level. In doing so, it may also be 
useful to look at the benchmarks set by the regional initiatives such as CEMLA, SADEC, CIS, 
API or other advanced payment systems. Third, the framework need not aim to introduce or 
formalize too extravagant payment mechanisms for the SAARC countries at this stage, but it 
should focus on the need to elevate the national payment systems of member countries to a 
level capable of facilitating present and future trade and investment flows and mitigating risks 
in  cross  border  transactions.  This  task  can  be  facilitated  by  setting  up  National  Payment 
Councils  (NPCs) 
their  own  countries  and  complying  with  common  standards, 
harmonization policies and international best practice. Fourth, the framework should broadly 
include the following: 
• 
• 
A time targeted vision acceptable to all members. 
A  clear  mission  accompanied  by  a  statement  of  the  roles  and  commitment  and 
responsibilities of all members. 
Policy objectives necessary to facilitate the present and future trade and investment 
flows within the region. 
Funding sources, budgetary allocations and an appropriate subscription formula. 
Guiding principles for mitigating risks and reaping benefits. 
  in 
Road map and way forward 
7.  
If  SAARC  central  bank  representatives  consent  to  establish  a  SAARC  regional  payment 
initiative, it will be necessary to appoint an apex body which is capable of taking the reforms 
forward. The member countries can decide on an appropriate name and the structure of the 
apex body. For convenience, I have taken the liberty to name it as the SAARC Payments 
Council (SPC) which can be chaired by a member central bank or co-chaired by two central 
banks. The Council should draft vision and mission statements for the SAARC region and 
prepare a road map for payment reforms for the next 5 – 10 years, taking into consideration 
the modernization that needs to be attended to by member countries at national and regional 
levels. Under SPC, there should be several task forces consisting of senior officials of central 
banks  and  other  financial  institutions  directly  involved  in  payment  and  settlement  related 
activities  who  will  attend  to  the  preliminary  work,  such  as  stocktaking  and  identification  of 
gaps  in  the  national  payment  systems.  There  should  be  task  forces  on  (a)  policy  and 
operational  matters;  (b)  legal  and  regulatory  aspects;  (c)  technical  and  institutional 
infrastructure; and (d) communication and exchange of information. The task forces should 
make their recommendations to the SPC, which will take considered decisions. In nominating 
members  to  the  task  forces,  where  possible,  countries  should  select  officers  from  their 
respective NPCs, as such councils are expected to have representatives of all stakeholders 
with the necessary skills and expertise to handle work relating to the above areas. Sri Lanka 
has  already  established  an  NPC  with  a  clear  mandate  to  take  forward  payment  reforms 
across  the  nation.  The  NPC  has  prepared  a  well-focused  action  plan  after  detailed 
deliberations  with  all  stakeholders  and  is  the  apex  body  for  payment  system  development 
policies and operations. I understand that India and some other countries too have NPCs. It 
BIS Review 79/2007 
 5
may  also  be  important  to  set  up  a  secretariat  in  one  of  the  countries  to  lead  the  regional 
payment  initiative.  The  SPC,  as  well  as  the  task  forces,  should  establish  close  links  with 
international organizations such as the WB, IMF, BIS and also with other regional payment 
groups and developed country central banks for guidance and technical assistance. 
As I mentioned before, the ACU is the only regional clearing mechanism that exists today 
among SAARC member countries. It needs a clear reform agenda to mitigate risks involved 
in  that  system  and  ensure  safe  payment  flows  among  the  member  countries.  Already,  a 
technical committee has been appointed under the Chairmanship of Sri Lanka to look into 
some elements of modernizing the ACU. The whole of yesterday we debated on some of the 
short-term measures that need to be introduced to the ACU clearing arrangements in order 
to  avoid  any  disruptions  to  cross  border  flows.  That  committee  too  could  report  its 
recommendations to the SPC. 
There  may  be  many  other  modifications,  modernizations  and  reforms  that  need  to  be 
introduced at national and regional levels which will shape the annual work program of the 
SAARC regional payment initiative. It is in that con text the topic “Working Towards a SAARC 
Regional Payments Group” was chosen as the theme for this conference. 
Conclusion 
8.  
We  need  not  wait  till  the  SAARC  region’s  trade  and  investment  flows  rise  significantly  to 
modernize our payment systems. The SAARC member central banks need to decide early to 
establish  a  regional  payments  initiative  to  reap  the  benefits  of  expanding  trade  and 
investment flows within the region. The deliberations of this conference during the rest of the 
day will focus on this topic and I hope that the central banks represented here will bring this 
conference to a logical conclusion of moving towards reaching consensus on the formation of 
the SAARC Region’s Payments Initiative. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 79/2007
