Rakesh Mohan: Risk management in an open market economy 
Speech  by  Dr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  inaugural 
programme of the Centre for Advanced Financial Learning, Mumbai, 4 June 2007. 
Assistance of K. Damodaran and Himadri Bhattacharya in preparing the speech is gratefully acknowledged. 
 Peter L. Bernstein in his celebrated book Against the Gods writes, “The revolutionary idea that defines 
the boundary between modern times and the past is the mastery of risk: the notion that the future is 
more than a whim of the Gods and that men and women are not passive before nature. Until human 
beings  discovered  a  way  across  that  boundary,  the  future  was  a  mirror  of  the  past  or  the  murky 
domain  of  oracles  and  soothsayers  who  held  monopoly  over  knowledge  of  anticipated  events” 
(Bernstein, 1996). 
Whereas  risk  management  characterizes  many  of  our  activities  in  different  spheres,  from  standard 
technological risk management embedded in almost all industrial goods and machinery, to worrying 
about climate change and global warming, it is in the world of finance that risk management is at the 
core  of  all  its  activities.  With  the  generalized  opening  of  trade  and  of  capital  movement  across  the 
world over the past decade and a half, risk management has become all pervasive across the whole 
financial  sector.  In  a  closed  economy  with  administered  prices,  fixed  or  predictable  exchange  rates 
and interest rates, the micro perception of risk was relatively benign. In those conditions, in effect, it 
was the sovereign that undertook to do the risk management for the economy. As a consequence of 
the  rigidity  embedded  in  these  systems,  economic  adjustments  did  not  take  place  on  a  day-to-day 
gradual basis and risks effectively accumulated until discontinuous macroeconomic adjustments were 
forced  on  the  system.  Such  discontinuous  adjustments  involved  non-marginal  adjustments  in  the 
exchange rate, interest rates, administered prices of basic goods, or in fiscal expenditures, and the 
like.  The  impact  on  individuals  and  market  participants  alike  was  usually  relatively  traumatic,  and 
consequent economic and financial crises were common. Moreover, such systems were likely to suffer 
from  misallocation  of  resources,  bouts  of  price  instability  and  consequential  low  and  uncertain 
economic growth. 
The notion that individual economic agents are ill-equipped to be exposed to exchange rate, interest 
rate and price risks, and that the sovereign alone should bear these risks is no longer regarded as 
tenable.  It  is  now  recognized  that  a  system  that  allows  for  daily  market  adjustment  of  such  prices 
operates more smoothly and that wider dispersion of risks among economic agents is more conducive 
to the maintenance of economic and financial stability. However, the issue of how economic risks are 
to be dispersed among the sovereign, financial intermediaries, large corporations, small businesses, 
farmers  and  households  and  other  categories  of  economic  agents  is  still  a  live  one.  It  is  generally 
acknowledged in this regard that there has to be some correspondence between the incidence of risk 
and different agents' capacity to bear it.  
Lacklustre  macroeconomic  performance  of  command  economies  in  the  1970s  and  in  the  following 
decades resulted in a shift in the thinking on risk, leading to the realization that it is far more efficient to 
allow  individual  economic  agents  to  face,  transfer  and  manage  risks  through  a  market  mechanism. 
The collapse of the Bretton Woods System in 1971 ushered in an era of `generalized floating' of the 
exchange rates of major currencies. The gradual deregulation, relaxation/abolition of capital controls 
and globalization that followed the collapse of the Soviet system provided the backdrop as also the 
incentive for the risk management concepts and practices to emerge and evolve. 
The  distinguishing  feature  of  the  new  paradigm  is  that  it  does  not  mean  that  all  risks  should  be 
eliminated by way of insurance-like products that have been known to mankind for a long time. The 
key  is  pricing  of  risks  in  markets  for  risk  products.  Development  of  deep  and  liquid  markets  in  risk 
products – both cash as well derivatives – which were boosted by phenomenal progress in quantitative 
finance made it possible for risk management as a discipline and profession to come of age. However, 
this way of looking at risk management does not mean at all that there is no role for the sovereign or 
for regulators in financial markets. 
Profound changes have also taken place in the economic and financial landscape in India over the last 
two decades or so, marked by wide-ranging reforms in both the real and financial sectors. Adoption of 
a  unified  and  market-determined  exchange  rate  for  the  rupee  in  early  1993,  followed  by  current 
account  convertibility  in  1994,  enactment  of  a  new  foreign  exchange  law  in  1999,  and  significant 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 1
though gradual capital account liberalization over the last decade have led to a manifold increase in 
the volumes of both current and capital account transactions between India and the rest of the world. 
At  the  same  time,  deregulation  of  interest  rates,  greater  use  of  indirect  instruments  for  monetary 
policy, reduction in statutory preemption on the resources of banks have paved the way for emergence 
of liquid markets for short- and long-term interest rates in India. 
The  upshot  of  all  these  developments  is  that  while  resource  allocation  &  use  have  become  more 
efficient leading to higher growth impulses, with economic agents now having more choices to make 
and competition to face, there are more risks to contend with as well on a daily basis. In other words, 
increased  opportunities  for  economic  agents  are  now  accompanied  by  new  types  of  risks  to  be 
managed as well. 
The broad trends marking the present and the foreseeable future are clear. Economic and financial 
engagement  with  the  rest  of  the  world  will  further  expand  in  several  dimensions.  Viewed  from  this 
perspective,  economic  agents  in  India  should  be  able  to  walk  in  step  with  their  counterparts  and 
competitors elsewhere. One essential requirement in this regard is that risk management systems and 
procedures as well as the market for risk management products in India should be world class. 
As we introduce new risk management systems, upgrade existing ones and develop new markets for 
risk management products, it is very important for us to keep in mind the objective conditions that exist 
in India. We will need to continually keep in view the differential risk-bearing capacities among different 
economic agents in the country. Even among different financial intermediaries, let alone households 
and  farmers,  we  have  the  coexistence  of  small  and  widely  dispersed  entities,  such  as  primary 
agriculture  credit  societies  (PACSs),  rural  and  urban  cooperative  banks,  public  sector  banks,  new 
private sector banks, and foreign banks, with each having different degrees of sophistication related to 
risk management. Hence, our approach to the introduction of modern risk management instruments 
and systems in the country has, per force, to be cognizant of our own requirements and capacity. 
Risk management in financial intermediaries and real sector entities 
The  broad  principles  governing  risk  management  are  the  same  for  entities  in  both  the  real  and 
financial  sectors.  However,  risk  management  in  banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries  acquires 
added  importance  because  of  their  three  distinguishing  characteristics:  (i)  they  are  much  more 
leveraged; (ii) they hold public money; and (iii) payments systems operate through banks.  
In general, banks are exposed to much more credit and interest rate risk, while the real sector entities, 
particularly those which are engaged in international trade and commodity manufacturing, processing 
or trade are more exposed to exchange rate and commodity price risks. But the commodity price risk 
that borrowers are exposed to gets translated into credit risk for their lenders. 
Risk  management  for  banks  and  financial  institutions  is  critically  important  because  they  are  “risk 
engines”; they take risks, they transform them and they embed them in their products and services. 
There are powerful motives for banks to implement risk-based practices; to provide a balanced view of 
risk and return from a management point of view, to develop competitive advantages and to comply 
with regulatory requirements.  
As  is  the  case  globally,  banks  in  India  have  a  very  special  role  to  play  in  promoting  better  risk 
management  standards and  practices.  Being  the  chief repositories  of credit  risk,  the  quality  of  their 
loan  assets  depends  critically  on  how  effective  the  risk  management  policies,  processes  and 
procedures  of  their  borrowers  are.  Among  their  borrowing  clients  themselves,  there  would  be 
differentiated risk-bearing expertise and hence banks are expected to provide professional advice to 
their  clients  on  risk  management.  Thus,  banks  have  good  business  reasons  for  acquiring 
specialization and professional expertise in risk management. This would, however, be possible only if 
banks themselves are good managers of their own risks. 
There is another related issue, albeit a slightly deeper one. In contrast to the capital market, banks are 
privy  to  much  more  wide  and  rich  information  in  respect  of  their  clients.  While  the  comparative 
advantage  of  banks  in  intermediating  financial  resources  hinges  on  their  being  able  to  enjoy 
economies of  scale  and scope  in  acquiring  and  processing  information  in  the  first place,  a  relevant 
issue in this context is whether this information is being put to optimal use for managing risks, both at 
the level of individual banks and also at the aggregate level. Although it is early days to assess the 
effectiveness of the institutional mechanism provided by credit information bureaus for the pooling of 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2007
critical borrower information for common use within certain important safeguards, the importance of 
more intensive and extensive use of information hardly needs to be overemphasized.  
Further, as the economy grows and new types of activities and enterprises appear on the scene, it 
would be an imperative for banks to be able to assess the risks associated with such activities and 
enterprises. As is the case elsewhere, this will also critically depend on collection and analysis of all 
relevant information. 
Business approach to risk management 
Risk  management  is  an  integral  part  of  the  overall  business  planning  and  management  and  not 
something  on  the  fringes  or  “add  on”.  When  RBI  introduced  the  Asset  Liability  Management  (ALM) 
framework  in  1999,  it  was  viewed  by  some  banks  initially  as  an  exercise  for  finding  out  maturity 
mismatches or re-pricing mismatches. It was only when banks began compiling ALM statements that 
they realized the benefits of pursuing pro-active asset liability management themselves. In the context 
of  transition  to  Basel  II  framework  in  India  and  elsewhere,  where  the  focus  is  significantly  on  risk 
management, there is a perception among some banks that this is merely adding to their compliance 
costs: hence, they tend to view it as a compliance issue. Basel II attempts to promote more advanced 
risk  management  systems,  align  regulatory  capital  closer  to  economic  capital  and  thus  promote 
greater efficiency in the use of capital. It is evident from the experience of the last few years, which 
have witnessed gyrations in exchange rate and interest rates that banks with better risk management 
policies  and  systems  are  more  resilient  to  shocks  and  volatilities,  thereby  creating  value  for  their 
various  stakeholders.  Basel  II  offers  an  opportunity  to  banks  to  become  more  efficient,  which  fact 
should be accorded more importance than the regulatory requirement.  
Whether risk management is at the centrestage or on the sidelines of business operations of banks is 
revealed in the pricing of various types of risks. Currently, the interest rate charged by banks in India 
on various types of loans and advances varies within an unusually wide range, say, between 6 per 
cent and 16 per cent, and even higher in some cases. Visiting bankers tell me that such a range is 
much wider than is observed in other markets. If this is true, is it the case that variance in risk is much 
higher  among  Indian  borrowers  relative  to  those  in  other  countries?  Or  is  it  that  our  banks'  risk 
appraisal techniques are faulty and that they end up magnifying the true variance in risk? Or is it the 
case that the pricing of credit is not scientifically linked to risk, leading to anomalies, such as cross 
subsidization in the credit market? It could also be that the proportionate cost of credit appraisal varies 
inversely with the size of loan, and banks substitute a high credit price for the cost of credit appraisal. 
In this context, the introduction of credit information bureaus, referred to earlier may be expected to 
make  a  material  difference  in credit  appraisal  practices.  Mis-pricing  of credit  risk  is  an  issue,  which 
apart from introducing systemic vulnerability, has welfare implications for small borrowers. Banks have 
access  to  all  relevant  credit  information  on  the  borrowers/  potential  borrowers  and  they  are  well 
positioned  to  use  this  to  their  advantage  while  discriminating  between  various  grades  of  risk. 
Moreover,  banks  are  well  equipped  today  to  re-orient  their  rating  processes  to  assess  the  line  of 
activity of the counterparty, in addition to the conventional assessment of the counterparty. 
It needs to be emphasized in the context of Basel II that no amount of capital can make a financial 
institution absolutely secure. The key issue is proper pricing of risks. If a purely compliance attitude is 
taken in respect of risk management and capital adequacy, there is a danger that it may lead to “seat 
belt law” banking. As the experience showed in many countries with mandatory use of seat belts, it 
became  apparent  soon  that  drivers  were  prepared  to  take  more  risks,  believing  themselves  to  be 
safer. Proper management of risks is the key. Risk management should be integrated with the activity 
of risk taking – one need to structure one’s position according to the risks understood by him or her. 
Risks that are not understood well should be avoided.  
Stress testing 
The  corollary  to  increased  risk  related  to  the  expectation  of  greater  fluctuation  in  prices,  exchange 
rates,  and  interest  rates,  is  the  need  for  developing  regular  systems  for  stress  testing.  In  fact,  the 
antidote to excessive complacency resulting from greater risk-related capital adequacy is the use and 
consciousness of regular stress testing.  
Globally, stress testing is becoming an integral part of banks’ risk management systems and is used to 
evaluate their potential vulnerability to certain unlikely but plausible events or movements in financial 
variables.  In  the  above  background,  the  need  for  banks  in  India  to  adopt  “stress  tests”  as  a  risk 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 3
management tool has been emphasised in the Annual Policy Statement announced by the Governor 
in April 2006. The draft guidelines that were issued in this regard are now being given a final shape on 
the  basis  of  the  feedback  that  has  been  received  from  market  participants.  An  efficient  stress  test 
framework is necessary to incorporate a forward looking element in banks’ business strategies. Banks 
would do well to approach stress testing not merely as a regulatory requirement but as an integral part 
of their risk management processes and Basel II implementation. The stress test results need to be 
suitably integrated into the risk management processes, business strategies and capital planning.  
Just  as  stress  testing  is  important  at  the  enterprise  level,  we  need  to  upgrade  our  stress  testing 
procedures  at  the  systemic  level  as  well.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  and  in  the 
context  of  the  increased  discussion  on  global  financial  architecture,  the  World  Bank  and  the  IMF 
introduced a new procedure for “Financial System Assessment Programmes” (FSAPs). India was one 
of the first countries to volunteer for this programme in 1999. We are now engaged in an update of that 
exercise, which we are doing ourselves so that such assessment programmes get internalized within 
the  system.  Such  a  programme  also  helps  in  coordinating  approaches  and  thinking  between  the 
government and all the financial sector regulators. 
Operational risk management 
Operational  risk  is  assumed  during  the  normal  course  of  business  along  with  other  major  risks  viz. 
credit  risk  or  market  risk,  and  is  not  normally  assumed  independently  on  a  risk-return  basis. 
Operational  risk  management  is  particularly  relevant  to  banks,  because  although  they  are  able  to 
either  transfer  or  hedge  a  portion  of  their  other  major  risks  viz.  credit  and  market  risk  exposures, 
operational  risk  cannot  be  hedged  or  transferred.  Further,  banks  are  increasingly  undertaking 
transaction  processing,  asset  management  services,  cash  management  services,  and  sale  of 
sophisticated  financial  products  which  are  generating  a  fair  amount  of  revenue.  Banks  have  also 
begun using models for managing their credit and market risks and this exposes them to model risks. 
Banks increasingly use computers and IT for a larger segment of their operations, including certain 
critical operations, and this exposes them to a significant degree of operational risk. Further, banks are 
exposed to reputational risk to a considerable extent which has not yet been formally taken on board 
and addressed as a risk element in many banks. Since operational risk has changed its complexion 
due  to  the  above  factors,  banks  need  to  take  a  comprehensive  view  in  this  regard  to  have  a 
wholesome picture of their exposure to operational risk.  
Traditionally,  some  aspects  of  operational  risks  have  been  sought  be  minimized  through  internal 
inspection  and  audit.  However,  there  is  a  need  to  recast  and  modernize  this  function  so  as  to 
transform it into a mechanism designed to operate on the whole suite of operational risk events.  
The  issue  of  operational  risk  has  assumed  higher  importance  worldwide  in  recent  years  with  the 
increased prevalence of outsourcing, particularly overseas. With India being a major recipient of such 
outsourcing,  this  issue  assumes  even  greater  importance  for  us.  Banks  and  other  financial 
intermediaries have to understand that operational risk management in their outsourced operations is 
their own responsibility. This issue has also given rise to a good deal of discussion among financial 
regulators:  to  what  extent  should  they  be  examining  risk  management  procedures  in  outsourced 
entities  or  how  can  they  assess  the  risk  management  procedures  in  the  regulated  entities  as  they 
relate to their service providers? 
Risk management and the use of financial derivatives 
The implication of the huge expansion in the use of financial derivatives that has taken place over the 
past  five  years  is  attracting  increasing  discussion  among  financial  sector  regulators.  How  do  we 
assess their impact on financial stability and systemic risk? The most succinct and lucid discussion of 
this general issue that I have come across is in a brief speech given just 2 weeks back by my US 
counterpart,  Donald  Kohn  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank.  As  he  puts  it  very  eloquently,  “…..  (t)he 
securitization of mortgages and other assets has been transforming regulated depository institutions 
from  holders  of  interest  rate  risk  and  credit  risk  to  originators  and  distributors  of  such  risk”  (Kohn, 
2007) 
What is the situation in India in respect of financial derivatives?  
4 
 BIS Review 69/2007
Use of financial derivatives in India  
A liquid market for forward foreign exchange contracts has existed in India for several decades now. 
This product is still the main instrument for hedging foreign exchange risk in India, although foreign 
currency  options  are  also  getting  increasingly  popular.  Over  the  last  10  years  or  so,  several  other 
types of derivatives have begun trading in India. As you are aware, efforts are on for introduction of 
credit derivatives in India. Feasibility probes for foreign exchange futures have begun. Efforts are also 
on for an appropriate design for interest rate futures. In the recent years, the regulatory ecosystem for 
financial  derivatives  has  been  sought  to  be  made more  effective  and  straightforward.  Insertion  of  a 
new Chapter IIID to the RBI Act, 1934 by way of an amendment in 2006 has been a milestone in this 
regard,  since  this  has  provided  legal  clarity  as  regards  OTC  derivatives  and  has  also  defined 
regulatory  domain  and  scope.  Accounting  treatment  of  financial  derivatives  in  banks  is  also  being 
streamlined so as to be broadly in tune with international standards.  
What are the issues that we need to be concerned about as the use of financial derivatives increases 
in India? We need to understand that, as reflected Donald Kohn's remark that I have just quoted, we 
will witness a significant change in the function of financial sector intermediaries over time, as the use 
of financial derivatives gathers force. We will need to prepare ourselves for these changes from the 
regulatory point of view as will the financial intermediaries themselves in their internal risk operations. 
As  has  been  the  case  in  some  developed  markets,  with  growth  in  securitization  and  expansion  of 
credit derivatives, if banks which are now the storehouse of credit risks are to significantly abandon 
this space, what implication could this have for financial stability.  
With more distribution of risk we will need to address the issue of where will the risks rest. We will also 
need to assess the capability of market participants who will ultimately bear the risks. Will they be such 
that regulators do not need to regulate them? Will financial regulators even need to know where the 
risks are distributed? One view is that as long as the participants in this market are large institutional 
investors, or high net worth individuals, they will need no protection. Let the risks be distributed among 
those who wish to take such risk, and let it be distributed according to their capacity as determined by 
the market itself. Hence, there is no need for any safety net like the one that is implicitly embedded in 
the lender of last resort role of central banks. What will be important in such markets is the availability 
of adequate market liquidity at all times for them to operate efficiently, enabling market participants to 
take and liquidate positions as necessary. The job for regulators would then be to ensure that there is 
adequate depth in the markets, that clearing and settlement systems are efficient and safe, that there 
are no dominant market players who can move markets, and that the players are themselves large 
and  sophisticated.  In  times  of  market  stress,  the  only  issue  would  be  the  availability  of  adequate 
liquidity. 
Given  that  the  extraordinary  growth  of  credit  and  other  financial  derivatives  is  still  a  relatively  new 
phenomenon, and that this has happened in the context of accommodative monetary policies in G3 
countries in recent years, it is too early to assess how such markets will work in times of stress and 
what the overall regulatory approach should then be. 
One positive side of this assessment is that, unlike the 1980s and 1990s, when financial crises were 
frequent in developing and developed countries alike, the past decade has been remarkably free of 
such  crises,  worldwide.  High  oil  prices,  large  business  failures,  large  stock  market  fluctuations  that 
have  been  witnessed  in  this  period  have  not  resulted  in  financial  crises,  or  disruptive  effects  on 
financial intermediaries. This is attributed to the wider dispersion of risk by some, whereas others point 
to the overall benign macroeconomic and healthy global growth conditions that have prevailed over 
this period. 
What is my take on these international developments and their implications for India? I don't have a 
clear answer. We need to embrace these financial developments in such a way that we continue to 
ensure  financial  stability,  and  that  we  enable  domestic  market  participants,  both  financial  and  non-
financial, to increasingly deal with the kind of risks that are emerging with greater market liberalization 
both at home and abroad.  
As  a  monetary  authority  and  financial  sector  regulator,  we  will  need  to  enhance  our  own  risk 
management capacity, both for our internal purposes, but also as evaluators of the risk management 
capacity of regulated entities. We will continuously endeavour to enhance the risk management skills 
and capabilities of market participants and improve the micro-infrastructure of markets so that financial 
stability is maintained. Meanwhile, we will need to keep in mind the very varied nature of our economy 
that I had alluded to earlier.  
BIS Review 69/2007 
 5
The  key  to  our  approach  to  the  development  of  financial  derivatives  in  India  has  to  be  a  proactive 
stance for the adoption of robust risk management systems within the relevant financial intermediaries 
and, from our point of view, particularly in banks. We have to ensure that the introduction of new risk 
instruments actually increases the risk management capabilities of the system as a whole, and not the 
other way round because of inadequate preparation. 
Reflections on risk management at RBI 
The Reserve Bank of India, like all other central banks is also a financial institution that is exposed to a 
variety  of  risks.  Over  the  last  several  years,  there  has  been  a  structural  transformation  of  the  risk 
exposure  of  the  RBI  in  that  as  against  pre-dominantly  rupee-denominated  assets  figuring  on  its 
balance  sheet,  it  now  has  an  overwhelming  proportion  of  assets  denominated  in  major  foreign 
currencies. This transformation means more volatility in its asset valuation in rupee terms as also in 
the current earnings in rupee terms. It needs to be emphasized that while a bank or a corporate in any 
country can choose to eliminate foreign currency risk, a central bank like the RBI, which does not have 
any liability in foreign exchange, cannot hedge exchange rate risk beyond a very modest extent. The 
approach followed by the RBI in this regard for a very long time has been to have a diversified portfolio 
of reserves, both in terms of currencies and instruments and a strong level of capitalization. The RBI 
has also been very transparent in disclosing its risk management policies in annual reports and also in 
half-yearly reports of reserves management since January 2005.  
In addition to the issues related to market risk management of our assets and, hence, the integrity of 
our  balance  sheet,  which  is  so  essential  for  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  we  have  to  deal 
increasingly with the issues of operational risk that I had outlined earlier. As the institution responsible 
for the payment and settlement system we are giving increased attention to all our own IT systems, 
back up, alternative sites, and the like. 
Limits of risk management 
Adoption  of  risk  management  policies  and  practices  by  economic  entities  in  the  sense  that  they 
assume  risk  by  choice  and  not  by  chance  is  value  enhancing.  However,  hedging  through  market 
instruments results in a redistribution of risks. Ideally, if this redistribution is done on the basis of a 
scientific  appraisal  of  the  optimal  level  and  combination  of  risks  for  each  entity  it  may  result  in  an 
overall reduction of risks at the macro level. But the economy as a whole would still be exposed to 
risks. Also, for proper functioning of hedging products it is essential that expectations about the risk 
variable  should  be  heterogeneous.  If  price  movements  are  unidirectional  for  a  long  time,  protection 
sellers demand large premium from protection buyers.  
Apart from the above, there are more subtle issues concerning risk management. It is well-known that 
markets flagrantly violate some of the postulates and assumptions of traditional mathematical finance. 
The  volatility  of  financial  prices  and  the  tendency  of  this  volatility  to  occur  sometimes  in  episodes 
generally  unrelated  to  any  clearly  exogenous  news  about  fundamentals  has  been  a  subject  of 
research for a long time in behavioural finance. 
The  behavioral  dimensions  of  risk  management  and  hedging  have  attracted  much  attention  in  the 
recent years among academics and researchers. Among other things, hedging decisions of any entity 
are influenced by two important factors: (a) stance of the competitors in this regard; and (b) anomalies 
of human behaviour. The latter-mentioned aspect is significant: most often entities do not always have 
the  intellectual  or  emotional  impulse  to  take  on  risks  and  deal  with  them  before  they  impinge  on 
performance and it is too late. Many do not feel the same way when they buy a luxury car and when 
they  buy  insurance  for  the  same  car.  When  we  are  educated  to  risk  management  possibilities,  we 
become aware of the rich potential that finance has for improving human welfare, but we do not find it 
emotionally easy always to take advantage of this potential. Experienced traders know it too well how 
difficult it is at times to quit a loss-making position. The field of risk management needs to design its 
methods to minimize the human weakness in risk management.  
Finally,  have  adoption  of  risk  management  and  use  of  risk  mitigation  products  made  the  financial 
markets a safer place than before? It is a tough call to take. In a recent interview, Professor Robert 
Merton, who along with Myron Scholes and Fischer Black invented the famous option pricing formula 
in the early 1970s, reportedly said, “The real story is not what happened to LTCM in 1998 but what 
6 
 BIS Review 69/2007
happened to Amaranth later – or rather what did not happen….institutions have adjusted and we have 
learnt to deal with some of these crises which are not crises any more” (Tett, 2007). 
References 
Bernstein, Peter (1996): Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley. 
Kohn, Donald (2007): “Financial Stability and Policy Issues”, Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Atlanta's  2007  Financial  Markets  Conference,  Sea  Island,  Georgia,  16  May  2007  (available  at 
www.bis.org). 
Tett, Gillian (2007): “The Appliance of Financial Science”, Financial Times, May 21 2007. 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 7
