Goh Chok Tong: Developments in Singapore within the last 10 years 
Speech  by  Mr  Goh  Chok  Tong,  Senior  Minister  of  the  Republic  of  Singapore  and  Chairman  of  the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Singapore  International  Chamber  of  Commerce's  (SICC) 
170th Anniversary Dinner, Singapore, 25 May 2007. 
 Distinguished guests 
Friends and Fellow Singaporeans 
I congratulate the SICC (Singapore International Chamber of Commerce) on your 170th Anniversary. 
You  are  one  of  Asia’s  oldest  chambers  of  commerce,  and  have  contributed  much  to  Singapore’s 
development. 
Ten  years  ago,  in  May  1997,  I  spoke  at  your  160th  Anniversary  Dinner.  Little  did  I  know  then  that 
within months, the Asian Financial Crisis would erupt and devastate many countries in Asia, plus a few 
outside. Singapore suffered collateral damage but our economy was relatively unscathed. What was 
the big lesson learnt? It was not just about having a flexible exchange rate or better supervision of the 
financial industry. It was: get your fundamentals right, build a strong economy with good governance. 
Then, you will better survive any unexpected financial or economic earthquakes. 
Following  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  the  world  was  hit  by  the  dot.com  bust  and  the  September  11 
attacks  in  2001.  The  global  economy  slowed  down  and  ours  went  into  recession.  Within  one  year, 
23,000 jobs were lost. Just as we were recovering, we were hit by SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome). 
But in typical Singapore fashion, we kept our cool to battle the crises and, at the same time, strategise 
to  meet  the  larger  challenges  posed  by  globalisation.  We  formed  the  Economic  Review  Committee 
(ERC). The ERC came up with a comprehensive strategy to restructure, upgrade and transform our 
economy.  The  government  accepted  most  of  the  ERC’s  recommendations.  We  have  since  cut 
corporate  and  personal  income  taxes,  reduced  business  costs,  made  wages  more  flexible, 
restructured  the  manufacturing  sector,  invested  more  in  R  &  D  (Research  and  Development)  and 
revamped our education system. 
Our economy is now stronger and more broad-based than ever before. In 2006, our GDP was S$210 
billion, 55% bigger than in 1998. Annual growth rate over the past 3 years averaged 8%, double the 
figure for the period between 1997 and 2002. This year, jobs are chasing after people. 
Two  weeks  ago,  I  attended  the  Gala  Dinner  for  Merrill  Lynch’s  inaugural  “Pan  Asia  Rising  Stars 
Conference”.  Several  foreign  bankers  and  business  executives  I  met  –  some  had  not  visited 
Singapore for many years and a few were here for the first time – told me that they were surprised and 
excited  by  the  “buzz”  in  Singapore.  It  is  not  just  the  business  buzz  of  the  financial  industry,  the 
Integrated Resorts, the sizzling property market, and so on. It is also the glitz of our nightlife and our 
arts, culture and restaurant scene. 
How have we managed this quick and dramatic rebound? 
First, we have a government which has the capacity to think long term and implement tough policies to 
resolve problems and transform the economy. The government is not bogged down by disruptive and 
unproductive  domestic  political  pit  fights.  Our  basic  economic  strategy  is  right;  our  implementation 
good. We are moving up the value chain to more technology- and knowledge-intensive manufacturing. 
We  are  growing  our  services  sector  in  areas  like  tourism,  healthcare,  education,  banking  and 
insurance.  We  are  pumping  money  and  talent  into  R  &  D.  We  have  enlarged  our  economic  space 
through  FTAs  (Free  Trade  Agreements)  and  moved  into  new  areas  like  the  Middle  East.  Foreign 
Minister George Yeo has just visited Libya and Yemen, the first Singapore Minister to do so. At the 
right time, I will go there too to strengthen our relations. Minister Mentor is himself engaging Russia 
and Kazakhstan to open up business opportunities. And if there are opportunities in North Korea, we 
will  go  there  too.  I  dare  say  that  our  Ministers  are  not  just  good  at  forging  relations  but  also 
enterprising like businessmen. 
Second, we have intelligent, hard-working and adaptable people. They know the world has changed 
and is constantly changing. They know they must run ahead of the pack in order not to be eaten by 
BIS Review 55/2007 
 1
the proverbial lion. Some Singaporeans grumble and complain about the government and its tough 
policies  but  basically,  they  are  nagging  the  government  to  listen  to  them  more.  Singaporeans  are 
pragmatic and disciplined. They are prepared to take bitter medicine prescribed by the government. If 
our people resist change like they do in France and Germany, our economy would be sluggish and 
unemployment high. 
Investors and international analysts have noted the way Singapore has reinvented itself. Many foreign 
leaders have also studied Singapore to discover the secret of our success. The Foreign Editor of a 
German newspaper I met earlier this week said that he was struck by Singapore’s development. So he 
could  not  understand  why  many  Singaporeans  he  had  interacted  with  talked  about  Singapore’s 
survival  in  the  same  breath.  This  was  his  first  visit  to  Singapore.  He  was  not  fully  familiar  with  our 
history, geography and geopolitics. I confirmed that indeed we worried constantly about our future. I 
explained that as a small country with only a short history, we have an acute sense of vulnerability. I 
likened Singapore to a small boat crossing the vast ocean, fully exposed to the elements. So we have 
to be alert to changes in the wind and current directions, and any signs of danger. 
No  matter  how  well  we  have  done  up  to  now,  being  vigilant  and  prepared  will  continue  to  be  our 
approach to life in a changing environment. 
Ten years ago, before the Asian Financial Crisis, ASEAN was a preferred investment destination for 
global investors. Today, it is not the only choice. Moreover, competition for high-value investments will 
grow keener. China will move from low-cost manufacturing into higher-value industries. Shanghai will 
become  a  big  financial centre,  first  serving  the  Chinese  market,  and  later,  an  international  financial 
centre.  Mumbai  and  Dubai  also  aspire  to  be  international  financial  hubs.  India  will  grow  its 
manufacturing  sector  in  a  big  way  and  make  its  presence  felt  in  the  export  market.  All  countries, 
including Singapore, will have to adapt to these realities. 
Domestically,  we  have  other  long-term  headaches.  We  are  facing  a  demographic  crunch,  with  a 
rapidly-ageing  population  and  a  declining  birth  rate.  Our  people  are  increasingly  mobile.  In  a 
borderless world, ensuring that our best remain rooted to Singapore, physically and emotionally, will 
be a challenge. 
Despite  these  challenges,  I  am  optimistic  about  our  prospects.  I  base  my  optimism  on  our 
fundamentals. We have two basic strengths – good governance and our ability to nurture and attract 
talent.  Good  governance  and  talent  form  a  virtuous  cycle  for  sustaining  economic  growth.  Let  me 
elaborate. 
First, good governance. A World Bank Institute report released in September 2006 ranked Singapore 
among  the  top  10%  of  countries  around  the  world  with  good  governance.  Good  governance  is 
possible only if you have an honest, capable and committed government. In our case, the government 
must, in fact, be exceptional to overcome the exceptional challenges faced by Singapore, given our 
land and space constraints and geopolitics. 
For the next decade at least, I do not see any danger of a drop in the quality of our governance. The 
new team under Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong is firmly in place. It has the drive and solutions to 
bring  our  economy  forward  and  the  wisdom  and  compassion  to  help  all  Singaporeans.  The 
government is paying particular attention to those in the lower-income group to help them and ensure 
that they, like the rest of Singapore, benefit from globalisation. It is a strong and pragmatic government 
with integrity and sound values. It gives the country a clear sense of direction, anticipates and solves 
problems, rallies the people towards common goals and takes care of all Singaporeans. 
The  challenge  for  Singapore  is  how  to  keep  on  producing  an  exceptional  government.  Without 
exceptional government, Singapore will lose its influence internationally, become a mediocre country 
and be marginalised. 
This  brings  me  to  the  second  critical  success  factor  –  talent.  While  good  governance  provides  the 
necessary conditions for growth – political stability, social harmony, justice and equal opportunities – 
what drives the economy and Singapore forward is talent. We need talent in the public and private 
sectors, in the arts and the social sector, in government institutions, in NGOs and the people sector, 
and in business and the economy. Countries now actively compete for talent to power their economy. 
They want to attract foreign talent while retaining their own. Even China which has 1.3 billion people 
wants to attract back its overseas Chinese talent and import foreign talent. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2007
To ensure that Singapore continues to have a strong talent base, we have to build, attract and retain 
talent.  We  will  continue  to  invest  heavily  in  our  people,  especially  our  young,  and  equip  the  next 
generation with the right skills and cutting edge knowledge. We will continue to welcome global talent. 
To enhance Singapore’s magnetic pull, we are developing Singapore into a truly global city – a “cool” 
and “happening” place, with social and cultural vibrancy, good educational institutions, clean, green 
and safe environment and iconic international sporting events like F1 Grand Prix. But the strongest 
pull in this magnet is economic growth. Without economic opportunities, talent will not come or stay. 
What of the future? 
We did not foresee the Asian Financial Crisis coming in May 1997. Despite keeping a close watch, we 
may still miss something or misinterpret a blip on the radar screen. This is why I have emphasised the 
importance of maintaining the virtuous cycle of good governance and talent to generate growth. This is 
the best strategy to face whatever challenges ahead. Sustaining this virtuous cycle must be the task of 
all Singaporeans. 
Let me now say a few words about how I see the role of the SICC in Singapore’s future development. 
Given the diverse markets in which SICC members operate, your chamber can play an important role 
in  helping  our  companies  internationalise  and  seize  global  opportunities.  The  SICC  can  help  your 
members move into new areas of growth like the Middle East. I am glad to note that more links and 
collaboration are being forged between SICC and your counterparts in the Middle East. We have just 
witnessed  the  signing  of  MOUs  between  the  SICC  and  the  Riyadh  and  Abu  Dhabi  Chambers’  of 
Commerce and Industry. 
I  also  encourage  SICC  to  collaborate with  IE  Singapore  and  the  Singapore  Business  Federation  to 
organise more networking platforms to forge partnerships between foreign and local companies. For 
instance, given our knowledge and connections, Singapore can serve as a bridge for Middle Eastern 
investors interested in going into China. 
Finally, let me once again congratulate the SICC on your 170th Anniversary and wish the SICC and its 
members continued success. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 55/2007 
 3
