Hamad Al-Sayari: Corporate governance for banks in the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia 
Speech  by  His  Excellency  Hamad  Al-Sayari,  Governor  of  the  Saudi  Arabian  Monetary 
Agency,  at  the  High-Level  Roundtable  Discussion  for  Bank  Executives  on  Corporate 
Governance for Banks in Saudi Arabia, Institute of Banking, Riyadh, 22-23 May 2007. 
 Dear Distinguished Audience  
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you, and I am delighted by your participation at this 
important  conference  on  "Corporate  Governance"  organized  jointly  by  the  Institute  of 
Banking and the IFC. 
Corporate  Governance  is  popularly  defined  as  a  structural  organization  and  executive 
procedures used to direct and manage business to achieve the objectives of the company 
and  ensure  its  financial  stability.  In  the  past  decade,  this  subject  has  taken  increasing 
worldwide  prominence  because  of  its  importance  and  relevance  for  the  enhancement  of 
macro-economic development and growth and the stability of the national financial systems 
in particular. 
In spite of the scarcity of books issued in Arabic on this subject, it is worth referring to two 
books; the first entitled "Corporate Governance" issued by Mr. Abdulmajeed Al-Bastati in 
2004 and the second entitled “The Way towards a Governing System for Corporations" 
issued by Dr. Ibraheem AL-Muneef in 2006. The latter refers to a third book, which I have not 
read, issued by Mr. Saleh Ali Husein in 2003 under the title "Practicing and Managing the 
Authority in Business Organizations".  
Dear Distinguished Audience, 
Effective Board and management leadership in any financial institution is the key pillar that 
would  enable  the  institution  to  achieve  its  objectives  and  guarantee  its  development  and 
growth  for  the  service  of  all  parties  including  shareholders  and  staff.  Effective  leadership 
stems  from  sound  corporate  governance  practiced  by  competent  and  highly  experienced 
officials and directors at the various levels, setting a comprehensive strategy and elaborate 
business  plans  with  appropriate  mechanisms  of 
transparency  and 
accountability in the financial institution.  
In this regard, the board of directors plays a prominent role in overseeing the development of 
a comprehensive strategy of the financial institution and in monitoring the decisions made by 
senior management for achieving these objectives. This requires having necessary skills and 
competencies  for  realizing  the  objectives  set  by  the  Board.  In  addition,  the  board  should 
establish clear guidelines regarding the independence of all departments and businesses in 
the organization and should ensure their compliance with established policies and approved 
procedures.  Therefore,  special  committees  of  the  Board  such  as  the  Audit,  Compliance, 
Compensation  and  other  special  committees,  can  play  extremely  important  roles  in  this 
respect. 
The senior management should set a comprehensive business strategy; oversee day-to-day 
decisions  that  support  the  long-term  objectives  and  policies  determined  by  the  board.  To 
ensure financial stability, the execution of the overall objectives of the firm must be supported 
by rigorous internal supervisory controls and effective risk management. An effective internal 
control  system  is  critical  for  providing  reasonable  assurance  and  producing  appropriate 
timely  information  by  the  organization  that  would  help  in  discovering  and  correcting  errors 
promptly.  Such  a  system  will  also  promote  the  organization's  operational  efficiency  and 
ensure  compliance  with  managerial  policies,  laws,  regulations,  and  other  prescribed 
mechanisms. 
responsibility, 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 1
Effective  risk  management  is  based  on  a  foundation  of  good  corporate  governance  and 
rigorous internal controls. Risk identification in all activities is a core function of any financial 
institution.  At  the  same  time,  the  institution  must  have  in  place  the  technical  systems  and 
management processes necessary to effectively measure, monitor, and control risks. 
An  effective  risk  management  and  control  structure  must  be  supported  by  an  institutional 
culture that ensures that written policies and procedures are actually translated into practice. 
The  institution's  culture  is  determined  by  the  philosophy  and  the  behaviour  of  its  board  of 
directors and the senior management. In particular, the actions of senior management and 
consistency of their decisions and behavior with the values and principles they articulate are 
critical in shaping the institution's culture. It is vital that senior managers should emphasize 
their commitment to ethical behaviour, effective risk management and rigorous controls and 
that these principles should be continuously applied to all levels of the organization. 
The other important factor that supports financial stability is effective market discipline, which 
also contributes significantly to good corporate governance. When market participants obtain 
timely,  accurate,  realistic  and  latest  information  about  the  institution's  performance,  their 
investment  and  credit  decisions  can  be  a  means  of  pressure  and  incentives  for  managers 
and boards of directors for managing their risks soundly. Equally important, the same market 
participants can penalize firms that fail to manage their risks soundly. 
Therefore,  market  discipline  must  be  supported  by  adequate  public  disclosure  and 
compliance  with  sound  accounting  standards.  Knowing  a  company's  risk  appetite  and  its 
approach  and  methodologies  for  managing  risk  is  essential  to  assessing  the  institution's 
future. 
Progress in the disclosure area, however, requires that accounting standards are enhanced 
to  ensure  proper  valuation  and  to  reflect  innovations,  in  terms  of  both  new  products  and 
modern risk management techniques. Accounting systems serve a variety of purposes, the 
most  prominent  of  which  is  helping  creditors  and  investors  make  rigorous  and  informed 
decisions  as  to  which  enterprises  meet  the  market  needs  in  terms  of  efficiency, 
competitiveness,  and  profitability.  Sound  accounting  systems  also  enable  investors  in 
assessing the real financial value of enterprises. The systems also assist in attracting capital, 
both foreign and domestic.  
Looking ahead, I believe that a major challenge for directors and executive management is to 
find directors who are sufficiently independent but still knowledgeable about the business of 
the financial institution. Independence reflects qualities of objectivity, experience, insight, and 
force of character. The need for directors to possess this blend of technical knowledge plus 
independence is critical, given the increased complexity of most banking activities and the 
rapid  pace  of  change  in  financial  markets  and  practices.  Getting  the  right  balance  of 
expertise and independence so that the board does not rubber-stamp the decisions of top 
management is a major challenge. 
Now, turning to Saudi Arabia, as the Central Bank and the Banking Supervisory Authority, 
SAMA  has  played  a  leadership  role  in  strengthening  corporate  governance  in  the  banking 
industry in Saudi Arabia since its establishment. You may be surprised to learn that as early 
as 1981, SAMA issued a document entitled "Powers and Responsibilities of the Board of 
Directors  of  Commercial  Banks  in  Saudi  Arabia".  This  document,  in  a  comprehensive 
manner, guided the Board members on compliance to Banking Control and Company Laws, 
required the implementation of a system of accounting and internal controls and assigned the 
Board the responsibility for monitoring the assets and liabilities, investments and profitability 
of  the  bank.  This  was  followed  by  a  guidance  document  in  1996  on  the  role  of  the  Audit 
Committee of the Board. This document in substantial detail provided guidance to the Banks 
on the composition, mandate, role and responsibilities of their Audit Committees. 
In  2004,  SAMA  issued  another  important  circular  affecting  the  Bank  Directors  and  Senior 
Managers entitled: "Qualifications and Requirements for Appointments to Senior Positions in 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2007
Banks licensed in Saudi Arabia". The circular is aimed at ensuring that directors and senior 
managers have sound reputation and are persons of integrity and honesty. 
Furthermore,  over  the  past  two  decades,  SAMA  has  issued  additional  governance  related 
regulations  and  guidance  to  banks  operating  in  Saudi  Arabia.  These  include  circulars  on 
Internal  Controls;  Know  Your  Customers  rules,  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Combating 
Terrorism Financing and Prevention of Fraud. Also, there are specific regulations on the Role 
of the External Auditors and on the Internal Audit function. SAMA also requires the Board of 
Directors to establish a specialized Compliance Function that monitors the compliance of the 
organization with regulations and standards, and has a reporting line to the Board or one of 
its  committees.  Moreover,  SAMA  requires  all  banks  to  apply  the  International  Financial 
Reporting Standards, and that two firms of external auditors are to conduct an annual audit.  
Furthermore, SAMA has required banks in Saudi Arabia to meet the corporate governance 
guidance emanating from the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision and more recently 
from  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board.  In  this  regard,  I  should  mention  that  SAMA  is 
participating  in  the  IFSB  Technical  Committee  and  in  various  working  groups  that  are 
developing standards of corporate governance for Shari'ah compliant financial institutions. 
The  leadership  role  played  by  SAMA,  over  the  past  decades,  in  promulgating  corporate 
governance  standards  and  in  promoting  a  governance  culture  has  been  reflected  in  the 
emergence  of  strong  financial  institutions  and  a  credible  banking  system.  Thanks  to  these 
efforts,  the  institutions  and  the  system  have  remained  stable  and  steady,  despite  global 
economic crises and oil price volatilities.  
Dear Audience, 
We  should  not  rest  on  these  past  successes.  We  must  remain  vigilant  and  continue  to 
monitor changes in regional and global markets. We must continuously ensure adopting and 
implementing  best  international  standards  and principles.  In  this  context,  I  wish  to  draw  to 
your  attention  that  SAMA  is  currently  directing  the  banks  in  the  Kingdom  towards  the 
adoption of Basle II Capital Adequacy standard by 1st January 2008. I expect all banks to 
easily meet the required capital requirements; and this will be positively reflected on fostering 
the risk management and corporate governance culture that is deemed essential for meeting 
the challenges of the forthcoming stage. 
In  conclusion,  I  wish  you  a  good  stay  in  the  Kingdom,  and  wish  all  success  to  your 
conference. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 3
