Axel A Weber: From academic to policy maker 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  CEPR  – 
CEPREMAP Lectures on Policy Making, Paris, 29 May 2007. 
  Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Kenneth Galbraith once remarked that “Economics is extremely useful as a form of employment for 
economists”. In monetary policy, a new observable trend seems to be to delegate the decision-making 
powers to people who have a strong academic background. Let me give you some examples: 
• 
• 
Otmar Issing – who became the Bundesbank’s Chief economist already in 1990. 
Mervyn  King  and  Charlie  Bean  from  the  Bank  of  England  (or,  formerly,  Willem  Buiter, 
Charles Goodhart, Stephen Nickell). 
Ben Bernanke, Frederic Mishkin and Randall Kroszner from the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System. In fact, half of the current Board members are persons who have 
spent most of their professional career as academics. 
Charles Plosser, Bill Poole and Janet Yellen from the Fed’s regional Reserve Banks. 
• 
And there seems to be an unbroken trend as the developments over the past couple of months have 
shown:  Lars  Svensson  became  a  member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Swedish  Riksbank  only  a 
week ago and Athanasios Orphanides is the new Governor of the Central Bank of Cyprus. 
Sending academics to politics clearly solves a problem inherent in academic policy advice: getting the 
message  across  to  do  the  right  thing.  Policy  makers  and  their  academic  advisors  typically  face 
different problems. The question is: Is the ivory tower not managing to get its message across in clear 
and  accessible  terms?  Or  is  the  political  field  per  se  unwilling  to  accept  advice  that  does  not  take 
account of political restrictions and interests? 
So,  why  are  there  so  many  academics  in  monetary  policy?  What  explains  this  trend  in  central 
banking? Is there something special about monetary policy compared with other fields of public policy? 
I want to highlight one aspect: Monetary policy is indeed remarkably different from other fields of public 
policy  in  that  it  is  conducted  by  independent  institutions.  This  is  true  of  the  euro  area,  but  the 
independence  of  central  banks  is  now  a  global  phenomenon.  Independence  means  that  monetary 
policy is shielded from the day-to-day conflicts and power struggles that characterise other areas of 
policy. This state of affairs may make it easier to delegate the decision-making power to “technocratic 
experts in macroeconomic and monetary matters”. 
The independence of a central bank is not an end in itself. Rather, central bank independence helps to 
maintain a long-term stability orientation of monetary policy by insulating decision-making bodies from 
short-term-motivated  political  influence  and,  thus,  contributes  to  enhancing  monetary  policy’s 
credibility. It also makes a central banker’s job interesting and attractive for academics. 
Has  independence  helped  in  containing  inflation?  The  decline  in  trend  inflation  worldwide  is  in  part 
explained  by  monetary  policy  in  many  countries  being  geared  towards  price  stability,  which  is 
enhanced by the increasing independence of central banks in achieving their goals. Globalisation will 
have played a supportive role, but, in the final analysis, it is monetary policy that is responsible for 
medium to long-term inflation outcomes. 
Academic research has contributed in important ways to such a consensus view. Take as examples 
the rational expectations revolution, the literature on time inconsistency, and the empirical research on 
the macroeconomic outcomes of central bank independence. Monetary policy is arguably the policy 
area  most  heavily  influenced  by  academic  contributions.  And  central  banks  are  devoting  significant 
resources to their own research activities. This might be a further reason why, over the past years, 
academic researchers have been taking up leading positions at central banks. 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 1
Some personal reflections on academics and policymaking 
Let me come back to the heart of the issue – academics and policymaking. Keeping with the theme of 
my  speech,  I  will  offer  a  few  thoughts  on  my  transition  from  academia  to  the  policy  world  –  in 
particular, how the former experience has prepared me for the latter. 
At least for me, but I suppose for all of my colleagues who have travelled the road from academia to 
policymaking, it is certainly true that I never imagined sitting in the driving seat of a central bank when I 
decided to become an academic. 
Before I was appointed as President of the Bundesbank, I held various tenures at German universities. 
My  administrative  experience  during  most  of  that  time  was  limited  to  the  often  painful  bureaucratic 
duties and procedures that are part and parcel of life at German universities. But for some years of my 
academic career, I enjoyed the privilege of being Director of the Frankfurtbased Center for Financial 
Studies. This meant the management of a research institute full of talented economists with productive 
ideas,  and  it  meant  staying  in  close  contact  with  monetary  policy  makers  and  bankers  alike  which 
helped me to shape my impression of the environment under which concrete political and business 
decisions were made. 
Like most of my colleagues, as a young economist an academic career was attractive to me because 
it  offered  the  freedom  to  analyse  economic  questions  I  personally  found  interesting.  My  fields  of 
interest  have  always  been  monetary  macroeconomics  and  international  economics.  Throughout  my 
academic career I kept a focus on the empirical dimension of the problems at hand. And now, having 
turned into a central banker, I still find it extremely useful to underpin the analysis of current economic 
issues  with  empirics.  However,  I  now  have  the  privilege  of  using  my  limited  time  for  asking  only 
questions which are relevant to policy. It is my staff that is finding the answers. 
Let me give you an example: In the euro area, the relationship between growth, export performance 
and trade has gained much attention. I therefore wanted to know more about the facts and myths of 
this matter. 
At  the  heart of  the  issue  is  the  diverging  export  performance  of  Germany  and  France:  Since 2000, 
Germany has been experiencing a sharp rise in net exports. By contrast, net exports in France initially 
declined  and  then  turned  negative  in  2004.  Similarly,  the  French  deficit  in  bilateral  Franco-German 
trade increased considerably in the second half of the 1990s and is now between 1% and 1½% of 
French GDP. 
This development is seen as worrying by several French politicians: A preference for a weaker euro 
has  been  voiced  time  and  again,  partly  as  a  consequence  of  the  recent  election  campaign,  but 
evidently  even  more  because  of  a  different  understanding  of  policy.  It  is  always  easy  to  find  a 
scapegoat.  For  me  as  an  economist,  however,  facts  come  first.  So  what  exactly  has  caused  the 
difference in export performance? 
The traditional argument is that such differences can be explained by the geographical and sectoral 
patterns  of  trade  specialisation.  A  closer  look  at  the  geographical  structure  of  German  and  French 
export markets tells us that patterns are indeed different. However, in the period from 2001 to 2006, 
real demand in German export markets did not grow significantly more strongly than in French export 
markets: it was, on average, a mere 0.3 pp higher. Nevertheless, German firms outperformed French 
firms  when  it  came  to  increasing  nominal  exports  of  goods  to  almost  all  parts  of  the  world.  For 
example, exports to the new EU member states rose, on average, by 8.2% in Germany (compared 
with 3.3% in France). 
As for the sectoral structure, no clear competitive advantage can be discerned either. Whereas France 
has  a  larger  share  in  exporting  consumer  goods,  Germany  has  a  larger  share  in  exports  of  cars, 
capital  goods  and  intermediate  goods.  But  since  2001,  exports  in  all  of  these  sectors  (including 
consumer goods) have been growing more dynamically in Germany than in France. 
If  the  traditional  analysis explains  very  little  in  terms  of  the differences  in  export performance, what 
else accounts for these differences? Are the worried voices right after all? No, they are not. 
First of all, intra-euro-area trade is more important for France than it is for Germany. In France, the 
share of exported goods to other EMU countries amounted to 48% of all exports in 2005, whereas in 
Germany it was 5 pp lower. Consequently, France appears less dependent on the euro’s exchange 
rate  than  Germany.  However,  the  BDI  (the  Federation  of  German  Industries)  said  last  month  that 
German industry could live with the strong euro, as long as it does not rise sharply. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2007
Even more importantly, the wishful thinking behind a policy-driven weakening of the euro does not go 
to  the  core  of  the  problem.  All  things  considered,  differences  in  export  performance  are  linked  to 
differences in competitiveness. As far as price competitiveness is concerned, it has increased in both 
Germany  and  France  since  the  start  of  EMU.  But  in  Germany,  the  increase  has  been  more 
pronounced. One reason for this has been wage policy moderation in Germany. In addition to that – 
and  unlike  French  firms  –  German  firms  have  boosted  their  competitiveness  by  increasingly 
outsourcing their production processes to low-cost countries. 
So, to some extent, the recent weakness of French export performance compared to Germany can be 
explained  by  stronger  gains  in  German  price  competitiveness.  But  what  is  more  important:  overall 
export  performance  in  France  cannot  adequately  be  explained  by  traditional  factors.  Estimations 
usually contain a noteworthy residual term. What accounts for it? Its reasons actually are more of a 
microeconomic nature, as has already been put forward by the French Council of Economic Analysis1. 
Examples  are  product  differentiation,  technological  progress,  reputation,  marketing,  or  the  export 
readiness of SMEs. For instance, the figure for French firms that export is only 4%, compared with 
11% in Germany. Moreover, French export firms are, on average, smaller than German ones. 
The  upshot  of  this  is  that  competitiveness  is  enhanced  by  firms,  not  in  exchange  rate  markets.  If 
politicians want to support domestic industries they should do so by increasing the flexibility of labour 
and product markets through structural reforms, not by interfering with market forces. 
But let me come back to my original theme – academics and policy-making. When it comes to core 
monetary policy issues in my current job, my professional background is clearly something I benefit 
from. Our models and forecasting techniques are quite familiar to me from my former academic life. 
The  way  monetary  policy  has  evolved  over  the  past  few  years  towards  more  transparency  and 
accountability,  the  role  of  monetary  policy  strategies  in  that  respect,  and  the  eminent  role  of 
communication  has  been  heavily  shaped  by  academic  research.  And  in  most  of  these  issues  my 
academic background provides a solid base to grasp the key issues at stake. 
However, there are some major aspects of monetary policy decision-making that are not reflected in 
undergraduate or graduate courses. The most important aspect deals with the analysis of the current 
stance.  The  way  the  multitude  of  economic  data  is  transformed  into  a  coherent  narrative  and 
perspective is something that is not taught at universities. Partly, there is good reason for this, as this 
is a hands-on business where practical experience is inherently essential. But all of us involved in the 
monetary policy process must try to synthesise a range of disparate information, including official data, 
anecdotal evidence, and qualitative developments, to construct a “narrative” about how the economy 
is  evolving:  What  forces  are  determining  economic  activity  now,  and  what  do  they  suggest  for  the 
future? 
Fortunately, before becoming President of the Bundesbank, I was a member of the German Council of 
Economic  Experts,  better  known  as  the  “five  wise  men”.  Here,  I  became  pretty  familiar  with  the 
thousands of economic statistics and with the necessary balance between theory and a good dose of 
judgment  in  forming  an  adequate  assessment  of  the  current  stance  of  the  economy.  Moreover,  my 
time at the Council helped me to shape my thinking about a host of other economic issues, such as 
social security, labour markets and issues of taxation. 
This  is  not  to  say,  however,  that  my  former profession  has  equipped  me  with  all  the  knowledge 
necessary for central banking. Central banks cover fields that are far more wide-ranging than the core 
monetary policy principles just outlined. We deal with financial stability issues, have responsibilities in 
the banking supervision process, are responsible for the proper functioning of the payment system, 
distribute  cash  services  to  banks,  companies  and  households,  and  play  an  important  role  in 
international fora like the IMF and the different G-settings. Here, my learning curve over the past three 
years has been quite steep. Arguably, not every aspect in that regard is equally interesting to me, but 
my experience since I took office has been that most of these issues are intellectually demanding and 
rewarding at the same time. 
Describing his own personal experience, Ben Bernanke has emphasised that one common theme in 
all these fields is to realise that the “devil is in the institutional details” and to appreciate this dictum is 
the foundation of all serious policy work. This is certainly true and arguably the thin line academics 
                                                      
1   Rapport du Conseil d’Analyse économique: Evolution récente du commerce extérieur français, Nov. 2006. 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 3
have  to  cross  to  become  serious  policymakers.  And,  here,  our  academic  background  might  be  of 
some  help  in  that  we  have  learned  to  grasp  the  underlying  economic  content  of  multifaceted  and 
complex issues. But it is certainly not enough to guarantee coherent and appropriate policy decisions. 
But  these  challenges  are  common  to  everyone  taking  up  a  political  job  without  former  practical 
experience in this area. 
One  final  remark:  Another  aspect  where  my  former  academic  life  did  not  fully  prepare  me  to  meet 
current  challenges  has  to  be  mentioned.  And  this  aspect  is  not  common  for  most  of  my  academic 
colleagues that have now turned into policymakers: The Bundesbank, an institution of roughly 11,000 
employees, is an institution in transition. 
The adjustment to the single monetary policy of the Eurosystem has meant a cultural watershed to the 
Bundesbank.  Having  formerly  been  the  anchor  of  the  European monetary  system,  the  Bundesbank 
has been facing necessities of adjustment and workload involved has been more wide-ranging than it 
has  been  for  other  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area.  We  are  currently  well  under  way  in 
restructuring and refocusing our medium-term strategy. Obviously, change management is something 
typically not included in economics I or II courses – so I had to learn on the job how to cope with all the 
difficulties that this entails. 
Admittedly, some of the tensions and issues that are inherent in policymaking for a large institution 
which is confronted with a massive shift in external conditions are the price to be paid in comparison 
with a purely academic life. On the other hand, working together for a public good like price stability is 
worth paying such a price for. 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2007
