Lucas Papademos: The effects of globalisation on inflation, liquidity and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the conference on 
the  “International  Dimensions  of  Monetary  Policy”  organised  by  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, S’Agaró, Girona, 11 June 2007. 
 Introduction  
I.  
My remarks tonight focus on “the effects of globalisation on inflation, liquidity and monetary policy”. 
This subject has received increasing attention among academic economists and policy-makers over 
the past two years. Indeed, a number of distinguished participants in this conference have contributed 
to  the  ongoing  analysis  and  public  debate  on  this  topic.  I  have  observed,  however,  relatively  less 
emphasis so far on the impact of globalisation on liquidity and the related implications for monetary 
policy and financial stability. For this reason, I will also devote some time on these aspects.  
It  might  be  interesting  to  recall  that  a  number  of  pertinent  issues,  which  I  will  also  address,  were 
already  very  topical  more  than  400  years  ago,  in  16th  century  Spain.  As  a  consequence  of  what, 
undoubtedly, was one of the first and most impressive periods of globalisation – benefiting Catalonia, 
however, only 200 years later1 – significant effects on inflation were observed. Of course, I refer to the 
Spanish discovery of the Americas and the large influx of gold and silver from the New World. The 
resulting rise in inflation in Spain quickly spread to Western Europe as a whole.2 One is thus tempted 
to  talk  about  the  first  evidence  of  global  excess  liquidity  driving  global  inflation  trends.  Economic 
historians  have  labelled  that  inflationary  period  a  “price  revolution”.3  Then,  as  now,  there  was 
academic  debate,  beginning  as  early  as  the  16th  century,  on  whether  inflation  was  due  to  excess 
liquidity  or  rather  diminishing  domestic  economic  slack  linked  to  urbanisation  and  income  growth.4 
And, I am sure, it was no coincidence that the quantity theory of money was invented by scholars of 
the School of Salamanca who were inspired by the price revolution period in 16th century Spain.5  
Even  the  potential  links  between  globalisation,  the  flattening  of  the  Phillips-curve  and  the  growing 
importance of global economic slack were issues already debated at that time. Historians tell us that 
urbanisation also contributed to increased trade between Europe’s regions, which made prices more 
responsive to distant changes in demand. Another topical issue I will elaborate on – the link between 
global excess liquidity and financial stability – also has its roots in 16th century Spain. Rising inflation 
and the dependency on gold and silver imports are mentioned as causes of multiple bankruptcies and 
economic crashes.6
Following  the  agenda  set  by  the  16th  century  globalisation  episode,  my  speech  is  divided  into  two 
main parts. The first part deals with the effects of globalisation on inflation dynamics and price stability 
from a monetary policy perspective. I will elaborate on the likely impact on product and labour markets 
as well as the impact on monetary aggregates and financial markets. In the second part, I will reflect 
on the link between globalisation and financial stability again focusing on the role of central banks. In 
this context, I will point to the risks associated with global imbalances and asset price boom-and-bust 
cycles. I will conclude by addressing two pertinent questions, namely (i) whether central banks need to 
adapt  their  monetary  policy  strategies  in  order  to  cope  with  the  challenges  of  globalisation;  and 
(ii) whether monetary policy has become less effective as a consequence of globalisation.  
                                                      
1  
2   Adam Smith estimated that “the discovery of the abundant mines of America reduced, in the sixteenth century, the value of 
In 1778, Catalonia was allowed to trade with the Americas by decree of Charles III. 
gold and silver in Europe to about a third of what it had been before.” See Smith, 1776. 
3   Hamilton, 1934. 
4   Bernholz and Kugler, 2007. 
5   Navarro,  one  of  the  most  famous  scholars  of  the  School  of  Salamanca  wrote  in  1566  that  “Other  things  being  equal,  in 
countries where there is a great scarcity of money, all other saleable goods, and even the hands and labour of men, are 
given for less money than where it is abundant.” 
6   See, for example, Munro, 1994. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 1
As I have already mentioned the term globalisation a number of times, and many more references will 
follow,  let  me  briefly  define  it  in  fairly  broad  terms:  it  is  the  process  of  rapidly  increasing  global 
economic  integration.  Over  the  past  decade,  this  process  involved,  and  is  evidenced  by,  the 
unprecedented and pervasive growth in the cross-border trade of goods and services as well as of 
financial and real assets, but it also involves the swift transfer of technologies, information and ideas. 
II.  
Globalisation, price stability and monetary policy 
Impact of globalisation on product and labour markets 
II.1.  
Let me start by briefly reviewing both the theoretical arguments and the empirical evidence pertaining 
to  the  effects  of  globalisation  on  product  and  labour  markets.  It  would  be  too  easy  to  dismiss  any 
inflationary effects stemming from globalisation with the argument that its impact will essentially and 
ultimately  result  in  a  change  in  relative  prices  and  that,  ceteris  paribus,  the  overall  rate  of  inflation 
should  not  be  affected.  Firstly,  integration  is  not  a  one-off  event.  Steadily  rising  integration  could 
potentially lead to steadily falling unit labour costs and, ceteris paribus, to protracted periods of lower 
inflation.  Secondly,  a  higher  degree  of  openness,  and  thus  increased  competition  could  lead  to 
permanently higher productivity growth and, again other things being equal, to lower inflation. Thirdly, 
globalisation could affect other aspects of the inflation process and the conduct of monetary policy: the 
slope of the Phillips-curve, the wedge between the “socially optimal” and the “natural” or “potential” 
output level, the “natural rate of unemployment” or NAIRU and even the relative emphasis placed on 
preserving  price  stability  by  the  central  bank  when  formulating  monetary  policy.  Thus,  globalisation 
could eventually affect the inflationary impact of supply shocks and, more generally, inflation dynamics 
and the size of the “inflation bias” in the economy.7
Many economists and policy-makers have examined the effects of globalisation on one or several of 
these factors and processes, partly in order to better understand or explain the recent period of low 
inflation.  Interestingly,  sometimes  the  theoretical  arguments and empirical  findings point  in opposite 
directions:  Some  have  argued  that  increasing  global  competition  will  tend  to  impinge  on  domestic 
monopolistic  structures  and  reduce  economic  distortions.8  Furthermore,  the  slope  of  the  short-term 
Phillips-curve  would  increase  in  the  short  run  as  national  economies  would  become  more  flexible. 
These two propositions and implied parameter changes imply a permanent reduction in the “inflation 
bias”.  Others  have  argued  instead  that  the  slope  of  the  Phillips-curve  should  become  flatter.9  This 
reasoning is based on a variety of potential channels: an increased degree of openness reduces the 
responsiveness of inflation to domestic slack, profit margins become more variable under competitive 
pressure  and  wage  developments  that  are  influenced  by  the  threat  of  outsourcing  jobs  and  labour 
immigration. There are other factors, however, which potentially could flatten the slope of the Phillips-
curve – the underlying, structural slope or the estimated, effectively observed slope – and which are 
not  necessarily  linked  to  globalisation:  for  example,  inflation  expectations  that  are  well-anchored  to 
price stability and less frequent price updates of firms in a low-inflation environment. 
Alternative  or  complementary  propositions  have  also  been  advanced.  It  has  been  argued  that  the 
whole debate about the slope of the short-term Phillips-curve is not particularly relevant, if at all.10 In a 
highly globalised economic environment, lower inflation could simply be due to a decline in the “natural 
rate of unemployment” or NAIRU. Importantly, Assaf Razin, among others, has recently shown how 
the  degree  of  trade  and  financial  integration  might  both  flatten  the  slope  of  the  short-term  Phillips-
curve  and  raise  the  optimal  weight  to  be  placed  on  the  central  bank’s  inflation  objective,  when 
                                                      
7  
“Inflation bias” in this context refers to the component of inflation which results from the implementation of time-inconsistent 
policies when nominal rigidities create an incentive for policy-makers to reduce unemployment by exploiting the short-run 
trade-off between inflation and unemployment. 
8   Rogoff, 2004, 2006. See Romer 1993 for a similar argument related to openness as a factor that leads to increasing t costs 
of an inflationary monetary policy due to fears of capital outflows. 
9   See, for example, Bean 2006a, 2006b. 
10   Frankel, 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2007
monetary  policy  maximises  consumer  preferences.11  This  would  lead  to  the  conduct  of  a  more 
aggressive (optimal) monetary policy in the presence of supply shocks.12
Not surprisingly, this debate has triggered a series of empiried studies trying to shed more light on the 
issue. I will focus on evidence for the euro area. In a recent and often-cited BIS paper, Claudio Borio 
and Andrew Filardo13 argue that short-term Phillips-curves have become flatter across countries and 
that  measures  of  global  economic  slack  have  become  more  important  than  of  domestic  slack  in 
explaining domestic inflation. Their own results, however, show that this is not the case in the euro 
area. Moreover, unpublished research at the ECB does not reveal any statistically significant structural 
breaks  with  respect  to  the  slope  of  the  euro  area  Phillips-curve  or  any  decline  in  the  estimated 
coefficient  over  time.  Other  evidence  regarding  a  possible  change  in  the  slope  of  the  short-term 
Phillips-curve  in  the  euro  area  is  also  very  mixed,  especially  with  regard  to  the  potential  effect  of 
increased  openness  on  the  slope.  14  The  failure  to  capture  econometrically  significant  globalisation 
effects could, of course, be due to the relatively recent nature of certain aspects of this phenomenon 
and the impact of other factors that might have had relatively greater influence on inflation dynamics 
during the past ten years. For this reason, the potential effects of globalisation on inflation dynamics, 
through its influence on behavioural or structural features of the labour and product markets, deserves 
close monitoring and further analysis.  
The  policy  relevance  of  this  debate  is  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that  even  if  future  empirical 
studies would confirm a significant drop in the responsiveness of inflation to domestic slack in Phillips-
curve equations, it is not at all clear whether this should be interpreted as a flattening of the aggregate 
supply curve in the short term. Such “reduced form” evidence can be observationally equivalent to the 
evidence that could result from an unchanged structural relationship in an economy where the central 
bank  has  been  successful  in  reducing  inflation  and  output  volatility,  which  would  correspondingly 
reduce or could even eliminate the empirical correlation between inflation and the output gap.15 For 
this reason, economists and policy-makers have to be particularly careful when using simple reduced 
form estimated Phillips-curve equations to calculate the NAIRU and then employ the estimated value 
as a benchmark for assessing inflationary pressure. 
There are two lessons I derive from this review of theory and evidence. First, there is no consensus at 
a  theoretical  level  on  the  relative  importance  of  the  various  potential  effects  of  globalisation  on  the 
inflation  process  through  this  channel.  Second,  the  available  empirical  results  provide  no  clear 
message either, except that, so far, there is not much evidence to support the view that globalisation 
has resulted in a flatter Phillips-curve, particularly in the euro area. This situation is, of course, not very 
comforting for a central banker. The good news is that all studies point toward a lower “inflation bias”, 
although for different reasons. 
Another  related  issue  is  whether,  and  to  what  extent,  globalisation  has  affected  prices  and  wages 
more  directly  in  the  euro  area  product  and  labour  markets  in  the  short-to-medium  term.  Estimates 
obtained at the OECD16, employing an accounting framework suggest that the more direct effect of 
globalisation  (captured  by  measures  of  economic  openness)  on  average  annual  consumer  price 
inflation is within the range of 0.0 to 0.3 percentage points over the period 2000-2005. The average 
size  of  the  estimated  impact  is  not  overwhelming,  but  at  least  the  upper  limit  of  this  range  is  not 
negligible  either.  An  internal  ECB  study  finds  a  comparable  effect  ranging  between  0.1  and  0.2 
percentage point over the period 1995-2004. The net direct impact of globalisation on HICP inflation is 
the result of two components: an inflation-dampening effect from non-commodity import prices and an 
inflation-augmenting effect from commodity import prices, including oil prices. The two effects are of 
course  linked  and  may  largely  offset  each  other  as  the  economic  success  of  emerging  market 
economies  is  largely  responsible  for  higher  world  commodity  prices.  Moreover,  the  interpretation  of 
                                                      
11   Razin and Binyamini, 2007. 
12   It would also reduce the inflation bias, as the effect on the bias of a larger weight on the inflation objective dominates that of 
the flatter Phillips-curve in this model. 
13   Borio and Filardo, 2007. 
14   Gnan and Valderrama, 2006; Ihrig et al., 2007; IMF, 2006; Bean, 2005; see also Ciccarelli and Mojon, 2006, who find that 
global factors have greater explanatory power in determining domestic inflation. 
15   Boivin and Giannoni, 2006 and Bean, 2005. 
16   Pain et al. (2006). 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 3
such estimated effects is not straightforward. The domestic economy’s response to the emergence of 
new international low-cost competitors is not captured by these estimates. Furthermore, it is not clear 
to what extent and for how long these effects should be expected to persist.  
The empirical evidence on the direct impact of globalisation on labour markets is also mixed. Indeed, it 
seems that the findings are getting less rather than more robust and it may be difficult to disentangle 
the  effects  of  globalisation  from  those  resulting  from  technological  advances.  In  theory,  it  could  be 
expected that the increased openness of the economies may affect the demand for labour by firms in 
advanced  economies  directly,  as  a  result  of  increased  international  competition  and,  indirectly,  by 
increasing  the  real  wage  elasticity  of  labour  demand.  There  is  some  evidence  confirming  these 
theoretical  propositions.17  The  quadrupling  of  the  effective  global  labour  force  over  the  last  twenty 
years has led to a fall in the labour share of unskilled workers’ sectors in advanced economies and to 
a – more moderate – rise in the labour share of skilled workers’ sectors. In the euro area, shifts in 
labour demand are predominantly resulting in changes in employment rather than in wages. The IMF 
concludes, however, that technological advances had an even bigger impact on the labour share of 
unskilled workers’ sectors than globalisation as such.  
Impact on monetary aggregates and financial markets  
II.2.  
As you are aware, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy attributes a prominent role to the analysis of 
monetary aggregates and its counterparts in the assessment of risks to price stability over the medium 
to  longer  run.  Two  processes  associated  with  globalisation  have  made  the  analysis  of  monetary 
aggregates for the purpose of extracting information for assessing future risks to price stability more 
complex.18
The first process is the growing size of international capital flows. The sum of the stocks of foreign 
assets and foreign liabilities of the total economy as a percentage of GDP – the most frequently used 
measure of financial globalisation – has increased threefold in advanced economies between the early 
1990s and 2004.19 In the euro area alone, the sum of outstanding foreign assets and liabilities has 
increased  from  190%  of  GDP  in  1999  to  280%  in  2005.20  With  larger  stocks  of  foreign  assets  and 
liabilities,  the  probability  of  occasionally  large  and  volatile  net  flows  has  risen.  When  euro  area 
residents  sell  securities  to  non  euro  area  residents  or  when  they  borrow  abroad,  the  net  external 
assets of monetary and financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area rise and the stock of broad money 
(M3)  expands,  if  the  settlement  of  these  transactions  involves  domestic  and  foreign  banks.  Cross-
border  mergers  &  acquisitions  (M&A)  activity  of  non-financial  corporations  can  also  account  for  a 
parallel  change  in  net  foreign  assets and  money.  Both  cross-border  portfolio  investments  and M&A 
activity are genuine elements of the process of globalisation. Unfortunately, simply accounting for the 
external sources of money growth and then mechanically correcting for cross-border portfolio flows or 
M&A  activity,  on  the  presumption  of  their  likely  remote  direct  effects  on  consumer  prices,  is  not  an 
advisable  option.  Rather,  these  transactions  have  to  be  analysed  with  respect  to  their  information 
content  concerning  their  potential  wealth  effects  on  residents’  income  and  on  asset  prices.21 
Depending on the outcome of this analysis, the policy implications could be far from negligible. 
The second process is financial innovation. The increasingly global nature of financial markets and the 
low  level  of  world  interest  rates  in  recent  years  have  fostered  financial  innovation.  These 
developments,  in  turn,  have  contributed  to  the  rapid  growth  of  the  activities  of  Other  Financial 
Intermediaries  (OFIs),  which  include  investment  funds,  financial  vehicle  corporations  as  well  as 
dealers in securities and derivative products. While the overall share of OFIs’ money holdings in M3 is 
only about 10% in the euro area so far – households account for about 50% – OFIs have contributed 
significantly to the annual growth of euro area M3 since 2005, adding up to 2 percentage points in 
some months, mainly due to the emergence and expansion of loan securitisation. The motives of OFIs 
for  holding  money  balances  are  likely  to  be  of  a  fundamentally  different  nature  than  those  of 
                                                      
17   International Monetary Fund, 2007. 
18   See ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2007;  ECB Monthly Bulletin, July 2007, forthcoming; Ferrero et al., 2007; von 
Landesberger, 2007. 
19   Ferguson et al. 
20   Over the same horizon, the net foreign liability position of the euro area only increased from 6.5% to 10% of GDP. 
21   See, for example, the description of the link between M&A activity and asset prices in Pepper, 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2007
households  or  non-financial  corporations.  Moreover,  the  process  of  securitisation  of  loans  itself 
positively affects the capacity of banks (of MFIs, to be precise), to issue new loans and thus it could 
have  an  indirect  expansionary  effect  on  M3  growth.  How  can  we  deal  with  the  influence  of  these 
factors on money creation and their potential effects on the medium and long-term inflation outlook? In 
general, the same answer applies as with respect to changes in net external assets. Given that the 
OFIs’  money  holdings  and  investment  activities  could  have  indirect  effects  on  consumer  price 
developments  via  asset  prices,  it  would  be  premature  to  automatically  exclude,  without  further 
analysis, the money balances held by OFIs from the monetary aggregates when assessing the risks to 
price stability.22  
The general conclusion that emerges from these considerations is that monetary analysis has become 
more challenging in the global economy as it has to explicitly take account of changes in domestic 
money  and  credit  markets  induced  by,  or  accompanying,  financial  globalisation.  To  address  this 
challenge, the Eurosystem is currently stepping up its analytical efforts to deepen its understanding of 
several  aspects  of  these processes  and  their  implications  for  the  assessment  of  medium  to  longer-
term risks to price stability. 
Globalisation and financial stability and the role of central banks 
III. 
A  second  set  of  important  issues  I  would  like  to  briefly  address  concerns  the  potential  effects  of 
financial  globalisation  on  financial  stability.  The  safeguarding  of  financial  stability  is  an  objective 
embedded, to varying degrees, in central bank statutes, reflecting national or area-wide institutional 
arrangements. But in all cases, a sufficient degree of financial stability is a necessary condition for the 
preservation  of  price  stability  by  central  banks.  Globalisation  could  have  implications  for  financial 
stability through various channels; I will focus on its potential implications through its effects on global 
imbalances and asset price cycles. 
Risks associated with an abrupt unwinding of global financial imbalances  
III.1.  
Incomplete  financial  globalisation23,  reflecting  the  low  level  of  financial  market  development  in 
otherwise fast-growing emerging market economies, combined with the “savings glut” hypothesis, can 
partly account for the current level and evolution of global net foreign asset and liability positions. This 
explanation notwithstanding, the possibility of a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances cannot be 
excluded for several reasons. First, the structural factors underlying the large financial flows from Asia 
and oil-exporting countries into the United States cannot persist forever. Second, economic policies 
which  have  been  causing,  or  have  thus  far  failed  to  address,  a  variety  of  market  distortions  and 
inefficiencies,  have  also  been  contributing  to  existing  financial  imbalances.  Financial  market 
participants  may  eventually  question  the  sustainability  of  some  of  these  policies  and  change  their 
behaviour in anticipation of their ultimate consequences. There is no doubt that financial globalisation 
fosters  international  risk  sharing,  promotes  economic  growth  and  reduces  macroeconomic  volatility. 
Nevertheless, the size of and the particular asymmetry in net foreign asset positions observed since 
the late 1990s involves potential medium to longer term risks to financial stability. Major and abrupt 
asset price adjustments, associated with a disorderly unwinding of global financial imbalances, could 
be  the  main  propagation  mechanism  of  a  financial  turbulence.  I  would  like  to  add,  however,  that 
currently the probability of such a disorderly unwinding scenario seems rather remote, as economic 
policies  are shifting  in  the  right  direction,  although clearly  more  needs  to  be  done.  Furthermore,  as 
shown by ECB research, historically, the necessary rebalancing of global demand in periods of current 
account adjustment was usually achieved in an orderly fashion and involved domestic demand and 
supply reallocations and did not require major asset price movements.24  
The  potential  role  of  monetary  policy  with  regard  to  global  imbalances  has  been  examined  but  the 
conclusions  are  not  clear.  Research  at  the  ECB  has  shown  how  the  combined  affects  of  domestic 
monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  and  productivity  developments  could  influence  current  account 
                                                      
22   ECB Monthly Bulletin, July 2007, forthcoming. 
23   Bini-Smaghi, 2006. 
24   Bems and Dedola, 2006, Algieri and Bracke 2006, Engler et al. 2006, Fratzscher, Juvenal and Sarno, 2007. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 5
positions.25  Related  exchange  rate  movements  could  lead  to  additional  valuation  affects  with 
implications  for  gross  foreign  asset  and  liability  positions.  One  interesting  question  to  explore  is 
whether the conduct of symmetric monetary policies – for example, in two countries linked by a fixed 
exchange  rate  regime  –  could  affect  the  relative  current  account  position  between  these  countries. 
Such an outcome could reflect asymmetries in the interest elasticities of saving and different wealth 
effects  related  to  heterogeneous  financial  market  development  and  capitalisation.  But  these  issues, 
though theoretically interesting, are very much unchartered territory.26  
Impact through asset price boom-and-bust cycles 
III.2. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  potential  impact  of  financial  globalisation  on  financial  stability  through  the 
effects on asset prices and risk premia. As colleagues at the BIS were first to emphasise, a potential 
interaction between globalisation and monetary policy may inadvertently contribute to the creation of 
global excess liquidity which could later play a role in the development of asset price boom-and-bust 
cycles. The benign effects of global competition and low-cost imports on consumer prices might lead 
to  an  underestimation  of  the  stimulative  effects  of  monetary  policy  which  is  consistent  with  the 
preservation  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  but  which  can  be  characterised  as 
accommodative as evidenced by buoyant credit and money growth over a prolonged period. A strong 
and persistent expansion of monetary liquidity could fuel or even trigger an asset price boom. During 
the  bust  phase  of  the  asset  price  cycle,  the  associated  credit  crunch  might  lead  to  an  economic 
downturn and a negative deviation from the objective of consumer price stability, and possibly even to 
deflation, which would exacerbate the financial crisis.  
The  channel  through  which  monetary  liquidity  could  affect  the  dynamics  of  asset  prices  could  be 
“purely monetarist” or reflect the influence of other factors as more recently explained with reference to 
behavioural finance. An environment of high monetary liquidity could affect the risk-taking behaviour of 
financial intermediaries and other financial market participants. High monetary liquidity and financial 
market  liquidity27  could  be  signs  of  arbitrage  strategies  such  as  carry  trades  and  “liquidity  seeking” 
behaviour, which could temporarily distort the pricing of risk.28 In fact, ECB research shows that there 
is  evidence  that  monetary  liquidity  shocks  have  played  a  role  in  driving  asset  prices,  particularly 
housing prices across OECD countries, during the boom phase of asset price cycles, and that they 
have also contributed to explaining the negative effects on economic activity during the subsequent 
bust phase.29 Other Eurosystem research has identified effects of an accommodative monetary policy 
on housing prices in the euro area and in the United States.30 The intriguing aspect of this hypothesis 
and  of  the  associated  empirical  findings  is  that  the  monetary  policy  stance  might  be  perfectly 
appropriate  for  and  consistent  with  the  preservation  of  price  stability  over  a  short-to-medium  term 
horizon. Nevertheless, the potential implications for asset price boom-and-bust cycles could signal that 
the monetary policy stance could prove too accommodative for maintaining price stability in the long 
run. 
IV.  
Implications for policy 
Do monetary policy strategies have to be adapted? 
IV.1. 
I would like to conclude by addressing the two questions that I raised at the beginning which concern 
the potential implications of globalisation for the strategy and effectiveness of monetary policy. More 
specifically,  the  first  question  is  whether  monetary  policy  strategies  have  to  be  adapted  in  order  to 
cope with the rapidly increasing global economic integration. In providing an answer, I will concentrate 
on and highlight the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. 
                                                      
25  Bems, Dedola, Smets, 2007. 
26   See Dedola, 2006 for a discussion of this hypothesis. 
27   See ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2007, Box 9 for a discussion of the concepts of monetary and financial liquidity. 
28   Rajan, 2005 and 2006. 
29   Adalid and Detken, 2007; and Detken, 2006 with respect to link between liquidity and low bond yields. 
30   Greiber and Setzer, 2007. 
6 
 BIS Review 64/2007
A  monetary  policy  strategy  comprised  two  main  elements:  the  policy  objective,  including  the  time 
horizon for its attainment, and the analytical framework which relates policy instruments and goals and 
provides  the  basis  for  assessing  the  prospects  for  attaining  the  policy  objective  and  the  associated 
risks. The ECB’s strategy includes a quantitative definition of its primary objective of preserving price 
stability and has a medium-term orientation in achieving this goal. Globalisation has no fundamental 
bearing on this element of the strategy, but it has some implications: it does underscore the relative 
importance of price stability as a central bank goal and the need to formulate and conduct monetary 
policy so as to preserve price stability over a medium-to-longer term horizon. As I noted earlier, recent 
research  has  stressed  that  increased  openness  to  trade  and  financial  interdependence  should 
reinforce the central bank’s emphasis on the objective of price stability relative to minimising output 
volatility.31  Such  a  result  can  also  be  derived  in  a  model  with  endogenous  portfolio  choices,  while 
focusing  on  the  risk-sharing  properties  of  cross-border  trade  in  nominal  bonds.32  Moreover,  in  an 
environment  of  price  stability  but  persistent  rapid  money  growth  and  rising  leverage,  financial 
liberalisation and integration could lead to the accumulation of financial imbalances over a number of 
years, increasing the probability of a boom-and-bust cycle in financial markets with repercussion on 
price stability over the longer term. This possibility implies that monetary policy should place increased 
emphasis on the preservation of price stability over longer time horizon extending beyond the medium 
term. 
With  regard  to  the  analytical  framework,  globalisation  can,  in  principle,  affect  market  structures, 
agent’s behaviour and inflation dynamics, thus requiring close monitoring and careful assessment of 
its effects. The economic analysis employed by the ECB to assess the short-to-medium term risks to 
price  stability  could  be  subject  to  greater  parameter  or  model  uncertainty  as  well  as  increased 
measurement error associated with unobservable variables, such as potential output, which underlie 
the assessment of real activity and inflation pressure. However, the econometric evidence in the euro 
area has not yet identified significant indirect effects, reflecting structural or behavioural influence of 
globalisation on inflation dynamics. Nevertheless, the complexity of economic analysis has increased 
and  its  task  has  become  more  challenging,  and  there  is  clearly  a  need  to  better  understand  and 
measure the impact of globalisation. 
In  a  period  of  potentially  significant  structural  change  in  the  product  and  labour  markets,  cross-
checking the assessment of risks based on economic analysis by monetary analysis becomes more 
important.  This  proposition  is  conceptually  correct.  Unfortunately,  the  influences  of  financial 
globalisation on money and credit growth imply that, in practice, monetary analysis is also becoming 
more  challenging  and  requires  increased  sophistication.  It  is  necessary  to  rely  on  a  wide  range  of 
analytical tools and models in order to identify the underlying trend in monetary developments and to 
assess its implications for price stability. At the same time, as I already stressed, in an environment of 
increased  global  financial  integration,  a  deeper  and  broader  analysis  of  developments  in  monetary 
liquidity can enhance our understanding of potential risks to financial stability which, if they materialise, 
can have repercussions for output volatility and price stability over the longer term. For these reasons, 
pertinent research at the ECB will be further strengthened, including the analysis of the interactions 
between financial globalisation and innovation, on the one hand, and monetary and market liquidity, 
on the other, and their potential implications for monetary policy and financial stability. 
All in all, there is no reason to change in any fundamental way the analytical framework we employ for 
assessing  the  prospects  for  and  the  risks  to  price  stability  in  response  to  globalisation.  On  the 
contrary,  I  conclude  that  the  ECB’s  strategy,  with  its  medium-to-longer  term  orientation  and  the 
prominence  it  assigns  to  the  analysis  of  monetary  developments  and  liquidity  conditions  for  cross-
checking  the  outcome  of  economic  analyses,  is  well  placed  to  address  some  of  the  implications  of 
globalisation  for  inflation  dynamics  and  long-term  financial  and  price  stability.  Nevertheless  an 
improved  understanding  of  the  influence  of  globalisation  on  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism will enhance the analysis underlying our decisions. This brings me to the second and last 
question on policy effectiveness.  
                                                      
31   Razin and Binyamini, 2007. 
32   Devereux, 2007. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 7
Has monetary policy effectiveness been reduced? 
IV.2. 
Has monetary policy become less effective as a consequence of increased financial integration? More 
specifically,  has  the  associated co-movement  of  long-term  interest  rates  impaired  the  functioning of 
one of the channels of the monetary policy transmission mechanism? Or, alternatively, has monetary 
policy gained effectiveness in times of almost perfect capital mobility and floating exchange rates, in 
line with the IS/LM paradigm, as recently stressed by central bank colleagues?33  
Indeed,  it  is  theoretically  plausible  to  argue  that  certain  features  of  globalisation  have  influenced  to 
varying degrees some of the key determinants of long-term interest rates, such as the global riskless 
real rate of interest and the real risk premium.34 In addition, expected inflation and the inflation risk 
premium  may  have  been  diminished  to  some  degree  by  forces  of  globalisation,  though  successful 
monetary policy across the globe has certainly been the main factor. There is some empirical evidence 
that in the euro area, as well as in a broader sample of OECD countries, long-term rates are reacting 
less  to  changes  in  short-term  rates  than  they  used  to.35  Global  factors  seem  to  be  increasingly 
important for the determination of national real bond yields.36 Furthermore, the co-movement of US, 
German  and  Japanese  bond  yields  has  been  exceptionally  high  over  the  last  three  years37.  My 
interpretation of these findings is that, although there is little doubt that global forces have played an 
important role in the determination of domestic long-term interest rates, they do not provide sufficient 
and convincing evidence to conclude that the effectiveness of monetary policy in controlling inflation 
has been reduced. The increased significance of global factors identified by empirical analysis is likely 
to reflect common trends as well as the similar orientation of monetary policies and their success in 
containing inflationary pressures. But nothing prevents national monetary policies from diverging from 
such  a  common  orientation,  which  itself  has  been  fostered  by  increasing  competition  between 
currencies.38 A central bank is still able to preserve price stability, or choose and achieve a long-term 
inflation  objective  under  floating  exchange  rates.  However,  the  relative  importance  of  the  different 
channels  of  transmission  of  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  might  be  affected  by  the  ongoing  global 
economic integration. This underscores the importance of a central bank’s credible commitment to its 
objectives and of effective and consistent communication.39  
Concluding remarks 
V.  
To sum up, the effects of globalisation on product, labour and financial markets can be potentially far-
reaching. However, the implications for monetary policy are overall fairly contained. The phenomenon 
of globalisation neither calls for any fundamental change in the monetary policy strategy nor it affects 
in  any  material  way  the  general  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  Globalisation  implies  a  greater 
emphasis on the price stability objective over a medium to longer-term horizon. It also implies that, 
monetary analysis has become more challenging but at the same time relatively more important for 
assessing long-term risks to price stability and financial stability. Moreover, globalisation can affect the 
relative  significance  and  the  functioning  of  some  channels  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism,  but  the  available  empirical  evidence  for  the  euro  area  suggests  that  such  effects  are 
limited  so  far.  In  this  context,  I  would  favour  the  approach  of  the  German  writer,  philosopher  and 
engineer Novalis, who mentioned that “hypotheses are like nets; only those who throw nets will catch 
fish”.  Clearly,  more  research  is  essential.  We  need  close  monitoring  and  careful  analysis  of  the 
empirical  evidence  as  well  as  an  improved  understanding  of  the  influence  of  globalisation  on  the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  This  will  help  improve  the  quality  and  robustness  of  the 
analysis  underlying  our  ability  to  continue  to  fulfil  our  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  and  to 
                                                      
33   See Yellen, 2006 and Weber, 2007. 
34   Wu, 2006. 
35   Reichlin, 2006. 
36   Giannone, Lenza, Reichlin, 2007. Interestingly already Barro and Sala-I-Martin in their classic 1990 article found that real 
interest  rates  for  seven  of  the  nine  OECD  countries  they  investigated  mainly  depended  on  world  factors  for  the  period 
1958-1989. 
37   Ferguson et al. 
38   See Kroszner, 2007. 
39   See Papademos (2006). 
8 
 BIS Review 64/2007
contribute to the safeguarding of financial stability. With this objective in mind and judging from the 
programme  of  this  conference,  I  have  the  highest  expectations  that,  after  a  brilliant  start  today,  the 
next  two  days  will  also  significantly  advance  our  understanding  and  knowledge  of  these  important 
issues.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
References 
Adalid,  R.  and  Detken,  C.  (2007),  Liquidity  Shocks  and  Asset  Price  Boom/Bust  Cycles,  European 
Central Bank Working Paper Series, No. 732. 
Algieri,  B.,  and  Bracke,  T.  (2007),  Patterns  of  Current  Account  Adjustment  –  Insights  from  Past 
Experience, Mimeo, ECB. 
Barro,  R.  J.  and  Sala-i-Martin,  X.  (1990),  World  Real  Interest  Rates,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 5. 
Bean,  C.,  (2005),  Monetary  Policy  in  an  Uncertain  World,  Oxonia  Distinguished  Speakers  Seminar, 
The Oxford Institute of Economic Policy, Oxford, 22 February. 
Bean,  C.  (2006a),  Comments  on  Ken  Rogoff:  “Impact  of  Globalization  on  Monetary  Policy”  at  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 30th Annual Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 
26 August. 
Bean, C. (2006b), Globalisation and Inflation, Speech to LSE Economics Society, London School of 
Economics, 24 October. 
Bems,  R.  and  Dedola,  L.  (2006),  Current  Account  Reversals  and  Capital  Markets  Integration:  The 
Adjustment of the US External Position Revisited, Mimeo, ECB. 
Bems, R., Dedola, L. and Smets, F. (2007), “US Imbalances: the Role of Technology and Policy”, ECB 
Working Paper, No. 719. 
Bernholz, P. and P. Kugler (2007), The Price Revolution in the 16th Century: Empirical Results from a 
Strucutral Vectorautoregression Model, Working Paper University of Basle. 
Bini  Smaghi,  L.  (2007),  Global  Capital  and  National  Monetary  Policies,  Speech  at  the  European 
Economic and Financial Centre, London, 18 January. 
Borio, C. and Filardo, A. (2007), Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country evidence on the global 
determinants of domestic inflation, BIS Working Papers No. 227. 
Boivin, J. and Giannoni, M. P. (2006), Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?, The Review of 
Economics and Statistics, 88(3): 445-462, (January 2003) NBER Working Paper Series, No. 9459. 
Ciccarelli, M. and Mojon, B. (2005), Global Inflation, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 537. 
Dedola,  L.  (2006),  Global  Imbalances  and  “Excess  Liquidity”:  Is  There  a  Link?,  ECB,  Directorate 
General Research, Research Bulletin, No. 4. 
Detken,  C.  (2006),  “Comment  on  The  Bond  Yield  “Conundrum”  from  a  Macro-Finance  Perspective” 
Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  24  (S-1),  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Bank  of 
Japan, pp. 109-119. 
Devereux, M. B. and Sutherland, A. (2007), Financial Globalization and Monetary Policy, Discussion 
Paper Series No. 6147, International Macroeconomics, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Engler, P., Fidora, M. and Thimann, C. (2007), External Imbalances and the US Current Account: Do 
Supply-side Changes Lessen the Exchange Rate Adjustment? Mimeo, ECB. 
European Central Bank (a), Financial Stability Review (forthcoming June 2007).  
European  Central  Bank  (b),  Monthly  Bulletin  article,  (forthcoming  July  2007),  Interpreting  monetary 
developments since mid-2004. 
Ferguson,  R.,  Hartmann,  P.,  Panetta,  F.,  Portes,  R.  (2007),  International  Financial  Stability,  Draft 
Report prepared for ICMB Conference, Geneva, 3-4 May. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 9
Ferrero, G., Nobili, A. and Passiglia, P. (2007), The Sectoral Distribution of Money Supply in the Euro 
Area, Temi di discussione, Banca d’Italia.  
Frankel,  J.  (2006),  What  Do  Economists  Mean  by  Globalization?  Implications  for  Inflation  and 
Monetary  Policy,  Written  for  Academic  Consultants  Meeting,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System. 
Fratzscher,  M.,  Juvenal,  L.  and  Sarno,  L.  (2007),  Asset  Prices,  Exchange  Rates  and  the  Current 
Account, ECB, Mimeo, March. 
Giannone,  D.,  Lenza,  M.  and  Reichlin,  L.  (2007),  The  Equilibrium  Level  of  the  World  Real  Interest 
Rate;  Paper  to  be  presented  at  the  First  Annual  Risk  Management  Institute  Research  Conference 
“Capital Flows and Asset Price: The International Dimension of Risk”, Singapore 6-7 July. 
Gnan, E. and Valderama, M. T. (2006), Globalization, Inflation and Monetary Policy, Monetary Policy & 
The Economy. 
Greiber,  C.  and  Setzer,  R.  (2007),  Money  and  Housing  –  Evidence  for  the  Euro  Area  and  the  US, 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Economics Department 
Hamilton,  E.  (1934),  American  Treasure  and  the  Price  Revolution  in  Spain,  1501-1650,  Harvard 
Economic Studies, 43; Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Ihrig, J., Kamin, S. B., Lindner, D. and Marques, J. (2007), Some Simple Tests of the Globalization 
and Inflation Hypothesis, International Finance Discussion Papers, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, No. 891. 
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook (2007), The Globalization of Labor, Chapter 5.  
Kroszner,  R.  S.  (2007),  Globalization  and  Capital  Markets:  Implications  for  Inflation  and  the  Yield 
Curve, Remarks at the Center for Financial Stability (CEF), Buenos Aires, Argentina,16 May. 
Landesberger von, J. (2007), Sectoral Money Demand Models for the Euro Area based on a Common 
Set of Determinants, ECB Working Paper, No. 741. 
Munro, J. (1994), Patterns of Trade, Money, and Credit, in Tracy, J., Brady, T. and Oberman, H. eds., 
Handbook of European History: The Later Middle Ages, Renaissance and Reformation, 1400-1600, 
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1994-95 
Pain,  N.,  Koske,  I.  and  Sollie,  M.  (2006),  Globalisation  and  Inflation  in  the  OECD  Economies, 
Economics Department Working Papers No. 524. 
Papademos, L. (2006), Monetary Policy in a Changing World: Commitment, Strategy and Credibility, 
Speech  at  the  Fourth  Conference  of  the  International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy, 
Washington D.C, 1 December. 
Pepper, G. with Olivier, M. (2006), The Liquidity Theory of Asset Prices. Wiley Finance. 
Rajan,  R.  (2005),  Has  Financial  Development  Made  the  World  Riskier?  NBER  Working  Paper 
No. 11728. 
Rajan,  R.  (2006),  Monetary  Policy  and  Incentives,  in  Fernández  de  Lis,  S.  and  Restoy,  F.,  Central 
Banks  in  the  21st  Century,  Proceedings of  an  international conference  sponsored  by  the Banco  de 
España; Madrid, Banco de España. 
Razin,  A.  and  Binyamini,  A.  (2007),  Flattening  of  the  Short-run  Trade-off  between  Inflation  and 
Domestic Activity, Paper presented at the Symposium on “The Phillips Curve and the Natural Rate of 
Unemployment”, Kiel Institute of World Economy, 3-4 June. 
Reichlin, L. (2006), Panel remarks at the Thirteenth International Conference “Financial Markets and 
the Real Economy in a Low Interest Rate Environment” Bank of Japan, Tokyo. 
Rogoff, K. (2004), Globalization and Global Disinflation, International Monetary Fund, paper prepared 
for  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  conference  on  “Monetary  Policy  and  Uncertainty: 
Adapting to a Changing Economy”, Jackson Hole, WY, 28-30 August 2003. 
Rogoff,  K.  (2006),  Impact  of  Globalization  on  Monetary  Policy,  Harvard  University  (prepared  for 
symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  on  “The  New  Economic 
Geography: Effects and Policy Implications” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 24-26 August). 
10 
 BIS Review 64/2007
Romer, D.  (1993), “Openness  and  Inflation:  Theory and  Evidence”  Quarterly Journal  of  Economics, 
108. 
Smith,  A.  (1776),  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  edited  by  C.  J. 
Bullock. Vol. X. The Harvard Classics. New York: P.F. Collier & Son, 1909–14. 
Weber, A. (2007), Challenges Posed by (Financial) Globalisation, Lecture at the University of Pune, 
Pune, 15 March. 
Wu, T. (2006), Globalization’s Effect on Interest Rates and the Yield Curve, Economic Letter – Insights 
from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Vol. 1, No. 9. 
Yellen, J. L. (2006), Monetary Policy in a Global Environment, Speech at The Euro and the Dollar in a 
Globalized Economy Conference, U.C. Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, 27 May. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 11
