Christian Noyer: Three questions on inflation and money 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the European Economics 
and Financial Centre (EEFC), London, 11 September 2007. 
 Keeping  inflation  in  check  is  Central  Banks'  main  objective.  Understanding  the  inflation 
process is Central Banks main concern. In recent years, we can take satisfaction in the fact 
that price stability has been achieved in most countries. At the same time, inflation dynamics 
may have become more complex. Our ability to consolidate our past successes in the future 
may  well  depend  on  our  capacity  to  further  deepen  our  knowledge  on  what,  ultimately, 
determines the inflation rate. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  address  three  specific  questions  which  have  been  extensively 
discussed, but not yet fully answered, in the academic and policy-making community: what is 
the  impact  of  globalisation  on  inflation?  Has  the  inflation  –  output  trade-off  changed  as  a 
consequence? And, finally, how can money aggregates help us in our efforts to achieve price 
stability? 
Globalisation and inflation 
In  the  last  twenty  years,  greater  integration  in goods,  services,  labour and  capital markets 
has coincided with stable and low inflation. Is there a link? 
Globalisation  has  made  a  significant  contribution  to  price  stability.  With  new  large  new 
players  (such  as  China  and  India,  or  Eastern  European  countries)  entering  the  world 
economy, cheap imports have become available  to developed countries. The fall in import 
prices in developed economies allowed real consumption wages to grow without impacting 
real production wages. This, in turn, has raised the level of employment compatible with price 
stability, or, put differently, lowered the inflation rate for any given level of employment. 
The effects of globalisation may also be felt more indirectly through increased competition, 
both  on  the  products  and  labour  markets.  On  the  products  market,  globalisation  has 
eliminated the least productive domestic firms (those that set the highest prices) and reduced 
the pricing power of remaining domestic firms. It may also have created the conditions for 
wage moderation by increasing the degree of competition on the labour market. 
Overall, these developments have made it easier for Central Banks to bring down inflation 
without real costs to the economy. But it is doubtful that we can count indefinitely on such 
"tailwinds". 
Inflation only partly depends upon imported prices. Many goods and most services are still 
produced  domestically  with  little  competition  from  abroad.  Domestic  factors  thus  remain 
crucial determinants of inflation rates. Globalisation lowers the relative price of tradables to 
non-tradables in an open economy. But the overall level and dynamics of prices ultimately 
remain determined by the monetary authorities provided they ensure that steady growth in 
overall nominal demand is maintained through an appropriate monetary policy.1
In addition, it is possible that the effects of globalisation on inflation will be reversed in the 
future.  Strong  growth  in  big  emerging  economies  is  increasingly  putting  pressures  on  the 
price of oil, food and other commodities. While labour supply in these countries will remain 
abundant, it is not all that clear whether it will remain cheap. Indeed, we are currently seeing 
                                                 
1   Speech by Charles Bean, “Globalisation and Inflation”, to the LSE Economic Society, 24 October 2006. 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 1
an increase in export prices in emerging countries, which translates into higher import prices 
for developed economies. This inflationary impact seems to have grown over the past few 
years,  while,  by  contrast,  the  disinflationary  impact  of  globalisation  seems  to  have  slowed 
down. 
Going further, some analysts have suggested that, because of capital market integration, real 
interest  rates  will  equalize  around  the  world,  thus  reducing  the  ability  of  national  Central 
Banks  to  control  inflation.  However,  this  need  not  be  true.  Indeed,  the  classic  Mundell-
Fleming analysis concludes that monetary policy should be more effective, rather than less, 
in the case of international capital mobility, although it can operate through different channels 
of transmission including the exchange rate. 
But inflation is more than the direct result of macroeconomic shocks. It is a process in which 
business cycles as well as expectations play an important role. Has this process changed? 
A change in the output – inflation trade-off? 
Inflation dynamics have changed over the past fifteen years or so. Inflation persistence has 
declined,  or,  in  other  words,  upward  changes  in  the  path  of  prices  have  become  more 
temporary and easily reversed. Also, inflation itself has become less responsive to shocks. 
Both are very welcome developments for monetary policy. 
Maybe the most documented and commented-upon change in inflation dynamics has been 
the so-called flattening of the Phillips curve. This, in economists' jargon, means that domestic 
inflation has become less sensitive to the domestic output-gap; or, alternatively, that it has 
become more stable during the business cycle. 
There are several possible – and not mutually exclusive – explanations for this phenomenon. 
It  may  well  be  that  expectations  of  future  inflation  have  become  a  more  important 
determinant of current inflation at the expense of the current output gap, which would signal 
that monetary policies have become more effective in anchoring the inflation rate. 
Most explanations, however, are of a more structural nature. 
It  is  possible  is  that,  as  a  result  of  structural  reforms,  the  NAIRU  has  decreased  in  many 
countries in recent years, thus giving the "optical" impression of a horizontal Phillips curve 
during this period. 
Another interpretation is that firms change their prices less frequently both because it is less 
necessary  in  a  low-inflation  environment  and  more  difficult  due  to  increased  competition, 
including from abroad. These arguments, however,2 have been challenged on the basis that, 
in  an  increasingly  competitive  environment,  setting  the  “wrong”  price  has  become  more 
costly  for  firms  in  terms  of  foregone  profits,  which  should  encourage  them  to  adjust  their 
prices  more  frequently.  If  anything,  according  to  this  view,  competition  and  globalisation 
should be expected to steepen the Phillips curve. 
In  a  broader  sense,  globalisation  itself  may  also  be  responsible  for  the  flattening  of  the 
Philips  curve.  In  an  open  economy,  domestic  demand  changes  can  easily  be  satisfied 
through increased imports. As a consequence, domestic inflation may become less sensitive 
to the domestic output gap and more sensitive to global tensions on production capacities. 
                                                 
2   Notably put forward by Laurence Ball. 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2007
Finally,  it  is  possible  that  (due  to  immigration  and  structural  reforms)  labour  supply  has 
become more elastic in many countries, and, as a consequence the cyclicality of wages (and 
prices) has been reduced. 3
Flatter Phillips curves may be a  mixed blessing for Central Banks. In such circumstances, 
looking at actual and projected inflation may not be sufficient to detect incipient imbalances 
between supply and demand. In other words, inflation becomes less informative about the 
output gap. There is a risk, then, that imbalances are allowed to build up to a point where a 
stronger reaction may become necessary. To prevent that risk, Central Banks may want to 
look at information coming from a broader set of indicators, chosen because of their ability to 
detect,  at  an  earlier  stage,  potential  inflationary  pressures. Obviously,  monetary  and  credit 
aggregates for instance are good candidates for such a job. 
What role for money in monetary policy? 
As you may know, this is precisely what is done in the context of the Eurosystem’s two-pillar 
monetary policy strategy which assigns an important role to money. This structure is based 
on a particular premise and has one important implication. 
The premise is that even if money has no systematic and immediate influence on prices, it 
can provide valuable and specific information on future inflation, at time horizons stretching 
beyond  those  usually  adopted  for  the  construction  of  central  bank  inflation  projections. 
Because of the long-term relation between money growth and inflation, money has leading 
indicator properties on future price developments. 
Though it is fair to say that the apparent link between monetary developments and inflation 
has  deteriorated  over  the  recent  years,  there  is  still  strong  statistical  evidence  of  a  link 
between monetary growth and inflation at a low frequency. This relation holds for the euro 
area,  but  also  for  the  US,  the  UK  and  large  OECD  countries,  with  monetary  trends 
systematically leading inflation trends.4
The  implication  referred  to  is  the  need  to  cross-check  the  information  on  inflationary 
pressures and risks to price stability; this cross-checking implies that we bring together and 
compare  different  analytical  strategies  and  that  we  systematically  use  all  the  information 
relevant to decision making. The main issue is to ensure that risks to price stability over the 
medium term do not materialize and that medium to longer-term inflation expectations remain 
solidly  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  the  price  stability  objective.  Such  anchoring  is  a 
prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting 
sustainable economic growth as well as job creation. 
Of  course,  monetary  policy  does  not  react  mechanically  to  monetary  developments,  but 
rather  responds  to  the  information  in  monetary  aggregates  that  is  relevant  for  maintaining 
price stability over the medium term. 
To  make  best  use  of  the  informational  role  of  money,  however,  we  have  to  address 
numerous and increasing challenges. 
                                                 
3  
It  is  worth  noting  that  not  everybody  is  convinced  that  globalisation  has  played  an  important  role  in  the 
flattening of the Phillips curve. For instance, Frederic Mishkin, Axel Weber and Donald Kohn emphasize the 
uncertainty surrounding the quantification of this globalisation effect, and Laurence Ball even questions this 
effect on theoretical grounds. Part of these doubts comes from the apparent lack of robustness of the result 
indicating that domestic inflation has become more sensitive to global output-gap fluctuations, which tends to 
weaken the case for the globalisation explanation of the flattening of the Phillips curve. 
4   Benati L. (2007), “Long-run evidence on money growth and inflation”, forthcoming in the ECB Working Paper 
Series. 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 3
One major difficulty is identifying in real time the nature of monetary developments and their 
implications  for  future  price  developments.  The  challenge  of  monetary  analysis  is  to  see 
through the noise in monetary data to recover those underlying trends which are relevant for 
monetary  policy  decisions.  Meeting  this  challenge  has  not  been  straightforward  in  recent 
years in the euro area. 
First  of  all,  short-run  monetary  developments  are  often  affected  by  transitory  shocks.  We 
need  to  identify  and  account  for  such  temporary  “special  factors”  or  “distortions”  that  may 
affect monetary developments and blur their information content. 
Second,  and  more  permanently,  it  is  necessary  to  disentangle,  in  monetary  and  credit 
developments,  those  which  reflect  structural  and  permanent  changes  from  those  which 
simply result from movements in the level of interest rates and the position in the economic 
cycle. 
Finally, we must be able to assess whether these developments result from money supply 
shocks,  in  which  case  they  clearly  entail  some  risks  to  price  stability,  or  whether  they  are 
caused  by  money  demand  shocks  that  may  raise  the  desired  level  of  money  balances 
without necessarily impacting aggregate demand. Such demand shocks can be triggered by 
structural  changes  in  the  behaviour  of  economic  agents  or  result  from  portfolio  shifts  or 
financial innovations in the context  of financial globalisation. There are  indeed some signs 
that  a  money  demand  shock  occurred  at  the  beginning  of  the  2000s  in  the  euro  area,  as 
illustrated  by  a  structural  shift  in  the  trend  velocity  of  money,  which  summarises  the 
relationship between money, output and the price level. 5
One  possible  consequence  of  current  events  in  credit  markets  may  be  to  trigger  a 
re-intermediation  process,  i.e.  an  expansion  of  banks'  balance  sheets  which  may  further 
complicate our reading and interpretation of monetary and credit dynamics in the months to 
come. 
Conclusion 
There  is  no  doubt  that  globalisation  has  impacted  in  various  and  non-trivial  ways  the 
functioning  of  our  economies.  In  doing  so,  it  has  blurred  the  information  content  of  many 
important  variables  or  indicators  relevant  for  the  monetary  policy  maker,  making  monetary 
policy probably more complex in a context of increased uncertainty. 
Economic  theory  usually  distinguishes  between  parameter  and  model  uncertainty.  In  the 
presence of parameter uncertainty, i.e. when the policy maker is uncertain about the impact 
a  policy  instrument  has  on  the  economy,  economic  theory  suggests  that  it  is  optimal  to 
respond more cautiously than would be the case in the absence of uncertainty (this is the 
well-known  Brainard  conservative  principle).  By  contrast,  model  uncertainty  would  require 
more  active  monetary  policy,  the  idea  being  to  insure  oneself  against  particularly  bad 
outcomes. 
I  will  leave  it  to  your  wisdom  to  guess  in  the  present  circumstances  which  of  these  two 
approaches would be preferable. Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
5   Bordes, C., Clerc L. and Marimoutou V. (2007): “Is there a break in equilibrium velocity in the euro area?”, 
Banque de France, Notes d’Etudes et de Recherche n° 165, February. 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2007
