Victor Mbewe: Positive financial and economic developments in Malawi 
Speech by Mr Victor Mbewe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the Sovereign Credit Rating 
Dissemination Conference, Lilongwe, 16 March 2007. 
 The Minister of Finance, Hon. Goodall Gondwe, M.P.  
The Minister of Trade, Industry and Private Sector Development, Hon. Ken Lipenga, M.P.  
His Excellency, the US Ambassador to Malawi, Mr Alan Eastham  
Members of the Diplomatic Corp  
Heads of Missions (Development Partners)  
Members of Parliament  
The Chief Secretary to the President and Cabinet  
Secretary to the Treasury  
Principal Secretaries  
Heads of Parastatal Organisations  
Heads of Private Sector Industries  
Mr Charles Seville and Veronica Kalema from Fitch Rating Agency  
Representatives of the Civil Society  
Distinguished Invited Guests  
Representatives of Electronic and Print Media  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I feel greatly honoured and happy to stand here today at this very important dissemination conference 
where Malawi has attained yet another economic development milestone indicating an improvement in 
the country’s creditworthiness. Credit rating is one of the areas where Malawi was considered lagging 
behind under the Millennium Challenge Account.  
Honourable  Minister,  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  since  the  last  credit  rating  in  December 
2005,  where  Malawi  was  rated  at  CCC,  a  lot  of  progress  has  been  made  and  it  was  therefore 
imperative that a fresh rating exercise be conducted to determine our current status. To this effect, 
Fitch Rating Agency was engaged by Millennium Challenge Corporation to conduct the rating between 
4th and 8th December 2006. Reserve Bank of Malawi as an implementing agency for Credit Rating for 
the country, successfully coordinated this exercise.  
To begin with, it is worthwhile to mention that credit rating is an indication of the ability and willingness 
of a country to pay its external debt on the original terms. With a sovereign credit rating, the country is 
signalling to the rest of the world especially international investors its readiness to participate in the 
global  economy  by  opening  itself  for  public  scrutiny  and  foster  transparency  in  the  collection  and 
dissemination of information. A credit rating also helps to promote realistic monetary and fiscal policies 
and adherence to liberalization policies and reform efforts in keeping up with peer group countries and 
the global economy. Furthermore, the business world uses a sovereign credit rating as the benchmark 
to evaluate current and potential risks in a nation's economic environment they desire to invest in.  
As alluded to earlier, many positive developments have taken place in Malawi since the last rating in 
2005. Among these are cancellation of Malawi’s debt by both multilateral and bilateral creditors, the 
decrease in inflation rate and a reduction in interest rates.  
The IMF and World Bank Boards on 30th and 31st August 2006, respectively, approved that Malawi 
had reached the HIPC Completion Point after making satisfactory progress in implementing its Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) for at least one year, and maintained satisfactory macroeconomic 
policies  as  evidenced  by  its  performance  under  the  PRGF.  Furthermore,  Malawi  also  met  all  the 
completion  point  targets  in  the  area  of  economic  governance  and  public  expenditure  management, 
safety nets, and microfinance.  
Apart  from  receiving  HIPC  debt  relief,  Malawi  also  qualified  for  the  Multilateral  Debt  relief  Initiative 
(MDRI) which cancelled all pre-2004 debt to the World Bank and African Development Bank, and pre-
2003 debt to the IMF. In October 2006, Paris Club creditors also agreed to cancel almost 100% of 
Malawi’s debt owed to them.  
BIS Review 30/2007 
 1
These developments, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, reduced Malawi’s external debt from 142% 
of  GDP  at  the  end of  2005  to 23%  of GDP at  the end of  2006.  Other  external  debt  indicators  also 
improved significantly.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, let me now turn to the monetary policy stance that was pursued 
in 2006. Monetary developments in 2006 were generally expansionary. The increase in money supply 
mainly arose from net foreign reserves on account of receipts for balance of payments support. The 
increase in money stock was also partly a reflection of an expansion in credit to the private sector. It 
should  be  noted  that  since  March  2006,  credit  to  the  private  sector  has  been  increasing  steadily, 
implying that the February 2006 reduction in the Liquidity Reserve Requirement (LRR) was bearing 
fruit. This is in line with the economic program which allows for more credit to the private sector to 
boost economic growth. The Bank Rate was adjusted downwards from 25.0 percent to 20.0 percent 
on 13th November 2006. As a result, commercial banks followed suit by adjusting both their savings 
and deposit rates. The reduction in interest rates should, therefore, give an opportunity to the private 
sector to participate in borrowing capital, thereby generating economic growth.  
It  is  also  pleasing  to  note  that  the  rate  of  inflation  has  been  declining  since  February  2006.  By 
December 2006, the annual rate of inflation declined to 13.6 % from 17.1% realised in 2005.  
This was mainly due to:  
• 
• 
• 
On the external sector, it is pleasing to note that foreign exchange reserves have been building up 
rapidly since the attainment of the HIPC Completion Point in August 2006. Between September 2006 
and January 2007, the country has been benefiting from inflows from various donor partners, including 
the  IMF,  the  British  &  Norwegian  Governments,  the  European  Union  and  DFID  because  of  good 
performance. As a result of these inflows, the country’s gross official reserves improved significantly.  
slowdown in food inflation as a result of a good crop.  
relative stability of the Malawi kwacha against other major currencies.  
lagged effects of a decline in money supply observed earlier in the year.  
Prospects for 2007  
Let me now give you a picture of our expected outcome for 2007. GDP growth in 2007 is projected to 
grow  by  5.6%,  a  slower  growth  from  8.5%  in  2006.  The  agricultural  sector  is  expected  to  continue 
leading this growth due to the on-going fertilizer subsidy program coupled with the current favourable 
rains.  
By  December  2006,  inflation  rate  had  decelerated  to  10.1  percent.  In  January  2007,  the  rate  of 
inflation  dropped  to  a  single  digit  of  9.6  percent  and  it  is  expected  that  it  would  continue  dropping 
further. This is mainly premised on the high food supply situation in the country (especially maize), that 
is expected to have a restraining effect on food inflation, which normally accelerates during this time of 
the  year.  The  favourable  outlook  for  inflation  is  based  on  the  continued  stability  in  food  prices,  the 
stable kwacha exchange rate and the easing of pressures on international oil prices.  
In 2007, growth in money supply will be closely monitored to safeguard and consolidate the declining 
rate of inflation and the overall financial system stability.  
The stability of the local currency will continue to depend on the flow of foreign exchange from the 
tobacco  auction  floors  and  the  donor  community,  prices  of  petroleum  products,  as  well  as 
government’s fiscal discipline.  
Distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  favourable  outlook  which  I  have  outlined  would  assist  the 
country to attain a higher rating at the end of 2007 compared to that of 2006.  
The improvement in credit rating being officially announced today will assist in enhancing pricing and 
access to international capital markets. This would in turn enhance the inflows of private capital and 
hence increased investment. The goodwill that we have built with the international community will be 
further strengthened and this will ultimately signal that Malawi is a better place for doing business.  
In conclusion, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, I would like to acknowledge the collective efforts 
played by all stakeholders for the success of the credit rating exercise. These include the Minister of 
Finance,  Members  of  Parliament,  Government  officials,  members  of  the  private  sector,  the  donor 
community and Non-Governmental Organisations. These officials spared their time to grant interviews 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2007
to Fitch Rating Agency. Let me also applaud my staff at RBM for compiling quality data used by Fitch 
in  the  rating  exercise,  some  of  which  was  supplied  by  National  Statistical  Office  and  Ministry  of 
Finance.  
Finally,  let  me  thank  Casals  and  Associates  through  the  Millenuim  Challenge  Corporation,  for  their 
financial as well as logistical support they have provided to make this Conference a success.  
Thank you for your attention and God bless you. 
BIS Review 30/2007 
 3
