Ben S Bernanke: The level and distribution of economic well-being  
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, before the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, Nebraska, 6 February 2007.  
 A bedrock American principle is the idea that all individuals should have the opportunity to succeed on 
the basis of their own effort, skill, and ingenuity. Equality of economic opportunity appeals to our sense 
of fairness, certainly, but it also strengthens our economy. If each person is free to develop and apply 
his or her talents to the greatest extent possible, then both the individual and the economy benefit. 
Although  we  Americans  strive  to  provide  equality  of  economic  opportunity,  we  do  not  guarantee 
equality of economic outcomes, nor should we. Indeed, without the possibility of unequal outcomes 
tied  to  differences  in  effort  and  skill,  the  economic  incentive  for  productive  behavior  would  be 
eliminated, and our market-based economy – which encourages productive activity primarily through 
the promise of financial reward – would function far less effectively.  
That said, we also believe that no one should be allowed to slip too far down the economic ladder, 
especially for reasons beyond his or her control. Like equality of opportunity, this general principle is 
grounded in economic practicality as well as our sense of fairness. To a significant extent, American 
economic success has resulted from the flexibility and adaptability of our dynamic market economy. 
Indeed, the ability of our labor and capital markets to accommodate and adapt to economic change 
has  helped  make  possible  the  strong  productivity  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy  over  the  post-
World  War  II  era,  including  the  past  decade.  But  this  very  dynamism  sometimes  creates  painful 
dislocations, as when a shift in consumer demand, the advent of new technology, or new competition 
leads to the closing of a factory or causes a worker's skills to become obsolete. If we did not place 
some  limits  on  the  downside  risks  to  individuals  affected  by  economic  change,  the  public  at  large 
might become less willing to accept the dynamism that is so essential to economic progress. 
Thus, these three principles seem to be broadly accepted in our society: that economic opportunity 
should be as widely distributed and as equal as possible; that economic outcomes need not be equal 
but should be linked to the contributions each person makes to the economy; and that people should 
receive some insurance against the most adverse economic outcomes, especially those arising from 
events largely outside the person's control. Even when we accept these principles, however, important 
questions remain. For example, what is meant in practice by equality of economic opportunity? Some 
might limit the concept to the absence of overt discrimination against particular individuals or groups, 
while others might extend the term to encompass universal access to adequate housing, education, 
and health care. Another difficult question is how to balance the need for maintaining strong market-
based incentives, which support economic growth and efficiency but may be associated with greater 
inequality of results, against the goal of insuring individuals against the most adverse outcomes, which 
may  reduce  inequality  but  also  tends  to  diminish  the  strength  of  incentives.  No  objective  means  of 
answering  these  questions  exists.  One  can  only  try  to  understand  the  various  issues  and  tradeoffs 
involved and then come to a normative judgment based on that understanding. 
I raise these questions of ethics and values because they are inextricably linked with the topic of my 
talk  today,  which  is  the  level  and  distribution  of  economic  well-being  in  the  United  States.  As  I  will 
discuss, the average standard of living in this country has improved considerably over time. However, 
by many measures, inequality in economic outcomes has increased over time as well, albeit at varying 
rates. In the remainder of my remarks I will review these trends. I will discuss what economic research 
has to say about the sources of rising inequality and briefly consider some implications for economic 
policy. I will not draw any firm conclusions about the extent to which policy should attempt to offset 
inequality in economic outcomes; that determination inherently depends on values and social tradeoffs 
and is thus properly left to the political process.  
Trends in the level and distribution of economic well-being 
On average, and by almost any measure, Americans have gained ground economically over time. For 
example, since 1947, the real (that is, inflation adjusted) hourly compensation of workers in the U.S. 
nonfarm  business sector  (a  measure  that  includes both  earnings and  benefits)  has  increased  more 
than 200 percent. In other words, the real reward for an hour of work has more than tripled over the 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 1
past sixty years.1 Over the same period, real disposable income per capita has increased almost 270 
percent, real consumption per capita has increased almost 280 percent, and real wealth per capita has 
risen 310 percent. We have also seen significant gains in other indicators of living standards, such as 
health  and  educational  attainment.  Thus,  in  absolute  terms,  the  well-being  of  most  Americans 
compares  quite  favorably  with  that  of  earlier  generations  and,  indeed,  with  the  well-being  of  most 
people in the world today. 
Although average economic well-being has increased considerably over time, the degree of inequality 
in economic outcomes has increased as well. Importantly, rising inequality is not a recent development 
but has been evident for at least three decades, if not longer.2 The data on the real weekly earnings of 
full-time  wage  and  salary  workers  illustrate  this  pattern.  In  real  terms,  the  earnings  at  the  50th 
percentile  of  the  distribution  (which  I  will  refer  to  as  the  median  wage)  rose  about  11-1/2  percent 
between 1979 and 2006. Over the same period, the wage at the 10th percentile, near the bottom of 
the wage distribution, rose just 4 percent, while the wage at the 90th percentile, close to the top of the 
distribution, rose 34 percent.3 In 1979, a full-time worker at the 90th percentile of the wage distribution 
earned about 3.7 times as much as a full-time worker at the 10th percentile. Reflecting the relatively 
faster growth of wages of higher-paid workers, that ratio is 4.7 today. The gap between the 90th and 
10th  percentiles  of  the  wage  distribution  rose  particularly  rapidly  through  most  of  the  1980s;  since 
then, it has continued to trend up, albeit at a slower pace and with occasional reversals.  
The long-term trend toward greater inequality seen in real wages is also evident in broader measures 
of financial well-being, such as real household income.4 For example, the share of income received by 
households  in  the  top  fifth  of  the  income  distribution,  after  taxes  have  been  paid  and  government 
transfers have been received, rose from 42 percent in 1979 to 50 percent in 2004, while the share of 
income received by those in the bottom fifth of the distribution declined from 7 percent to 5 percent. 
The  share  of  after-tax  income  garnered  by  the  households  in  the  top  1  percent  of  the  income 
distribution  increased  from  8  percent  in  1979  to  14  percent  in  2004  (Congressional  Budget  Office, 
2006).5 Even within the top 1 percent, the distribution of income has widened during recent decades.6  
The  measures  of  inequality  I  have  cited  reflect  "snapshots"  of  a  single  time  period,  usually  a  year. 
Consequently,  they  may  not  tell  a  complete  story  about  the  extent  of  inequality  or  its  trend.  For 
example, the fact that an older, more-experienced worker earns more than a newly hired employee will 
                                                      
1   This result is calculated using the data on compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector from the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics,  deflated  by  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption  expenditures  from  the  national  income  and  product 
accounts. 
2   Goldin and Margo (1992) find that wage inequality has been increasing at varying rates since 1950. Piketty and Saez (2003) 
obtain a similar result for wage income since the mid-1950s; using a measure of total income excluding capital gains, they 
find that inequality was more or less constant from the early 1950s until the early 1970s and rose thereafter. By contrast, 
Weinberg (1996) found that family income inequality, as measured by the Gini index, had diminished somewhat between 
1947 and 1968, but had increased between 1968 and the early 1990s, when his sample period ended. 
3   The data are  weekly earnings of full-time wage and salary  workers aged twenty-five and older and are derived from the 
Current  Population  Survey,  published  by  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics.  The  data  are  deflated  by  the  price  index  for 
personal consumption expenditures. 
4   Other important measures of economic well-being include consumption and wealth. Some economists view consumption as 
a  better  measure  of  economic  well-being  than  labor  compensation  or  income  because  consumption  is  a  more  direct 
indicator of the standard of living and because, on the assumption that households consume according to the income they 
expect to receive over the longer term, it may also be a better measure of a household's long-term economic prospects. As 
with  other  measures  of  economic  well-being,  consumption  has  become  increasingly  unequal  over  time,  although  at  any 
point  in  time  it  is  less  unequally  distributed  than  wages  or  income  (Krueger  and  Perri,  2006).  Wealth  –  the  difference 
between a household's assets (both physical and financial) and its liabilities – shows a slightly different pattern. As we know 
from the Federal Reserve's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances, wealth is distributed far more unequally than income, 
with  about  33  percent  of  aggregate  household  net  worth  being  held  by  the  top  1  percent  of  families  and  with  just  2-1/4 
percent of wealth being held by the bottom half (Kennickell, 2006). However, the relative shares of wealth held by the richest 
and poorest have changed very little over the past decade or so, in contrast to the further widening in the distributions of 
wages, incomes, and consumption. 
In  general,  measures  of  economic  well-being  (such  as  disposable  income)  that  take  account  of  taxes  paid  and  transfer 
payments received from the government show lower levels of inequality at any point in time than measures that exclude 
such payments; the difference reflects the progressive nature of our system of taxes and transfers. However, analysis of 
these broader measures indicates that, over time, tax and transfer policies have not materially altered the general tendency 
toward greater inequality. 
5  
6   Data  on  the  distribution  of  income  in  the  top  1  percent  comes  from  an  update  of  Piketty  and  Saez  (2003),  available  at 
http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~saez/TabFig2004prel.xls. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2007
appear  as  wage  inequality  when  measured  at  a  given  time;  but  as  long  as  the  new  employee  can 
expect to gain experience and someday earn a higher wage, inequality arising for this reason should 
not  particularly  concern  us.  Studies  that  track  individuals'  positions  in  the  earnings  distribution  over 
time suggest that, in a given five-year period, almost half the population moves from one quintile of the 
distribution  to  another,  and  the  percentage  moving between  quintiles  increases  over  longer  periods 
(McMurrer  and  Sawhill,  1996).  However,  economists  disagree  about  whether  income  mobility  has 
changed  significantly  over time  (Lee  and  Solon,  2006).  If  it  has not,  then  factors related  to mobility 
cannot go far in helping to explain the upward trend in measures of short-term inequality.7  
The sources of changes in the level and dispersion of economic well-being 
What are the underlying sources of these long-term trends in wages, incomes, and other measures of 
economic  well-being?  Economists  have  established  that,  over  longer  periods,  increases  in  average 
living  standards  are  closely  linked  to  the  growth  rate  of  productivity  –  the  quantity  of  goods  and 
services that can be produced per worker or per hour of work. Since 1947, hourly labor productivity in 
the  U.S.  nonfarm  business  sector  has  increased  a  robust  2-1/4  percent  per  year,  and  productivity 
growth has been close to or above that figure in most of the past ten years. This sustained productivity 
growth has resulted in large and broad-based improvements in the standard of living. When discussing 
inequality, we should not lose sight of the fact that the great majority of Americans today enjoy a level 
of material abundance – including the benefits of many technological advances, from air conditioning 
to computers to advanced medical treatments – that earlier generations would envy. 
That  being  said,  understanding  the  sources  of  the  long-term  tendency  toward  greater  inequality 
remains a major challenge for economists and policymakers. A key observation is that, over the past 
few  decades,  the  real  wages  of  workers  with  more years of  formal  education have  increased  more 
quickly  than  those  of  workers  with  fewer  years  of  formal  education.  For  example,  in  1979,  median 
weekly earnings for workers with a bachelor's (or higher) degree were 38 percent more than those of 
high-school graduates with no college experience; last year, that differential was 75 percent. Similarly, 
over the same period, the gap in median earnings between those completing high school and those 
with  less  than  a  high-school  education  increased  from  19  percent  to  42  percent.  To  a  significant 
extent, to explain increasing inequality we must explain why the economic return to education and to 
the development of skills more generally has continued to rise. 
Economists have hypothesized that technological advances, such as improvements in information and 
communications  technologies,  have  raised  the  productivity  of  high-skilled  workers  much  more  than 
that  of  low-skilled  workers.  High-skilled  workers  may  have  enjoyed  this  advantage  because,  for 
example,  they  may  have  been  better  able  to  make  more  effective  use  of  computer  applications,  to 
operate  sophisticated  machinery,  or  to  adapt  to  changes  in  workplace  organization  driven  by  new 
technologies. If new technologies tend to increase the productivity of highly skilled workers relatively 
more  than  that  of  less-skilled  workers  –  a  phenomenon  that  economists  have  dubbed  "skill-biased 
technical change" – then market forces will tend to cause the real wages of skilled workers to increase 
relatively faster. Considerable evidence supports the view that worker skills and advanced technology 
are complementary. For example, economists have found that industries and firms that spend more on 
research and development or invest more in information technologies hire relatively more high-skilled 
workers and spend a relatively larger share of their payrolls on them (Autor, Katz, and Krueger, 1998; 
Bartel and Sicherman, 1999; Berndt and Morrison, 1995; Berman, Bound, and Griliches, 1994).  
Although  skill-biased  technical  change  appears  to  be  an  important  cause  of  the  rise  in  earnings 
inequality, it does not provide a complete explanation for that trend. The hypothesis cannot explain, for 
example,  why  the  sharp  rise  in  investment  in  information  technology  in  the  1990s  was  not 
accompanied  by  a  higher  rate  of  increase  in  wage  inequality.  Nor  can  it  explain  why  the  wages  of 
workers in the middle of the distribution have grown more slowly in recent years than those of workers 
                                                      
7   Another respect in which snapshots of inequality may be misleading is that they are influenced by fluctuations in income that 
are transitory and that hence have a smaller effect on long-term economic well-being. One study suggests that, for men, 
about one-third of the rise in point-in-time earnings inequality during the 1970s and 1980s resulted from an increase in the 
transitory  variation  in  wages  (Moffitt  and  Gottschalk,  2002).  The  proper  interpretation  of  these  short-lived  changes  in 
earnings is not clear. To the degree that they are associated with factors such as job changes, moves, or entry into or exit 
from schooling, temporary variations in individual incomes could signify a healthy labor market. On the other hand, such 
variations would be of greater concern if they reflected a higher incidence of factors such as short periods of unemployment 
or loss of income due to health problems. 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 3
at  the  lower  end  of  the  distribution,  even  though,  of  the  two  groups,  workers  in  the  middle  of  the 
distribution  are  typically  the  better  educated  (Autor,  Katz,  and  Kearney,  2006;  Autor,  Levy,  and 
Murnane, 2003).  
Another challenge for the hypothesis of skill-biased technical change, at least in its basic formulation, 
is to explain the especially large wage gains seen at the top of the distribution. A possible link between 
technological change and the substantial increases in the wages of the best-paid workers is that some 
advances, such as those that have swept the communications industry, may have contributed to the 
rise of so-called "superstars" – a small number of the most-gifted individuals in each field who are now 
better  able  to  apply  their  talents  in what  has  increasingly  become  a  global  marketplace  (Frank  and 
Cook, 1995; Hausman and Leonard, 1997; Krueger, 2005; Manasse and Turrini, 2001; and Rosen, 
1981). For example, two decades ago, the highest-paid player for the Boston Red Sox baseball team 
(and in the American League), Jim Rice, earned (in inflation-adjusted terms) just over $3 million. In 
2004,  the  highest-paid  player  on  the  Red  Sox  (and  in  all  of  major-league  baseball)  was  Manny 
Ramirez, who received $22.5 million for the season. The number of fans who can fit into Fenway Park 
has  not  increased  much  since  Jim  Rice's  day.  But  presumably  the  Red  Sox  owners  believed  that 
Ramirez's higher salary was justified by the increases in broadcast and merchandising revenues he 
might  generate  as  a  result  of  the  confluence  of  new  distribution  channels  (such  as  Internet-based 
broadcasts of games) and a larger and wealthier potential global audience.8 The earnings potentials of 
superstar  entertainers,  investment  bankers,  lawyers,  and  various  other  professionals  have  likewise 
risen sharply as technological innovations and globalization have helped them leverage their talents 
over a wider sphere. 
The compensation of chief executive officers of corporations is often singled out for particular scrutiny. 
Some  economists  have  argued  that  the  observed  increases  in  CEO  pay  packages  can  largely  be 
justified by economic factors, such as changes in the relationship between the CEO and the firm that 
have  led  to  shorter  and  less-secure  tenures  for  CEOs  (Kaplan  and  Minton,  2006)  and  to  a  greater 
tendency  to  hire  CEOs  from  outside  the  company  (Murphy  and  Zabojnik,  2004).  Others  note  that 
substantial increases in the size and scope of the largest corporations have raised the economic value 
of  skilled  corporate  leadership  (Gabaix  and  Landier,  2006).  However,  critics  have  responded  that 
increases  in  CEO  pay  may  have  been  amplified  by  poor  corporate  governance,  including  the 
substantial  influence  that  some CEOs appear  to  have  had  over their  own  pay  (Bebchuk and  Fried, 
2003). This debate will no doubt continue. 
Beyond the effects of technological change, the variety of economic forces grouped under the heading 
of  "globalization"  may  also  have  been  a  factor  in  the  rise  in  inequality,  even  as  these  forces  have 
provided a major stimulus to economic growth and to living standards overall. Immigration – the flow of 
people across borders – is one aspect of the increased economic integration of the world economy. In 
recent decades, most immigrants to the United States have arrived with relatively low levels of skills. 
By itself, this pattern of immigration increases measured inequality because it leads to an increase in 
the  relative  size  of  the  low-wage  work  force  (Lerman,  1999).  Standard  economic  reasoning  also 
suggests  that  the  immigration  of  such  workers  should  reduce  the  relative  wages  of  less-skilled 
domestic workers. Empirical analyses of individual cities or regions have found some evidence that 
corroborates this hypothesis, although in most cases the effect appears to have been small. A typical 
finding  is  that  an  increase  of  10  percent  in  the  share  of  immigrants  in  a  city  reduces  the  wages  of 
lower-skilled natives 1 percent or less. This somewhat muted effect of low-skilled immigration on local 
markets  may  reflect  the  adaptability  of  U.S.  labor  and  product  markets,  which  has  allowed  native 
workers and firms to adjust with relatively little displacement (Card, 2005; Card and Lewis, 2005; and 
Lewis, 2004, 2005). However, studies that examine national data tend to find somewhat larger effects, 
with a 10 percent increase in the share of immigrants in the total population reducing the wages of 
low-skilled natives 3 percent to 5 percent (Borjas, 2006).  
International trade, another aspect of globalization, may also have differential effects on the economic 
well-being of U.S. workers even as it tends to raise real wages and incomes on average. For example, 
some empirical research suggests that, in the 1980s and 1990s, increased international trade reduced 
the  profitability  and  hence  the  demand  for  labor  in  a  number  of  industries  that  employed  relatively 
                                                      
8   Recently, the Red Sox paid $51 million simply for the right to negotiate with the Japanese pitcher Daisuke Matsuzaka; they 
later  signed  Matsuzaka  for  an  additional  $52  million  over  six  years.  Illustrating  some  of  the  effects  of  globalization  on 
baseball economics, the city of Boston anticipates that increased interest by Japanese tourists will bring in some $75 million, 
aside from what the Red Sox will earn from signing Matsuzaka (Reed, 2006). 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2007
more low-skilled workers (Borjas, Freeman, and Katz, 1997; Sachs and Shatz, 1994). Of course, trade 
has increased the potential markets for other domestic industries, leading to higher demand and thus 
higher real wages for workers in those industries. A related development has been the outsourcing 
abroad  of  some  types  of  services  and  production  activities.  Because  labor  markets  are  adaptable, 
outsourcing abroad does not ultimately affect aggregate employment, but it may affect the distribution 
of  wages,  depending  on  the  skill  content  of  the  outsourced  work.  At  least  until  recently,  most  such 
activity appears to have involved goods and services that use relatively more low-skilled labor, which 
(all else being equal) would tend through the workings of supply and demand to slow the growth of 
wages  of  domestic  low-skilled  workers  relative  to  those  with  greater  skills  (Feenstra  and  Hanson, 
1996).9  
Unfortunately,  much  of  the  available  empirical  research  on  the  influence  of  trade  on  earnings 
inequality dates from the 1980s and 1990s and thus does not address later developments. Whether 
studies of the more-recent period will reveal effects of trade on the distribution of earnings that differ 
from those observed earlier is to some degree an open question. Overall, I read the available evidence 
as favoring the view that the influence of globalization on inequality has been moderate and almost 
surely less important than the effects of skill-biased technological change. 
Finally, changes in the institutions that have shaped the labor market over the past few decades may 
also  have  been  associated  with  some  increase  in  wage  inequality.  For  example,  unions  tend  to 
compress  the  dispersion  of  pay  for  jobs  in  the  middle  of  the  skill  distribution.  Thus,  the  decline  in 
private-sector union membership over the post-World War II period – particularly the sharp drop in the 
1980s – has been associated with an increased dispersion of pay among workers with intermediate 
levels of skill (Freeman, 2005). The sources of the decline in union membership are much debated, 
and  certainly  long-run  structural  changes  in  the  economy,  such  as  the  decline  in  manufacturing 
employment,  have  played  a  role.  Whatever  the  precise  mechanism  through  which  lower  rates  of 
unionization affected the wage structure, the available research suggests that it can explain between 
10  percent  and  20  percent  of  the  rise  in  wage  inequality  among  men  during  the  1970s  and  1980s 
(Card, 2001; DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 1996; Freeman, 1993).  
Declines in the real value of the minimum wage, brought about by the combination of inflation and the 
fact that minimum wages are usually set in dollar terms, also affect the labor market. Some research 
suggests that this factor contributed to the relative decline in the wages of the least-skilled workers 
during the 1980s. Economists have also pointed out that, although higher minimum wages increase 
the wages of those who remain employed, they may also lead to reduced employment of low-skilled 
workers. Thus, the net influence of the minimum wage on earnings and income inequality, as opposed 
to the inequality of observed hourly wages, is ambiguous (Neumark, Schweitzer, and Wascher, 2005). 
In any case, the real value of the minimum wage, adjusted to include state minimum wages that are 
above the federal level, has been fairly flat in recent years, and so has the proportion of the labor force 
that is unionized. This suggests that these institutional factors have been less important sources of 
increasing wage inequality recently than they were in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Some policy implications 
What,  if  anything,  should  policymakers  do  about  the  trend  of  increasing  economic  inequality?  As  I 
noted at the beginning of my remarks, answering this question inevitably involves some difficult value 
judgments that are beyond the realm of objective economic analysis – judgments, for example, about 
the  right  tradeoff  between  allowing  strong  market-based  incentives  and  providing  social  insurance 
against economic risks. Such tradeoffs are, of course, at the heart of decisions about tax and transfer 
policies that affect the distribution of income as well as countless other policy debates. 
Policy approaches that would not be helpful, in my view, are those that would inhibit the dynamism 
and flexibility of our labor and capital markets or erect barriers to international trade and investment. 
To  be  sure,  the  advent  of  new  technologies  and  increased  international  trade  can  lead  to  painful 
dislocations as some workers lose their jobs or see the demand for their particular skills decline.10 But 
                                                      
9   For an opposing view, see Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006). 
10   Surveys of workers displaced from jobs because their plant closed or moved show that rates of such job loss fluctuated only 
a little, on balance, from  1983 to 2003 despite the decline in  unemployment over  that period (Farber, 2005). A range of 
studies have yielded conflicting answers to the question of whether job stability and job insecurity have changed over time, 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 5
hindering  the  adoption  of  new  technologies  or  inhibiting  trade  flows  would  do  far  more  harm  than 
good, as technology and trade are critical sources of overall economic growth and of increases in the 
standard of living.  
A  better  approach  for  policy  is  to  allow  growth-enhancing  forces  to  work  but  to  try  to  cushion  the 
effects  of  any  resulting  dislocations.  For  example,  policies  to  facilitate  retraining  and  job  search  by 
displaced workers, if well designed, could assist the adjustment process. Policies that reduce the costs 
to workers of changing jobs – for example, by improving the portability of health and pension benefits 
between  employers  –  would  also  help  to  maintain  economic  flexibility  and  reduce  the  costs  that 
individuals  and  families  bear  as  a  result  of  economic  change.  Of  course,  devising  policies  that 
accomplish these goals in the most effective way is not straightforward, nor can such policies deal with 
all  of  the  negative  effects  of  trade  and  technology  on  affected  individuals.  Displaced  older  workers 
present a particularly difficult problem, as these workers have greater difficulty than others in finding 
new  jobs  and  experience  a  greater  decline  in  earnings  than  other  workers  if  they  are  re-employed 
(Munnell  and  others,  2006).  Considerable  debate  and  analysis  of  policy  alternatives  lie  ahead,  but 
these discussions will be well worth the effort. 
As the larger return to education and skill is likely the single greatest source of the long-term increase 
in  inequality,  policies  that  boost  our  national  investment  in  education  and  training  can  help  reduce 
inequality  while  expanding  economic  opportunity.  A  substantial  body  of  research  demonstrates  that 
investments in education and training pay high rates of return both to individuals and to the society at 
large  (Acemoglu  and  Angrist,  2001;  Becker,  1964;  Card,  1999;  Topel,  2004).  That  research  also 
suggests that workers with more education are better positioned to adapt to changing demands in the 
workplace.  
In assessing the potential of education and training to moderate inequality, one should keep in mind 
that  the  economically  relevant  concept  of  education  is  much  broader  than  the  traditional  course  of 
schooling  from  kindergarten  through  high  school  and  into  college.  Indeed,  substantial  economic 
benefits may result from any form of training that helps individuals acquire economically and socially 
useful  skills,  including  not  only  K-12  education,  college,  and  graduate  work  but  also  on-the-job 
training,  coursework  at  community  colleges  and  vocational  schools,  extension  courses,  online 
education, and training in financial literacy. The market incentives for individuals to invest in their own 
skills  are  strong,  and  the  expanding  array  of  educational  offerings  available  today  allows  such 
investment to be as occupationally focused as desired and to take place at any point in an individual's 
life.  
Although  education  and  the  acquisition of  skills  is  a  lifelong  process,  starting  early  in  life  is  crucial. 
Recent research – some sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in collaboration with 
the University of Minnesota – has documented the high returns that early childhood programs can pay 
in terms of subsequent educational attainment and in lower rates of social problems, such as teenage 
pregnancy  and  welfare  dependency.11  The  most successful  early  childhood programs appear  to  be 
those  that  cultivate  both  cognitive  and  noncognitive  skills  and  that  engage  families  in  stimulating 
learning at home (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006). 
To return to the themes I raised at the beginning, the challenge for policy is not to eliminate inequality 
per  se  but  rather  to  spread  economic  opportunity  as  widely  as  possible.  Policies  that  focus  on 
education, job training, and skills and that facilitate job search and job mobility seem to me to be a 
promising  means  for  moving  toward  that  goal.  By  increasing  opportunity  and  capability,  we  help 
individuals and families while strengthening the nation's economy as well. 
References 
Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Angrist (2001). "How Large Are Human Capital Externalities? Evidence 
from  Compulsory  Schooling  Laws,"  in  Ben  S.  Bernanke  and  Kenneth  Rogoff,  eds.,  NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 9-59.  
                                                                                                                                                                      
although the editor of a set of papers presented at a conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York concluded that 
the relationship of employees and firms weakened some in the 1990s (Neumark, 2000). 
11   More information on the Early Childhood Research Collaborative and copies of its research papers can be obtained from the 
website of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, www.earlychildhoodrc.org. 
6 
 BIS Review 12/2007
Autor,  David  H.,  Frank  Levy,  and  Richard  J.  Murnane  (2003).  "The  Skill  Content  of  Recent 
Technological  Change:  An  Empirical  Exploration,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  vol.  118 
(November), pp. 1279-333. 
Autor,  David  H.,  Lawrence  F.  Katz,  and  Melissa  S.  Kearney  (2006).  "The  Polarization  of  the  Labor 
Market," American Economic Review, vol. 96 (May), pp. 189-94. 
Autor,  David  H.,  Lawrence  F.  Katz,  and  Alan  B.  Krueger  (1998).  "Computing  Inequality:  Have 
Computers Changed the Labor Market?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 113 (November), pp. 
1169-213. 
Bartel, Ann P., and Nachum Sicherman (1999). "Technological Change and Wages: An Interindustry 
Analysis," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 107 (April), pp. 285-325. 
Bebchuk, Lucien A., and Jesse M. Fried (2003). "Executive Compensation as an Agency Problem," 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 17 (Summer), pp. 71-92. 
Becker, Gary S. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference 
to Education. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches (1994). "Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within 
U.S.  Manufacturing:  Evidence  from  the  Annual  Survey  of  Manufacturers,"  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, vol. 109 (May), pp. 367-97. 
Berndt,  Ernst  R.,  and  Catherine  J.  Morrison  (1995).  "High-Tech  Capital  Formation  and  Economic 
Performance in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: An Exploratory Analysis," Journal of Econometrics, vol. 
65 (January), pp. 9-43. 
Borjas,  George  J.  (2006).  "Native  Internal  Migration  and  the  Labor  Market  Impact  of  Immigration," 
Journal of Human Resources, vol. 41 (Spring), pp. 221-58. 
Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz (1997). "How Much Do Immigrants and 
Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1997, pp. 1-67.  
Card,  David  (1999).  "The  Causal  Effect  of  Education  on  Earnings"  in  Orley  Ashenfelter  and  David 
Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3A. New York: Elsevier, pp. 1801-63. 
___________ (2001). "The Effect of Unions on Wage Inequality in the U.S. Labor Market," Industrial 
and Labor Relations Review, vol. 54 (January), pp. 296-315. 
___________  (2005).  "Is  the  New  Immigration  Really  So  Bad?"  Economic  Journal,  vol.  115 
(November), pp. F300-23.  
Card,  David,  and  Ethan  G.  Lewis  (2005).  "The  Diffusion  of  Mexican  Immigrants  during  the  1990s: 
Explanations and Impacts," NBER Working Paper Series 11552. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau 
of Economic Research, August. 
Congressional  Budget  Office  (2006).  "Historical  Effective  Federal  Tax  Rates:  1979-2004," 
www.cbo.gov/ftpdoc.cfm?index=7718&type=1.  
DiNardo,  John,  Nicole  M.  Fortin,  and  Thomas  Lemieux  (1996).  "Labor  Market  Institutions  and  the 
Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach," Econometrica, vol. 64 (September), 
pp. 1001-44. 
Farber, Henry S. (2005). "What Do We Know About Job Loss in the United States? Evidence from the 
Displaced Workers  Survey,  1984-2004,"  Federal Reserve  Bank of  Chicago  Economic  Perspectives, 
vol. 29(Q2), pp. 13-28. 
Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson (1996). "Foreign Investment, Outsourcing, and Relative 
Wages,"  in  Robert  C.  Feenstra,  Gene  M.  Grossman,  and  Douglas  A.  Irwin,  eds.,  The  Political 
Economy of Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 
89-127. 
Frank,  Robert  H.,  and  Philip  J.  Cook  (1995).  The  Winner-Take-All  Society:  How  More  and  More 
Americans  Compete  for  Ever  Fewer  and  Bigger  Prizes,  Encouraging  Economic  Waste,  Income 
Inequality, and an Impoverished Cultural Life. New York: Penguin Books.  
BIS Review 12/2007 
 7
Freeman,  Richard  B.  (1993).  "How  Much  Has  De-unionization  Contributed  to  the  Rise  in  Male 
Earnings  Inequality?"  in  Sheldon  Danziger  and  Peter  Gottschalk,  eds.,  Uneven  Tides:  Rising 
Inequality in America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 133-63. 
_________________(2005). "What Do Unions Do? The 2004 M-Brane Stringtwister Edition," NBER 
Working Paper Series 11410. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June.  
Gabaix,  Xavier,  and  Augustin  Landier  (2006).  "Why  Has  CEO  Pay  Increased  So  Much?"  NBER 
Working Paper Series 12365. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. 
Goldin, Claudia, and Robert A. Margo (1992). "The Great Compression: The U.S. Wage Structure at 
Mid-Century," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 107 (February), pp. 1-34. 
Grossman, Gene M., and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2006). "The Rise of Offshoring: It's Not Wine for 
Cloth Anymore," in The New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications, paper prepared 
for  a  symposium  in  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,  August  24-26.  Kansas  City:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City, www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/symmain.htm. 
Hausman,  Jerry  A.,  and  Gregory  K.  Leonard  (1997).  "Superstars  in  the  National  Basketball 
Association: Economic Value and Policy," Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 15 (October), pp. 586-624. 
Heckman,  James  J.,  Jora  Stixrud,  and  Sergio  Urzua  (2006).  "The  Effects  of  Cognitive  and 
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior," Journal of Labor Economics, 
vol. 24 (July), pp. 411-82. 
Kaplan, Steven N., and Bernadette Minton (2006). "How Has CEO Turnover Changed? Increasingly 
Performance Sensitive Boards and Increasingly Uneasy CEOs," NBER Working Paper Series 12465. 
Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. 
Kennickell,  Arthur  B.  (2006).  "Currents  and  Undercurrents:  Changes  in  the  Distribution  of  Wealth, 
1989-2004," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-13. Washington: Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System, August. 
Krueger, Alan B. (2005). "The Economics of Real Superstars: The Market for Rock Concerts in the 
Material World," Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 23 (January), pp. 1-30.  
Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri (2006). "Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? 
Evidence and Theory," Review of Economic Studies, vol. 73 (January), pp. 163-193. 
Lee, Chul-In, and Gary Solon (2006). "Trends in Intergenerational Income Mobility," NBER Working 
Paper Series 12007. Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. 
Lerman,  Robert  I.  (1999).  "U.S.  Wage-Inequality  Trends  and  Recent  Immigration,"  American 
Economic Review, vol. 89 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 23-28. 
Lewis,  Ethan  (2004).  "How  Did  the  Miami  Labor  Market  Absorb  the  Mariel  Immigrants?"  Working 
Paper Series 04-3. Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, January. 
____________(2005). "Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique," Working Paper Series 
05-8. Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, May. 
Manasse,  Paolo,  and  Allessandro  Turrini  (2001).  "Trade,  Wages,  and  ‘Superstars,'"  Journal  of 
International Economics, vol. 54 (June), pp. 97-117. 
McMurrer,  Daniel  P.,  and  Isabel  Sawhill  (1996).  "Economic  Mobility  in  the  United  States,"  Urban 
Institute, www.urban.org/publications/406722.html (accessed January 16, 2007). 
Moffitt, Robert A., and Peter Gottschalk (2002). "Trends in the Transitory Variance of Earnings in the 
United States," Economic Journal, vol. 112 (March), pp. C68-73. 
Munnell,  Alicia  H.,  Steven  A.  Sass,  Mauricio  Soto,  and  Natalia  A.  Zhivan  (2006).  "Has  the 
Displacement of Older Workers Increased?" paper prepared for the Eighth Annual Joint Conference of 
the Retirement Research Consortium, Washington, D.C., August 10-11. 
Murphy,  Kevin  J.,  and  Jan  Zabojnik  (2004).  "CEO  Pay  and  Appointments:  A  Market-Based 
Explanation for Recent Trends," American Economic Review, vol. 94 (May, Papers and Proceedings), 
pp. 192-96. 
Neumark, David, ed. (2000). On the Job: Is Long-Term Employment a Thing of the Past? New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation. 
8 
 BIS Review 12/2007
Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher (2005). "The Effects of Minimum Wages on 
the Distribution of Family Incomes: A Nonparametric Analysis," Journal of Human Resources, vol. 40 
(Fall), pp. 867-94. 
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez (2003). "Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998," 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118 (February), pp. 1-39L. 
Reed, Keith (2006). "Japanese May Follow Matsuzaka to Boston," Boston Globe, December 15. 
Rosen,  Sherwin  (1981).  "The  Economics  of  Superstars,"  American  Economic  Review,  vol.  71 
(December), pp. 845-58. 
Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Howard J. Shatz (1994). "Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufacturing," Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1994, pp. 1-69.  
Topel,  Robert  (2004).  "The  Private  and  Social  Values  of  Education,"  in  Education  and  Economic 
Development, proceedings of a conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, November 
18-19, 2004, pp. 47-57, www.clevelandfed.org/research/conferences/2004/November/cbook.pdf. 
Weinberg,  Daniel  H.  (1996).  "A  Brief  Look  at  Postwar  U.S.  Income  Inequality,"  Current  Population 
Reports, P60-191 (June). Washington: Census Bureau, www.census.gov/hhes/www/img/p60-191.pdf. 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 9
