Ardian Fullani: Summary of the latest macroeconomic developments in Albania 
Address by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, to the meeting “The banking system 
over 2007: the Governor communicates with the market”, Tirana, 26 March 2007. 
 Distinguished participants, 
Considering  the  today’s  meeting  of  a  special  importance  in  line  with  our  institutional  tradition  and 
intensive  communication  with  the  general  public,  particularly  with  the  main  market  stakeholders,  I 
would like to thank you for your participation. I think that such meetings further increase the degree of 
mutual understanding, aiming at enhancing the financial market efficiency.  
Allow me to start my address, making a brief summary of the latest macroeconomic developments. 
Likewise  in  2005,  the  Albanian  economy,  even  during  the  last  year,  continued  its  path  towards 
macroeconomic consolidation. The country’s GDP is estimated at 5 percent growth in real terms. This 
growth  has  been  associated  with  price  stability,  denominated  in  an  average  annual  inflation  of  2.4 
percent.  The  monetary  conditions,  characterised  by  historically  low  interest  rates  and  a  stable 
exchange rate, have favoured the rise of investments and consumption in the economy. Particularly, 
they have been reflected even in the rapid credit growth, further sustaining the economy growth.  
The  fiscal  developments  have  resulted  within  the  programmed  levels,  contributing  to  further 
consolidation of the public finances and to budget deficit control.  
The  extension  of  the  country’s  economic  activity  has  been  associated  with  increased  foreign  trade 
exchanges. The balance of payments for 2006 has recorded positive terms, sustaining the exchange 
rate stability.  
From  the BoA’s  monetary  policy  viewpoint,  I  would  like  to  underscore  that  year  2006  coincided 
with  a  change  of  the  previous  direction.  Initially  in  July  and  later  on  in  November  2006,  the  BoA’s 
Supervisory Council rose key interest rate by 0,25 pp, leading it to 5,5 percent, from 5 percent at end 
of June 2006.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  decisions  were  a  reflection  of  a  number  of  risk  factors,  whose  presence 
constituted  a  potential  risk  on  the  long-term  inflation  performance,  which,  I  re-emphasise,  from  the 
legal  viewpoint,  constitutes  our  primary  objective.  The  Bank  of  Albania  is  confident  that  its 
decisions were appropriate and they have served to orient inflationary expectations within the target 
range.  
End-2006 and first quarter of 2007, as well as current inflation forecasts indicate that we have been 
successful in this direction. However, I avail myself of the opportunity to re-emphasise that we remain 
totally  committed  to  successfully  monitor  the  current  developments  and  the  implications  they  may 
entail in future development. Our focus will continue to be the control of inflationary pressures in the 
economy.  
To this end, I would like to attract the banking system attention to a new project of the Bank of Albania, 
which is going to assist us a lot in this regard. Our researches, the business and consumer sentiments 
do not succeed in attaining appropriate dimension under the conditions of lacking the financial market 
expectations on inflation, exchange rate and key interest rate. In the near future, a new requirement 
will be made to the banking system, having to do precisely with what I previously said: Which is the 
bank’s  expectation  on  inflation,  exchange  rate  and  repo  rate  in  the  short  and  long  run. 
Personally, I consider it as a new challenge for the banking system; therefore I would insist that the 
whole banking system should deal seriously with this problem, to timely incorporate scientific analysis 
and research centres into its organisational structures.  
I am confident that the banking system has already understood that, inter alia, it is just the time for 
such institutions to pay attention to developments of the economy, intensifying the analysis on current 
and future developments.  
Another issue I will deal with in this address is the monetary policy decision-making perception and 
implementation.  Given  the  current  stage  of  financial  market  development  in  Albania,  high  level  of 
euroization  and  other  objective  and  subjective  factors,  I  would  say  that  the  monetary  transmission 
efficiency is not yet in the parameters of the developed financial markets. The currency market is still 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 1
concentrated;  its  specific  segments  are  characterised  by  insignificant  trading  volume  and  high 
volatility.  
Effective liquidity management is an important element for us, which, as in other central bank, goes 
beyond a  mechanic management of  excess  liquidity  withdrawal  or  injection  in case  of shortage.  By 
managing  the  liquidity,  we  have aimed  at  implementing  the  monetary  policy  decisions  made  by  the 
Bank of Albania Supervisory Council to the market. Liquidity management intends controlling short-
term interest rates, keeping them in line with monetary policy decisions. Concretely, the frequent use 
of  other  instruments,  besides  the  main  instrument  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  reflects  the  Bank  of 
Albania’s determination in terms of controlling short-term interest rates.  
I would also like to point out that preventing or solving situations of liquidity shortage or excess are not 
sufficient  for  achieving  the  liquidity  management  goal  by  the  central  bank;  the  effective  liquidity 
management should ensure its smooth re-allocation among banking system operators. As a result of 
liquidity concentration, this would reduce the short-term interest rate volatility.  
In  this  framework,  in  2007,  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  start  the  application  of  a  new  Regulation  “On 
repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements” which will bring about a novelty on interventions for 
a more effective distribution of banking system liquidity.  
This development of the regulatory framework will foster the repo market among commercial banks. It 
will contribute to the establishment of a more active inter-bank liquidity market and more active liquidity 
management by commercial banks. Not only the information but also the real time of its transmission 
is of unquestionable importance to the financial market. In this context, I would like to emphasize that 
though  the  central  bank  has  the  necessary  statistics  to  estimate  the  banks’  positions  and  their 
operations, we expect from them to work more for enhancing the transparency in this regard.  
To encourage banks in terms of enhancing the transparency, the Bank of Albania has provided to the 
system the Regulation “On calculating fixed interest in interbank currency market”, whose application 
shall be of importance not only to the Bank of Albania, but also to commercial banks for active liquidity 
management.  In  the  same  line,  the  central  bank,  through  its  active  participation  in  the  “Dealers 
Association” is supporting even the creation of a code of conduct for interbank relationships, which is 
deemed to lay another stone to market development in Albania.  
As I mentioned above, the political decision-making of the Bank of Albania is forward-looking. From 
this viewpoint, I would require from the banking system to adopt the same philosophy: “React today to 
prevent undesirable events in the future! As Alain Blinder has stated: “Frequently the decision-
makers  only  look  through  the  window  and  make  case  decisions,  based  on  current 
circumstances”. Therefore, the banking system should adopt the same philosophy for assimilating 
and factorising the Bank of Albania’s decisions into the short- and long-term operational strategy.  
Another  issue  is  an  argument,  which  given  the  importance  and  the  current  stage  of  the  economic-
financial development of the country, assumes an extremely high importance. The financial stability 
has become a central topic of current practical-academic debate. I would like to bring to your memory 
the regional conference of the Bank of Albania organised in October of the last year related to this 
issue. While the debate continues for determining a number of qualitative and quantitative indicators to 
measure the vulnerability of the economy, I would like to attract your attention to a higher attention we 
jointly should pay in this direction.  
The macroeconomic stability is of primary importance, but without doubt, even the financial stability 
is of the same vital importance. We should not forget that the segment represented in this audience 
constitutes the most developed and regulated part of the whole financial sector. The banking system in 
Albania has been transformed into a promoter of the country’s economic sustainability, by extending 
funds to the economy. At the same time, the variety of financial products it supplies is being increased 
year on year.  
At end-2006, the banking system was presented in a good financial position. Its assets were to ALL 
624.3  billion,  or  about  25.7  per  cent  more  than  in  end-2005.  The  banking  system  deposits  have 
amounted to ALL 520.3 billion, reaching 20.2 percent on annual basis. The loans portfolio is estimated 
at ALL 197 billion, 55 percent higher than year-end 2005. About 28 percent of the loans portfolio has 
been extended in ALL, while the rest in foreign currency. At end of 2006, the loans portfolio quality 
resulted to 3.05 percent. In December 2006, the capital adequacy ratio was 18.1 percent; while the 
banking  system  profit  was  ALL  7.45  billion.  Return  on  assets  was  1.36  percent,  whereas  return  on 
equity was 20.2 percent. It is my pleasure to observe the increased number of branches and banking 
agencies  and  the  ever  increased  geographic  covering  of  the  territory  with  banking  services  and 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2007
products. The entry into the market of distinguished European banks is another accomplishment of the 
last  year,  which  is expected  to  continue  even  during  the  current  year.  Being driven  by  competition, 
banks  have  been  more  aggressive  in  lending,  using  new  segments  of  the  lending  market,  such  as 
consumer credit or real estate loans.  
In  spite  of what  I  mentioned  earlier,  it  does  not  mean  that  we  are  automatically  immunized  against 
various risks, which may occur from one moment to the other. Furthermore, the rapid credit growth is 
an argument for more prudence, particularly in terms of its quality. Being completely aware for our role 
as a decision-making and regulatory institution, we have decided to raise our vigilance in this direction. 
We will create a specialised unit, i.e., the Financial Stability Department, as a first step.  
The safeguarding of the banking and financial system stability will be given a new dimension relating 
to  the  policy  of  licensing  the  conduct  of  banking  business  by  the  Bank  of  Albania.  Once  more,  the 
Bank of Albania emphasizes its objective related to licensing and the presence of sound institutions in 
the  banking  system:  which  are  backed  by  influential  and  experienced  shareholders  in  the  banking 
industry; which apply the best standards of accountability in management; which conduct a balanced 
business with well-administered risks; which are able to cope with and develop under the competition 
provided  in  an  open  and  integrated  market  into  the  international  financial  market;  which  boost  the 
country’s economic development and which, transparently provide to the public qualitative and efficient 
banking products and services.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  is  confident  that  only  financially  stable  banking  institutions  guarantee  the 
foundations  of  a  financial  market,  which  develops  dynamically  and  which  is  able  to  avoid  systemic 
financial crises. Therefore, the Bank of Albania sustains and encourages the process of transformation 
and  consolidation  of  the  activity  of  banking  institutions.  They  naturally  come  to  help  the  banking 
institutions which are faced with difficulties during their own activity and others which intend to expand 
the business through a more effective use of ample financial sources.  
In this framework, the Bank of Albania, based on the new banking system law, cooperating with other 
financial  market  authorities,  will  work  for  enriching  and  stratifying  this  market  with  efficient  financial 
institutions  specialised  in  financial  activities,  which  sustain  the  banking  activity  and  ensure  a  better 
covering of the population needs with financial services.  
Regardless of the above, I think that the system should be more committed to this direction. Banks, 
particularly those that are more active and of systemic importance, should set up and strengthen their 
risk management structures, mainly in terms of market risks (interest rate and exchange rate), credit 
risk  and  operational  risk.  This  implies  not  only  the  ensuring  of  human  capacities,  but  also  the 
establishment  of  necessary  systems  of  information  and  technology.  This  process  should  not  be 
considered  as  a  cost-advantage  relationship  in  material  level  and  in  the  short  run,  but  as  an 
indispensable process, which hedges the bank from risks, which, under certain market conditions, may 
be intensified, resulting to fatal circumstances.  
While the supervisory attention is focused particularly on large banks that are of systemic importance, 
the  same  importance  is  assigned  even  to  small  banks,  which  are  faced  intensively  with  the 
consequences  brought  about  by  enhancement  of  market  competition.  In  view  of  this,  the  Bank  of 
Albania requires from the management of these banks to act quickly for protecting their business. The 
necessary  operations  should  intend  the  qualitative  improvement  of  banking  services  to  the  public, 
development of joint projects with larger banks and with other financial institutions inside the country 
and  abroad,  establishment  of  a  more  suitable  work  environment  and  provision  of  necessary 
promotions to their staff. In the meantime, their boards of directors and shareholders of these banks 
should  strengthen  the  monitoring  and  should  be  ready  for  a  larger  financial  support  for  the  bank’s 
activity.  
In particular, I would like banks to be cautious with regard to: 
• 
The  continuous  monitoring  and  controlled  conduct  of  lending  activity,  focusing  on  setting 
realistic  development  objectives,  on  the  exposure  to  related  persons,  exposure  to  foreign 
currency  –  in  particular,  to  borrowers  with  insufficient  financial  assets  in  foreign  currency, 
exposure  to  new  loan  products,  such  as  consumer  loan,  etc.  It  is  crucial  for  banks  to 
rigorously observe the lending and loans’ quality analysis procedures. Moreover, they should 
maintain a conservatory stand, in terms of being insured with pledges and collaterals, and of 
providing for reserve funds, required in cases of non-performing credit risk. In this context, 
the Bank of Albania expects commercial banks to duly observe the final amendments made 
to the regulation “On managing credit risk”.  
BIS Review 31/2007 
 3
 The consolidation of internal control systems of their activity, in view of the adoption of best 
accounting  standards  in  management,  as  well  as  the  careful  formulation  and  analysis  of 
financial statements by the banks’ structures and their internal and external auditing. With 
regard  to  the  latter,  we  are  under  the  process  of  enhancing  the  reporting  system,  by 
shortening the reporting time of the financial data, periodically reported by banks to the Bank 
of  Albania.  We  think  that  banks  should  qualitatively  improve  the  method  of  preparing  and 
reporting these data to the Bank of Albania. These issues will be the topic of discussion in a 
special meeting to be held in the near future. 
From  the  legal  viewpoint,  the  issues  related  to  the  conduct  of  a  safe  banking  business  have  been 
addressed  at  a  higher  level,  in  the  new  law  “On  banks  in  the  Republic  of  Albania”,  passed  by  the 
Albanian  Parliament  on  18  December  2006,  and  becomes  effective  on  1  June  2007.  Some  of  its 
important  amendments  are  the  following:  a  more  complete  addressing  of  banking  business 
supervision  issues,  including  the  organization,  the  risk  monitoring,  the  provision  of  prudential 
supervision  norms,  the  clarification  of  procedures  related  to  the  management  and  liquidation,  the 
inclusion of some general principles related to the client’s protection (consumer of banking products) 
etc.  Following  the  notification  sent  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  on  January  this  year,  the  banks  should 
speed up the steps to duly and timely carry out the necessary changes in their internal procedures, 
which ensure the complete consistency of their business with the requirements of the new law. 
I  take  this  opportunity  to  draw  your  attention  in  terms  of  applying  the  legal  requirement  for  the 
observance of international financial reporting standards, starting from 2008. This is an issue banks 
belonging to European Union banking groups are more prepared for. However, these banks, and in 
particular  other  banks  not  availing  of  this  opportunity,  should  co-operate  with  external  auditing 
companies, in order to define the concrete measures to be taken in their activity for the observance of 
this legal requirement. 
Dear participants,  
I believe today’s meeting is a good opportunity to communicate with one-another; therefore, I invite 
you  to  keep  on  exchanging  effective  ideas  and  thoughts.  On  behalf  of  the  institution  I  represent,  I 
would  like  to  reassure  you  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  remains  fully  committed  and  accountable  in 
fulfilling its legal mission, capable and willing to loyally co-operate with any institution or stakeholder 
influencing on the country’s economic and financial development 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2007
