Jarle Bergo: Best practice in structuring stabilization and commodity wealth 
funds  
Presentation by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
European Institute's Sovereign Funds Roundtable, London, 8-9 May 2007. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  organizers  for  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  some  of  the  most 
important  features  of  our  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global,  formerly  known  as  the  Government 
Petroleum Fund. 
Any  discussion  on  how  to  invest  funds  must  depart  from  an  understanding  of  when,  and  for  what 
purpose,  the  funds  are  to  be  used.  That  is  how  we  can  distinguish  between  relevant  risk  and  less 
relevant risk. We need to be aware of the risks of not reaching the objectives of the fund. All funds 
have an objective, but not all objectives can be translated into precise and clear-cut solutions for how 
to invest the funds. Many commodity wealth funds belong to this category, where liabilities have to be 
thought of in a very broad sense.  
The Norwegian Pension Fund has always been more similar to an endowment than to a stabilization 
fund, but even more so in later years as the Fund has grown faster than expected and has become 
very large relative to the Norwegian economy.  
Today I would like to focus on some of the major structures and principles supporting the Norwegian 
model. I will look at both the underlying economics of the Fund, and on how we have structured our 
management model. As our "liabilities" are rather intangible, a broad approach is necessary in order to 
convey the major principles behind our model.  
The  source  of  our  Fund  is  commodity  wealth.  So  let  me  start  by  putting  the  petroleum  sector  in 
Norway into perspective. 
In 2006 government oil revenue amounted to 36 per cent of total government revenues. That is a high 
figure, but it also implies that Norway has a substantial tax base (64 per cent) in addition to our natural 
resources. 
The Government Pension Fund has two main objectives: One is to serve as a savings instrument with 
an  aim  to  distribute  our  national  wealth  in  an  equitable  manner  across  generations.  The  petroleum 
resources  are  part  of  our  national  wealth  and  belong  not  only  to  the  current  generation  but  also  to 
future generations. 
Second, even though Norway has a fairly diversified tax-base, the large variability in the price of oil 
would have caused large demand fluctuations in the Norwegian economy, if petroleum revenues were 
to be used as they accrue. Moreover, internationally exposed industries would suffer a negative impact 
from high-level spending of petroleum revenues through a deterioration in competitiveness.  
Hence, an important objective for the Fund is to shield the economy from fluctuations in prices and 
extraction rates in the petroleum sector, which is one reason why the Fund is not allowed to invest in 
Norway. The Fund serves as a buffer between current petroleum revenues and the spending of these 
revenues in the Norwegian economy. 
It is important to note that the entire petroleum revenues, as well as the return on the Fund, go into the 
Government Pension Fund. Then, an amount equal to the non-oil budget deficit is transferred into the 
fiscal budget. This mechanism ensures three objectives: First, the variability in petroleum revenues is 
isolated to the growth rate of the Fund. Second, any use of the Fund is integrated into the ordinary 
budget routine and does not undermine the fiscal budget as a single instrument for assigning priority 
to different needs. And third, the amount of spending of petroleum revenues, that is the size of the 
non-oil  budget  deficit,  can  be  aligned  with  the  needs  of  fiscal  policy  as  well  as  with  the  targeted 
intergenerational distribution. 
Note that this setup for the Fund can work with different fiscal rules or guidelines for how large the 
non-oil budget deficit should be. In Norway, the Storting (Norwegian parliament) has approved a fiscal 
guideline that implies that the annual non-oil deficit should, on average over time, be limited to 4 per 
BIS Review 45/2007 
 1
cent of the Pension Fund. This is equal to the long-term expected real return on the Fund. Such a 
guideline provides predictability in the level of spending.  
If the government disregards the guideline, enterprises will loose an important reference in gauging 
the  expansiveness  in  fiscal  policy.  Thus,  three  successive  governments  have  been  loyal  to  this 
guideline and it still enjoys a substantial majority backing in the Norwegian parliament. Adherence to 
this policy is also scrutinized closely by the public who have developed a sense of ownership of the 
Fund. 
Another important feature of the model is that there is consistency between the size of the Fund and 
Norway's net financial wealth. This is ensured by the Act relating to the Government Pension Fund 
where it is stated that the government cannot borrow as long as the balance of the Fund is positive. 
The Fund has become large and is still growing very rapidly. It is projected to reach 200 per cent of 
Norway's  GDP  around  the  year  2010.  The  huge  cash  flow  into  the  Fund  has  posed  an  operational 
challenge, which I will return to later. 
In 2006, the name of the fund was changed from the Government Petroleum Fund to the Government 
Pension Fund – Global. But the name change did not imply any operational changes and the return 
(the  4  per  cent)  continues  to  be  a  general  support  to  the  budget,  not  ear-marked  for  any  specific 
purpose. This reflects that the Fund has no formal link to a liability side. 
Let me turn to the management of the Fund. The Fund is formally owned by the Ministry of Finance, 
while operational management is delegated to Norges Bank. This arrangement is formalised through a 
management mandate given to the Bank by the Ministry. The Ministry submits an annual White Paper 
to the Norwegian parliament where the management of the Fund, both strategic allocations as well as 
active management, is reviewed. The Office of the Auditor General performs independent reviews of 
the management. 
There is a clear division of responsibilities between the Ministry and the Bank. The owner decides on 
the long-term strategic allocation, represented by a benchmark portfolio, and this choice of strategic 
allocation for the Fund is the main determinant of the expected absolute return of the Fund.  
The Bank's main responsibility is to maximise expected return relative to the benchmark – within risk 
limits  formulated  in  the  mandate. Hence,  Norges  Bank has  a  mandate  to  engage  in  active  portfolio 
management  in  addition  to  providing  a  cost-effective  conversion  of  incoming  petroleum  wealth  into 
financial assets. 
The Bank’s mandate has increasingly been adapted to the "future generations"-objective of the Fund 
with a stronger focus on tracking error as the sole risk limit. Some earlier restrictions on credit quality 
have been lifted, in light of the increased investment horizon of the Fund. 
Important decisions are presented to the Norwegian parliament in a White Paper before decisions are 
implemented. A recent example of such a decision is a proposal to increase the share allocated to 
equities from 40 per cent to 60 per cent, again reflecting the transition to an endowment fund with a 
very long horizon. 
Note that the absence of a formal liability side has an impact on how we go about constructing the 
strategic allocation. The fiscal guideline, that is how much of the Fund that should be used every year, 
is what most closely resembles liabilities. However, since the guideline is formulated as a percentage 
of the Fund itself, it yields little guidance to the risk characteristics of the allocation. Thus, the process 
of  establishing  a  strategic  allocation  is  still  more  similar  to  that  of  an  endowment  than  to  that  of  a 
pension fund – despite the recent change in the name of the Fund. 
Let me move on to the management of the Fund within Norges Bank. 
Norges  Bank's  contribution  to  the  Fund's  return  has  been  positive.  Total  returns  have  fluctuated 
considerably since the Fund made its first investments in equity markets in 1998, while excess returns 
have been relatively stable. 
As a financial investor, we have three main tasks. Invest incoming cash as efficiently as possible in 
capital markets (transition), stay invested in markets broadly in accordance with the strategy that is 
defined by the Ministry of Finance and endorsed by the Norwegian parliament (beta management) and 
finally to achieve a higher return where markets provide opportunities for this and where we have an 
advantage in terms of specialist skills (alpha management) by diverging from the benchmark portfolio.  
2 
 BIS Review 45/2007
With respect to  the  first  task  we  are  different  from many  investors.  Simply  maintaining  the  financial 
exposure  is  a  demanding  task  with  the  size  of  our  inflow.  We  have  therefore  dedicated  substantial 
resources to this activity. 
There are economies of scale in the beta function. We see commercial managers that are providers of 
beta-exposure that are up to 15 times the size of the Government Pension Fund. Yet we are able to 
perform these tasks more cost-efficiently in-house. Hence we believe we now are sufficiently large so 
as to harvest most of the benefits of scale. 
Economies  of  scale  are  more  elusive  when  it  comes  to  active  management.  On  the  one  hand  the 
excess  return  potential  is  reduced  because  there  will  be  a  higher  degree  of  market  impact.  On  the 
other hand, size can be an advantage in obtaining access to information and in active positions where 
the  objective  is  to  reap  the  benefits  of  being  a  liquidity  provider.  The  setting  for  the  Government 
Pension Fund with its long investment horizon is well suited for such an objective. 
All of the passive investment (enhanced indexing) is done internally both for equities and fixed income. 
On the active side however, we use a large number of external managers. The split differs between 
equities and fixed income. On the fixed income side, most of the active risk is taken internally while the 
opposite is the case for equities.  
In  total,  about  60  per  cent  of  the  active  risk  stems  from  external  managers.  The  guiding  principle 
behind  this  choice  is  an  assessment  of  expected  returns  after  costs,  and  a  strong  belief  in 
diversification among managers. There is no favouring of internal (or external) managers. 
There  is  a  clear  investment  philosophy  behind  risk  taking  in  Norges  Bank.  First  and  foremost,  it  is 
important to have a clear separation between activities directed towards achieving beta-exposure and 
activities linked to active risk taking. In that way, a true assessment of realised returns as well as costs 
associated with active management is possible.  
Moreover,  active  risk  taking  is  done  with  humility  and  with  a  strong  belief  in  the  effectiveness  of 
markets.  Hence,  we  mostly  apply  active  bets  when  we  think  we,  either  internally  or  through  our 
external managers, possess an informational advantage. Such an advantage is sought through a high 
degree of specialization.  
Another type of active position is based on collecting risk premiums where we as an investor have a 
comparative advantage to bear the risk. An example of this is liquidity premiums.  
It has been a challenge to us to establish a professional and vigilant business culture within the central 
bank.  I  think  we  have  succeeded.  An  important  instrument  in  this  respect  has  been  performance-
based  remuneration  for  the  Bank's  investment  managers.  The  investment  management  wing  of  the 
bank  now  resembles  a  private  investment  manager  rather  than  a  typical  central  bank  investment 
office. In particular, all investments are delegated to professionals in a clear line structure.  
But recruiting and keeping skilled human capital requires more than competitive wages. Whether we 
succeed will depend on our ability to create an environment where such capital can thrive and prosper. 
Our philosophy is to stimulate ownership of decisions and empowerment in the investment process – 
and that is appreciated by our managers.  
Moreover, the mere importance of the mission, as formulated by our Board, "... to safeguard and grow 
financial  wealth  for  future  generations  through  highly  professional  management  coupled  with  strict 
integrity", is attracting resources in and of itself.  
To  wed  a  business  culture  to  a  central  bank,  with  its  civil  service  responsibilities,  has  posed  a 
challenge  in  terms  of  adapting  the  Bank's  governance  system  to  the  increased  importance  of 
professional  investment  management. Elements  in  addressing  this  include a strengthened  focus  on 
accountability by a clear division of responsibilities and a system of checks and balances.  
Maybe the most important element in our governance system is the establishment of a high degree of 
transparency  for  the  public  by  providing  open  information  on  performance,  risks,  costs  and 
investments on a timely basis. 
All  in  all, we feel  the challenge  of  managing  the  Fund  has  enriched  the  organisation  by  forcing  the 
central bank to think outside of the box. And perhaps the central bank perspective and values have 
added to the depth and long-term horizon of the investment organisation. 
Let me round off this presentation by recapitulating some of the main insights we have gained in the 
decade the Fund has existed.  
BIS Review 45/2007 
 3
An important key to the success of the Fund so far has been the clear separation between investment 
decisions by professionals in a performance-oriented environment, and the economic policy role of the 
Fund.  We  have  been  able  to  establish  a  setting  where  investments  are  made  in  a  business-like 
manner. 
Another  essential  insight  is  the  importance  of  political  support  for  strategic  allocation.  There  was  a 
broad consensus in parliament behind the choice of investing in equities in 1997. This was important 
in order to navigate through the turbulent waters of equity markets in the beginning of this century – 
and such turbulence will certainly return.  
Perhaps most importantly, the Government Pension Fund and our fiscal guideline have helped us to 
avoid the common pitfalls in resource rich economies, e.g. lack of fiscal discipline and loss of focus in 
structural policy. We have managed to avoid creating a subversive second fiscal budget. The Fund 
has shielded the mainland economy from excessive variability and has to a large extent reduced the 
oil-price dependency of the exchange rate.  
Yet, I would like to end with a word of caution: The model we have chosen in Norway has evolved in a 
Norwegian setting and is not necessarily suited as a blueprint for other countries. But it is important to 
understand  the  basic,  and  maybe  universal,  principles  underlying  the  model  and  adapt  them  to  the 
particular  fiscal  situation  and  the  particular  political  tradition  of  the  country  in  question.  Hopefully,  I 
have  managed 
for  your 
attention.
light  on  some  of 
today.  Thank  you 
those  principles 
to  shed 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2007
BIS Review 45/2007 
 5
  6 
 BIS Review 45/2007
  7
BIS Review 45/2007 
   8 
 BIS Review 45/2007
BIS Review 45/2007 
 9
10 
  BIS Review 45/2007
BIS Review 45/2007 
  11
