Randall S Kroszner: Analyzing and assessing banking crises 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Conference on the Asian 
Financial Crisis Revisited, San Francisco, 6 September 2007. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Good morning. I am delighted to be speaking to you today at the second of a pair of excellent 
conferences  that  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  has  organized  on  the  tenth 
anniversary  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  Janet  Yellen  and  her  staff  deserve  kudos  for 
focusing our attention on this important topic and I feel honored for the invitation to speak 
today.1  
Introduction 
Before  moving  to  the  main  topic,  I  would  like  to  reinforce  remarks  made  last  week  by 
Chairman Bernanke on the recent turbulence in financial markets. In the United States we 
have seen a fairly sharp downturn in housing markets, and in recent weeks there have been 
growing  investor  concerns  about  mortgage  credit  performance,  particularly  with  subprime 
mortgages. If current conditions persist in mortgage markets, the demand for homes could 
weaken further, with possible implications for the broader economy. And financial stress has 
not  been  limited  just  to  mortgage  markets,  but  has  spread  to  other  markets.  In  general,  a 
shift  in  risk  attitudes  has  interacted  with  heightened  concerns  about  credit  risks  and 
uncertainty about how to evaluate those risks. Fortunately, this recent period of turbulence in 
financial  markets  has  occurred  at  a  time  when  U.S.  commercial  banks  are  strongly 
capitalized, reflecting years of robust profits. 
As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve seeks to promote general financial stability 
and to help to ensure that financial markets operate in an orderly manner. Accordingly, the 
Federal Reserve has taken some steps in recent weeks to provide liquidity and to promote 
the  orderly  functioning  of  markets.  We  continue  to  follow  these  developments  in  financial 
markets closely, particularly those that may have a broad impact on real economic activity.  
Today I plan to offer some thoughts about ways to analyze and assess the impact of banking 
crises  on  real  economic  activity.  Others  at  this  conference  will  be  addressing  some  of  the 
specifics of the Asian financial crisis in 1997-98 and the status of economies and financial 
systems  of  Asian  countries  today,  so  I  believe  I  can  best  contribute  by  setting  up  a 
conceptual and empirical framework that can be applied to various types of financial crises, 
including Asia in 1997-98.  
Much  of  what  I  plan  to  discuss  is  based  on  a  paper  I  published  earlier  this  year  with 
colleagues  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  World  Bank,  Luc  Laeven  and  Daniela 
Klingbiel,  titled  "Banking  Crises,  Financial  Dependence,  and  Growth".2  In  particular,  this 
research focuses on a key question for policy, namely, through what channels can financial 
turmoil have an impact on real economic activity? We study the effect of different types of 
crises on the performance of various sectors and firms in economies with differing levels of 
development of their banking and financial systems. Surprisingly, little systematic empirical 
                                                 
1  The  views  I  express  today  are,  of  course,  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  represent  those  of  the  Board  of 
Governors or the Federal Reserve System. 
2   Kroszner, Laeven, and Klingbiel (2007). 
BIS Review 98/2007 
 1
work  had  been  done  detailing  the  mechanisms  by  which  financial  crises  can  generate 
problems in the real economy.3 I will provide a brief overview of these results and then draw 
some lessons that policymakers might keep in mind when considering ways to help prevent 
and mitigate future crises.  
As a final introductory thought, I want to note that my remarks today on banking crises relate 
to  research  conducted  on  a  range  of  countries,  many  of  them  emerging-market  countries, 
and are not a commentary on current financial conditions or on the health of the U.S. banking 
system, which, as I noted above, is quite good. 
Framework for assessing and analyzing banking crises 
Financial crises can assume various forms. I am going to focus primarily on financial crises 
involving the banking sector and do so for several reasons. First, banks play a prominent role 
in the credit intermediation process in most countries, providing funding to firms beyond the 
cash flow provided by their normal operations. Banks also typically serve as custodian of a 
significant portion of household saving. In many Asian countries, for example, banks play a 
key  role  in  channeling  credit  to  firms  –  particularly  those  firms  not  able  to  acquire  funding 
from capital markets or other sources – and also hold substantial consumer deposits.  
In  addition,  much  of  the  literature  on  financial  crises  indicates  that  crises  involving  the 
banking sector can lead to disruptions in the real economy. The definition of banking crisis I 
will use today, consistent with the definition in our recent paper, is an episode during which 
the  capital  of  the  banking  sector  has  been  depleted  due  to  loan  losses,  resulting  in  a 
negative net worth of the banking sector.4 Therefore, the use of the term "banking crisis" in 
our  research  refers  to  major  disruptions  in  a  country's  banking  system,  not  just  minor 
downturns or disturbances. By focusing on banking crises in our research paper, we were 
able to isolate the impact of banks on the provision of credit and liquidity to firms during times 
of  distress. I  believe  that  combining  this  type  of  empirical  research  on  banking  crises  with 
practical experience from bank supervisors and market participants, such as those attending 
this  conference,  helps  us  all  to  understand  and  address  the  problems  associated  with 
banking crises – and perhaps even to help to prevent them.  
Much  work  has  been  done  on  how  financial  intermediaries  and  financial  markets  facilitate 
investment  by  firms  and,  hence,  promote  economic  growth.5  Financial  intermediaries  and 
financial markets are generally thought to reduce information asymmetry problems that can 
make  raising  external  funds  difficult  and  expensive  for  firms.  Well-functioning  and  well-
developed financial intermediaries and markets thus should particularly benefit firms that rely 
most heavily on external funding to finance their growth.6 Conversely – and this is the novel 
aspect of our research – crises in the financial sector thus should have a disproportionately 
negative impact on firms that rely heavily on external sources of finance.  
In particular, we investigate whether the impact of a banking crisis on sectors dependent on 
external sources of financing varies with the level of development of the financial system. If 
the  banking  system  is  the  key  element  allowing  firms  that  depend  heavily  upon  external 
funding sources to finance their growth, then an impairment of these intermediaries – in a 
system  where  such  intermediaries  are  important  –  should  have  a  disproportionate 
contractionary impact on precisely those sectors that flourished in "normal" times, due to their 
                                                 
3   Our paper provides a literature review. 
4   Caprio and Klingbiel (2002). 
5   See Levine (1997, 2005) and Kroszner and Strahan (2005) for overviews.  
6   One measure of financial or external dependence is the fraction of capital expenditures not financing with cash 
flows from operations. See Rajan and Zingales (1998). 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2007
reliance on banks. Thus, an important element of our analysis is the level of development of 
a country's financial system, that is, whether it is "deep" (more developed) or "shallow" (less 
developed).7  
To  address  these  issues,  we  gathered  data  from  thirty-eight  developed  and  developing 
countries  that  have  experienced  a  banking  crisis  during  the  last  quarter  century.8  We 
documented clear linkages between the state of the banking system and the performance of 
the  real  economy.  More  specifically,  we  find  that  in  well-developed  and  deep  financial 
systems,  sectors  highly  dependent  on  external  sources  of  funding  tend  to  experience  a 
greater contraction during a banking crisis than do externally dependent sectors in countries 
with shallower financial systems. In other words, sectors of the real economy that rely heavily 
on  external  finance  (that  is,  do  not  fund  capital  expenditures  through  cash  flow)  tend  to 
experience a substantially slower growth of value added during a banking crisis than those 
sectors  that  do  not  rely  so  heavily  on  external  funding.  This  effect  is  more  pronounced  in 
countries  with  more  developed  financial  systems.  Our  results  hold  for  a  wide  group  of 
countries  and  over  a  long  time  span,  but  as  I  note  below,  have  particular  relevance  to 
emerging market countries.  
While these results are consistent with a so-called credit channel impact of banking crises on 
real  economic  activity,  there  are  further  implications  of  the  "credit  channel"  view  that  we 
explore in more detail. Among firms that depend heavily on outside financing, young firms 
with short histories and firms with a large fraction of hard-to-measure intangible assets, for 
example,  may  have  particular  difficulties  raising  funds  from  the  market  due  to  information 
problems.  Instead,  such  firms  would  tend  to  depend  heavily  on  banks  and  other 
intermediaries for funding. Consistent with this, we find a greater negative impact of banking 
crises  on  growth  for  industries  dominated  by  young  firms  that  are  highly  dependent  on 
external finance and for industries with high levels of intangible assets.  
While all of these results are consistent with a "credit channel" view of the impact of banking 
crises on real economic activity, we certainly need to explore some alternative explanations 
before drawing final conclusions. In particular, many factors may be correlated with the level 
of  financial  development  of  a  country,  so  we  want  to  make  sure  that  the  level  of  financial 
development  is  not  simply  standing  in  for  something  else.  The  differences  in  financial 
development,  for  example,  can  arise  from  historical,  political,  cultural,  and  legal  reasons. 
There is a well-developed literature emphasizing, for instance, that the nature of a country's 
legal  system  and  the  manner  in  which  laws  are  enforced  can  have  an  effect  on  the 
development of its financial system.9 Similarly, other country-specific factors also might have 
an influence on how financial institutions and markets behave. If one of these factors, rather 
than  financial  development,  is  driving  the  results,  we  might  have  to  interpret  those  results 
differently. 
As a way to try to address such questions of interpretation, we controlled for the quality of the 
political and legal institutions in the countries included in our data analysis. We found that our 
results still hold, namely that a banking crisis has a more pronounced effect on a country's 
economy  when  its  financial  system  is  more  developed  and  when  its  firms  rely  more  on 
external finance, even after taking into account a variety of proxies for the differences in the 
quality of institutions and legal structures across countries. 
                                                 
7  
In our recent research paper, the proxy for depth of the financial system is the ratio of private credit to gross 
domestic product. 
8   Clearly, determining the precise timing of crises is difficult, both in terms of identifying the beginning and the 
end of a crisis. In our research we experimented with alternative definitions of crisis windows, expanding and 
contracting the length of the crisis, pre-crisis, and post-crisis periods as well as the gap between the crisis and 
the pre- and postcrisis periods; our results are not sensitive to the alternative definitions. 
9   La Porta et al (1998). 
BIS Review 98/2007 
 3
Furthermore, we explored differences in the effect of banking crises on countries based on 
their  overall  levels  of  development.  In  other  words,  we  wanted  to  assess  separately  the 
impact of banking crises in less-developed countries versus more-developed countries since, 
of  course,  overall  economic  development  and  financial  sector  development  tend  to  be 
correlated.  Interestingly,  when  we  remove  Organization  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development  (OECD)  countries  from  our  sample,  the  effects  of  banking  crises  were  more 
pronounced, indicating that banking crises in emerging market countries likely do more harm 
to the overall economy than in developed countries.  
Interestingly,  our  research  also  provides  evidence  that  crises  affecting  the  banking  sector 
can have a more serious impact on the real economy than alternative economic disruptions 
such as economic contractions or shocks such as currency crises.10 That is, banking crises 
have represented a unique shock to a country's financial system. These results suggest that 
the "credit channel" effects on real economic activity we document are operating through the 
banking system.  
In short, the results highlight that a healthy banking system generally contributes to strong 
economic growth, and banking crises can present a substantial drag on the real economy. 
This underscores why we consider it important to analyze the economic impact of financial 
crises involving the banking sector, and to mitigate potential drivers of such crises. Indeed, in 
the case of Asia a decade ago, the trouble experienced by the region's banks, given their 
dominant  role  in  Asian  financial  systems,  created  disruptions  that  spread  across  Asia. 
Problems in the real economies of Asian countries would likely not have been so great had 
the banking systems been stronger. 
So  far  I  have  been  discussing  results  that  focus  on  the  real  growth  impact  on  sectors  or 
industries. We were able to obtain data on the impact on individual firms but for a smaller 
sample than for the sectors or industries. We use a variety of measures for individual firm 
performance, such as real growth in sales, real growth in earnings before interest and taxes, 
and  real  stock  market  returns.  The  results  are  the  same  as  in  the  sectoral  level  data  I 
described  above:  The  performance  of  firms  heavily  dependent  upon  external  sources  of 
funding is disproportionately negatively affected in deep financial systems during periods of 
banking crisis.  
In  addition  to  providing  microeconomic  support  for  the  credit  channel  view,  individual  firm 
data also allow us to examine important hypotheses about the impact that transparency and 
public  disclosure  by  individual  firms  can  have  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  banking  crises  on 
those firms. One author, using data from the Asian crisis, has investigated the relationship 
between stock market performance and quality of public disclosure.11 Our recent paper also 
delved into this issue by using certain proxies for individual firm disclosure practices, such as 
having a listing in the United States (hence disclosing by U.S. standards) or by being audited 
by one of the major international accounting firms. Our results suggested that greater public 
disclosure had a favorable impact on stock market performance, both during the crisis period 
as well as afterward. Indeed, there is a large literature supporting the idea that a country can 
benefit  by  promoting  transparency  and  disclosure.  But  I  know  that  there  is  still  ongoing 
debate about the effects of globalization on financial markets and economies and I believe 
that  further  research  and  discussion  about  the  benefits  of  openness  and  transparency  are 
worthwhile. Perhaps a discussion on this topic will ensue at this conference over the next two 
days.  
I  will  pose  one  final  topic  before  moving  on  to  some  policy  suggestions.  I  believe  it  is 
important to try to understand the long-term impact of a crisis on the financial system and the 
                                                 
10   For our definition of economic contractions, see Braun and Larrain (2005); for our definition of currency crises, 
see Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (1998). 
11   Mitton (2002). 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2007
real  economy.  In  particular,  it  is  useful  to  examine  whether  a  particularly  deep  crisis  or  a 
recent  one  may  have  effects  on  participants  in  that  country  during  the  next  crisis. 
Interestingly,  our  recent  work  provided  some  evidence  that  past  crises  do  not  necessarily 
create a stoppage of bank credit to firms once "normal" times returned, but when the next 
crisis occurred, its impact on growth was usually deeper in magnitude.  
Thoughts on preventing and managing banking crises 
Having  raised  some  issues  for  consideration  about  banking  crises  –  and  having  tried  to 
provide  some  answers,  where  possible  –  I  would  now  like  to  offer  some  thoughts  that 
policymakers  may  consider  as  they  try  to  prevent  and  manage  banking  crises.  I  note  that 
market participants should also consider these ideas, since it is not just policymakers who 
can learn lessons from past crises.  
First, one of the major lessons to be learned from past banking crises is the importance of a 
healthy banking system. Maintaining a safe and sound banking system, given the key role 
that  banks  play  in  most  financial  systems,  contributes  to  the  health  of  a  country's  overall 
economy. Most countries do this by some form of banking supervision, generally accepting 
that the added protection to the banking system in the form of supervision is worth the costs 
of the regulatory burden. Effective banking supervision has helped foster a banking system in 
the United States that today is safe, sound, and well-capitalized.  
One  of  the  ways  that  bank  supervisors  can  help  promote  a  healthy  banking  system  is  to 
focus  banks  on  the  development  of  improved  risk-management  techniques.  Indeed, 
identifying,  assessing,  and  promoting  sound  risk-management  practices  have  become 
central  elements  of  good  supervisory  practice.  Bankers  should  ensure  that  their  risk-
management practices include a focus on less likely outcomes, not just the most common 
ones, and that the bank is being adequately compensated for the risk it is bearing. The use 
of  exercises  such  as  stress  tests  and  scenario  analyses  can  help  bankers  identify  certain 
points of vulnerability that may arise during potential downturns.  
In  some  countries,  bank  supervisors  have  an  explicit  responsibility  to  ensure  that  banks 
adhere  to  existing  laws  and  maintain  and  implement  appropriate  consumer  protection 
policies. For example, in the United States the federal banking agencies play an important 
role in fostering not just a safe and sound banking system, but also one that is diverse and 
fair in meeting the needs of consumers.  
Good  banking  supervision  is  vital  to  the  health  of  banks,  particularly  when  the  banking 
system has some type of government support – for example, either explicit or implicit deposit 
insurance.  But  ensuring  a  safe  and  sound  banking  system  that  is  also  competitive  and 
profitable  has  its  challenges.  Clearly,  banking  supervision  on  its  own  can  create  some 
distortions  or  burden,  so  it  is  also  very  important  to  let  market  forces  work  as  much  as 
possible,  with  reliance  on  market  participants  –  in  their  role  as  depositors,  counterparties, 
creditors, and shareholders – to exercise discipline on banks. Policymakers have to find the 
right  balance  between  the  more  visible  hand  of  government  supervision  and  the  invisible 
hand of market forces.  
Second,  pursuing  sound  macroeconomic  policies  is  another  way  for  policymakers  to  help 
prevent  banking  and  financial  crises.  For  instance,  it  is  beneficial  to  have  sound  and 
sustainable  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  to  provide  a  stable  operating  environment  for 
entrepreneurs  and  financial  institutions  and  markets.  Many  past  crises  were  precipitated 
either  by  an  external  shock  affecting  an  already  vulnerable  financial  system  or  by  market 
participants 
institutions  or 
governments. History has taught us that if a condition or policy looks unsustainable, it most 
likely is and market forces will eventually bring it to an end. To paraphrase Herb Stein, if a 
policy cannot go on forever, it won't!  
targeting  vulnerabilities 
in  certain  markets  or 
in  certain 
BIS Review 98/2007 
 5
Third,  I  referred  earlier  to  research  on  the  benefits  of  disclosure  and  transparency.  Our 
analysis  contributes  to  the  evidence  that  having  an  open  and  transparent  financial  system 
and  economy,  accompanied  by  reliable  and  accurate  accounting  standards,  generally 
benefits a country and its market participants. A core principle of economics is that markets 
are more competitive, and therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to 
both  consumers  and  suppliers.  Information  is  thus  critical  to  the  effective  functioning  of 
financial  markets: 
information  about  markets,  market 
participants,  and  governments  is  important  for  all  actors  to  be  able  to  make  informed 
decisions. This is of course true during normal times, but  perhaps more so during a crisis 
when  market  participants  and  governments  are  sometimes  trying  to  determine  where 
problems  lie  and  how  severe  they  might  be.  Lack  of  information  can  present  additional 
problems  during  a  crisis,  and  incorrect  or  incomplete  information  provided  by  firms, 
governments, and other institutions can severely undermine their credibility, worsening the 
problem.  
timely  and  accurate 
financial 
Conclusion  
These conferences on the Asian crisis serve as excellent forums to analyze the events of ten 
years ago and share views on ways to prevent and mitigate future crises. They also allow 
market  participants  to  offer  feedback  on  past  policy  steps,  including  which  past  policies 
helped and which ones hindered. Policymakers and market participants must remember that 
preventing and mitigating financial crises requires a blend of sharp analysis, keen judgment, 
practical experience, and rigorous understanding of how markets work – in both normal times 
and times of stress.  
I  have  tried  to  provide  a  framework  for  analyzing  the  impact  of  banking  crises  on  real 
economic activity, described some results analyzing crises from around the world during the 
last quarter century, and offered three policy lessons: the importance of a healthy banking 
system, of sound macroeconomic policy, and of high levels of transparency and disclosure. 
This is by no means an exhaustive list but I hope it can provide a useful starting point for the 
discussions that will take place during the rest of the day. 
As a final thought, I counsel policymakers and market participants alike to remember that no 
two  crises  are  the  same.  Recall  that  the  Asian  crisis  of  1997-98  actually  manifested  itself 
differently  across  Asian  countries,  with  each  country  having  its  own  set  of  problems  and 
needing to find its own solutions. In other words, there is never a single remedy to each crisis 
and each brings its own surprises and risks. Clearly, we can all learn a lot from past crises – 
which is the value in holding conferences like this one. But we should not assume that past 
remedies will fully solve the next set of problems or address all future risks. The key is to 
take  lessons  from  the  past  and  tailor  them  appropriately  to  future  situations  of  potential 
distress. 
References 
Beck,  T.,  Levine,  R.,  Loayza,  N.  (2000).  "Finance  and  the  Sources  of  Growth",  Journal  of 
Financial Economics, vol. 58, pp. 261–300. 
Braun, M., Larrain, B., (2005). "Finance and the Business Cycle: International, Inter-industry 
Evidence", Journal of Finance, vol. 60 (June), pp. 1097–1128. 
Caprio, G., Klingbiel, D. (2002). "Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises", In: 
Klingebiel, D., Laeven, L. (Eds.),  Managing the Real and Fiscal Effects of Banking Crises. 
World Bank Discussion Paper No. 428, Washington, DC, pp. 31–49. 
King, R.G., Levine, R. (1993). "Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right", Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, vol. 153, pp. 717–738. 
6 
 BIS Review 98/2007
Kroszner,  R.S.,  Strahan,  P.E.  (2005).  "Regulation  and  Deregulation  of  the  U.S.  Banking 
Industry:  Causes,  Consequences,  and  Implications  for  the  Future.  In:  Rose,  N.  (Ed.), 
Economics of Regulation. NBER Conference Volume, Forthcoming. 
Kroszner, Randall and Luc Laeven and Daniela Klingbiel (2007). "Banking Crises, Financial 
Dependence, and Growth, Journal of Financial Economics", vol. 87 (April), pp. 187-228.  
La  Porta,  R.,  Lopez-de-Silanes,  F.,  Shleifer,  A.,  Vishny,  R.W.  (1998).  "Law  and  Finance," 
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 106, pp. 1113–1155. 
Levine, R. (1997). "Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda (371 
KB PDF)", Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 35, pp. 688–726. 
Levine,  R.  (2005).  "Finance  and  Growth."  In:  Aghion,  P.,  Durlauf,  S.  (Eds.),  Handbook  of 
Economic Growth, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Forthcoming. 
Milesi-Ferretti,  G.M.,  Razin,  A.  (1998).  "Current  account  reversals  and  currency  crises: 
empirical regularities”, NBER Working Paper No. 6620, Cambridge, MA. 
Mitton, T. (2002). "A Cross-Firm Analysis of the Impact of Corporate Governance on the East 
Asian Financial Crisis", Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 64, pp. 215–241. 
Rajan, R.G., Zingales, L. (1998). "Financial Dependence and Growth", American Economic 
Review, vol. 88, pp. 559–596. 
BIS Review 98/2007 
 7
