T T Mboweni: The commodity price boom and the South African economy 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Regional Business 
Achievers Awards Dinner of the Businesswomen’s Association, Pretoria, 27 June 2007.  
Honoured guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1.  
Thank you for your invitation to speak at this business achievers awards ceremony. For too long the 
world of business has been a domain for men only, but in recent years more and more women have 
been  making  their  mark  in  this  arena.  The  Businesswomen’s  Association  has  been  instrumental  in 
promoting  and  encouraging  women  who  have  entered  the  business  world.  The  important  role  that 
women  played  in  the  liberation  of  our  country  is  without  question.  Women  have  also  played  an 
important role in various fields which have contributed to the overall development of the country. It is 
now  time  for  women  to  be  at  forefront  of  the  business  sector.  Women  in  business  are  a  scarce 
resource and your efforts deserve support. 
The economic environment in South Africa has been extremely positive in recent times, with growth 
averaging  around  five  per  cent  for  the  past  three  years.  An  important  contributing  factor  to  this 
favourable environment has been the behaviour of commodity prices. As a commodity producer, we 
should  be  pleased  when  commodity  prices  are  performing  well.  However,  as  we  know  from  past 
experience,  commodity  price  booms  can  be  a  mixed  blessing.  Too  often  in  our  history  we  have 
ignored the fact that commodity prices move in cycles. There had been a tendency to regard price 
booms as being permanent, only for things to end in tears when the cycle ended. The current boom 
has  persisted  for  longer  than  many  had  predicted,  leading  to  suggestions  that  we  are  now  in  a 
commodity super-cycle. At the same time, commodities have become a new asset class on their own. 
In my comments this evening I will highlight some of the recent developments in commodity prices and 
some of the challenges posed for the economy in general and monetary policy in particular. 
Commodities and the South African economy 
2.  
As you are aware, commodities have played a central role in South Africa’s economic development. 
The mining industry, largely supported by gold, diamonds, coal and the platinum group of metals, has 
for more than a century contributed significantly to the national economy. It has provided the impetus 
for the development of physical infrastructure, as well as the establishment of the country’s secondary 
industries.  
South  Africa  is  a  leading  supplier  of  a  range  of  minerals  and  mineral  products.  According  to  the 
Chamber of Mines, in 2005, approximately 55 different minerals were produced from 1 113 mines and 
quarries, of which 45 mines produced gold, 29 produced platinum-group minerals, 64 produced coal 
and  202  produced  diamonds.  Mining,  therefore,  remains  a  key  foundation  of  the  South  African 
economy. In 2005 mining made a direct and indirect contribution of approximately 15 per cent to GDP, 
accounted for around 50 per cent of merchandise exports (including primary and beneficiated mineral 
exports), 12 per cent of fixed investment, 30 per cent of the market value of the JSE limited and 20 per 
cent of formal-sector employment.  
However, it is important to note that an abundance of resources has not always implied a prosperous 
economy. This is particularly true for many resource-rich African countries, which until recently have 
not  benefited  from  their  resource  endowments.  Natural  resources  are  also  not  a  prerequisite  for 
growth.  Countries  such  as  Japan  and  Switzerland  with  few  natural  resources  have  at  times 
outperformed  countries  with  a  wealth  of  resource  endowments.  In  fact,  having  natural  resources  is 
sometimes regarded as a curse. As far back as the 1950s, Prebisch and Singer postulated the secular 
decline of terms of trade of commodity-producing countries. The essence of their argument was that 
commodity prices had a tendency to decline over the long term. This, until recently, has been largely 
borne out by empirical evidence.  
BIS Review 73/2007 
 1
In the last 140 years there have been 18 commodity cycles, with slumps being more persistent than 
booms. In some instances in sub-Saharan Africa, commodity price slumps have lasted over 30 years. 
However, since 2001, as commodity prices have boomed, we have witnessed impressive economic 
growth  in  many  of  the  resource-rich  African  countries.  Notwithstanding  the  structural  shift  from  a 
commodity-based  country  to  a  more  services-oriented  one,  South  Africa  has  also  experienced  a 
concomitant increase in growth over this period. 
Commodity price movements over the last five years 
3.  
During 2001, the overall commodity index as measured by the International Monetary Fund began to 
increase steadily. This increase has continued well into 2007, particularly in the case of energy and 
metals. Not only have the increases been more persistent, giving rise to the super-cycle hypothesis, 
but the surge has been larger than in previous cycles. Increases have also differed significantly across 
commodities. For example the price of North Sea Brent crude oil increased from around $19 per barrel 
in 2002 to around $72 per barrel in June 2007, having peaked at almost US$80 per barrel in August 
last year. Metals have also shown a strong increase with gold and platinum prices having increased by 
approximately 120 per cent over the same period.  
Agricultural  prices,  by  contrast,  have  displayed  more  volatility  and  less  growth  when  compared  to 
energy and metals. Between 2001 and 2006, the IMF commodity food price index increased by 36 per 
cent. More narrowly, and perhaps more relevant to South Africa, the cereals price index increased by 
48 per cent over the same period. In 2006 alone, the IMF maize and wheat price indices increased by 
24 per cent and 26 per cent respectively. Food price inflation is becoming a world-wide concern and 
South Africa has not been spared. Spot prices of yellow and white maize have increased from levels of 
around R500 per ton in 2004 to current levels of around R1 800 per ton driven in part by international 
price developments. In October and November last year, meat prices increased at year-on-year rates 
of almost 20 per cent, and currently overall food inflation is in excess of 8 per cent per annum. 
What has driven the recent price increases? 
4.  
It  used  to  be  the  case  that  the  growth  cycle  in  the  United  States  determined  the  commodity  cycle. 
More  recently,  with  the  emergence  of  the  Asian  economies  and  China  in  particular,  the  dominant 
influence of the US economy on the commodity cycle has waned. Most commentators attribute the 
recent  escalation  of  commodity  prices  to  the  increase  in  demand  for  raw  materials  by  China  in  the 
wake  of  this  country’s  ongoing  economic  growth  and  industrialisation.  Two  factors  are  frequently 
mentioned as part of the explanation of China’s impact on global commodity prices. Firstly, China’s 
large population of over 1,3 billion and the associated large pool of unskilled labour have contributed 
to increased competitiveness and has led to China being the leading manufacturing production centre 
of the world. This has in turn kept the demand for commodity inputs in manufacturing high. Secondly, 
China’s  industrialisation  comes  at  a  time  of  ongoing  globalisation,  which  has  contributed  to  overall 
demand for commodities globally. 
China’s  contribution  to  global  growth  in  the  consumption  of  base  metals  in  recent  years  has  been 
considerable.  According  to  the  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook,  between  2002-2005,  China’s 
contribution  to  world  consumption  growth  in  aluminium,  copper  and  steel  was  around  50  per  cent. 
Furthermore, China contributed in excess of 80 per cent to increased world demand for nickel and tin. 
More significantly, over the same period, China accounted for all the consumption growth in lead and 
zinc, and for 30 per cent of world consumption growth in oil. Due to its rapid growth and rising share in 
the world economy, China is expected to retain its critical role in driving commodity price movements. 
The recent increase in food prices has been the result of a number of factors including a weaker US 
dollar, the impact of higher energy and fertiliser prices, crop-specific supply shortfalls and droughts, 
and low inventory levels. Some analysts suggest that higher global real incomes have also contributed 
to the upward pressure on food prices. An increasingly important driver of agricultural prices comes 
from  the  strong  demand  for  bio-fuels,  which  has seen  the  diversion  of  agricultural  output  to  energy 
production. Although a number of countries have made significant strides in bio-fuels production, the 
United  States  and  Brazil  together  account  for  more  than  70  per  cent  of  worldwide  production  of 
ethanol. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2007
The commodity price boom and the markets 
5.  
In recent years, investor interest in commodities has increased in line with the rise in commodity prices 
and increased global liquidity. Trade in commodity indices, which total approximately US$100 billion 
has increased by a factor of 20 in the past decade. This is still relatively small compared to other asset 
classes  but  there  has  been  a  proliferation  and  diversification  of  the  investor  base  including  hedge 
funds and asset managers who have seen commodities as a means to diversify portfolio risk and take 
advantage of the high yields that have been achieved. Significantly, investors are increasingly viewing 
commodities as a long-term investment. The financialisation of commodities has also been boosted by 
developments  in  financial  engineering,  with  strong  growth  underlying  contracts  and  investment 
strategies.  Expectations  of  continued  and  sustained  growth  in  Asia,  particularly  in  India  and  China, 
have served to fuel the increased demand for commodity asset classes. 
A deeper and diversified market can bring benefits in terms of market efficiency. For example the fact 
that it is easier to hedge future production reduces the risk of new productive investment which may 
otherwise take some time to come on stream. A related issue concerns the role of speculators who are 
regarded by some as being responsible for price volatility in the market. Recent evidence, however, 
suggests that this may not necessarily be the case. A recent study conducted by the Chicago Futures 
Trading Commission showed that speculative traders were not leading but rather responding to market 
developments. This suggests that speculators have tended rather to stabilise the market. 
Developments  in  the  financialisation  of  commodity  markets  may,  however,  raise  several  financial 
stability  questions  for  central  banks  and  financial  sector  regulators.  In  particular,  it  is  not  certain 
whether regulators have enough information about the exposures of financial institutions to the prices 
of  their  export  commodity  or  about  how  firms’  foreign  exchange  exposure  could  compound  their 
commodity  exposures.  Moreover,  a  rise  in  commodity  price  volatility  could  make  domestic  financial 
assets more volatile. An additional challenge for central banks stems from the credit exposure to the 
primary  production  sectors  of  the  banking  system  and  pension  funds  which  have  significantly 
increased their exposure to commodity assets. Furthermore, central banks should always be alert to 
sudden  declines  in  commodity  prices  that  may  bring  about  deflationary  pressures  and  financial 
instability in the domestic economy. 
Economic policy challenges  
6.  
Despite  the  positive  impacts  of  higher  commodity  prices  on  the  economy,  they  also  create  various 
problems and challenges for economic management. For commodity-exporting countries, commodity 
price booms bring with them the concern about the possibility of Dutch Disease, which arises when a 
booming primary sector causes the real exchange rate to appreciate, and this in turn puts pressure on 
the manufacturing and other tradable sectors of the economy. The concern is even greater when the 
cycle turns and the loss of markets by the manufacturing sector is not easily reversible.  
From  a  fiscal  policy  perspective,  the  challenge  that  arises  relates  to  the  management  of  windfall 
revenues. To the extent that tax revenues are boosted by the commodity boom, there may be a need 
to  smooth  expenditure  and  not  treat  the  revenue  increase  as  permanent.  A  number  of  primary-
commodity exporters, for example Chile and Norway, have created national wealth funds to ensure 
that expenditure can be maintained when the commodity cycle declines and tax revenues fall. 
Monetary  policy  would  be  concerned  with  the  possible  impact  of  commodity  price  increases  on 
inflation. Ironically, the strong non-oil commodity price increases have not translated into generalised 
inflation. In fact the commodity boom has coincided with a long period of low global inflation. Part of 
the reason may lie again with China and globalisation. High rates of productivity growth in China have 
allowed for the production of a wide range of goods at low prices despite the increased costs of inputs. 
In a highly competitive globalised world market and credible monetary policies, product price increases 
have remained low or prices have even fallen in some instances. 
Oil and food prices, however, appear to be posing more of a threat to the global inflation outlook than 
other commodities. Nevertheless, contrary to initial fears, the impact of rising oil prices has had less of 
an  impact  on  inflation  and  output  than  in  previous  episodes  of  oil  price  increases.  This  may  be 
because  of  a  general  decline  in  oil  intensity  in  many  countries  and  more  credible  monetary  policy 
frameworks.  However,  oil  and  food  prices  have  been  the  driving  forces  of  recent  inflation 
developments in South Africa and pose the major upside risks to inflation both here and abroad. 
BIS Review 73/2007 
 3
Monetary responses to terms-of-trade shocks such as oil price increases are not straightforward and 
depend in part on the magnitude and duration of these shocks. In essence, the issue boils down to 
distinguishing  between  permanent  and  transitory  changes  in  these  prices,  and  how  the  first-  and 
second-round effects are likely to influence future inflation outcomes. In general, central banks are not 
likely to change monetary policy in response to commodity price fluctuations. Monetary policy should 
address  the  risks  emanating  from  possible  second-round  effects,  i.e.  adjustments  in  expectations 
triggered by movements in commodity prices which may exert an impact on the inflation process.  
Conclusion 
7.  
Not  surprisingly,  in  our  uncertain  world,  there  are  conflicting  views  on  the  outlook  for  commodity 
prices.  Some  believe  that  commodity  prices  will  fall  back  to  their  long-term  declining  trend.  Others 
however,  foresee  a  sustained  boom,  or  at  worst  a  levelling  off  at  higher  levels,  given  the  ongoing 
industrialisation in China and other emerging-market countries. 
Whatever the future course of commodity prices, there is little doubt that it will have an impact on our 
economy.  In  essence,  the  policy  responses  will  depend  on  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  the  price 
movements. In this regard, the effect of commodity price movements on inter alia the trade balance, 
aggregate  demand,  exchange  rate  and  fiscal  developments  are  of  paramount  importance.  From  a 
monetary policy perspective, our key concern is the possible impact on inflation. Food and oil prices 
are likely to remain an upside risk to the inflation outlook in South Africa. Monetary policy has to be 
sensitive to the impact of these developments on inflation expectations and we will act appropriately to 
prevent  the  emergence  of  more  generalised  inflation.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  remains 
committed to its primary mandate of ensuring price stability, that is the maintenance of CPIX inflation 
between the target range of 3 to 6 per cent. 
Finally, commodities will retain a central role in the South African economy in the future. A challenge 
facing our country, and one that is of particular relevance to this audience, is to ensure that women 
also  play  their  rightful  role  in  this  area  of  economic  activity.  To  this  end  the  recognition  of  the 
achievements of women plays a significant role in fostering their interest in all sectors of the domestic 
economy.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2007
