Fatos Ibrahimi: The banking system situation and the future challenges 
Address  by  Mr  Fatos  Ibrahimi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  European 
Finance Convention, Tirana, 14-15 September 2007. 
 Dear participants, 
It is a pleasure to participate in this summit and to outline some of the main developments in 
one of the key areas of the Albanian economy, that of the banking system.  
In my following discussion, I will dwell on two main issues: 
First,  the  key  steps  in  the  banking  reforms,  with  special  focus  on  the  issues  related  to 
commercial banks and the system’s financial developments in the recent years. 
Second, the aspirations of the Albanian economy to absorb foreign direct investments, their 
importance to our financial system and the FDI growth implications in the future.  
framework 
incoherent  regulatory 
The performance of the Albanian banking system 
1) 
Reform in banking was part of the structural reforms undertaken by the Albanian authorities 
after 1992. In addition to the macroeconomic stability, these reforms aimed to transform the 
Albanian economy into a market economy, through its privatization and the establishment of 
financial institutions and institutions of social protection.  
Albania has been going through a constant process of banking system consolidation since 
the transition into a market economy. In most of the 90s, this process was relatively sluggish 
as  a  result  of  the  informal  financial  markets  which  had  held  the  country’s  economic  and 
financial  development  back.  The  high  interest  rates  offered  by  these  markets  kept  the 
efficiency of monetary policy in steering the interest rate pending. In addition, other issues, 
such  as  the  high  concentration  of  deposits  and  loans  in  three  state-owned  banks,  their 
operational  losses  as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  non-performing  loans’  portfolio,  the 
undeveloped  and 
in  supervision  had  become  an 
impediment to the expansion of reforms in the banking sector.  
Following  this  period,  the  banking  system  consolidation  process  began  to  progress.  This 
period  is  characterized  by  the  reduction  in  the  share  of  state-owned  banks,  their  gradual 
privatization and the considerable increase in the number of private banks from 4 operating 
in 1997 to 17 banks in 2006. In this context, the central bank has been extremely prudent in 
selecting and licensing the private banks, where only three of them licensed the recent years 
are of entirely Albanian capital.  
Despite  the  increase  in  the  number  of  domestic  commercial  banks,  the  expansion  of  the 
banking  activity  until  2003  was  a  prudent  one,  being  in  line  with  the  country’s  economic 
development. During 1998-2003, the banking system’s total assets grew by an average of 13 
per  cent  a  year,  consistent  with  the  nominal  GDP  growth  during  this  period.  Nonetheless, 
there has been a swift growth in banking assets by 67 per cent in the last three years, which 
is 2-3 times higher than the cumulative growth of nominal GDP. As a result of the enhanced 
confidence  in  the  domestic  banking  system,  the  share  of  assets  to  the  GDP  increased  in 
2006 to the peak level of 70 per cent, which is comparable to that of the Central and East-
European countries.  
The performance of commercial loan to private sector and to households is also satisfactory. 
Its growth rate has been constantly exceeding the expansion rate of banking assets. Over 
the  last  years,  private  loan  has  improved  considerably;  for  2005-2006  it  recorded  a 
cumulative growth of 175 per cent, which is the highest growth recorded in the region and the 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 1
Central  and  East-European  countries.  Another  characteristic  in  support  of  foreign  crediting 
institutions is the free choice of currency, where almost 3/4 (three-fourth) of total loan was 
extended in foreign currency.  
Thus  far  we  may  say  that  credit  supply  is  in  prudent  levels,  since  non-performing  loans’ 
portfolio,  though  increased  moderately  to  3.1  per  cent  of  gross  loans  in  2006,  provides 
evidence  for  a  limited  exposure  of  the  banking  sector  to  non-settlement  risk.  However, 
despite  the  considerable  improvement  in  the  assets  quality  and  the  commercial  banks’ 
financial performance, the growth of lending to the private sector and to households remains 
low as a share to the GDP – about 21.3 per cent in 2006, compared to 49 per cent in Central 
and  East-European  countries  –  providing  evidence  for  other  non-utilized  banking  services 
capacities in the Albanian economy.  
Banking law 
2) 
Many  amendments  to  the  law  on  the  financial  system  have  been  made  over  these  years. 
These amendments resulted from the need of adopting the European Directives in this area 
and  the  Basel  core  principles  for  an  effective  banking  supervision.  This  process  was 
successfully  finalized  upon  the  approval  of  Law  No.  9662  “On  Banks  in  the  Republic  of 
Albania” by the Parliament. Compared with the previous law, the new law is more complete 
and more accurate in some parts of it. It has integrated some new concepts which are in full 
compliance with the European Directive 83/349 and other important directives. It stipulates 
changes in the licensing of activities by level of capital, in consolidated supervision, etc. In 
addition, “risk management”, which previously was provided for in specific regulations, has 
been now summarized in a specific chapter of this law.  
Foreign direct investments and the Albanian financial system 
3)  
Foreign direct investments have been assessed as very important for developing countries, 
since  they  have  a  positive  impact  on  the  macroeconomic,  technological  and  institutional 
performance of recipient countries. The wide experience over the last decades indicates that 
the presence of the financial FDIs improves the soundness of the domestic financial system, 
through a better management of portfolio risk and a more efficient allocation of credit funds. 
In  addition,  the  technological  innovations  deriving  from  the  FDI  inflows  affect  the 
enhancement of the banking system competition and efficiency, through the increase in the 
variety  of  products  and  services  provided.  Despite  these  positive  effects,  the  presence  of 
foreign  banks  in  the  country  instigates  improvements  in  the  institutional  framework,  by 
pushing  the  application  of  international  accounting,  reporting  and  supervision  standards, 
which does not only help the commercial banks’ decision-making process but also the central 
bank’s.  
Therefore, the FDIs are expected not only to promote the production activity in the country, 
but  also  to  have  a  direct  and  indirect  impact  on  the  Albanian  financial  system.  Foreign 
production  companies  will  directly  need  financial  transfers  and  services  (channel  payrolls 
through the ATMs, POS), which will be executed through the domestic financial system. The 
international companies investing in the country will make use of commercial banks’ funding 
sources in order to prevent exchange rate and interest rate risk.  
There  have  been  many  property-related  developments  in  the  Albanian  banking  system. 
Since its establishment, the domination of state-owned banks has been reducing and today, 
foreign commercial banks’ assets account for over 90 per cent of the banking system.  
The increase in the number of foreign banks in the system has been also favoured by the 
fact  that  such  investments  have  not  been  penalized  in  Albania;  the  requirements  for 
establishing a bank are similar for both domestic and foreign-owned banks. 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2007
The  current  ownership  is  diverse;  there  are  foreign  investors  from  Austria,  Italy,  Greece, 
USA,  Turkey,  Germany,  Bulgaria,  Malaysia  and  some  Arab  countries.  Greek  banks  have 
been present in the market since 1996; the German and Italian investment has been present 
for quite a long time as well, while the latter has grown substantially and has become one of 
the  market’s  key  actors.  Austrian  investments  may  be  considered  as  the  most  dominant 
ones. Their ownership has resulted from the acquisition of the largest domestic state-owned 
bank.  
The  long  presence  of  foreign  banks  in  the  Albanian  banking  system  has  influenced  the 
establishment  of  a  stable  banking  system  and  its  stable  growth.  Despite  the  financial 
collapse  of  1997  or  the  panic  crisis  in  2002,  in  none  of  the  cases  was  the  system’s 
performance  a  source  of  crisis  or  instability.  Previously,  foreign  banks  were  more 
conservative  in  terms  of  expanding  their  geographical  activity;  however,  the  entry  of 
Raiffeisen Bank into the market pushed them to be more active. This fact may be evidenced 
by the variety of products provided in the market, the growth of lending and the employment 
of clear strategies to increase or maintain their market share.  
However,  the  economic  benefits  deriving  from  the  presence  of  foreign  banks  have  not 
reached the proper levels yet. The enhancement of the quality of information provided to the 
public  at  large  and  to  the  central  bank,  the  lowering  of  the  intermediation  cost,  the  further 
improvement  of  risk  management,  and  the  standardization  of  the  accounting  and  financial 
reporting systems are not in the desired levels yet.  
Now  let  us  now  turn  briefly  to  the  possible  financial  relationship  between  the  Albanian 
banking  system  and  the  production  foreign  investments  flow.  Undoubtedly,  the  positive 
influence  foreign  direct  investments  have  on  economic  growth  depends  largely  on  their 
recipient  countries’  circumstances.  It  requires  a  substantial  level  of  financial  system 
development as a crucial precondition. A developed financial system improves the efficiency 
in allocating the resources and it further enhances the country’s capacity to absorb the FDI.  
The  entry  of  new  investors  will  orient  the  concentration  of  market  segments  to  large-size 
businesses. Their impact, along with the lending capacity of our banking market, are believed 
to be the crucial proof for their success in Albania. 
In more concrete terms, the circumstances in Albania are such that there is an asymmetrical 
distribution of total assets between banks in the market. The reference is only to banks, since 
in terms of total assets, the banking system shares more than 90 per cent. Other non-bank 
financial institutions play a more insignificant role than the commercial banks. As far as the 
latter is concerned, there are many qualitative banks in the market, whose presence is an 
attractive factor for absorbing the FDI.  
On the other hand, the concentration of assets and banking loans in a few commercial banks 
bears the risk of creating an oligopolistic environment where only a few banks establish the 
terms for new loans. Such a situation would increase the investment cost in the public and 
private sector and in households, as well. Though thus far there have not been any cases of 
prices  manipulation  or  banks  exercising  a  dominant  position  in  the  market,  I  deem  as 
necessary the promotion and vitalization of other financial market segments in general. This 
market requires real commitment in the efficient intermediation of financial resources in all its 
segments.  Non-bank  financial  institutions  need  to  become  more  active  by  expanding  their 
activity in the market segments they operate in. With regard to the banking system, the Bank 
of Albania deems the revitalization of certain institutions, whose activity shares a small part 
of the banking market, as crucial. These institutions need to become more active, by taking 
more responsibility consistent with their business plans and they need to find new ways of 
organization and co-operation between them in order to enhance competition and provide a 
more symmetrical re-distribution of banking activity in our market. 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 3
The system’s future challenges 
4)  
Some sectors of economy, such as agriculture, continue to be credited at low levels or are 
not  credited  at  all.  The contribution of  banking  loans  to  production investments  is  still low. 
Moreover, considering the high share of loans for commercial purposes, it may be concluded 
that the largest share of loans is used to finance imports. The level of public accessing the 
banking  system  is  not  in  the  parameters  set  in  the  country’s  economic  development 
objectives.  Furthermore,  the  level  of  cash  in  economy  is  extremely  high.  All  these 
phenomena push the borders of informality further and reduce the monetary policy efficiency. 
It is the financial system’s duty and responsibility to make all its efforts in co-operation with 
the Bank of Albania and other Government authorities to find the solution to these problems.  
In  conclusion  I  would  like  to  say  that  as  a  result  of  the  reforms  undertaken,  the  Albanian 
banking system, being the most dynamic part of the financial system, has made significant 
progress during the last years. This progress results from the clear visions and seriousness 
shown by the Albanian authorities in reforming the banking sector, the fruitful co-operation 
these authorities have had with the international financial institutions such as the IMF and the 
World  Bank  for  designing  medium-term  strategies  and  developing  this  sector  further.  This 
progress is also a result of the numerous challenges the Albanian banking system has been 
faced with over the recent years.  
It  may  be  concluded  that  the  Albanian  banking  system  is  presented  safe,  sound,  under  a 
constant reformation and consolidation process. It is going through a new stage, which will 
provide to the business and the banking clients modern banking services, aiming to reach 
the western banks’ standards. ¨ 
With regard to the aspirations of the Albanian economy and strategies to be employed for its 
further opening to foreign investors, we believe that these undertakings will have a positive 
impact on the country’s macroeconomic, technological and institutional area.  
The  banking  system’s  stage  of  development  and  the  FDI  flows  in  economy  have  mutual 
influences  on  each  other.  Hence,  if  Albania  attracts  stable  and  long-term  FDI  flows  in  the 
following  years,  their  impact  on  the  further  development  of  the  financial  system  will  be 
considerable. Furthermore, the demand for banking products both from domestic and foreign 
companies will grow. 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2007
