Stefan Ingves: Is there an optimal way to structure supervision? 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the 4th Summit Meeting of the 
Islamic Financial Services Board, Dubai, 15 May 2007. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this  4th  Summit  Meeting  of  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board.  The 
issues of regulation and supervision are generally the same in a system of Islamic financial services 
as in any other financial system. You need the same authorities and the same regulations to ensure 
that your financial institutions and markets are safe and sound.  
My  presentation  is  about  finding  the  best  way  of  structuring  the  financial  regulatory  authorities  in  a 
country.  This  issue  has  been  hotly  debated  for  a  long  time  because  of  the  important  and  political 
issues  involved  and  the  discussion  is  still  going  on.  I  will  discuss  the  matter  based  on  experiences 
from countries around the world, including situations in which I have been personally involved such as 
when a country reconsiders its institutional set-up after a crisis. First I will describe the alternatives for 
supervision that countries have chosen. Then I will discuss how certain key aspects for supervision, 
such  as  independence,  accountability,  transparency  and  efficiency  can  be  accommodated  under 
various supervisory structures. Third, I will debate the arguments for and against having supervision 
inside a Ministry or in a national central bank, which I will call NCB for short. I will also evaluate the 
arguments for and against combining various supervisory authorities.  
My main conclusion is that there is no optimal solution for all cases; it depends on the circumstances 
in  the  individual  country  at  the  present  moment.  Ensuring  operational  independence,  accountability 
and  transparency  for  the  supervisory  agencies  are  more  important  than  how  they  are  structured.  If 
your  country  has  a  well  functioning  banking  supervision  do  not  change  its  structure  until  you  have 
clear  arguments  to  do  so.  Do  not  make  structural  changes  when  the  financial  sector  is  weak  or 
recovering  from  a  crisis.  On  the  other  hand,  developments  in  your  financial  sector  such  as  an 
increasing  role  for  other  institutions  than  banks,  argue  for  closer  ties  between  the  supervisory 
agencies.  
There are two basic issues in the discussion on the organisation of supervision: 
• 
Should supervision be inside or outside the NCB and the Ministries?  
• 
Should supervision of different sectors be unified in the same authority? 
These questions will be discussed later in my presentation. Let me first describe some of the present 
practices in organising supervision. 
Present practices 
Currently there is a great diversity of supervisory structures but the majority comes under one of the 
two main streams: 
The  first  is  the  traditional  one  with  bank  supervision  in  the  NCB  and  securities  supervision  in  an 
independent  standalone  authority.  Insurance  supervision  is  in  many  countries  also  located  in  a 
separate authority, but in other cases it is a department of the Ministry of Commerce or some other 
ministry.  
The  second  main  stream  is  full  unification  of  the  supervision  of  banks,  securities  companies  and 
insurance companies, all in one institution. 
The trend since some 15 years is that bank supervision in a number of countries has been moved 
outside  the  NCB  and  has  been  consolidated  with  the  supervision  over  securities  and  insurance 
companies. However, the most common structure is still the traditional one1.  
                                                      
1   Martin Čihák and Richard Podpiera: IMF Working Paper WP/06/57 from 2006. 
BIS Review 49/2007 
 1
But there are many variations. One is the combination of banking and securities supervision, which is 
logical due to the close relations between banking and securities activities. Another is the combination 
of securities and insurance supervision with the aim to create a stronger authority with more resources 
and expertise. 
There are also some broader alternatives. The FSA in the UK performs supervision over a wide range 
of financial institutions, including brokers, pension funds and many more. Its objectives also include 
financial sector consumer issues and even the promotion of London as a financial market place. All 
kinds of supervision and other activities related to the financial sector are placed under one roof. 
The  Netherlands,  Australia  and  others  have  followed  an  approach  based  on  the  purpose  of  the 
supervision.  In  these  countries  prudential  supervision  of  banks  and  securities  firms  is  conducted 
separately from the oversight of the conduct of the financial markets. The underlying rationale is that 
these activities are different. Ensuring the safety and stability of banks and securities firms requires 
different regulations and skills from monitoring market conduct and taking enforcement actions. 
Ireland, France, Finland and others have retained bank supervision in an organisation closely related 
to the central bank but not in the central bank itself. In this way they benefit from the resources of the 
NCB and can make some cost savings, but avoid some of the arguments against locating supervision 
in the NCB itself. 
Other countries, among them Germany, have a stand-alone authority for financial regulation but the 
central  bank  maintains  a  role  in  the  conduct  of  supervision  by  conducting  most  of  the  on-site 
inspections  of  banks.  In  this way  the  Bundesbank  benefits  from  its  vast  network  of regional  branch 
offices and its knowledge of the local economy. 
Criteria for evaluating the organisation of supervision 
The choice of structure for supervision is not an end in itself but a means to achieve certain objectives. 
We should therefore analyse the conditions that must be in place to ensure good supervision. 
The first one is operational independence. There must be laws to prevent policy makers or financial 
market participants from trying to influence the operational decisions of the supervisor. Independence 
also  implies  sufficient  and  stable  resources  to  attract  skilled  staff,  to  build  good  IT-systems,  and  to 
inspect supervised entities. The head of supervision should be independently appointed and should 
not be dismissed for other reasons than those provided in the law. The head and the staff should be 
protected against frivolous law suits, as long as they conduct supervision in good faith. 
Traditionally, independence has been best protected when supervision is conducted in an NCB since 
the NCB itself is independent due to its role in monetary policy. The NCB also has its own revenues 
and budget. Outside the NCB, independence must be ensured through explicit legislation and through 
clear  rules  for  obtaining  the  necessary  resources,  e.g.  by  levying  fees  on  the  supervised  entities. 
Contrary  to  supervision  located  in  the  central  banks,  the  supervisory  sections  which  are  entities  of 
Ministries are by definition not operationally independent and their resources are dependent on budget 
appropriations. 
The  second  condition  for  good  supervision  is  accountability.  The  authority  must  regularly  provide 
information about its performance in various forms, such as Parliamentary hearings, speeches by the 
management, written reports and websites. On these occasions the authority describes and explains 
its actions and stands ready to receive criticism.  
There is no specific structure of supervisory authorities that automatically leads to better accountability 
so clear rules must be set regardless of how the authority is structured. 
The third condition is transparency. The general public and in particular the supervised entities need to 
have  full  information  about  regulation  and  supervision.  The  authority  must  consult  with  interested 
parties to ensure that efficient laws and regulations are drafted and after implementation they should 
cooperate with  the  market  participants and others  to  ensure  that the  rules  are  well  understood and 
implemented.  Transparency  is  traditionally  not  a  focus  of  supervisors,  so  it  needs  to  be  explicitly 
enacted, independently of how supervision is organised. 
The  fourth  condition  is  the  efficiency  and  efficacy  of  supervision.  Does  the  authority  perform  its 
services at a reasonable cost? To a large extent this depends on the organisation of the work itself 
and not the overall supervisory structure. There is also an argument of economies of scale and scope, 
implying that some costs could be reduced if you combine the supervisory authorities.  
2 
 BIS Review 49/2007
A  more  important  aspect  of  efficacy  is  whether  the  authority  lives  up  to  its  stated  objectives,  for 
instance  to  ensure  a  safe  and  sound  financial  system.  This  has  not  so  much  to  do  with  the 
organisation of the authority but more with its legal powers and independence. An even broader issue 
concerns  the  appropriate  range  of  objectives  for  a  supervisory  authority,  for  instance  if  consumer 
protection, competition policy or promotion of the financial sector should be included together with the 
basic objective of financial stability and smooth operations in the financial sector and its institutions. 
My  experience  from  many  countries  is  that  it  is  usually  more  efficient  to  separate  these  objectives 
between different authorities. For instance, handling consumer issues is resource intensive and may 
negatively affect confidence in the supervisory authority. Having too many objectives might also lead 
to conflicting goals for the authority. As an example, it is more difficult to propose needed regulatory 
measures at the same time as promoting the growth of the financial market. 
To  sum  up:  A  country  should  be  able  to  manage  independence,  accountability,  transparency  and 
efficiency satisfactorily in any kind of supervisory structure. For independence there might be some 
advantage with central bank supervision. But for cooperation leading to better efficiency there might 
be a slight advantage with a unified authority. 
Arguments for and against various supervisory structures 
After having discussed the conditions for good supervision let me now review some of the arguments 
for  and  against  the  various  actual  supervisory  structures.  I  will  first  address  the  issues  of  having 
supervision inside or outside the ministries and the central banks. I will then turn to the arguments for 
and against unified authorities. 
Supervision  inside  ministries  may  provide  some  benefits  in  the  form  of  insight  and  staff  expertise, 
maybe also access to resources. But there is a strong disadvantage in the lack of independence plus 
the risk to the public’s confidence in the government if failures should occur in the supervised sector. 
There is also a serious governance issue in those countries where the government is the owner of 
financial institutions and also supervises them. 
Arguments for retaining supervision in the NCB 
What  about  supervision  inside  the  NCB?  First,  banks  have  a  special  importance  in  the  financial 
system.  Their  activities  are  often  complex.  Therefore,  they  need  high  quality,  resource-intensive 
supervision. The NCB normally has independence and revenues. NCBs can often recruit and retain 
good staff by offering attractive salaries and other advantages. 
Second, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Bernanke2 and others argue that information gathered in 
the  conduct  of  supervision  provides  a  necessary  input  for  the  monetary  policy.  Having  updated 
knowledge  about  the  financial  system  is  also  important  if  the  central  bank  is  requested  to  provide 
liquidity support in a crisis situation. Although such information can be summoned from a supervisory 
authority outside the NCB, the NCB will be in a better position if it is already familiar with the situation 
through  its  in-house  supervision.  A  similar  argument  is  that  the  central  bank  is  often  running  or 
overseeing  the  large  value  payments  system.  Thus  the  central  bank  will  be  able  to  spot  potential 
liquidity problems at an early stage and can take timely remedial action if it has the supervisory powers 
to do so. 
Arguments against retaining bank supervision in the NCB 
But  there  are  also  counterarguments  to  conducting  supervision  in  the  NCB.  Some  would  reverse 
Bernanke’s argument and say that just because the NCB is responsible for monetary policy, payments 
system oversight and liquidity support in a crisis, it should not be responsible for daily supervision. An 
NCB with such responsibilities might run into a conflict between the objectives of monetary policy and 
of supervision. Simply put, the NCB might be tempted to keep interest rates excessively low in order to 
                                                      
2   Held  at 
the  Allied  Social  Science  Association  Annual  Meeting,  9  January  2007.  Link 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/BoardDocs/speeches/2007/20070105/default.htm
BIS Review 49/2007 
 to 
the  speech: 
3
prevent  that  some  weak  banks  run  into  acute  problems.  In  fact,  some  research  results3  based  on 
OECD countries have indicated that the inflation rate is higher and more volatile in countries where the 
central bank has the sole responsibility for banking supervision. A failure in a supervised entity might 
affect the reputation of the NCB to the extent that its capability to perform effective monetary policy is 
hampered. In a crisis, there is a management problem in that the solution of a crisis in the supervised 
entities will preoccupy the minds of the NCB management so that it will not have the time to focus on 
other important issues. The Finnish approach is an attempt to solve this dilemma by having a separate 
board for the supervisory decisions but still being a part of the central bank for its funding and sharing 
of administrative resources. 
An overarching argument is that the Parliament should not delegate too much power to a non publicly 
elected  body  such  as  the  central  bank.  But  I  do  not  see  this  as  a  major  problem.  The  Parliament 
should set the parameters and limits for the powers of the NCB and the NCB will have to account for 
its conduct on a regular basis. If supervision is located in another authority, there will be similar issues 
of delegation and accountability. 
I noted earlier that the current trend is to move supervision out of the NCBs. However, some countries 
have gone the opposite way by moving securities and insurance supervision under the umbrella of the 
NCB.  They  have  benefited  from  the  independence  and  resources  of  the  NCB.  On  the  other  hand, 
these  sectors  require  partly  different  staff  skills  and  methods  and  they  include  issues  which  are 
normally  outside  the  mandate  of  a  central  bank  such  as  investigations  of  market  conduct  and  law 
enforcement  actions  against  individual  firms  or  persons.  Failures  in  securities  and  insurance 
companies may affect overall confidence in the NCB, although these institutions are in most cases of 
limited interest to the NCB from the point of view of financial system stability. Such failures might even 
lead  to  what  Professor  Goodhart  calls  “a  creep  of  the  Central  Bank  safety  net”4  implying  that 
exceptional  liquidity  assistance  might  be  used  for  non-systematically  important  institutions.  My 
conclusion is therefore that you should only bring securities and insurance supervision into the NCB if 
this is needed because they can not fulfil their tasks outside the NCB for some reason such as lack of 
independence or human resources. 
After having discussed whether supervision should be inside or outside the Ministries and the NCB, I 
now  turn  to  the  issue  of  unified  supervision.  These  are  some  often-heard  arguments  for  the 
consolidation of supervisory authorities: 
Consolidating supervision in one authority 
Information sharing and coordination will be facilitated if the different sector supervisors are located in 
the same authority. In my experience this is mostly true, both for practical and legal reasons. But this 
requires  that  the  unified  supervisor  is  really  integrated  and  not  just  a  combination  of  separate 
branches. I have seen bad examples of unified supervisors where the staff are not allowed to discuss 
mutual issues since there are still legal barriers between the departments within the authority! I have 
also  seen  bad  examples  of  turf  battles  within  a  unified  authority,  which  has  certainly  not  facilitated 
information sharing. 
A unified authority will imply some cost savings because of economies of scale. However, this should 
not be exaggerated. Some administrative overhead costs may be reduced but other costs will remain. 
Most of the costs emanate from the supervisory operations and there is little scope for savings in this 
area. More substantial cost savings and more efficiency in supervision may be achieved through better 
streamlined cooperation between different sector supervisors but this can be achieved both when they 
are located separately and when they are within the same authority. 
The  authority  conducting  banking  supervision  is  in  most  countries  more  advanced  and  has  more 
resources  than  the  other  supervisory  authorities.  By  combining  bank  supervisors  with  other 
supervisors it is hoped that the former can share resources and knowledge with the weaker sectors. 
This argument if often heard, but in practice it does not always work as planned. The risk is rather that 
                                                      
3   Haubrich  (1996)  and  Di  Noia  and  Di  Giorgi  (2000).  These  and  other  issues  related  to  the  role,  responsibilities  and 
governance of central banks are discussed in the paper Governing the Governors: A clinical study of central banks, drafted 
by Lars Frisell, Kasper Roszbach and Giancarlo Spagnolo. A yet unpublished draft manuscript was issued in August 2006. 
4   Charles Goodhart: The Organisational Structure of Supervision; FSI Occasional Papers No 1, Nov. 2000. 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2007
banking  supervision  is  weakened  when  resources  are  transferred  and  when  skilled  banking 
supervisors leave the authority. 
Another  argument  is  that  a  unified  supervisory  authority  could  become  stronger  and  thus  more 
independent than the individual authorities. I would argue that the issue of independence is not related 
to  the  unification  of  supervision.  Independence  could  equally  be  given  to  a  small  standalone 
supervisory authority as to a unified large one.  
Is there an urgent need to change your supervisory structure? 
Let  me  turn  to  another  aspect.  Is  there  any  urgency  to  change  to  unified  supervision  or  could  you 
wait? The main argument for changing is when the non-bank financial sector is expanding rapidly and 
is taking a significant market share. Consolidated supervision is then needed to ensure that all risks to 
the financial groups and markets are taken into account. We see some development in this direction in 
almost all countries. The financial sector is expanding and introducing new instruments and activities. 
The  boundaries  between  banking,  securities  operations,  and  insurance  business  are  becoming 
blurred. In many countries this is a slow process, but in others it moves faster. 
There are arguments against changing the supervisory structures in the near term. The first one is the 
flip-side  of  the  argument  above.  Also  the  banks  are  getting  larger  and  more  complex.  In  many 
countries they still dominate the financial sector and the payments system. Hence, society has a clear 
interest in strong banking supervision to avoid costly bank failures. We should take into account that 
banking  supervision  in  many  countries  functions  quite  well,  while  supervision  of  the  other  financial 
sectors is much weaker. Major structural changes involving bank supervision will therefore hamper the 
conduct  of  such  supervision  for  a  long  time  due  to  the  focus  on  the  transition  rather  than  on  the 
operations. There is also an obvious risk that qualified staff will leave bank supervision due to the less 
attractive work prospects outside the NCB. For instance, government salaries and other benefits are 
usually not as good and it is less prestigious to work outside the NCB. The result would be weaker 
bank supervision without compensating improvements in other sectors. 
There  are  other  ways  of  meeting  the  challenge.  Many  countries  have  instituted  arrangements  for 
closer cooperation between the supervisors. Memorandas of Understanding have been drafted so that 
information may be shared without legal or other impediments. Joint forums have been established 
where  representatives  from  the  different  supervisory  authorities  meet  regularly.  Cross  directorships 
imply  that  high  level  supervisors  sit  on  each  others’  Boards  and  can  inform  themselves  of 
developments.  
In  fact,  legislation  might  be  necessary  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  NCB  can  always  obtain  the 
information it needs to fulfil its responsibilities on financial stability, extraordinary liquidity assistance in 
a  crisis,  and  monetary  policy.  In  Sweden,  the  central  bank  concluded  an  MoU  with  our  bank 
supervisors but we also have the legal power to ask the banks directly for information. 
It  is  difficult  to  sum  up  all  the  arguments  for  and  against.  If  you  are  contemplating  change  in  your 
country, I would say that a broad and objective assessment of the present strengths and weaknesses 
will give good guidance as to which way to go. The optimal solution for the near term may not be the 
same as for the long term. 
The aspects of cross-border supervision 
Financial  institutions  increasingly  operate  across  national  borders.  They  establish  branches  and 
subsidiaries in other countries and they have business linkages with institutions in other countries. Is 
there  any  structure  of  the  domestic  regulatory  authorities  that  is  particularly  suited  to  the  efficient 
supervision  of  international  financial  operations?  I  do  not  think  so.  What  matters  is  that  there  are 
arrangements  between  home  and  host  supervisors  which  ensure  information-sharing  and  close 
cooperation  in  particular  in  crisis  situations.  Such  arrangements  can  be  agreed  on  whether  bank 
supervision is in a central bank or combined with securities and insurance supervision in a separate 
authority. That said, Roger Ferguson, a former Member of the Fed Board and Chairman of the FSF, 
BIS Review 49/2007 
 5
argues that the well established global network among central banks, such as through the BIS, gives 
central banks a comparative advantage in informal information sharing and cooperation5. 
Which role remains for the central bank? 
Ensuring jobs for the central bank staff is not a valid reason for retaining bank supervision in the NCB. 
Hence, the question is: Which would be the primary tasks of the NCB if supervision is moved out?  
Of course, the task of conducting monetary policy would remain with the NCB. The NCB will also run 
the large-value payments system, or at least exercise oversight over it. In addition, the NCB should 
always  have  the  responsibility  for  the  oversight  of  overall  stability  in  the  financial  system.  Financial 
stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  efficient  monetary  operations  and  is  in  itself  an  important 
component in a country’s sustained macro economic growth. Since the NCB will still be the lender-of-
last-resort the knowledge gained from its financial stability analysis will be crucial in a crisis situation. 
But  the  NCB  cannot  perform  an  efficient  financial  stability  analysis,  nor  act  as  lender-of-last-resort 
without close cooperation with the supervisory authorities. The other authorities will also benefit from 
the stability work by the NCB. 
Conclusions 
Let me try to sum up. My first conclusion is to use the American expression “If it ain’t broke don’t fix it”. 
If  bank  supervision  works  well  in  your  country,  let  it  be  as  is  and  strengthen  the  other  sector 
supervisors instead. Operational independence should be implemented and at the same time rules for 
accountability  and  transparency.  This  is  more  important  than  the  structure  of  the  supervisory 
authorities. 
If you see good reasons in your country for changing the supervisory structure, you should follow a 
transparent process and be clear of the consequences. For obvious reasons, you must avoid making 
organisational  changes  when  the  financial  sector  is  weak.  Nor  should  you  change  during  major 
developments in the financial sector, such as the introduction of the bank capital framework Basel II 
and the new accounting standard IAS 39. The structural change must be accompanied by measures 
to strengthen the capacity of the new authority. Otherwise the change is merely cosmetic. 
In many countries there is a political pressure to change the supervisory structure to show expediency, 
in particular when there has been a financial crisis and irrespective of the supervisory agencies’ roles 
and  behaviour  before  and  during  the  crisis.  As  a  result  banking  supervision  may  in  such  cases  be 
moved  out  of  the  central  bank  or,  at  other  times,  into  it.  Also  the  unification  of  the  supervisory 
authorities is sometimes seen as a political issue. In my experience, there is not much to gain from a 
political  point  of  view.  On  the  contrary,  the  politicians  might  be  blamed  for  future  failures  of 
supervision.  
Finally, the time has come to answer the question in the title of this presentation “Is there an optimal 
way  to  structure  supervision”.  My  answer  is  “No”.  The  different  supervisory  structures  reflect  the 
specific situation of their countries, which may change over time, and there is no globally agreed best 
practice.  As  former  Chinese  Chairman  Deng  Xaioping  once  said:  “The  colour  of  the  cat  does  not 
matter as long as it catches the mice”. 
                                                      
5   Ferguson,  R  (2000)  Alternative  Approaches  to  Financial  Supervision  and  Regulation,  Journal  of  Financial  Services 
Research, 17(1), 297-303 
6 
 BIS Review 49/2007
