Caleb M Fundanga: Recent significant developments in the Zambian economy 
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  2006  Business  and 
Financial Writers, Media Awards, Lusaka, 24 January 2007. 
 • Heads of Diplomatic Missions, Permanent Secretaries and senior Government officials 
• Heads of Economic, Financial and Business organizations 
• Heads of Media Institutions 
• Economic, business and financial writers 
• The ACCA International Assembly Member and the Branch President 
• ACCA Country Manager 
• Distinguished invited guests, ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted both as Governor of the Bank of Zambia and as patron of the business and financial 
writers  forum,  to  officiate  at  the  5th  annual  business  and  financial  writers  awards  ceremony  for  the 
second consecutive time. 
I must say I am always delighted to interact with you my colleagues from the media because we are 
both  stakeholders  in  the  provision  and  dissemination  of  financial  and  economic  information  to  the 
public. 
The  purpose  of  this  annual  event  is  to  recognise  outstanding  journalism  effort  demonstrated  by 
economic,  financial  and  business  writers  from  various  media  institutions.  In  this  room  tonight  are 
different organizations represented with a commonality, that is, we all wish to have accurate, timely, 
informative, creative, relevant and in-depth information. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  am  pleased  as  patron  of  the  business  and  financial  writer 
forum to continue working with you. I would like to begin my presentation this evening by sharing with 
you some of the recent significant developments in our economy: 
1. 
2. 
Positive and significant real GDP Growth rates over the last 7 years. 
Continuous and significant drop in overall annual inflation rate to levels below 10%. As at 
end 2006, overall annual inflation was 8.2% compared with 15.9% at end 2005. But I must 
hasten to add here that the impact of increases in petroleum products and anticipated millers 
upward adjustment of maize prices in line with FRA maize prices pose significant threats to 
overall inflation. 
A fall in commercial banks lending interest rates. In line with falling inflation and yield rates 
on Government securities, the average commercial bank lending rate declined to 27.8% in 
December 2006 from 33.9% in December 2005. Although the trend is in the right direction, 
the  Bank  of  Zambia  considers  the  levels  of  lending  rates  to  be  still  too  high  and  I  urge 
commercial banks to reduce their lending rates further to stimulate growth. 
In  2006,  the  exchange  rate  recorded  depreciation.  Against  the  US  dollar,  the  Kwacha 
depreciated  by  21.1  percent  compared  to  an  appreciation  of  26.4  percent  in  2005.  The 
depreciation in the Kwacha was largely on account of reductions in emerging market premia 
due  to continued  interest  rate  hikes  in major  global economies, which resulted  in reduced 
participation by foreign portfolio investors in the domestic securities market, a change in the 
commodities  market  sentiment  aligned  with  lowering  copper  prices  and  uncertainty 
associated  with  the  run-up  to  September  28,  2006  elections  and  the  period  immediately 
following the elections. 
Another important milestone in 2006 was the licensing of credit reference bureau. As you are 
all  aware,  one  important  objective  of  a  credit  reference  bureau  is  to  help  separate  truant 
borrowers from good borrowers thereby help reduce the cost of borrowing in Zambia. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
As  you  endeavor  to  deliver  daily  targets  of  newspapers  and  electronic  media  that  are  in  a  hurry  to 
report  on  a  daily  basis,  there  also  needs  to  be  some  commitment  to  create  a  longer  term  trail  of 
rigorously  investigated  news  that  is  backed  by  authoritative  evidence.  Bank  of  Zambia,  commercial 
banks,  the  Central  Statistics  Office  and  other  information  providers  amass  a  lot  of  detail  that  is 
reflective of what has happened in the economy. I would encourage business and financial writers to 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 1
monitor  and  highlight  trends  that  can  help  us  forecast  where  our  economy  and  business  sector  is 
actually headed. If economic indicators are tracked effectively by the media and progress highlighted, 
it  helps  to  generate  even  greater  confidence  in  those  seeking  to  make  Zambia  an  investment 
destination. As part of its contribution to improved business reporting last year, the Bank of Zambia 
invited Mr Allan Beatie, International Business Editor, with one of the leading global newspapers, the 
Financial Times, to share views with journalists here in Zambia. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  there  are  a  myriad  of  pointers  that  can  be  given  to  where 
economic, business and financial information can be found. As a starting point, I would like to suggest 
that journalists look around this room and will no doubt recognize the rich collection of invited guests 
who hold significant information from which we can learn a lot. These are people who can stimulate 
debate, provide relevant information, validate it, and explain its proper use. 
Colleagues, allow me now to focus on one key stake-holder mentioned above, namely the business 
and  financial  writers’  fraternity.  It  is  heartening  to  note  that  the  judges  feel  that  the  standards  of 
reporting have improved significantly. I am also pleased to note that those who have been past prize 
winners are continuing to apply themselves effectively and raising the standards of the profession as a 
whole. It is therefore my delight to be able to officiate at August gathering of business and financial 
writers knowing they are all putting in a more than average effort to attain today’s awards. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the top prizes over the last 3 years have been designed to build capacity in 
the journalists nominated. Attachments to top business newspapers in South Africa and training our 
journalists in economics at the University of Zambia should give us the comfort that a specialization is 
being  built  from  which  we  can  confidently  tap  into  and  exchange  ideas  and  analysis.  One  of  the 
challenges for our writers has been a lack of specialization. As such, they have had to understand all 
subjects broadly rather than in-depth to help them to communicate more authoritatively. As they are 
being  strengthened  through  various  training  interventions,  we  should  therefore  be  able  to  see  a 
marked improvement in their performance. In this vein, I am told that the American Centre and the 
Canadian High Commission have also been keen stakeholders in training our journalists in this area 
and  to  this  end  have  worked  closely  with  ACCA  over  the  past  two  years  in  delivering  one  week 
workshops on key topical areas. The partnerships demonstrate that there are a number of interested 
stakeholders that all have a common goal – good, reliable and timely information. 
The announcement of the national budget is round the corner. It is that time of the year when many 
differing analysis are made. Don’t take these analyses at face value – examine them in your own right 
and  come  up  with  alternative  lines  of  reasoning  so  that  the  public  can  have  a  holistic  view  of  the 
effects of the budget pronouncements. We would indeed expect this for any other economic, business 
and financial pronouncement. 
To all the prize winners for 2006, I extend my sincere and heartfelt congratulations for well deserved 
awards. Please remember that it is not enough to only enjoy the glory of the moment, but also to take 
the  responsibility  to  act  as  mentors  to  emergent  writers.  I  believe  that  what  the  journalist  fraternity 
needs  is  not  individuals  who  excel  alone,  but  a  cadre  of  responsible  reporters  that  leave  an 
outstanding legacy. Let me also take this opportunity to thank ACCA, the sponsors of this event and 
prizes for their continuing support to economic, business and financial journalism. 
In  conclusion,  allow  me  to  encourage  our  journalists  to  compete  for  international  media  awards  as 
well. This will be the true barometer of where you stand as Zambian journalists because you will be 
judged against international best practice which is, in turn, the true barometer in global economy. 
As your patron, I wish you all the best in this and future endeavors that seek to raise the standards of 
journalism in the country. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2007
