Jean-Claude Trichet: Major issues related to the process of European financial 
integration – the regional and global perspective 
Keynote luncheon remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
conference  “Transatlantic  Roundtable  on  Finance  and  Monetary  Affaris”,  at  the  invitation  of  the 
European Institute, Washington, DC, 13 April 2007. 
 Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I would like to thank the European Institute for inviting me to share with you some thoughts on the 
financial integration process, both within the euro area and between the euro area and the rest of the 
world.  
I will structure my remarks into two parts. In the first part, I will elaborate on the regional dimension of 
European  financial  integration.  After  stressing  the  importance  of  financial  integration  for  economic 
growth in Europe, I will highlight some of the main achievements of European financial integration thus 
far, as well as the challenges still facing us.  
Seen from an international perspective, the European process of regional financial integration should 
not  be  misunderstood  as  creating  an  isolated  fortress,  but  on  the  contrary  as  a  tool  for  European 
financial markets to become better integrated with global markets. In the second part of my speech, I 
will therefore provide some evidence illustrating that the financial links of the euro area with the rest of 
the world are already particularly strong in comparative terms. I will also show that the advent of the 
euro has given further impetus to such financial linkages, which now also increasingly include capital 
flows to and from key emerging market economies. 
The regional perspective  
Implications of European financial integration for economic growth 
Financial integration is of key importance for the European Central Bank (ECB), given its relevance for 
the conduct of the single monetary policy: a well-integrated financial system enhances the smooth and 
effective  transmission  of monetary  policy  impulses  throughout  the  euro  area. Today,  I  would  like  to 
highlight a further implication of financial integration, namely that it raises the economy’s potential for 
stronger non-inflationary economic growth.  
Generally speaking, financial systems serve to channel funds from those economic agents that have a 
surplus  of  savings  to  those  with  a  shortage;  and  to  trade,  hedge,  diversify  and  pool  risks.  These 
functions are facilitated by financial integration. As a result, there is a better sharing and diversification 
of risk and a greater potential for stronger non-inflationary economic growth.  
Regarding risk sharing, it is interesting to note that in the US, according to a particularly interesting 
research, capital markets would smoothe out 39 % of the asymmetric shocks to gross state product 
(the  equivalent  of  our  GDP),  the  credit  channel  would  smoothe  out  23 %  of  such  shocks  and  the 
federal  government,  through  the  fiscal  channel,  13  %.  25  %  of  the  shocks  would  not  be  smoothed 
out.1 Hence in the United States financial markets and financial institutions would contribute 62 % to 
the absorption of state idiosyncratic shocks. The effect is very substantially higher than the effect of 
the  federal  budget.  We  see  from  the  US  example  that  the  financial  channel  can  be  much  more 
important  than  the  fiscal  channel  and  that  is  a  particularly  important  additional  reason  to  speed  up 
financial integration in Europe.  
Financial integration is also very important for stimulating economic growth in Europe via its impact on 
the  development  of  the  European  financial  system.  Financial  development  refers  to  the  process  of 
                                                      
1   See P. Asdrubali; B. Sorensen; O. Yosha, “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: United States 1963-1990”, The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, No. 4, November 1996, pp. 1081-1110. 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 1
financial innovation, and to the institutional and organisational improvements in a financial system that 
reduce asymmetric information, increase the completeness of markets, add possibilities for agents to 
engage  in  financial  transaction  through  (explicit  or  implicit)  contracts,  reduce  transaction  costs  and 
increase  competition.  Progress  in  financial  development  can  obviously  also  occur  in  perfectly 
integrated markets. 
Therefore,  by  speeding  up  the  reallocation  of  capital  from  declining  to  evolving  and  promising 
industries  –  the  Schumpeterian  process  of  “creative  destruction”  –  both  financial  integration  and 
financial development positively influence the efficiency of a financial system, ultimately leading to a 
higher potential for economic growth. 
The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  already  brought  about  important  benefits  resulting  from  increased 
financial  integration.  And  the  process  of  European  financial  integration  and  development  is  still 
ongoing:  a  research  study  by  London  Economics  estimates  the  benefits  of  the  full  integration  of 
European  bonds  and  equity  markets  to  be  around  1%  of  GDP  growth  over  a  ten-year  period,  or 
approximately €100 billion.2
This brings me to the next point I would like to make, namely the identification of major achievements 
and challenges of European financial integration. 
Achievements and challenges of European financial integration  
Let me first draw your attention to a new report entitled “Financial integration in Europe”, which the 
ECB  published  for  the  first  time  just  three  weeks  ago.3  The  main  purpose  of  this  report,  which  will 
become  an  annual  publication,  is  to  contribute  towards  the  advancement  of  European  financial 
integration and to raise public awareness of the role of the ECB and the Eurosystem in supporting this 
process. My remarks will also draw on some of the findings of this report. 
In  order  to  better  assess  the  state  of  European  financial  integration,  the  ECB  has  developed  42 
quantitative indicators which are described in our report.4 In a nutshell, the evidence confirms that the 
degree of integration varies according to the market segment, and that integration is generally more 
advanced in those market segments that are closer to the single monetary policy.  
With respect to the euro area money market, the unsecured money market reached a stage of “near-
perfect”  integration  almost  immediately  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  with  the  cross-country 
standard deviation of the average overnight lending rates among euro area countries as low as one to 
two basis points. This success has been sustained by the high degree of integration of the large-value 
payment systems. The launch of the single technical platform, TARGET2, in November this year will 
promote further financial integration, in particular  through a harmonised service level, a single price 
structure, and a harmonised set of cash settlement services. 
It is, however, also a fact that the euro area short-term debt securities market has witnessed only a 
limited  degree  of  cross-border  activity.  This  may  partly  be  due  to  the  fact  that  short-term  debt 
securities issued in the euro area have very similar risk characteristics and therefore offer little scope 
for  international  diversification.  Our  indicator,  which  gives  the  share  of  short-term  debt  securities 
issued by euro area residents and held by other euro area residents, shows a rising trend – from 7% in 
2001 to over 12% in 2005 – but the absolute numbers are small when compared to the corresponding 
indicators for the bond and equity market. In this respect, I would like to emphasise the Short-Term 
European Paper (STEP) initiative. The STEP initiative promotes the development of a European short-
term paper market through market players’ voluntary compliance with a set of standards encompassed 
in  the  STEP  Market  Convention.  By  the  end  of  March  this  year,  35  STEP-compliant  programmes, 
amounting to €201 billion, had been launched under the STEP label.5  
                                                      
2   London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macroeconomic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to 
the European Commission. 
3   See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialintegrationineurope200703en.pdf. 
4   See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/stats/finint/html/index.en.html. 
5   The ECB regularly produces statistics on yields and volumes in the STEP market and publishes them on its website. See 
http://www.ecb.int/stats/money/step/html/index.en.html#data.  The  data  are  published  weekly  on  the  first  business  day  of 
each week, referring to each day of the previous week. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2007
With  respect  to  bond  markets,  euro  area  cross-border  holdings  of  long-term  debt  securities  have 
increased strongly – from about 10% at the end of the 1990s to nearly 60% in 2005 – suggesting that 
investors are increasingly diversifying their portfolios across the euro area and, therefore, that the euro 
area government bond market has reached a very advanced stage of integration. 
Finally,  the  quantity-based  measure  of  euro  area  equity  market  integration  also  indicates  a  rising 
degree of integration in the equity markets. Between 1997 and 2005, euro area residents doubled their 
holdings of equity issued in another euro area country to reach nearly 30%. This implies that, following 
the introduction of the euro, euro area investors have significantly reallocated their equity portfolio from 
domestic holdings to holdings elsewhere within the euro area.  
As a remaining challenge to the integration of euro area securities markets, I note that the euro area 
securities  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructure  is  not  yet  sufficiently  integrated,  although  several 
initiatives  are  underway.  Last  November,  for  example,  at  the  European  Commission’s  request,  the 
relevant European industry associations and their members signed a “European Code of Conduct for 
Clearing and Settlement”, which aims to foster competition and efficiency of clearing and settlement in 
the EU. The ECB welcomes this initiative and acknowledges the commitment by the industry. 
In this respect, let me also mention that the Eurosystem considers developing a single platform for the 
settlement of securities in central bank money – the so-called TARGET2-Securities. The scope of this 
project  is  restricted  to  the  settlement  layer  of  the  post-trading  activity  regarding  securities  settled  in 
central bank money. The next step will be the definition of user requirements which will benefit from a 
public consultation.  
Last but not least, I would like to mention the retail banking markets, which are less integrated than the 
other euro area financial market segments. However, we also see progress in some fields.  
For  example,  the  current  fragmentation  of  the  European  retail  payment  infrastructures  is  being 
addressed  by  the  so-called  SEPA  project  that  has been  initiated  by  the  European  banking  industry 
with a view to creating a single euro payments area. The Eurosystem supports this project in a catalyst 
role, by providing guidance to banks and the payments industry in setting objectives and defining high-
level requirements. The self-regulatory approach chosen for SEPA is working well and we expect the 
European banking industry to launch the first SEPA instruments on 1 January 2008. 
Furthermore,  a  number  of  indicators  point  to  increasing  cross-border  banking  activities  in  the  euro 
area,  such  as  the  growing  cross-border  share  in  the  financial  holdings  of  banks  and  cross-border 
mergers  and  acquisitions.  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  cross-border  banking  is  first  and 
foremost  a  market-driven  process.  Still,  the  public  sector  can  play  a  significant  role  in  providing  an 
adequate  policy  framework.  According  to  our  assessment,  which  we  also  explain  in  the  new  ECB 
report,  the  EU  supervisory  arrangements  have  been  substantially  enhanced  by  two  significant 
measures: the extension of the Lamfalussy approach to the banking sector and the adoption of the 
Capital  Requirements  Directive  (CRD),  which  sets  up  the  new  regulatory  framework  in  the  EU  for 
banks’ capital adequacy as agreed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Both measures 
contribute to increasing cooperation and coordination between supervisors on a cross-border basis. 
The CRD provides for better home-host supervisory cooperation, among other things, by enhancing 
the role of the authority responsible for the consolidated supervision.  
I would also like to mention that regulatory convergence is important not only within the EU but also in 
a global context. The ECB supports the EU-US Financial Markets Regulatory Dialogue and believes it 
can serve as a forum where solutions to important regulatory issues on both sides of the Atlantic can 
be sought, such as accounting standards, the revised proposal for de-registration of foreign firms from 
US markets, and the recent announcement regarding the cooperation between the United States and 
the  EU  in  audit  oversight.  Furthermore,  the  ECB  supports  the  European  Commission’s  objective  to 
deepen the financial dialogue with other countries, such as China and Japan. 
The global perspective  
I would now like to turn to the financial links between the euro area and the rest of the world. 
Let me first recall a fact that is already well-known: namely that, in trade terms, the euro area is very 
open, actually more open than the other G3 economies, the United States and Japan. Extra-euro area 
exports of goods and services account for around 20% of euro area GDP, roughly the same share as 
extra-euro area imports. This is substantially higher than in the United States, where exports represent 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 3
about 10% of GDP and imports 16%, as well as in Japan, where exports and imports of goods and 
services amount to 15% and 13.4% of GDP, respectively.  
Probably less well-known is, however, that the euro area is also more open than the United States and 
Japan regarding the financial linkages. Such linkages can be measured with different indicators. As I 
would like to highlight long-term trends, I will focus here mainly on stock data, given that flow data tend 
to be very volatile and usually reflect cyclical patterns in the short run. 
Five  main  observations  can  be  derived  from  cross-country  comparisons  of  international  investment 
positions.6
First, comparative data highlight the financial openness of the euro area, thus contradicting any notion 
that  this  region  is  inward-looking  when  it  comes  to  financial  integration.  The  external  assets  and 
liabilities of the euro area account for a large share of GDP, around 124% and 137%, respectively. By 
comparison, in the United States, the corresponding numbers are substantially lower: 90% for assets 
and 110% for liabilities. In Japan, foreign financial assets are likewise significantly lower than in the 
euro area (94% of GDP in 2005), and the difference is even stronger for liabilities, which represent 
only 60% of GDP, i.e. less than half of the corresponding figure for the euro area. 
Second, it is interesting to observe that the advent of the euro seems to have significantly contributed 
to  the  process  of  opening  up  euro  area  financial  markets.  The  euro  area  has  indeed  become 
progressively more open since 1999. On the assets side, stocks of euro area assets held abroad have 
increased from less than 87% in 1999 to, as mentioned, over 124% in 2005. On the liabilities side, the 
increase was also very substantial, from around 92% to 137%. The rise has actually been much less 
pronounced for the United States during the same period: US assets grew from 80% of GDP in 1999 
to 90% today, and US liabilities increased from 91% to 110% of GDP. In other words, the euro area 
and  the  United  States  held  roughly  comparable  assets  and  liabilities  in  1999,  but  the  euro  area 
witnessed a more substantial increase since the start of Economic and Monetary Union. 
Third,  the  euro  area  appears  to  be  a  very  important  player  in  world  financial  markets.  Comparing 
assets and liabilities in absolute value terms, the sizeable gross financial liabilities of the United States 
(USD 13.62 trillion in 2005) have received a lot of attention in recent years because this country also 
runs very large net foreign liabilities: USD 2.5 trillion, against USD 1.2 trillion for the euro area. The 
euro  area,  however,  has  about  the  same  amount  of  gross  financial  liabilities  as  the  United  States 
(USD 13.65 trillion). The difference between the two economies in net terms – hence their different 
contribution  to  global  imbalances  –  can  be  related  to  the  fact  that  the  euro  area  holds  significantly 
more  assets  abroad  (USD  12.4  trillion)  than  the  United  States  (USD  11.0  trillion).  The  difference 
between  the  net  positions  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  is  related  to  the  persistent  current  account 
deficits run by the United States in recent years whereas the euro area has been running a current 
account position close to balance. 
Fourth, the euro area is an attractive place for foreign direct investment (FDI). A breakdown of extra-
euro area liabilities indeed reveals that inward foreign direct investment (FDI) amounts to more than 
27% of euro area GDP, against 22.5% for the United States. The euro area seems to have received, 
proportionally to GDP, a similar amount of FDI as China, 27.3% for both economies, according to the 
IMF statistics. In net terms the euro area is close to balance as the stock of direct investment abroad is 
only slightly higher than that of FDI within the euro area (30.4% against 27.3%, respectively). 
Fifth, let me conclude with a few remarks on the bilateral FDI linkages of the euro area. In this regard, 
one should keep in mind that the geographical breakdown of FDI flows and stocks is clearly subject to 
some caveats, as a substantial share of FDI is channelled through offshore centres, which makes it 
sometimes difficult to establish their true geographical origin and destination.  
Based on available data, it is worth noting that the stock of euro area FDI abroad is mostly held with 
mature economies: nearly 21% in the United States, 24% in the United Kingdom, 9% in Switzerland, 
and between 2.5% and 3% in Sweden, Canada and Japan. Likewise, on the liabilities side, the United 
Kingdom and the United States account for an even larger share than on the assets side (nearly 40% 
and 23.5%, respectively). 
                                                      
6   All data in this section refer to 2005 unless otherwise indicated, as 2006 data are not yet available for all countries. The data 
source  is  the  IMF  International  Financial  Statistics,  which  provides  comparable  data  across  countries.  These  data  may 
somewhat differ from other data sources. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2007
At the same time, I should also stress that the amount of euro area FDI in emerging market economies 
rose quickly. Between 1999 and 2005, outward FDI from the euro area to the so-called BRIC group – 
which includes Brazil, Russia, India and China – increased markedly. Over this period, the stock of 
outward FDI in the BRIC group rose from €63 billion to €133 billion (or by 111%). In comparison, the 
stock of euro area FDI in the United States increased by 55%, from € 360 billion to €558 billion, during 
the same period. While the overwhelming share of outward FDI to the BRIC group was directed to 
Brazil, euro area companies have raised considerably their FDI stocks in Russia, China and India in 
recent years.  
Even more interestingly, the euro area has also become attractive as a destination for FDI from the 
BRIC countries: between 1999 and 2005, FDI stocks  from the BRIC group in the euro area tripled, 
from €4 billion to €12 billion, while still remaining low in comparative terms (for instance, the figures for 
US  FDI  stocks  in  the  euro  area  rose  from  €322  billion  to  €560  billion  over  the  same  period).  The 
Brazilian and Russian firms account for the bulk of the BRIC countries’ FDI surge in the euro area, but 
Chinese and Indian FDI has picked up in most recent years, as frequently reported in the media.  
On the whole, this evidence suggests that the euro area is financially integrated not only with mature 
economies but increasingly also with the most sizeable emerging economies. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
This brings me to the end of my remarks in which I have highlighted some major issues related to the 
process of European financial integration, a process that should not be seen in isolation but rather as 
an  important  contribution  to  global  financial  integration.  I  very  much  appreciate  the  transatlantic 
dialogue on the lessons we can learn from each other. This round table today contributes a great deal 
to increasing our awareness of these issues.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 5
