Savenaca Narube: Brief overview of the Fiji economy and monetary 
policy 
 Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
official opening of the Westpac Branch, Port Denarau, 3 September 2007. 
 Mr. John Cashmore, Westpac Fiji Chief Manager 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Good Evening 
I am pleased to be here at Port Denarau today for the opening of Westpac’s newest branch. 
Over the past two years, I have attended a few of Westpac’s functions. In October last year, I 
participated in Westpac’s launch of the MoneyGram Worldwide Money Transfer Service with 
MH Supermarkets. In April, this year, I was also at their launching of the Westpac American 
Express Credit Card. 
I also take this opportunity to congratulate Westpac for its 106 years of service to Fiji – the 
exact date was 12 August 2007. Westpac is considered Fiji’s longest continuing bank. We 
can see that Westpac has played a valuable role in advancing Fiji’s financial system and also 
its economic development.  
Westpac Port Denarau 
I am sure that the decision by John and his Westpac team to open a branch in Port Denarau 
was  an  easy  one  to  make.  The  growth  and  the  development  in  Denarau  have  been 
impressive. It makes good business sense to establish a bank branch in Denarau. 
This branch is an extension to Westpac’s existing facilities in this area – that is a bureau de 
change and ATMS – at Sheraton Fiji and Westin. I have been informed that this is a fully 
fledged  branch  service  which  also  includes  a  business  centre  complete  with  an  interview 
room and a separate business teller’s area. 
This  branch  will  cater  for  businesses,  Denarau  Island  residents,  local  and  international 
visitors  and  workers  of  the  surrounding  island  resorts.  I  am  sure  that  your  customers 
appreciate your presence here – right at their door step. 
The  new  Port  Denarau  branch  is  Westpac’s  18th  branch  in  Fiji.  I  have  been  told  that 
Westpac  intends  to  increase  their  representation  in  Fiji.  This  definitely  reflects  Westpac’s 
confidence in the country. 
As  we  can  see,  this  branch  has  a  modern  look  and  feel.  It  has  a  telephone  and  internet 
banking kiosk in-branch for customers who wish to access such services. 
This  branch  is  manned  by  6  employees  and  a  Customer  Service  Manager.  There  will  be 
regular  visits  from  Westpac  Corporate,  Business  and  Personal  Banking  Managers  for 
investment, business and personal loan services. 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 1
Real Time Gross Payment System 
Technological  advancements  have  assisted  in  the  modernization  of  our  financial  system.  I 
must say that Fiji is not too far behind the rest of the world in terms of financial technology 
and  innovation.  There  is  internet  banking,  telephone  banking,  ATMS  and  so  on  and  these 
services  have  provided  customers  easier  and  faster  access  to  financial  services  from  the 
comforts of our homes and offices. Westpac has been at the forefront of this innovation. I 
note that Westpac was the first bank to introduce telephone banking back in 1999. 
In  modernizing  Fiji’s  financial  system,  I  am  pleased  to  inform  you  that  Fiji’s  real  time 
automated payments system is now operational. Fiji is the first country in the South Pacific to 
have such a state of the art payment system. We had a soft launch on 30 August and the 
system is working well. The system will facilitate faster clearance of cheques amongst banks. 
This  was  an  important  project  that  has  spanned  over  five  years  and  required  a  lot  of 
collaboration  with  commercial  banks.  I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  banks  for  their 
cooperation,  support  and  guidance.  I  am  confident  that  this  payment  system  will  be  the 
springboard to other modernisation of the financial system. 
The Fiji economy 
Let me turn to the economy. 
We  have  released  our  revised  economic  projections  with  a larger  economic  decline  of  3.1 
percent this year compared to 2.5 percent expected earlier. All economic indicators support 
this new forecast. 
There are some downside risks to this forecast. These include lower than expected tourist 
arrivals. What happens to tourism industry has considerable flow on effect to the wholesale & 
retail trade; hotels & restaurants; and transport & communication sectors. The other risks to 
this  projection  are  the  possible  rise  in  oil  prices  and  of  course  the  weather.  On  balance 
however, I think that it is very unlikely that the economic contraction will be worse than what 
we have announced. 
Monetary policy 
Let me say a few words on monetary policy. 
As you know, we have imposed a ceiling on loans by commercial banks. However, we are 
allowing banks to exceed this ceiling only for lending to priority areas. This arrangement is 
working well for us. Since the credit ceiling was imposed in December last year, the Reserve 
Bank has approved over $156 million of loans above the credit ceiling. Most if not all of this 
increase is to the priority areas which we have agreed with commercial banks. This includes 
lending towards investment and to the micro, small and medium sized enterprises. 
The growth in credit is slowing down from around 25 percent annual growth prior to the credit 
ceiling to about 12 percent now. Imports have declined by 7 percent in the first six months of 
the year. Exports have shown some encouraging signs. Foreign reserves have stabilized and 
have even risen lately. 
But we are not out of the woods yet – far from it. While exports have increased by 7 percent 
in the first six months of the year, this was mainly from seasonality in the receipts of sugar 
export proceeds. We are still expecting exports to decline in 2007. We should therefore re- 
energize  our  export  drive.  It  is  always  far  superior  to  drive  the  economy  through  exports 
rather  than  what  we  are  doing  now  in  pulling  back  import  demand  in  order  to  protect  our 
balance of payments. 
With  the  credit  ceiling  in  place,  we  have  allowed  liquidity  to  build  up.  This  has  led  to  a 
reduction  in  lending  rates.  I  expect  the  high  liquidity  to  remain  for  some  time.  The  lower 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2007
interest rates should support the restoration of economic growth. We expect the economy to 
grow by around 2 percent next year on the back of growth in the tourism industry. But this 
growth does not include any mining of gold. The major risks to this projection is the delay in 
the restructuring of the sugar industry  
We are reviewing these economic and monetary conditions on an ongoing basis. The credit 
ceiling  will  be  lifted  as  soon  as  conditions  allow  us  to  do  so.  These  enabling  conditions 
hinges on our external financial stability. 
You  may  recall  that  we  had  announced  earlier  this  year  our  intention  to  reduce  the  local 
borrowing allowed by non-resident companies and individuals beginning from next year. We 
have  received  many  feedbacks  on  this  exchange  control  policy.  As  a  result,  we  have 
reviewed this policy. We acknowledge that some companies may face difficulty in borrowing 
money from abroad. We have also taken into account that foreign reserves have stabilized. 
The Board of the Reserve Bank has agreed to the following changes: 
• 
That the requirement that non-resident companies refinance 50 percent of their local 
borrowing has been dropped; 
The local borrowing by non-resident companies will be governed by the gearing ratio 
which will depend on the proportion of their local equity. I believe that this will be 
more transparent and easier to administer. 
 We will announce details of these changes shortly. I am of the view that these changes meet 
the concerns that were raised on this policy but at the same time adequately addressing our 
balance of payments situation. The new policy will still become effective at the beginning of 
next year.  
I  must  acknowledge  the  cooperation  and  support  of  the  commercial  banks  in  the 
implementation of our monetary policy particularly at these difficult times. 
Coin review 
I would also like to announce that following the introduction of our new Bank Notes this year, 
we  are  now  reviewing  Fiji’s  coin  structure.  We  are  of  the  opinion  that  there  is  merit  in 
modernizing Fiji’s coins and we need to introduce coins that are convenient to handle and 
cheaper  to  produce  with  significant  cost  savings  to  the  nation.  We  have  conducted  a 
nationwide  survey  and  the  views  of  the  public  are  being  considered.  This  project  will  take 
about a year to complete. 
Concluding remarks 
Finally, I would like to thank Mr. Cashmore for inviting me here this evening. Westpac has 
played  a  prominent  role  in  Fiji’s  economic  development  through  its  services,  innovative 
products and towards introducing the latest banking technology. 
I congratulate you, John, and your Team on the opening of your 18th branch in Fiji. I wish the 
Westpac Team all the best in its future endeavours. 
Official opening 
I now have much pleasure in declaring this Port Denarau branch of Westpac open. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 3
