Erkki Liikanen: Southern engines of global growth – China, India, Brazil 
and South Africa  
Opening remarks by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the UNU-WIDER 
Conference, Helsinki, 7 September 2007. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  your  kind  introduction  Professor  Shorrocks,  and  good  morning,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  to  open  this  conference  on  Southern  Engines  of 
Global Growth. 
China, India, Brazil and South Africa – together with many other emerging market countries – 
are playing an increasingly important role in the global economy. Their growing importance is 
being  felt in  many  areas,  including growth,  trade,  international  finance,  global  governance, 
and geopolitics. 
As  a  backdrop,  let  me  say  first  just  a  few  words  about  the  global  economy.  The  ongoing 
global economic expansion is exceptionally broad in terms of geography. The strong growth 
in  emerging  market  and  developing  countries  is  reducing  the  number  of  people  living  in 
extreme  poverty,  and  the  gap  between  average  incomes  of  developing  and  developed 
countries  is  narrowing.  These  positive  developments  are  clearly  visible  even  for  a  casual 
observer,  as  I  had  the  chance  to  witness  earlier  this  year  when  I  was  traveling  in  Sub-
Saharan Africa and Latin America. 
However, despite these very favorable developments, there is no room for complacency. 
The  extended  period  of  rapid  global  growth  has  resulted  in  a  build  up  of  some  tensions 
which, if left unaddressed, pose a threat to continued global growth in the longer term. One 
source  of  concern  is  global  current  account  imbalances  and  the  risk  of  their  abrupt  and 
disorderly  unwinding.  Another  source  of  concern  is  the  uneven  distribution  of  benefits  of 
globalization within countries, which risks eroding support for globalization. 
These two concerns are closely linked to the rapid rise of emerging market countries. 
Growth and trade  
As a small northern country with high per capita income, Finland is quite different from the 
CIBS-countries  that  are  all  large,  southern,  and  still  relatively  poor.  Nevertheless,  some  of 
the  factors  behind  Finland's  transformation  from  a  poor  agrarian  economy  to  a  modern 
advanced  economy  bear  relevance  to  the  current  challenges  of  the  CIBS,  or  any  other 
country that seeks to put in place conditions for sustained economic growth. 
First  is  a  proactive  attitude  toward  the  internationalization  of  the  economy,  importantly 
through foreign trade. 
Second  is  the  importance  of  sound  macroeconomic  policies.  That  is,  sound  money, 
sustainable government finances and sustainable external position.  
Third is a stable institutional environment in which contracts can be enforced and property 
rights can be established. 
In all these areas, the CIBS have made significant, albeit uneven, progress. But much more 
remains  to  be  done.  Moreover,  these  preconditions  for  growth  alone  cannot  guarantee 
growth in the longer term. 
BIS Review 98/2007 
 1
In the longer run, a country's economic performance is increasingly determined by how well it 
can harness its human potential. Therefore, a key challenge for the CIBS will be to ensure 
that all people have a reasonable chance to fulfill their potential and aspirations. 
I  emphasize  here  equality  of  opportunity.  It  implies  that  individuals  are  not  excluded  from 
education,  health  care  or  employment  on  the  basis  of  immutable  traits.  Equality  of 
opportunity is about making the playing field more level, but it does not, and even should not, 
guarantee equality of outcome. 
The  most  pressing  problems  arising  from  inequality  vary  greatly  between  different  CIBS-
countries,  but  they  are  formidable  in  all  of  them.  China  has  the  widening  gap  between  its 
booming cities and stagnant rural areas, India’s potential is constrained by the rigidity of the 
caste  system,  Brazil  suffers  from  very  wide  and  deeply  entrenched  inequality,  and  South 
Africa is yet to rid itself fully from the negative legacy of apartheid. 
These  are  extremely  complex  problems  and  their  remedies  will  need  to  take  into  account 
many culture specific aspects. However, there seem to be some factors that have universal 
relevance. One such is the crucial importance of education as a means of ensuring better 
equality of opportunity and securing sustainable economic growth. 
Equality  in  terms  of  gender,  region,  and  social-economic  background  has  been  a  long-
standing  guiding  principle  of  Finland's  education  system.  Compulsory  basic  education  was 
one of the first reforms implemented after Finland became independent 90 years ago. In the 
1970s,  implementation  of  the  comprehensive  school,  together  with  other  reforms,  further 
improved equality in opportunity to pursue education.  
Educated  labor  force  is  a  pre-requisite  for  innovation  and  to  the  capacity  to  absorb  new 
technology, and thereby it fosters economic growth. This shows that – even in the face of 
globalization  –  an  economic  model  that  emphasizes  equal  access  to  education,  can  be  a 
source of strength rather than an impediment to economic growth.  
I would also like to make a couple of remarks about growth and trade from a central banker's 
perspective.  
The increased role of the EMEs in global growth and trade pose interesting challenges for 
central  bankers.  In  particular,  the  increasing  weight  of  the  EMEs  in  world  trade  has  been 
changing  the  domestic  inflation  process  in  the  advanced  economies,  including  in  the  euro 
area. It has contributed to a lower worldwide inflation rates in recent years. The questions of 
how big this dampening effect has been, and whether it will persist going forward, are among 
the most important and hotly debated questions in central banking.  
International finance  
Next,  I  would  like  to  discuss  briefly  another  main  theme  of  the  conference,  that  of 
international  finance.  First,  I  want  to  acknowledge  upfront  that  the  causal  link  between 
financial  integration  and  growth  is  far  from  being  straightforward.  However,  it  seems 
irrefutable  that  better  allocation  of  global  resources  allowed  by  deepening  financial 
integration has been an important factor in supporting global growth.  
The role of the EMEs has increased in international finance. Many EMEs have also made 
great strides in developing their domestic financial markets, but much remains to be done. 
Here I want to underscore the need to proceed with caution.  
This is because capital market liberalization involves not only benefits but also risks, both to 
countries in question and investors that invest in these countries. We have ample experience 
of how things can go wrong, for example, the Asian crisis in the late 1990's, and the series of 
crises in Latin America around the turn of the millennium. And, also Finland has first hand 
experience from a severe banking crisis that took place less than 20 years ago.  
There are many lessons to be drawn from these crises. Here I want to highlight just two.  
2 
 BIS Review 98/2007
First is the importance of sound macroeconomic policies. Prudent fiscal policy and stability 
oriented monetary policy make an economy more resilient to shocks. In some cases, more 
flexible exchange rates could help prevent unsustainable developments.  
Second is the need for careful sequencing of liberalization and coordinating capital account 
liberalization with structural measures that strengthen domestic financial systems.  
I  would  like  to  highlight  a  couple  of  issues  in  international  finance  that  are  particularly 
relevant for central banks.  
First,  as  shown  clearly  by  recent  market  volatility,  global  financial  integration  has  made 
different countries and markets more interdependent. Consequently, domestic asset prices 
are increasingly determined by global factors. For instance, the question of to what extent the 
investment  of  China's  current  account  surplus  has  reduced  long  term  interest  rates  in 
advanced economies, most notably in the US, has been studied extensively in recent years. 
The results are not clear-cut but it seems that the impact has been substantial. For central 
banks  this  increased  interdependency  means  somewhat  reduced  leverage  to  influence 
domestic longer-term interest rates.  
Second, global imbalances have featured on the top of the central banks' agenda already for 
a  number  of  years.  This  is  because  their  abrupt  and  disorderly  unwinding  could  result  in 
financial  instability  and  have  negative  impact  on  world  growth.  Therefore,  an  orderly 
reduction of global imbalances is a shared responsibility. To this end, as part of the recently 
concluded multilateral talks organized by the IMF, China announced plans to reduce external 
imbalances, including by boosting domestic demand, by speeding up financial reform, and by 
further improving the exchange regime in a gradual and controllable manner.  
China's plans are most welcome, as the tensions arising from its large trade surplus have 
potential to stoke protectionist sentiments in other countries, with potentially harmful effects 
on the world trade and growth.  
Global governance  
Global  governance  is  sometimes  defined  as  "collective  efforts  to  identify,  understand,  or 
address worldwide problems that go beyond the capacity of individual states to solve."  
There are a number of different informal and formal fora that fit this description. However, 
one  that  clearly  stands  apart  in  terms  of  its  truly  global  reach  and  importance  is  the 
International Monetary Fund.  
The ongoing reforms aim to ensure that the IMF will remain an effective and representative 
forum  of  global  governance.  All  the  key  reforms  at  the  Fund  are  somewhat  linked  to  the 
changes in the global role of the emerging market economies.  
The  IMF  surveillance  framework  and  modalities  have  been,  and  are  still  being  adapted  in 
response to challenges of an increasingly open world economy, where the large emerging 
market countries have become major players in trade and finance alike.  
The  steep  decline  in  the  IMF's  lending  activities  as  a  result  of  reduced  loan  demand  from 
large emerging market countries, such as Brazil, necessitate fundamental reforms in the way 
that the IMF finances its activities.  
There are ongoing discussions on a new liquidity instrument for market access countries that 
would better respond to potential borrowing needs of emerging market countries.  
However, the most crucial aspect of the reform in terms of global governance is the so called 
quota and voice reform. One key question is how to ensure that dynamic emerging market 
economies will have an adequate say in the internal governance of the Fund, and thereby 
also  in  global  governance  in  the  areas  of  the  IMF's  competence.  To  achieve  this,  quota 
BIS Review 98/2007 
 3
shares  need  to  be  adjusted  to  better  reflect  the  relative  weight  of  members  in  the  world 
economy and voice and participation of low-income countries need to be enhanced.  
This  reform  is  now  nearing  a  decisive  stage.  Difficult  concessions  from  all  parties  are 
necessary to reach a balanced compromise. Finland will continue to work constructively for a 
predictable  and  rules-based  system  of  determining  voting  shares  so  as  to  ensure  that  the 
distribution of power at the IMF better reflect prevailing economic realities.  
Geopolitics 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  one  CIBS-related  issue  that  is  gaining  in  geopolitical 
importance.  
Competition  for  strategic  raw  materials  is  intensifying.  Related  to  this,  there  has  been 
increased interest in Africa, including from large emerging market countries such as China 
and India. The increased activity of EMEs in poor but resource rich African countries reflects 
changing  balance  in  geopolitics.  It  is  also  of  particular  interest  to  the  IMF,  given  that  a 
number of these countries just recently benefited from the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative.  
Specifically,  non-concessional  lending  to  countries  with  a  recent  history  of  unsustainable 
debt should be avoided. Although the prime responsibility of maintaining debt sustainability 
rests  with  the  borrowing  countries  themselves,  creditor  countries  should  adhere  to  the 
principles of prudent and responsible lending and keep their terms of credit transparent.  
Conclusions  
To  conclude,  the  Southern  Engines  of  Growth  are  one  way  or  another  linked  to  all  most 
topical issues in international economics. It reflects the fact that as a result of globalization, 
the fortunes of all countries are becoming inextricably linked. 
This  increased  interdependency  means  that  both  positive  and  negative  spillovers  will  be 
stronger.  Consequently,  the  continued  favorable  developments  in  the  CIBS  are  not  only 
essential for improving living standards in these countries, but are in the interest of us all.  
Fortunately, the outlook for continued favorable developments is fundamentally good. At the 
same  time,  CIBS  face  formidable  policy  challenges  as  they  seek  to  become  ever  more 
integrated  with  the  international  economy.  In  this  process,  sound  macroeconomic  policies 
and  strong  institutions  are  indispensable.  Studying  the  experience  of  other  countries  may 
offer some clues for what to do and how to avoid pitfalls.  
In  the  longer  run,  economic  performance  of  the  CIBS  countries  will  be  increasingly 
determined  by  how  well  they  can  harness  their  human  potential.  To  this  end,  one  cannot 
overemphasize the importance of ensuring increased and more equal access to education.  
The increasing weight and role of the emerging market countries in the global economy must 
also  be  better  reflected  in  global  governance  structures.  This  is  essential  for  the 
effectiveness  of  such  multilateral  structures  as  their  efficiency  derives  from  the  legitimacy 
that they enjoy among the members of international community.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  thank  WIDER  for  bringing  together  here  in  Helsinki  such  an 
impressive group of researchers and other experts. The issues that you will be discussing 
during the next two days are, I believe, of critical importance, not only for the CIBS countries 
themselves,  but  also  for  the  global  economy  as  a  whole.  I  wish  you  many  stimulating 
discussions and a successful conference. 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2007
