Davíð Oddsson: Review of recent economic and financial developments in 
Iceland 
Address by Mr Davíð Oddsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, at 
the Bank's annual meeting, Reykjavik, 30 March 2007.  
 Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors,  Prime  Minister,  Ministers  of  Government,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen:  
On behalf of the Board of Governors I welcome you all to this, the 46th annual meeting of the Central 
Bank of Iceland. At the Bank’s last annual meeting it was announced that the Government of Iceland 
and  the  Central  Bank  had  been  in  consultation  on  the  need  to  boost  the  Bank’s  foreign  reserves 
substantially and also to improve its capital position. Their motivation for doing so was not, however, 
that either position had weakened, nor that the Bank no longer met the benchmarks for capital and 
foreign reserves. For a long time the minimum foreign reserve has been set at an amount equivalent 
to  three-months’  imports,  and  this  level  has  always  been  ensured.  However,  the  major  changes  – 
which could even be called revolutionary – that have taken place in Iceland’s financial sector over a 
relatively few years prompted the Board of Governors to regard it as prudent to take other factors into 
account, such as the size and scope of the financial sector. As far as the capital position is concerned, 
it  can  be  said  that  clear  guidelines  are  to  be  found  in  recent  legislation  on  the  Central  Bank.  The 
clause in the law dealing with the transfer to the Treasury makes some for provision for whether the 
Bank’s capital has reached a specified minimum relative to the size of the domestic credit system. The 
Central Bank Act states that an amount equal to two-thirds of the Central Bank’s profit shall be paid 
annually  to  the  Treasury.  However,  the  Bank  pays  only  one-third  of  its  profit  to  the  Treasury  if  its 
capital  is  equivalent  to  less  than  of  2.25%  of  the  amount  of  lending  and  domestic  securities  in  the 
credit system.  
At present the Bank’s capital is still a long way short of this legal reference level, and its annual profit 
will not suffice to strengthen it markedly anyway. Growth has not only soared in the Icelandic credit 
system, but on an increasing scale each year has also been associated with foreign markets, where 
credit  institutions’  activities  have  expanded  enormously.  These  changes  also  give  grounds  for 
considering  other  terms  of  reference  for  foreign  reserves  than  import  levels  alone.  As  the  Prime 
Minister  stated  in  his  speech  earlier,  the  government  responded  positively  to  the  points  raised  by 
Central Bank and authorised it to borrow abroad in the name of the Treasury in order to strengthen its 
foreign reserve substantially, while the government was also mandated by parliament to strengthen 
the Bank’s capital position. The Board of Governors would like to thank the government for such a 
good, firm response. The foreign loan that the Central Bank was authorised to take was its largest on 
behalf of the Treasury so far. It can only be said that this was a highly successful measure – in fact, a 
respected  international  financial  journal  ranked  it  one  of  the  ten  most  successful  international  bond 
issues  worldwide  last  year.  The  borrowing  terms  were  very  favourable  and  of  course  reflected  the 
confidence enjoyed by the Republic of Iceland in the market.  
The Central Bank’s greatly enhanced capital position and stronger foreign reserves do not signal any 
shift in its policy, but represent a natural response to changes in the environment in which the Bank 
operates.  
At  last  year’s  annual  meeting  we  all  had  serious  concerns  about  the  peculiar  discussion  and 
sometimes unfounded speculation aired then about the Icelandic banks, their position and strength. 
There is no doubt that this debate and the ensuing events made conditions tighter for the banks for a 
while.  The  banks  responded  firmly  to  the  uncomfortable  position  that  had  arisen.  They  made  great 
efforts  to  explain  the  structure  and  organisation  of  the  Icelandic  banks.  This  was  no  half-hearted 
measure, but a steadfast and confident approach which produced results. The banks adjusted certain 
aspects  of  their  operations  and  operating  environment  in  response  to  relevant  criticisms,  and 
dismissed  what  was  less  relevant  with  explanations,  reports  and  candid  communication,  at  large 
meetings, small meetings and man-to-man, depending upon which was most productive. They needed 
temporarily to look beyond their traditional markets for funding, and unquestionably these conditions 
put their resources and management under strain. It can definitely be said that those involved passed 
this difficult test. The funding problem that loomed around this time a year ago is a thing of the past, 
terms in the secondary market have been normalised and market confidence has been restored. This 
BIS Review 34/2007 
 1
is  to  be  welcomed.  What  remains,  however,  is  of  course  that  people  are  now  more  aware  of  the 
widespread  risks  that  the  future  may  hold  in  store.  Global  market  conditions  can  change  suddenly. 
Credit access, which in recent times has been exceptionally favourable for Icelandic and other banks, 
may  change  suddenly  if  unexpected  conditions  arise.  It  is  important  to  be  prepared  for  such  a 
contingency.  
At the height of this furore, I would venture to say that the Central Bank made a strong contribution 
with  its  Financial  Stability  report,  which  was  deemed  to  be  professional,  candid  and  in  line  with 
international best practice. The Bank’s next Financial Stability report will be published towards the end 
of April.  
Although these were not enviable times for financial companies, they definitely learned a lesson from 
this ordeal and are both more cautious and more aware of external influences than before.  
Rapid and sweeping changes in the financial sector put a great strain on regulatory agencies, which 
may  face  an  uphill  struggle  to  keep  up  with  the  swift  pace  of  developments.  The  same  may 
undoubtedly be said about the Central Bank. After all, useful and supportive as these institutions may 
be, they neither can nor should play a leading role. That role can only be performed by the financial 
companies themselves. Because they rely so heavily on open access to credit markets, it is crucial for 
them to enjoy the confidence of their creditors. In this respect like many others, credibility is a fragile 
thing and a very high price can be paid for losing it.  
Turbulence in global markets is sure to continue. Naturally people try to read the signs and foresee the 
most important parameters, in order to adapt to them in good time or respond sensibly. Important as it 
is to keep a close watch on developments and changes in global markets, what matters most of all is 
to be strong and well-positioned enough to withstand the most unexpected shocks.  
Global liquidity has been exceptionally abundant in recent years, and has been widely tapped on good 
terms.  The  benefits  of  resourcefulness  and  bold,  quick  action  can  be  realised  to  the  full  in  such 
circumstances. It is impossible to rule out that such a climate will persist for a long while, but this is by 
no  means  certain.  And  when  a  change  does  take  place,  it  may  be  caused  by  unexpected 
circumstances and strike quickly. It is then that caution and prudence prove most effective. Interest 
rates have been on the increase recently in most parts of the world and capital is not as cheap as 
before, although it can still be procured at very low rates. Conditions in capital markets in general are 
therefore more likely to tighten in the coming years.  
Influential as economic developments on both sides of the Atlantic may be for the Icelandic economy, 
the way we handle our own affairs is still important. The crucial consideration is to achieve a rapid 
reduction  in  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  restore  stability.  To  do  so,  domestic  demand  must  be 
reduced. Part of this process will occur automatically with the completion of ongoing investments in the 
aluminium and power sectors.  
Much  has  changed  since  the  meeting  a  year  ago,  some  things  for  the  better,  and  others  not.  The 
current account deficit run up last year will not be forgotten for a long time – it even managed to trump 
the most pessimistic forecasts. Fortunately, clear signs of a gradual contraction are now visible, but 
this  improvement  is  likely  to  be  slower  than  we  had  previously  expected,  especially  on  account  of 
foreign debt service.  
The  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Central  Bank  decided  yesterday  to  leave  the  Bank’s  policy  rate 
unchanged at 14.25%, at the level where it has been since December. By contrast, the day before last 
year’s annual meeting, the Board of Governors raised the policy rate by 0.75 percentage points. These 
two  decisions  hopefully  give  some  indication  of  where  the  Central  Bank  considers  that  it  currently 
stands in the battle against inflation. This battle is a priority and there is no doubt that a successful 
outcome is very much in the national interest, not least for young people who have taken on heavy 
liabilities  to  secure  themselves  short-term  or  long-term  housing.  Household  debt  with  the  deposit 
money banks has surged in Iceland in recent years. However, debt service as a proportion of income 
has not grown, due to the more favourable credit terms now available, as well as rising incomes. Loan 
delinquency is still minimal. Both these indicators are very positive. However, this does not alter the 
Central  Bank’s  concerns  about  excessive  borrowing,  or  at  least  very  precarious  borrowing,  which 
could make the foreseeable economic contraction very tough for indebted households, and in some 
cases insurmountable. In such conditions, rising inflation could deal many households a heavy blow.  
Some  people  have  responded  to  Iceland’s  relatively  high  interest  rates  and  price  indexation  by 
switching  their  debts  to  foreign  currencies,  but  the  benefits  could  prove  short-lived  if  the  króna 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2007
depreciates.  A  depreciation  would  be  instantly  reflected  in  repayments  on  these  foreign  loans.  Its 
impact on domestic indexed borrowing would be less and come later.  
At the last annual meeting, it was pointed out that the Central Bank had strongly encouraged financial 
institutions to curtail their credit growth at that time which, in the Bank’s view, had gone beyond all 
reasonable  bounds.  They  responded  positively  to  the  Bank’s  recommendations,  and  there  was  no 
question that credit growth slowed substantially. However, there are now many indications of a return 
to the earlier situation, so the Bank must reiterate its words of warning.  
At  the  same  time  as  the  Central  Bank  announced  its  interest  rate  decision  yesterday,  it  published 
Monetary  Bulletin.  This  outlines  the  main  assumptions  behind  the  Bank’s  decision  along  with 
indications about its policy in the near future and the viewpoints it considers important to bear in mind 
for economic policy. In the current edition, major changes were made to the assumptions behind the 
baseline forecast, which enhance both the credibility of the forecast and monetary policy transparency. 
By doing so, the Central Bank of Iceland joined the vanguard of the inflation-targeting central banks. 
Monetary  Bulletin  reveals  that  inflation  developments  have  turned  rather  more  favourable  than  the 
Bank’s  previous  forecast  had  indicated,  and  although  underlying  inflation  was  somewhat  higher  in 
February  and  March  than  was  hoped,  the  Bank  expects  both  headline  and  underlying  inflation  to 
decrease rapidly in the next months. By both measures, inflation will be close to target from the middle 
of  2008.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  outcome  is  largely  thanks  to  the  tight  monetary  stance,  which 
included raising the policy rate by 3.75 percentage points last year.  
As  usual  it  should  be  pointed  out  –  and  especially  in  the  current  climate  –  that  exchange  rate 
uncertainties  can  complicate  this  picture.  The  exchange  rate  has  been  relatively  stable  after  the 
adjustment that took place in the first half of last year, and the króna is currently somewhat stronger 
than historical measures would warrant, although it should be admitted that determinism is probably 
not  the  most  suitable  approach  for  assessing  currency  developments.  One  reason  for  uncertainty 
about the exchange rate is the large current account deficit, as well as the fact that it can easily be 
driven by factors over which we have no control, given how closely Iceland’s financial sector is now 
integrated with global financial markets.  
A central bank with a legislative and regulatory remit to target inflation is of course pleased with such 
inflation  developments,  but  would  prefer  them  to  be  built  on  a  more  solid  foundation.  Domestic 
demand growth has declined, but rather more slowly than the Bank had hoped. The current account 
deficit is large and will also contract more slowly than the Bank would have desired. Demand remains 
buoyant in the housing market and there are indications that the rate of credit growth may be on the 
increase  again.  For  these  and  other  reasons,  the  Bank  will  remain  on  the  alert  and  not  ease  its 
monetary stance until even clearer signs emerge that a lasting change has been established.  
Equity prices have soared in Iceland in recent years. One explanation for the increase may be that 
Icelandic  companies  have  been  undervalued  by  the  markets,  for  example  relative  to  comparable 
businesses in other countries, and another that bold and determined investment ventures have driven 
up their value. But risk and gain often go hand in hand. Sometimes the stakes may be raised too high. 
It has long been customary to pay a premium for attractive investment options. Such goodwill used to 
be depreciated in companies’ accounts over a long period and rarely affected their operations. The 
situation has changed whereby companies now need to make impairment tests of the goodwill they 
enter on the asset side of their balance sheets. If their original ventures fall flat, the goodwill must be 
depreciated accordingly. Thus there is a risk, if conditions deteriorate, that this rule could amplify a 
company’s  negative  results  at  the  worst  possible  time.  Goodwill  totalling  more  than  500  b.kr.  was 
entered in the financial statements for 2006 of companies listed on Iceland Stock Exchange, and at 
certain  companies,  goodwill  and  other  intangibles  account  for  more  than  half  of  the  total  assets  on 
their books. This is a cause for some deliberation.  
Although the Central Bank’s main function on occasions such as this is to draw particular attention to 
causes  for  concern,  it  should  of  course  take  note,  like  everyone  else,  of  the  factors  conducive  to 
strengthening  the  long-term  economic  outlook.  Iceland’s  economy  is  advanced,  transparent  and 
vibrant. Its strong fiscal position is exemplary, and the population is relatively young, well educated 
and quick to adapt to technological and scientific innovations of all kinds. A strong pension system has 
been  built  up  and  –  unlike  other  countries  that  have  great  fears  about  the  future  of  their  pension 
systems  and  their sustainability  –  it  is clear  that  Iceland’s  pension  system  is becoming  increasingly 
stronger. Admittedly it is still not mature enough to have begun to pay out a representative proportion 
of its owners’ lifetime earnings, but this proportion is growing every year and all the pointers indicate 
that, for the foreseeable future, it will be highly sustainable. Thus the pension system is going from 
BIS Review 34/2007 
 3
strength to strength in Iceland, at the same time as significant weaknesses are coming to the fore in 
many  comparable  economies.  Real  incomes  in  Iceland  rank  with  the  highest  in  the  world,  and 
unemployment with the lowest. Large-scale investments have recently been made which will generate 
handsome  export  revenues.  Traditional  sectors  currently  enjoy  secure  markets  and  high  product 
prices. Undeniably this picture looks very bright and many more positive signs could be cited. But this 
does not alter the fact that, as I said earlier, the foundation has been precarious in many areas and the 
medium  term  will  have  a  decisive  significance  for  the  outcome.  Uncertainties  abound  and  many 
households in Iceland thread a narrow path of debt and wages, where if they lose their footing, the fall 
could be heavy. Thus caution, steadfastness and self-control are called for in all areas of the economy 
– in other words, the maxim that “the doors of pleasure should not be thrown wide open” still applies. 
As far as the Central Bank is concerned, ensuring low inflation is its most important function today and 
in the future. And that picture is growing brighter, although care still needs to be exercised.  
4 
 BIS Review 34/2007
