Mario Draghi: Reflections on monetary and financial policy – Governor Baffi’s 
monetary policy 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Centro di Economia monetaria e 
finanziaria “Paolo Baffi”, Università Commerciale Luigi Bocconi, Milan, 15 March 2007. 
 The  “Paolo  Baffi”  Centre  for  Monetary  and  Financial  Economics  has  invited  me  to  give  this  talk  to 
revive the custom of the “Reflections on Monetary and Financial Policy” that had been interrupted for a 
decade. I thought it would be appropriate to start off the new series by exploring the personality and 
monetary policy of Paolo Baffi, to whom the centre is dedicated. 
Baffi was Governor of the Bank of Italy during five of the most difficult years this country has known. It 
is not easy to discuss the problems that beset monetary policy in those years or the decisions that 
were  taken  using  today’s  language.  Since  then,  the conditions  of  Italy’s  economy  and  politics  have 
changed radically, as have the prevailing opinions on the link between money and economy, the role 
of the central bank, and its objectives. The lexicon of monetary economics has mutated. The years in 
which Paolo Baffi was at the helm of the Bank of Italy, a period of exceptional economic and political 
difficulties,  marked  the  start  of  the  transition  towards  our  present  manner  of  interpreting  and 
conducting monetary policy. Reviewing those years can help us recall the importance of institutional 
conquests that we now take for granted. 
Intellectual roots and institutional framework 
Paolo Baffi was one of the first professional economists to be taken on by the Bank of Italy; it was 
1936.  He  took  over  the  leadership  of  the  Bank  in  August  1975,  just  a  few  days  after  Guido  Carli’s 
resignation, and was the first Governor to have made his career within the Bank. 
Many  of  his  writings  bear  witness  to  the  intellectual  evolution  and  choices  of  an  economist  whose 
outlook  embraced  equally  theoretical  interests  and  policy  concerns.  In  1935,  after  Italy  invaded 
Ethiopia,  Baffi’s  mentor,  Giorgio  Mortara,  carried  on  a  campaign  against  the  international  sanctions 
imposed against Italy from his Giornale degli Economisti. Baffi, twenty-four at the time, came out in 
favour of international economic cooperation, anxious about the nationalistic illusions entertained by 
his professor, who retorted with accusations of “internationalistic illusions”. 
The  young  man  had  obviously  seen  further  ahead  than  the  older  one,  who  was  soon  to  suffer  the 
effects of nationalism transformed into anti-Semitism. What interests us here, however, is the fact that 
Baffi attributed his sound judgement at the time to a “diet of classical texts of economic liberalism”.1 
This  left  an  enduring  mark  on  his  training  as  an  economist  that  was  reflected  in  his  subsequent 
theoretical output, less so in his policies, which were influenced by the formidable constraints existing 
during his time as Governor. 
Economic liberalism, according to Luigi Einaudi, was not so much an economic doctrine as a way of 
reasoning,  which  takes  an  apparently  simple  rule  and,  through  systematic  use  of  theory,  derives 
indirect and distant effects that are often the opposite of their proponents’ intentions. Undoubtedly, one 
of the main characteristics of Baffi’s thinking was his focus on indirect effects, on the links between the 
various elements of the economic system. His concern to make plain the relation between real and 
financial  phenomena  was  at  the  root  of  the  “national  monetary  balance  sheet”  developed  in  the 
aftermath of the War, the embryo of today’s financial accounts. 
In 1953 Baffi was a member of the committee appointed to pronounce on the reform of IRI’s bylaws 
and its future role. While the majority of the committee favoured the creation of a Ministry for State 
Holding  Companies  and  an  increased  role  for  IRI  in  promoting  economic  growth,  Baffi  and  a  few 
others held that the solution lay above all in sound regulation of the market.2
                                                      
1   P. Baffi, “Giorgio Mortara e la Banca d’Italia”, in id., Nuovi studi sulla moneta (Milan: Giuffrè, 1973). 
2   Ministero dell’Industria e del Commercio, L’Istituto per la ricostruzione industriale (Turin: Utet, 1955), Vol. II, pp. 575-85. 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 1
The  1960s  and  1970s  were,  by  admission  of  Baffi’s  predecessor,  Governor  Carli,  the  period  when 
political  power  was  most  closely  interwoven  with  monetary,  financial  and  supervisory  policy;  it  was 
also the most dangerous time for the repercussions on the performance of the economy, both then 
and  later.3  In  the  first  half  of  the  1970s,  and  particularly  between  1973  and  1976,  a  dense  web  of 
constraints  and  rules  developed  regarding  banks’  portfolios,  subsidized  credit,  interest  rates,  and 
capital movements. Baffi never came out openly against this, but his scepticism, rooted in his reading 
of classical texts on economic liberalism, was no secret to anyone inside the Bank of Italy. 
To  understand  the  central  bank’s  modus  operandi  in  those  years  we  must  consider  the  powerful 
influence  exerted  by  the  predominant  economic  culture.  It  was  not  a  market  culture.  Its  influence, 
combined with vested interests, often directed economic policy towards solutions that did not follow 
the  market.  In  Italy,  Keynesianism  only  acquired  a  foothold  in  academia  towards  the  middle  of  the 
1960s  and  the  version  that  gained  credence  among  policy-makers  had  a  distinctly  more  dirigiste 
flavour  than  that  prevailing  internationally:  not  only  did  economic  policies  to  support  demand  earn 
plaudits from politicians and economists, but more generally, above and beyond the actual Keynesian 
propositions, they saw broad government intervention in economic activity, especially investment, as 
the means of perpetuating the growth of the 1950s. 
Development,  industrialization  and  social  and  distributive  conflict  were  the  issues  that  attracted  the 
best  minds  and  the  vision  of  political  leaders.  What  was  asked  of  monetary  policy  was  to  produce 
growth,  capital  formation,  the  narrowing  of  the  gap  between  Italy  and  its  European  partners,  and 
balance-of-payments  equilibrium.  Price  stability  was  a  secondary  concern.  The  autonomy  of  the 
central bank was not viewed as essential to stability. In Italy, interest focused on the real economy; the 
role of money, the causes and effects of inflation were not common subjects of inquiry. Baffi’s studies 
on money thus constitute a notable exception. 
The  discussions  that  Franco  Modigliani  had  in  1967  with  the  top  management  of  the  Bank  of  Italy 
during the development of the econometric model exemplify the difficulty of describing the problems of 
monetary  policy  at  that  time  using  today’s  language  and  criteria.  In  those  meetings  Governor  Carli 
defined the Bank’s main objective as that of fostering a sufficient level of income to allow investment 
that  would  close  the  distance  between  Italy  and  the  other  members  of  the  European  Economic 
Community.4 The Governor mentioned price stability only as a subordinate aim, and it was interpreted, 
moreover, solely as alignment with the level of international prices, that is to say an objective for the 
defence of competitiveness. The pre-eminence of the objective of price stability did not have formal 
sanction;  it  was  not  shared  by  public  opinion,  nor  was  it  comprehended  in  academic  and  political 
circles. 
Monetary  management  was  increasingly  entrusted  to  administrative  controls  on  credit,  namely  the 
ceiling on the growth in bank lending (introduced in 1973) and the requirement that banks invest a part 
of their portfolios in long-term fixed-income securities. Initially designed for allocative purposes and to 
support private investment, these instruments were almost immediately employed for macroeconomic 
purposes and to facilitate the financing of the Treasury. Effective in rapidly curbing aggregate demand, 
they continued to be used until the end of the 1980s in spite of their allocative cost and the fact that 
they soon came to be circumvented. 
Treasury bills were the main instrument for financing the Treasury. At the auctions it was customary 
for the Bank of Italy to submit a bid guaranteeing that all the securities on offer would be taken up at 
the floor price. Since this was often set above the levels at which the market would have subscribed 
the  whole  quantity  issued,  this  obliged  the  Bank  to  make  systematic  interventions  and  prevented 
control of liquidity creation. The interbank market was anaemic and inefficient. 
Heads  of  Government  and  Treasury  ministers  listened  to  the  Bank  of  Italy,  but  the  Bank  had  very 
limited independence in using the instruments of monetary policy. The discount rate was fixed by the 
Treasury, albeit on the basis of a proposal from the Governor, and nearly every act of the Bank was 
formally  subject  to  the  Government’s  oversight.  The  prerequisites  for  autonomy  of  the  central  bank 
comparable to that enjoyed by today’s European System of Central Banks were lacking. 
                                                      
3   G. Carli, Intervista sul capitalismo italiano, edited by E. Scalari (Bari: Laterza, 1977), p. 42. 
4  G.M. Rey and P. Peluffo, Dialogo tra un professore e la Banca d’Italia, Vallecchi, Florence, 1995, p. 54. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2007
The transition towards a “monetary constitution” 
In the summer of 1975, when Baffi succeeded Carli, the Italian economy had fallen into the deepest 
recession since the war, triggered by the oil shock and by the credit tightening that had been agreed 
with the International Monetary Fund in order to counter the imbalance in the external accounts, the 
upsurge of inflation and the depreciation of the lira. 
The shock hit Italy at the height of an expansionary cycle, at a time of extreme weakness of economic 
policy management. Wages, rising at annual rates of more than 20 per cent, had lost any link with 
productivity.  The  devaluation-inflation  spiral  seemed  untamable,  not  least  because  of  the  perverse 
system of indexation. The Treasury’s deficits, pushed up by increases in public spending that were out 
of  control,  had  exceeded  values  compatible  with  non-inflationary  financing.  The  central  bank, 
unheeded, watched from the sidelines. 
In  the  international  arena,  the  prevailing  view  of  the  role  of  monetary  policy  was  changing.  The 
Bundesbank had been announcing money supply targets since 1974, and the Federal Reserve, under 
Paul Volcker, would adopt quantitative monetary targets in 1979. 
In the Concluding Remarks that he read on 31 May 1976, Baffi, recalling similar opinions of Einaudi 
and  Carli  at  dramatic  moments,  observed  that  the  severe  limitations  imposed  by  the  institutional 
framework did not allow the Bank of Italy freedom of action. In times of financial imbalance and wage 
inflation, he stressed, “control of the money supply has to be abandoned in order to avoid, or at least 
postpone, worse evils”. 
However,  Baffi  did  not  give  up  pursuing  the  fundamental  goal:  moving  Italy  towards  institutional 
arrangements in the field of monetary policy that would guarantee monetary stability over the longer 
run.  This  process  would  not  actually  get  under  way  until  the  start  of  the  1980s,  with  the  “divorce” 
between the Bank of Italy and the Treasury promoted by Treasury Minister Beniamino Andreatta and 
Governor Carlo Azeglio Ciampi. During the era in which he was governor, Baffi launched a “campaign 
of persuasion” directed at public opinion and the political forces. It was his conviction that monetary 
policy, in order to be successful, had to be backed by the consensus of all society on the objectives, 
including  price  stability.  Italy  was  still  far  from  such  a  situation.  In  Baffi’s  view,  what  prevailed  in 
determining  the  decisions  regarding  the  public  finances  and  wage  trends  was  an  alliance  between 
different political and social groups that fuelled inflation. 
In  the  Governor’s  view  the  first  requirement  for  a  reform  of  the  monetary  constitution  was  that  the 
principle  of  safeguarding  monetary  stability  become  the  linchpin  of  monetary  policy.  However,  he 
considered that an insurmountable obstacle to this was the absence within the Italian legal framework 
of  a  provision,  such  as  that  in  Germany,  expressly  entrusting  the  central  bank  with  the  task  of 
defending  the  currency.  A  systematic  search  was  made  for  arguments  in  support  of  assigning  the 
Bank  autonomous  responsibility  for  fixing  and  pursuing  monetary  base  objectives:  during  internal 
meetings the possibility was repeatedly raised of calling on the Government to enter into commitments 
to this effect or of using suggestions of similar import put forward by international institutions such as 
the European Economic Community or the International Monetary Fund. 
As one of Baffi’s leading collaborators has recalled, he invited the Bank’s legal experts to delve into 
every  legal  nook  and  cranny  in  search  of  the  desired  precept.5  The  absence  of  a  well-defined 
institutional framework made it necessary to adopt complicated logical exercises to argue in favour of 
the defence of the currency: for Baffi the principle of “no taxation without representation”, violated by 
inflation insofar as it causes arbitrary redistribution, was the one to call upon to give the central bank 
the task of defending the currency. 
In this “campaign of persuasion” Baffi frequently discussed monetary policy choices in the press. He 
believed that announcing monetary objectives was a factor of transparency that would have durably 
altered central banks’ modus operandi. As he was to say later, “the actions of central banks are no 
longer cloaked in silence, and perhaps never will be again. Whereas in the past silence was seen as a 
guarantee of independence, today this is achieved by giving an explicit account of one’s actions”.6
                                                      
5   M. Sarcinelli, “Governor Baffi’s monetary policy”, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, Quarterly Review, no. 179, December 1991, 
pp. 513-35. 
6   Banca d’Italia, Annual Report for 1978, p.158. 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 3
Baffi  was  strongly  opposed  to  the  tangle  of  credit  and  foreign  exchange  administrative  controls 
through  which  monetary  policy  was  conducted.  He  found  it  profoundly  unsatisfactory  “in  having  to 
direct  central  bank  action  in  such  a  way  that  it  suffocates  a  system  that  possesses  its  own  valid 
parameters and mechanisms; in having to constrain the volume of credit potentially expressed by the 
flow of monetary base because it is not possible to regulate that flow; in having to channel the flow of 
credit”. He was convinced that the costs of the distortions produced by administrative controls were 
substantial and lasting and that the monetary effects were ephemeral: in the long run the aggregates 
are brought “back into line with basic economic conditions”. 
Monetary management and the EMS negotiations 
Baffi  did  not  win  the  battle  against  the  straitjacket  that  had  been  imposed  on  the  market.  The 
emergencies he had to tackle, the exceptionally difficult situation he faced with regard to taxes and 
wages forced him to continue to use the administrative constraints put in place by his predecessor in 
earlier years. Monetary policy itself was constrained by the fact that price stability was not explicitly 
targeted  and  by  his  belief  that  there  was  no  consensus  on  this  in  Italy.  He  was  convinced  that  a 
monetary rule, however necessary and well formulated, could not replace discipline in the decisions 
and conduct of society as a whole and that it had to follow, and not precede, the adoption of such 
discipline. 
According to the expression used in the Concluding Remarks of the Annual Report for 1975, monetary 
management in those years was “coming to resemble an economy under siege”. At the beginning of 
1976,  after  political,  business,  trade  union  and  academic  pressure  had  led  to  an  easing  of  liquidity 
conditions, the low level of the official reserves and the opening of a Government crisis triggered a 
violent attack against the lira, the presages of which had been underestimated up to the end of the 
previous year, and led to the closing of the foreign exchange market for forty days. 
The  turbulence  on  foreign  exchange  markets  continued  during  the  year  with  ups  and  downs  and  a 
succession of restrictive measures that included exchange and credit controls, the reintroduction of the 
ceiling on loans, an increase in compulsory reserves and rises in the discount rate for a total of nine 
points. These steps were effective in bringing the external balance back into equilibrium, replenishing 
the official reserves and repaying foreign loans. The exchange rate fell by about one third; inflation 
rose to 23 per cent and then slowed to about 12 per cent. 
Recourse  to  administrative  credit  and  foreign  exchange  measures  was  not  avoided.  Contemporary 
documents  confirm  that  Baffi  was  against  using  administrative  controls  but  also  show  that  he  was 
convinced their use could not be ruled out given the influence exerted by the state of the market. 
Late in 1978, the dramatic year that saw the kidnapping and assassination of Aldo Moro and the killing 
of his escort, negotiations began for Italy’s membership of the European exchange rate mechanism. 
Not a few considered acceptance of the external constraint as providing powerful support in curbing 
the factors − rents, wages and public expenditure − that prevented Italy from definitively overcoming 
an emergency that had lasted too long not to threaten the stability of the country’s institutions. 
Baffi’s position was cautious: he recognized that belonging to the European Monetary System could 
help to bring down inflation, but he believed that this should be the result of agreement on domestic 
policies and that a start should be made before entering into the exchange rate commitment. During 
the negotiations Baffi advocated a system with a broad fluctuation band of 6 or 8 per cent about the 
central  parity  for  all  the  participant  countries.  This  idea  was  not  disagreeable  to  the  Bundesbank, 
which  feared  an  inflexible  exchange  rate  with  partners  marked  by  high  inflation  and  low  credibility. 
Baffi was well aware of the risks of a constraint associated with an exchange rate parity unrelated to 
the performance of the fundamentals of the economy. He feared that the results Italy had achieved in 
the three previous years in terms of replenishing the reserves and adjusting the current account of the 
balance of payments might be jeopardized by participation in a mechanism that would force the lira to 
appreciate in real terms, to the detriment of exports. 
Italy did join the EMS, but with a broader fluctuation band than that applying to the rest of the System 
members. The exchange rate constraint helped to damp down inflation in the first half of the 1980s. Its 
symbolic value was perceived by the political and social forces as a prerequisite to Italian participation 
in  European  integration,  and  the  Bank  of  Italy  was  able  to  implement  counter-inflationary  monetary 
policy.  Baffi’s  caution with  regard  to  the  cogency  of  the  exchange  rate  constraint  may  have  proved 
excessive, perhaps, but only because System realignments were much more frequent than could have 
been predicted when the Exchange Rate Mechanism was agreed. At the same time, the availability of 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2007
the broad fluctuation band, which he had argued for, allowed a degree of freedom for monetary policy 
and thus limited the risk of the speculative attacks that typify fixed exchange rate regimes. In Baffi’s 
own words, the mechanism permitted “a soft transition, without the jumps, the discontinuities in market 
rates that trigger destabilizing speculation and often enable it to reap enormous profits”.7
The legacy of Paolo Baffi 
This is not the proper place to recount the well-known judicial affairs that forced Paolo Baffi to resign 
as Governor on 20 September 1979, only to be totally exonerated from the charges two years later. As 
he later said, his incrimination obliged him to contend “for two years and more not with bad money but 
with a justice system that was even worse”. Quite apart from the machinations behind the scenes in 
his  indictment,  which  had  major  repercussions  on  the  Bank  of  Italy,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the 
institutional  architecture  of  the  day  –  the  Director  General’s  responsibilities  included  banking 
supervision but he was also a member of the Board of Directors of IMI – was a weakness, which was 
later rectified. 
If the results achieved in the battle against inflation were only partial during Baffi’s governorship, the 
successes that came in the course of the 1980s and 1990s can be traced to the seeds he had sown 
with  his  commitment  to  a  new  monetary  constitution.  During  his  Governorship  the  question  of 
separating the responsibilities of government and central bank was posed. The process subsequently 
set in motion produced first the abandonment and then the prohibition of monetary financing of the 
Treasury, the assignment to the Bank of Italy of the power to set the discount rate, formal recognition 
of its independence and, finally, its formal mandate, within the framework of the European System of 
Central  Banks,  to  work  for  the  objective  of  price  stability.  The  full  achievement  of  independence 
nevertheless took another fifteen years, major legislative reform and, lastly, an international treaty. 
In the 1980s and early 1990s, in a course of reform that was initiated and spurred in part by the Bank 
of  Italy,  broader  and  more  efficient  money  and  government  securities  markets  were  created.  The 
effectiveness of indirect instruments of monetary control increased. 
Paolo Baffi as Governor is perhaps best symbolically portrayed as a ferryman of ideas, with all the 
exertion that such an image implies. His intellectual heritage was liberal, embracing more leavenings 
of modernity than were to be found in the political and economic culture of the day. But action was 
fettered  by  the  harshness of  the  times. These were years,  let  us not  forget,  of  bitter social conflict, 
years of terrorism. Paolo Baffi’s awareness of the drama of social problems was painfully acute, as is 
well known by those who were close to him in those years and could see the signs that a man of his 
temperament allowed to emerge. 
Subsequent developments in Italy and in Europe and the consequent advances in economic theory 
have  confirmed  that  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  depends  above  all  on  appropriate 
institutional arrangements and on the ability to affect the expectations and the behaviour of the public; 
and  that  appropriate  institutional  arrangements,  in  turn,  are  not  unrelated  to  political  and  social 
consensus. Institutions comprise the set of written and unwritten rules that guide the conduct of the 
central  bank,  formal  recognition  of  its  objectives  and  independence,  and  suitably  designed 
instruments, ensuring effectiveness of action without interfering in the operation of a market economy. 
To us Paolo Baffi, who was the very antithesis of the politician, has bequeathed the conviction that the 
strength  of  economic  policy  springs  from  rigorous  conduct  and  from  the  consensus  it  enjoys  in  the 
society within which it works its effects. 
                                                      
7   P.  Baffi,  “Due  momenti  del  negoziato  sullo  SME:  la  banda  larga  e  l’adesione  del  Regno  Unito”  in  Il  sistema  monetario 
europeo  a  dieci  anni  dal  suo  atto  costitutivo:  risultati  e  prospettive,Atti  del  convegno  promosso  dal  Ministero  degli  Affari 
esteri e dall’IMI (Proceedings of a conference organized by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and IMI), Rome, December 
1988. 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 5
