Ardian Fullani: A vision for the future of the Albanian economy and financial 
system 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the launch of the European Fund for 
Southeast Europe, Tirana, 6 March 2007. 
 Honourable Mr. Prime Minister,  
Honourable Mr. Minister of Finance, 
Dear Mr. Glaubitt, 
Dear friends, 
I am honoured to be invited to the occasion of launching the European Fund for Southeast Europe. I 
regard  this  new  initiative  in  the  Albanian  financial  system  as  a  highlight  development,  due  to  the 
financial potential and to the signals it brings to our market. 
It has become almost inevitable to start each speech with a short description of the latest economic 
and  markets’  situation.  I  invite  you  to  interpret  it  as  an  opportunity  to  understand  our  vision  for  the 
future of the economy and the financial system.  
From  the  general  viewpoint,  I  would  briefly  highlight  that  the  inflation  and  inflationary  expectations 
have been kept under control, the economy is growing under stable rates and there is an increasing 
business  confidence.  The  financial  markets  are  relaxed,  well-regulated  and  lucrative.  It  is  good  to 
evidence that apart from the other contributing factors, the Bank of Albania has played a key role in 
providing for such an environment with its prudent policies pursued over 2006.  
Global  factors  have  increased  their  interest  in  the  developments  of  the  Albanian  economy,  with  a 
special focus on the macroeconomic and development policies. The expansion of global markets has 
exerted pressures on our economy, expected to be  increased in the future. The Bank of Albania is 
paying a special attention to the considerations and signals deriving from these markets and invites 
the  business  community  to  do  the  same.  The  entry  of  foreign  players  into  the  market  should 
encourage  the  domestic  business  to  re-dimension  or  re-consider  its  role  in  the  development  of  the 
market in general, and of the financial one, in particular.  
Over  the  last  years,  the  Bank  of  Albania,  being  supported  by  the  business  community,  has  paid  a 
special interest and attention to the development of the domestic financial system. If I were to ask you: 
“Have we been successful?” your answer would have been “Certainly, yes.” It holds true that we have 
made significant steps towards a modern banking system and facts do speak for themselves: there 
are 17 banks, all private-owned; stable growth and profits; great European players; new products and 
modern  approaches;  consolidation;  sound  competition  and  last,  a  new  contemporary  law  on  the 
banking system.  
In this respect, one might even say that the transition to a modern financial system is approaching its 
end.  However,  allow  me  not  to  fully  agree.  Do  not  forget  that  what  I  have  been  talking  about 
represents a crucial, but solely, segment of the financial system. It is in the interest of the economy, 
private  sector  and  households,  and  in  our  interest  as  well,  as  the  monetary  authority,  to  push  the 
development of the entire financial system. I think that the financial system we have is not enough to 
foster our expectations in the context of the economic and financial development of the country. 
I would not exclude the banking system from the observation. The high and stable profits have further 
deepened  the  concentration  of  the  banking  system  and  investment  in  a  financial  market  segment. 
Such a trend might affect financial stability due to an undesired mix of financial and human capital and 
of  managerial  abilities  in  a  restricted  segment  of  financial  market.  Moreover,  these  risks  could  be 
fuelled  by  reckless  competition  and  market  share  deriving  from  the  concentration  and  issues  of 
immoral speculations. 
The  launching  of  this  scheme,  apart  from  emphasizing  the  confidence  in  our  development  policies, 
helps  to  provide  the  layers  for  the  financial  system  and  to  fill  in  the  gaps  in  the  financial  markets, 
stating an indisputable fact that there is room for boosting and strengthening those segments which do 
not  seem  to  be  lucrative.  This  is  a  significant  signal  for  small-sized  enterprises  having  great 
ambitions. 
BIS Review 22/2007 
 1
These developments should help us to really understand the true potential of the Albanian economy 
and they must be read by all players as such. Moreover, they must understand that such entries will 
make  the  rules  of  participating  in  the  market  clearer.  They  set  the  standards  for  the  quantity  and 
quality of both financial and human capital, which make a company an eligible market player. Time 
requirements impose the necessity for building similar capacities with the new entrants, otherwise the 
market will not tolerate.  
In this context, the Bank of Albania will be cautious to avoid any negative consequences deriving from 
the timely misinterpretation of current and expected developments. In our belief, all participants in the 
system should act responsibly and professionally, no matter how small they are. The misinterpretation 
of  this  new  philosophy  would  be  intolerable,  with  consequences  for  the  financial  stability,  since  it 
operates as a whole. These developments impose to us, as a monetary and supervisory authority, the 
adoption of more contemporary standards. The new players, in additional to sound macroeconomic 
policies, require the establishment of a market that can accommodate their business in both assets 
and liabilities.  
In  response  to  these  challenges,  the  Bank  of  Albania  aims  to  formulate  and  later  on,  implement  a 
medium-term strategy for the development, licensing and supervision of banking financial institutions. 
The  key  objectives  of  this  strategy  would  be  summarized  in:  the  adoption  and  application  of 
supervision  standards  deriving  from  Basel  II  Accord;  the  adoption  of  more  conservative 
practices  related to  the principle  of selective  licensing; the constant  promotion  to boost the 
banking  system,  mainly  through  mergers  and  acquisitions;  the  adoption  of  both  theoretical 
and practical approaches related to services and products to develop all the financial market 
segments. With the latter one, we intend to provide the right incentives for the managers to extend 
their business in those market segments where they are located, helping in this way to fully develop 
that particular market segment. I take this opportunity to invite all the existing financial institutions to 
grow, expand and become active players within the market segments where they operate.  
Otherwise,  they  should  seek  those  market  areas  where  they  provide  most  of  their  efficiency, 
considering their financial and human capital and the products they own. The Bank of Albania seeks to 
use market segmentation as a prerequisite for building market discipline in the financial system: 
First, to facilitate the monetary policy, through the perfection of monetary transmission mechanism. 
Second, to boost the country’s economic and social development. 
Therefore, the Bank of Albania sees this new entry as a premise for the development and revitalization 
of money and capital market. Allow me to explain it more broadly. The available fund in this scheme is 
considerable.  However,  the  positive  stands  in  the  fact  that  these  additional  funds  will  be  used  to 
launch new products and services in those market segments which have not had so-far, access to the 
financial infrastructure.  
This is particularly true for small-sized businesses in local communities and rural areas, to which large 
universal  banks  are  not  their  perfect  partners.  Moreover,  the  financial  market  is  being  enriched 
with a new instrument, which will be a novel investment alternative for all the economic agents 
concerned, be they households, organizations or businesses.  
The  orientation  toward  micro  and  small  entrepreneurships  reflects  a  sound  and  specialized 
understanding  of  their  financial  needs.  They  represent  a  key  element  of  economic  infrastructure,  of 
employment  and  income  growth,  in  particular  for  the  sector  of  agriculture  and  local  communities. 
Undoubtedly,  this  new  initiative  will  also  provide  its  positive  effects  to  the  social  context  of  these 
segments.  
In this context, the launch of the European Fund for Southeast Europe is a new element, which will 
serve as a catalyst for a number of new changes and opportunities, in line with the requirements of a 
modern  market,  able  to  support  the  perspective  development  of  the  country.  Its  expansion 
throughout  our  region  will  allow  the  further  enhancement  of  regional  co-operation  and  will 
facilitate other regional initiatives.  
You  are  welcome  and  we  assure  you  that  you  have  our  full  co-operation  in  your  activity  and  in 
developing the market and free initiative of Albanian economic agents. I wish you a lot of success in 
your work.  
2 
 BIS Review 22/2007
