Derick Latibeaudiere: Maintaining healthy banking and financial systems 
Opening remarks by Mr Derick Latibeaudiere, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, at the Tenth 
Annual  Assembly  of  the  Association  of  Banking  Supervisors  of  the  Americas  (ASBA), 
Montego Bay, 10 October 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  this  morning  to  welcome  you  to  the  Tenth  Annual 
Assembly  of  the  Association  of  Banking  Supervisors  of  the  Americas  (ASBA).  I  am 
very pleased that this event is taking place in Jamaica and particularly delighted that we are 
meeting in our enchanting “second city” - Montego Bay. Montego Bay and especially Rose 
Hall,  the  estate  on  which  this  hotel  now  stands,  has  been  a  significant  part  of  our 
Spanish/English colonial heritage about which I am sure you will hear over the next two days.  
It  is  with  a  great  deal  of  appreciation  and  support  that  I  commend  the  Association  for  the 
work  that  it  is  doing  to  develop,  disseminate,  and  promote  sound  banking  supervisory 
practices throughout the Americas. The range of items on the Agenda is a clear indication of 
the continuing seriousness and strong commitment with which you have approached the task 
of ensuring that these objectives are met. The Bank of Jamaica is very pleased to be a part 
of this organization and we welcome the opportunity to be involved in organizing and hosting 
this Assembly.  
I  must  extend  a  special  welcome  to  the  Chairman  of  the  Association,  Paulo  Sergio 
Cavalheiro  and  to  the  other  Board  members  of  ASBA  who  met  here  yesterday  for  Board 
discussions.  I  trust  that  the  environment  contributed  to  productive  deliberations.  We  look 
forward to hearing about the programmes that you have charted for the year ahead.  
I would also like to welcome Mr. Rudy Araujo, the Executive Director of ASBA and the 
other members of the ASBA Secretariat who have travelled to Jamaica from Mexico. Permit 
me to thank them for their efforts in co-ordinating the arrangements for this Assembly, along 
with my BOJ team.  
With us also, are a number of specially invited guests - representatives from non-member 
multilateral and regulatory organisations and from the private sector, who will be joining in 
the discussions over the next two days. I will not venture to name all of you, and so I say 
welcome all.  
Mr. Chairman, one of the major lessons of the ten years since the start of these Assemblies 
has been the heightened recognition of just how important it is for us to maintain a healthy 
banking and financial system. A strong and healthy financial system is critical for the growth 
and development of any country. Throughout the long history of financial markets, there have 
been  a  number  of  banking  and  financial  crises  that  have  severely  disrupted  economies. 
There is no reason for us to believe that there will be an end to these disruptions in an era of 
continuing technological change and innovation.  
What is therefore important is that we continually seek to prevent and mitigate future crises. 
This we can do with a blend of sharp analysis, keen judgment, practical experience and a 
rigorous  understanding  of  the  workings  of  financial  markets  in  both  normal  and  abnormal 
times. I believe that this is what defines effective banking supervision. It is also this rigorous 
understanding  of  the  operations  of  financial  markets  that  is  of  critical  importance  to  the 
development of macroeconomic policy inclusive of monetary policy.  
Mr.  Chairman,  over  two  and  a  half  centuries  ago,  in  the  18th  century  to  be  exact,  Adam 
Smith  wrote  of  the  free-market  system  as  the  “invisible”  hand  that  guides  the  market  to 
achieve  the  public  good.  While  that  concept  has  today  still  not  lost  its  resonance,  the 
increase in the complexity of economic and financial affairs and the potential for instability 
BIS Review 116/2007 
 1
that this has fostered, has placed us in a new arena. An arena, whose sphere of influence is 
constantly changing and one that therefore requires close and integrated monitoring in order 
for  us  to  understand  and  manage  the  risks  that  abound.  The  banking  crises  of  the  last 
quarter of a century and particularly those of the last ten years have had a damaging impact 
on  economic  activity  and  the  repercussions  have  been  devastating  for  a  number  of 
economies. There is therefore no room for countries in our region to be less than aggressive 
in  ensuring  a  more  careful,  integrated  and  direct  oversight  of  the  financial  system  to 
complement at least, that “invisible hand” of which Adam Smith wrote. This is of course, what 
ASBA is trying to achieve. 
I  use  the  word  integrated  because  in  some  of  our  jurisdictions,  Jamaica  for  example, 
supervision  is  divided  among  institutions.  In  the  Jamaican  case  we  have  over  the  years 
reduced  the  number  of  supervisory  authorities  in  the  financial  sector  to  two.  This  has 
achieved positive results in terms of the efficiency of supervision. It is my view that we could 
achieve  an  even  greater  level  of  effectiveness  by  going  one  step  further  with  the 
establishment of a single supervisory authority for the financial system as a whole.  
I also believe that there are significant advantages to be derived from the integrated interplay 
between  the  roles  of  supervision  and  the  effort  to  achieve  financial  and  macroeconomic 
stability. I believe that the benefits from this interplay are best realized when the supervisory 
functions are integrated and placed in one umbrella organization such as the central bank - 
the most logical location, bearing in mind the synergies that I mentioned. In other words, in 
the  Jamaican  context,  my  preference  is  for  an  integrated  and  autonomous  supervisory 
authority within the central bank.  
Traditionally, the central bank’s main objective is the achievement of monetary and financial 
stability  as  a  means  to  enhancing  macroeconomic  stability,  growth  and  development. 
Financial  stability  has  always  therefore  been  an  important  aspect  of  central  banking.  In 
pursuit of its twin functions, the central bank closely monitors developments in the financial 
market, interacts regularly with its primary dealers and other market players and analyzes the 
risks to the financial system. Over the last ten years the central bank’s emphasis on financial 
stability  has 
for  systemic  risk.  The 
transformation in the structure of financial markets and the continuing increase in volumes 
and products, have contributed to increasing the potential for risk and fuelled the need for a 
greater degree of interdependence in the pursuit of macroeconomic and financial stability.  
We have seen the challenges that recent developments in financial markets have posed for 
central banks both here and abroad. Indeed, these developments point to the dynamic and 
intricate links between central banks and financial markets. The Northern Rock case certainly 
reinforces  the  importance  of  these  links  and  points  to  the  need  for  a  more  integrated 
approach to the analysis and management of financial market activities both from a central 
banking  and  supervisory  point  of  view.  This  is  especially  important  in  an  environment  of 
continuing  change  and  particularly  relevant  to  emerging  and  vulnerable  market  economies 
such as Jamaica. 
There is no doubt that the achievement of a strong and resilient financial system is enhanced 
by the continuous improvement in the analysis and management of risk. Indeed, that is the 
subject  of  the  Basel  II  framework.  But  the  achievement  of  a  strong  and  resilient  financial 
system  is  also  augmented  by  sound  and  sustainable  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  The 
linkages are therefore critical.  
Furthermore,  and  speaking  from  the  perspective  of  the  Bank  of  Jamaica,  the  ability  to  act 
effectively  in  a  financial  crisis  is  enhanced  by  the  fact  that  the  supervision  of  commercial 
banks resides in the central bank. Indeed, the Bank’s current supervisory function helps the 
central  bank  to  obtain  timely  and  reliable  information  regarding  conditions  in  the  banking 
sector and the payments system. But over the years the changing financial landscape has 
spawned a variety of institutions other than the traditional commercial banks. The Bank of 
Jamaica has no regulatory authority over these other institutions, which makes it difficult to 
increased  because  of 
increased  potential 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2007
quickly gather and evaluate the necessary information to facilitate sound policy responses or 
avert crises.  
I believe that our central banking activities, coupled with the access to information from an 
integrated supervisory authority under the umbrella of the Bank of Jamaica, would enhance 
the  effectiveness  of  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  manage  crises.  At  the  same  time  the 
supervision  of  the  financial  sector  as  a  whole  would  benefit  from  the  results  of  central 
banking  activities  in  the  financial  markets.  The  Bank’s  technical  expertise  in  monitoring 
financial  market  developments  would  also  be  on  hand  to  add  value  to  prudential  risk 
evaluation.  
The Bank of Jamaica is very pleased that the Government has indicated its commitment to 
an  independent  Central  Bank.  We  will  be  working  towards  this  and  in  this  context  we  will 
pursue  the  matter  of  an  umbrella  supervisory  authority  under  the  central  bank.  There  are 
good  reasons  to  believe  that  such  an  arrangement  would  significantly  benefit  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole.  After  all,  price  stability  and  financial  stability  go  hand  in  hand,  and 
prudence is as intrinsic to central banking as it is to financial stability and supervision.  
BIS Review 116/2007 
 3
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I believe that the Tenth Annual ASBA Assembly will serve to strengthen the bonds of banking 
supervisors within the respective regions and provide meaningful insights into approaches to 
current issues in banking supervision. 
I know that your discussions over the next two days will produce valuable results and provide 
the direction for an even more robust administrative year for ASBA. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2007
