Stanley Fischer: The Israeli economy, its banking system and Basel II 
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, to the Conference of 
the Association of Banks, Tel Aviv, 25 December 2007. 
 Today  I  will  first  speak  about  the  state  of  the  economy  in  Israel,  and  about  the  banking 
system as an important part of the economy; then I will talk of the Bank of Israel’s activity 
regarding competition in the banking system; and finally I will turn to Basel II. 
The state of the economy 
1.  
Israel’s  economy  is  in  a  very  good  situation,  and  growth  this  year  is  expected  to  be  5.4 
percent,  or  even  slightly  higher.  Exports  have  risen  rapidly,  the  current  account  of  the 
balance of payments is showing a surplus of 4 percent of GDP, the debt/GDP ratio has fallen 
to about 82 percent of GDP, compared with about 102 percent in 2003, the strong inflow of 
foreign  investment  in  Israel  is  continuing,  unemployment  is  declining,  and  according  to 
quarterly figures has already reached 7.3 percent, down from about 11 percent in 2003, the 
rate of participation in the labor market is rising, price stability has been maintained, and both 
financial and economic stability have been preserved. At the present time, the inflation rate is 
slightly higher than the upper bound of the target range, but it is expected to return to the 
target  by  around  the  middle  of  next  year.  The  Bank  of  Israel,  for  its  part,  will  make  every 
effort to ensure this outcome. 
The auspicious state of the economy is reflected in the OECD’s invitation to Israel to start the 
process  of  joining  the  organization,  the  improved  credit  rating  granted  to  Israel,  the 
agreement  of  the  US  government  to  continue  providing  us  with  loan  guarantees,  and  the 
report of the IMF delegation that visited Israel this month. 
Nevertheless,  the  future  looks  less  rosy:  it  appears  that  the  financial  crisis  in  the  US  and 
Europe will become more severe. The central banks are searching for the right tools to deal 
with the problems of liquidity, and as a result of the difficulties in the financial markets the 
gaps between central banks’ interest rates and market rates are widening. The first signs of 
the fruits of the central banks’ efforts are becoming visible. If this continues, the interest rate 
gaps will again become more reasonable, but even then the problem of the collapse of the 
US housing market and its implications for the economy will remain. 
Till  now  there  has  been  no  evidence  of  a  slowdown  in  the  US  economy.  However,  a 
slowdown  is  expected,  and  the  financial  crisis  is  likely  to  exacerbate  the  situation.  Israel’s 
banks  were  hardly  exposed  to  the  situation  that  developed  in  the  international  financial 
markets. Nevertheless, Israel’s interest spreads have widened, and if a serious slowdown in 
the US occurs, it is bound to affect Israel’s economy too. 
The intensity of the potential impact on Israel depends on us. Therefore, it is imperative that 
the  government  continue  to  observe  fiscal  discipline,  that  the  Bank  of  Israel  continue  to 
maintain  price  stability  and  to  support  financial  stability,  and  that  the  banks  continue  with 
prudent, and particularly with cautious risk management. If all the above fulfill their functions 
properly, and if concurrently the business sector continues to display enterprise and to thrive, 
we will be able to continue to grow at a good pace, even against the background of some 
economic slowdown in the advanced economies. 
In  the  context  of  this  strategy,  our  chances  of  achieving  the  main  objective  of  economic 
policy will improve – to convert a high rate of growth into sustainable growth. Such growth is 
vital to the future of the country, society, and the economy. Growth has already improved the 
standard of living of the whole population in Israel and of all its strata. As a result, the rise in 
the  poverty  rate  halted  in  2006,  based  on  the  relative  measure  of  poverty  (which  relates 
BIS Review 151/2007 
 1
mainly to income differentials); based on the absolute measure of poverty (with relates to the 
ability to purchase a basket of basic goods), poverty actually declined in 2005 and 2006. In 
addition, unemployment has fallen from its peak in 2003 at all educational levels, including 
the lowest, the rate of participation in the labor market has risen in all parts of the country, 
including the outlying ones, and the rate of employment of Israelis and the average real wage 
has risen in all industries, including the low-technology ones. 
The Israeli banks 
2.  
What  does  this  mean  for  Israel’s  banks?  It  is  clear  that  economic  buoyancy  affects  the 
banks. The financial position of the banks in Israel has improved during the last few years, 
with  regard  to  their  profits,  capital  ratio,  and  the  drop  in  the  proportion  of  problem  loans. 
Israel’s economy needs the banking system to remain strong and robust. However, it was not 
only correct management that contributed to their success – the improved economic situation 
also played a part. Therefore, I repeat the message that I delivered in my address last year 
(it sounds better in Yiddish): “Bad loans are made in good times.” 
This is an important thing to say at any time but particularly at the present time, in view of 
expectations of a growth slowdown in the global economy and, especially, the US economy, 
in 2008. On this point, an important aspect is the process in which the banks are currently 
engaged,  with  the  support  of  the  Supervisor  of  Banks  –  of  raising  the  capital  ratio.  This 
process should be followed through to its completion. 
Before I turn to the subject of competition in the banking system, I would like to emphasize 
one especially important point. The banks have recently been subjected to a wave of attacks 
in the name of competition and customers’ wellbeing, and I too have leveled criticism with 
regard to one aspect, and that is bank fees. 
Sometimes the banks themselves take steps that seem to invite such attacks, but we must 
be extremely careful. A strong and stable banking system, as I have already stated, is vital to 
the robustness of the economy, and we must not weaken it. 
Although  nearly  all  proposed  legislation  regarding  banks  purports  to  protect  depositors,  in 
certain cases it would harm the banks and the desire of other entities to act as competitors to 
the banks, and in the final analysis, the depositors themselves. It is thus essential that any 
initiative concerning the banking system be undertaken in full cooperation with the banking 
supervision. 
Competition in the banking system 
3.  
Competition in the banking system has been a focus of attention in the Bank of Israel and 
among the public for many years. There is a reasonable degree of competition in the area of 
banking services for the business sector, and the Bachar Committee dealt with competition in 
the credit and capital markets. 
This  year  bank  fees  were  the  focus  of  a  great  deal  of  attention.  The  Banking  Supervision 
Department  was  deeply  involved  in  the  subject  this  year.  Firstly,  the  Supervisor  of  Banks, 
together with the Knesset Economics Committee, successfully promoted the Bank Fees Law. 
Following  that,  the  Banking  Supervision  Department,  after  investing  a  great  deal  of  effort, 
drew  up  a  new  schedule  of  bank  fees  for  households  and  small  businesses.  The  new 
schedule  is  standard  for  all  banks,  and  contains  68  fees,  still  not  a  small  number,  but 
significantly fewer than the 198 fees currently listed. The new schedule will make it easier for 
customers to know how much they will have to pay, and for what. This enables customers to 
compare the fees charged by the different banks, and to decide which offers the cheapest 
rates for which services. We hope that when the degree of competition has increased we will 
no longer have to supervise bank fees. The best supervision is that exercised by consumers 
and the markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2007
In addition to the work invested in the subject of bank fees, the Bank of Israel was also very 
busy with many aspects of increasing the level of competition long term in banking services 
for households and small businesses. 
The underlying approach to this topic is to create sources of competition not only from within 
the  banking  system  but  also  from  outside  it.  The  aim  is  to  offer  the  Israeli  consumer 
alternatives for certain services currently provided by the banks. In some areas this requires 
cooperation with other institutions, such as the Ministry of Finance (and specifically with the 
Commissioner  of  the  Capital  Market,  Insurance  and  Savings),  the  Ministry  of  Justice,  the 
Securities  Authority,  the  Tel  Aviv  Stock  Exchange,  the  Anti-Trust  Authority,  and  the 
Government Companies Authority. 
What are the main potential sources of competition for the banking system from without? 
1. 
Money  market  funds.  These  are  likely  to  compete  for  short-term  local-currency 
deposits in banks. We hope that in due course they will be able to offer additional 
cash management services, such as drawing checks. 
Commercial  paper.  These  are  likely  to  compete  for  short-term  local-currency 
deposits in banks. 
Repo-type transactions. These are likely to compete against short-term bank credit. 
Securitization.  This  should  contribute  to  the  general  development  of  the  credit 
market, including nonbank credit. 
A platform for online distribution of mutual funds. This may compete with the banks 
in their distribution of mutual funds. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
In  addition  to  the  above,  there  are  other  possible  sources  of  competition  from  within  the 
banking system: 
1. 
Simplification  of  switching  from  bank  to  bank.  This  a  very  important  step  in 
encouraging  competition  within  the  banking  system,  and  several  significant 
measures  have  already  been  introduced  by  the  Banking  Supervision  Department: 
banks need to provide customers with relevant information before customers close 
accounts and the process of switching banks has been simplified; the transfer of the 
account  is handled  by  the  bank  to  which  the  customer  is  moving;  customers  now 
have  the  possibility  of  transferring  some  of  their  activities;  and  the  costs  of 
transferring  to  another  bank  have  been  reduced.  The  Banking  Supervision 
Department intends to tighten the enforcement of its directives in this regard and to 
increase  customers’  awareness  of  it.  The  power  to  supervise  bank  fees  will  also 
enable  steps  to  be  taken  as  necessary  to  reduce  the  costs  of  switching  between 
banks. 
Increasing  the  transparency  of  banking  activity  for  customers.  The  Banking 
Supervision  Department  intends  to  take  further  steps  towards  the  uniformity  and 
simplification of reports to customers on their banking and credit-card activities, and 
the  provision  of  information  about  a  given  banking  service  before  the  customer 
commits  him/herself  by  signing  a  contract  The  new  fee  schedule  is  an  important 
move in this direction. 
Increasing  the  chances  of  other  banks  entering  the  banking  system.  The  more 
banks there are in Israel, the greater the choice facing customers, and the greater 
the competition. 
On this point there is a trade-off between the number of banks in the system—the 
more  banks,  the  more  competition  –  on  the  one  hand,  and  their  efficiency  and 
robustness, on the other, and the latter is certainly a relevant consideration for the 
supervisory  authorities  This  trade-off  is  a  focal  consideration  when  it  comes  to 
decisions on mergers between banks. 
2. 
3. 
BIS Review 151/2007 
 3
The Banking Supervision Department is already taking steps to remove barriers to increase 
the chances of an internet bank operating in Israel, to advance the privatization of the Postal 
Bank and to regularize its banking activity, and to bring about the entry of a foreign bank into 
the field of retail banking in Israel. All of which, without waiving considerations of banking-
system stability. 
Here it is important to stress the following two points: 
1. 
The size of Israel’s economy, the high technological level of its banking system, and 
Israel’s  geopolitical  situation  all  play  a  part  in  foreign  banks’  considerations  about 
entering Israel’s retail banking market. 
As  I  mentioned  before,  the  attacks  on  banks,  and  I  include  in  that  the  extensive 
legislative  activity  regarding  banking,  is  likely  to  deter  anyone,  including  foreign 
banks, from starting to operate in Israel. 
2. 
Some  of  the  points  made  above  are  already  being  dealt  with  by  the  Bank  of  Israel,  and 
others  will  be  discussed  by  the  Ariav  Committee  set  up  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  and 
myself.  The  committee  consists  of  the  appropriate  people  in  the  relevant  authorities  and 
external experts in the field. The establishment of the committee signifies the importance that 
the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Israel, among others, attribute to the development of 
Israel’s financial system. Now we must allow the committee to get on with its work and to 
present its conclusions in due course. 
I now turn to my last subject for today: 
Basel II 
4.  
The adoption of the Basel II principles is one of the most important tasks being tackled by the 
Banking Supervision Department, and hence, by the banking system as a whole. 
Basel  II  is  an  advanced  approach  to  bank  management  and  supervision,  based  on  the 
establishment  of  risk-management  systems  rather  than  detailed  rules.  This  requires  the 
banks to invest much effort in setting up sophisticated information and management systems 
and an extensive database. 
The  Banking  Supervision  Department  is  devoting  many  resources  to  this  subject.  The 
Supervisor  of  Banks  has  already  published  a  schedule  and  delineated  the  path  to  be 
followed in preparing for and completing the adoption of Basel II. This is an ambitious project, 
and it is very important that we succeed in implementing it. 
Adopting the Basel II principles and those of SOX 404 will improve overall management – 
and  in  particular  risk  management  –  and  banks’  control,  and  will  institute  the  highest 
international standards in Israel’s banking system. 
I hope that next year we will be able to stand on this platform and look back and see how 
much we have progressed in this vital aspect of banking, and in particular with regard to the 
competitiveness, efficiency, and robustness of the banking system. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2007
