Jean-Pierre Roth: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Switzerland  
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 13 December 2007. 
 Economic outlook 
The last few months have seen a number of remarkable events in the global economy. The 
US dollar has plunged, dropping below the level attained in 1995 against the Swiss franc. Oil 
prices  have  continued  to  soar,  threatening  to  breach  the  hundred  dollar  mark.  Sub-prime 
credit  markets  continue  to  disrupt  financial  markets.  How  have  these  factors  affected  the 
international  economy?  The  US  economy  is  affected  simultaneously  by  the  unfavourable 
developments  in  real  estate  markets,  which  are  impacting  on  credit  markets,  and  by 
increasing oil prices. At the same time, the fall in the dollar is bolstering external demand, so 
that  most  observers  are  not  forecasting  more  than  a  temporary  decline  in  US  economic 
growth  next  year.  As  for  the  European  economy  –  which  is  less  open  than  the  national 
economies of which it is composed – it is only slightly affected at present by the upturn in the 
euro,  mirroring  the  downturn  in  the  US  dollar.  The  outlook  for  European  growth  in  2008 
remains favourable, despite a light downward correction. All in all, the international economic 
situation remains generally positive, although it is true to say that this assessment is even 
more uncertain than three months ago. 
Despite its substantial international integration, the Swiss economy, at this point, is scarcely 
affected by the turmoil in the international financial markets. Growth remained strong in the 
third  quarter.  Real  gross  domestic  product  rose  at  an  annual  rate  of  3.3%.  Employment 
continued improving across the board, in line with our expectations. In both the industrial and 
service  sectors,  the  process  of  new  job  creation  carried  on.  In  construction,  employment 
stabilised at a high level. Unemployment continued falling. 
As  a  result  of  the  favourable  developments  in  the  labour  market,  consumer  sentiment 
remains buoyant. Consequently, household expenditure is still increasing at a robust pace. 
Furthermore,  strong  demand  for  labour  is  now  leading  to  a  faster  increase  in  real  wages. 
Given this situation, private consumption should continue to support growth in 2008. Due to 
impetus  from  Europe,  Asia  and  the  oil-producing  countries,  goods  exports  are  advancing 
further.  Looking  at  production,  expectations  remain  optimistic  both  for  the  manufacturing 
sector  and  for  non-financial  services  –  businesses  expect  the  growth  phase  to  persist. 
Investment activity remains lively.  
The banking sector is faced with the uncertainties that have arisen out of the developments 
in the US real estate market together with the structured products that relate to this market. It 
is possible that the contribution of the Swiss financial sector to GDP growth will fall as early 
as the fourth quarter of this year, due to a drop in the volume of activity on financial markets. 
Other factors could also have an impact during the course of 2008, for instance, via a decline 
in the total wage bill paid by the sector.  
Against  this  backdrop,  Swiss  GDP  growth  is  likely  to  settle  at  around  2%  in  2008.  This 
easing-off should allow for a reduction in the level of capacity utilisation. In a moment I will 
outline the risks attached to our baseline scenario. 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 1
Developments in monetary and financial conditions 
Since  the  onset  of  the  sub-prime  credit  crisis  in  August,  yields  on  long-term  Swiss 
Confederation bonds have remained almost unchanged. For 10-year maturities, the rate has 
fluctuated  around  3%.  For  shorter  maturity  bonds,  however,  the  search  for  quality 
investments has resulted in a drop in rates. Yields on two-year maturities, for instance, have 
fallen  from  3.0%  to  2.0%.  However,  this  decline  has  been  partly  offset  or  even  fully 
neutralised  by  an  increase  in  risk  premiums,  in  particular  in  the  case  of  issuers  with  poor 
ratings. Since September, the depreciation in the US dollar has accelerated. The Swiss franc 
has also strengthened a little against the euro, although the movements were more volatile in 
nature.  
Monetary  and  financial  conditions  can  also  be  analysed  in  terms  of  volumes.  Special 
attention  should  be  given  to  commercial  lending,  since  a  shortage  of  credit  in  the  current 
circumstances  would  be  equivalent  to  a  tightening  in  monetary  conditions.  However,  no 
effect of this kind can be identified in Switzerland, not even in the most recent statistics. On 
the contrary, trends that have been observed over a period of several years continue to hold. 
The gradual slowdown in the growth of mortgage loans, whose rate of increase is now below 
4%,  is  persisting.  The  growth  in  other  lending  is  still  picking  up  pace,  confirming  the 
momentum of the business cycle. These loans are now growing at a rate of 16%, which is 
faster than in the boom period of 1999 and 2000. At this rate, the level attained during that 
previous boom will soon be reached again. 
The behaviour of the monetary aggregates might appear to contradict movements in lending. 
However, we should not forget that money is a long-term indicator, while the other credits are 
an  indicator  that  moves  in  line  with  the  business  cycle.  In  response  to  past  increases  in 
interest  rates,  a  transfer  from  sight  deposits  and  savings  deposits  to  higher-yield  term 
deposits  is  underway.  Consequently,  the  M1  and  M2  monetary  aggregates,  which  do  not 
include  term  deposits,  are  declining.  M3,  which  incorporates  all  types  of  deposits,  is 
registering  very  moderate  growth  compatible  with  more  stable  inflation  in  the  medium  and 
long term.  
Risks associated with the inflation outlook 
As usual, our assessment of the inflation outlook is embedded in the baseline scenario that 
we consider the most probable future development. However, the uncertainties associated 
with the scenario are greater than usual. This is due to a convergence of various trends with 
differing effects on the economy.    
First  of  all,  there  are  a  number  of  events  that  could  slow  down  the  economy,  thereby 
moderating  inflation.  A  deterioration  in  the  international  growth  outlook  associated  with  a 
widening of the impact of the crisis in the US real estate market should be placed in this first 
category. If the resulting slowdown in the growth of the Swiss economy remains moderate, 
this  would  reinforce  price  stability.  However,  a  substantial  slowdown  would  necessitate  a 
change of direction for us. 
Next,  there  are  some  developments  that  could  simultaneously  slow  the  economy  and 
threaten  price  stability.  An  example  of  this,  if  it  were  to  prove  persistent,  is  the  rise  in  oil 
prices. In this respect, monetary policy finds itself in a dilemma and care needs to be taken in 
order to prevent prices from spiralling out of control.  
Finally, there are developments that could stimulate economic activity – which is already at a 
high level – as well as exacerbating inflationary risks. In this category we should mention a 
possible continued weakening in the Swiss franc. To date, the depreciation of the currency 
has mainly stimulated the economy without pushing up prices. Negative effects on inflation 
have  been  limited  due  to  productivity  gains,  the  opening  up  of  the  labour  market  and  the 
appearance of new international competitors. 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2007
The concurrence of these contradictory risk factors makes a global evaluation difficult and 
encourages the adoption of a prudent and watchful attitude. 
Monetary policy decision 
We have decided to leave the current Libor target range unchanged and to continue aiming 
for  the  middle  of  the  range.  This  decision  is  based  on  the  following  considerations.  Our 
analyses show that, following the slowdown in the global economy, the outlook for inflation 
has improved, if we disregard the temporary rise that will occur over the next few months as 
a  result  of  the  rise  in  oil  prices.  Moreover,  the  turmoil  affecting  the  international  financial 
markets and the uncertainty with respect to the extent of possible fall-out on the rest of the 
economy all call for prudence. The risk of a rise in inflation has not been dispelled; of that 
there can be no doubt, given the rise in oil prices, the weakness of the Swiss franc against 
the euro, and the high level of capacity utilisation. Nevertheless, we do not consider this to 
be  a  matter  of  urgency  and  view  an  adjustment  in  our  policy  as  unnecessary  under  the 
current  circumstances.  It  is  evident  that  we  will  continue  to  keep  a  very  close  watch  on 
developments in the situation.  
Inflation forecast graph 
I will now turn to the final part of my remarks. What is our inflation forecast? The dashed red 
curve on the graph represents the new forecast. It relates to the period between the fourth 
quarter of 2007 and the third quarter of 2010, and maps the future development of inflation 
on  the  assumption  that  the  2.75%  level  remains  constant  over  the  forecasting  period.  For 
purposes  of  comparison,  the  dash-dotted  green  curve  shows  the  inflation  forecast  of  the 
September monetary assessment, which was also based on a three-month Libor of 2.75%.   
The new forecast indicates that inflation will rise in the first half of 2008. It is likely that it will 
breach even the 2% level. However, this increase will be temporary and will be chiefly due to 
the rise in oil prices. After that time, inflation will settle at around 1.5%, with a slight upward 
trend  at  the  end  of  the  period.  The  slowdown  in  the  international  economy  explains  the 
downward revision in the inflation outlook for 2009 and 2010. 
Naturally,  any  forecast  is  uncertain,  and  at  present  both  upside  and  downside  risks  are 
greater than usual. Consequently, we will continue to keep a close watch on developments in 
the  financial  markets,  the  international  economy,  oil  prices  and  the  Swiss  franc  exchange 
rate, in order to assess their impact on the inflation outlook and to be in a position to react 
swiftly should the need arise. 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 3
   Observed inflation December 2007 
2004
2005
2006
2007
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Inflation
0.06 0.87 0.91 1.38 1.35 1.06 1.18 1.10 1.23 1.33 1.22 0.46 0.09 0.52 0.63
  Inflation forecast of September 2007 with Libor at 2.75% and of December 2007 with Libor 
at 2.75% 
2007
2008
2009
2010
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Forecast September 2007,
Libor at 2.75%
Forecast December 2007,
Libor at 2.75%
   0.66 1.20 1.50 1.38 1.57 1.69 1.75 1.80 1.85 1.91 1.96 2.00  
   1.62 2.14 1.54 1.56 1.51 1.47 1.46 1.46 1.48 1.51 1.53 1.55
   4 
 BIS Review 150/2007
