Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic management in a large currency zone 
like the euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Breakfast Policy Briefing at the European Policy Centre, Brussels, 8 October 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honour and a pleasure to be invited to say a few words at your “Breakfast Policy 
Briefing”.  I  like  an  early  start  and  greatly  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  talk  to  such  a 
distinguished and influential audience.  
Not  too  long  ago,  a  single  currency  in  Europe  would  have  been  unthinkable  for  many 
observers. And yet, we are now approaching the tenth anniversary of the creation of the ECB 
and  the  launch  of  the  euro.  We  have  already  achieved  a  great  deal  and  overcome  big 
challenges at a time when a lot was happening both worldwide and in Europe. Indeed, world 
growth has been very solid over the recent years. Competitive forces are reshaping global 
manufacturing, the financial landscape and the sharing of wealth. More and more countries 
have opened up their economies and are benefiting from greater prosperity.  
Several of the benefits of the euro are already clearly visible, such as the deepening of trade 
and financial links between euro area countries and the greater resilience of the euro area to 
external shocks. Today I will discuss both of these accomplishments, and I will also touch on 
some of the challenges that we continue to face. For instance, there is presently a degree of 
diversity among euro area countries. What I intend to argue is that we have to consolidate 
the gains from the euro, seize global opportunities and reduce any future risk of divergence.  
In  my  briefing  this  morning,  I  will provide  you  with  a  number  of  arguments  concerning  the 
need  for  a  sound  economic  management  in  the  euro  area,  which  now  comprises  13 
countries and has 317 million inhabitants. Such economic management is an important tool 
in  order  to  address  the  challenges  we  are  facing.  I  will  start  by  providing  some  of  the 
reasoning behind the main principles of our economic management and will finish by looking 
at some areas of strength that we enjoy in this respect.  
The reasoning behind a sound economic management: why is it needed?  
Some  diversity  is  a  natural  phenomenon  in  any  vast  currency  area.  Heterogeneity  can 
originate from various sources, some of which have no direct link with monetary policy or a 
single currency. Causes may include country-specific demographic trends or catching-up in 
terms of living standards. There could also be differences in productivity growth, reflecting 
national  differences  in  areas  such  as  industry  characteristics,  investment  in  R&D  and 
innovation.  
Differences in the timing and extent of past structural reforms in euro area countries are also 
a  source  of  diversity.  To  give  you  an  example,  the  Netherlands  undertook  labour  market 
reforms much earlier than the largest euro area countries. This enhanced its flexibility and 
increased its ability to adjust to a wide range of shocks. In some other countries, short-term 
shocks  may  have  had  more  persistent  effects  on  growth  differentials  owing  to  slow 
adjustment processes caused by the presence of structural rigidities.  
Differences  in  fiscal  policies  and  other  national  policies  can  also  give  rise  to  diverse 
economic situations. There is an additional source of diversity that may be working its way 
through  the  system.  After  the  launch  of  the  euro,  some  countries  suddenly  benefited  from 
lower short and long-term interest rates, as well as easier access to more competitive credit 
markets.  This  encouraged  the  purchase  of  durable  and  non-durable  goods,  as  well  as 
BIS Review 112/2007 
 1
housing, albeit to differing extents in the various euro area countries. This was equivalent to 
a one-off shock immediately after the launch of the euro.  
All in all, the degree of diversity observed in the euro area is not substantially different from 
that seen in the United States. And neither is it substantially different from that seen within 
the national borders of several large economies (such as Germany, Italy and Spain), which is 
a continuation of historical patterns. 
Diversity in perspective 
Diversity within the euro area should be put in perspective, and I shall now look at three main 
types of divergence. Whenever possible, I will compare the euro area with the United States, 
as the world’s only other industrialised economy of a comparable size.  
a) Inflation dispersion in the euro area declined considerably in the 1980s and 1990s and 
is  now  on  a  par  with  that  of  the  United  States.  Impressive  progress  has  been  made,  and 
inflation dispersion among euro area countries has broadly stabilised at a low level since the 
launch  of  the  euro.  To give  you  an  example, the unweighted standard deviation of annual 
HICP inflation rates still stood at around 6 percentage points in late 1990, but this rate has 
broadly stabilised at around 1 percentage point since the launch of the euro. This dispersion 
level is similar to that of the 14 US metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs), but is somewhat 
higher than that of the four US census regions. Although such comparisons are subject to 
some  well-known  caveats,  I  would  argue  that  inflation  dispersion  in  the  euro  area  has  not 
been high by international standards.  
One feature of euro area inflation differentials is their persistence over long periods of time; 
in this respect, the euro area differs from the United States. In other words, inflation in most 
euro  area  countries  displays  significant  inertia.  Most  euro  area  countries  exhibiting  higher 
than average inflation rates in recent years have been in this position for at least a decade. 
Similar persistence is observed in low inflation countries. However, the good news is that we 
are now seeing signs of limited reversals of this trend. The inflation rates of some euro area 
countries have moved from being relatively high to being in line with – or even below – the 
euro area average. Of course, these corrections are welcome, but the point is that they have 
been fairly slow in coming. 
If we look at the cost side, the factors generating inflation differentials are, in most countries, 
primarily  domestic  rather  than  external.  In  particular,  we  have  witnessed  sustained 
divergence  in  wage  developments  across  the  euro  area  and  smaller  differences  in  labour 
productivity  growth.  These  differences  in  the  growth  of  labour  costs  have  been  the  main 
sources of persistence in inflation differentials. Various reasons can be suggested for this. 
Varying  levels  of  wage  rigidity  across  the  euro  area,  changes  in  profit  margins,  imperfect 
competition  and  associated  price  rigidities  across  countries  all  affect  labour  costs  and 
contribute to inflation differentials.  
If we look at product groups, price dispersion has been greater in the area of services, mostly 
owing  to  the  dispersion  observed  in  wage  developments  across  countries.  By  contrast, 
inflation  dispersion  has  been  relatively  low  for  tradable  non-energy  industrial  goods,  with 
greater competition in tradable goods being the main reason for this. Products with relatively 
volatile  prices  (such  as  energy  and  both  processed  and  unprocessed  food)  have,  on  the 
other hand, shown high levels of dispersion across countries in terms of price changes. 
To sum up, a significant degree of diversity does exist among the national economies of the 
euro  area  in  terms  of  inflation  and  cost  developments.  This  diversity  is  of  the  order  of 
magnitude  of  what  is  observed  in  the  United  States.  But  the  persistence  of  inflation 
differentials is the main problem to the extent that it reflects structural rigidities or a lack of 
competition. It has to be corrected at the level of the economies concerned in order not to 
see their relative competitiveness fall for too long.  
2 
 BIS Review 112/2007
b) Output growth differentials in the euro area have remained broadly stable since the 
early  1970s.  The  average  dispersion  of  annual  real  GDP  growth  over  the  period  between 
1999  and  2006  (measured  as  unweighted  standard  deviation)  was  around  2  percentage 
points. This figure is close to the average dispersion of real growth rates since the 1980s. By 
comparison, if we look across all 50 US states, the dispersion of real growth has averaged 
approximately  2.5  percentage  points  over  the  last  15  years.  When  the  United  States  is 
divided  into  the  eight  statistical  regions,  the  average  dispersion  is  around  1.5  percentage 
points. 
One important issue of concern, however, is the fact that within the euro area there is also a 
relatively  high  degree  of  persistence  regarding  output  growth  differentials.  This  is  less  the 
case in the United States. However, taking the United States for comparison only helps up to 
a certain point. On the one hand, the US economy is more flexible than the euro area, which 
means that the effects of asymmetric shocks can be absorbed more easily and more quickly. 
On the other hand, the United States exhibits stronger regional specialisation than the euro 
area, making its regions more susceptible to specific asymmetric shocks.  
Let me now turn to the two main drivers of growth differentials for the euro area: differentials 
in cycles and differentials in trends. Differentials in cycles have steadily declined since the 
early 1990s. There is also evidence of a stronger common euro area cycle accounting for a 
large part of the business cycle fluctuations across euro area countries. Since 1999 several 
shocks have spread in similar ways across euro area countries. For example, the euro area 
has successfully weathered a number of shocks, including the bursting of the dotcom bubble, 
the  ripple  effects  of  the  terrorist  attacks  of  11  September,  the  surge  in  global  commodity 
prices – particularly energy prices – and the persistence of sizeable global imbalances. The 
high  degree  of  synchronisation  in  the  business  cycles  of  euro  area  countries  is  a  feature 
unique  to  the  euro  area.  This  suggests  that  EU  integration  and  the  launch  of  the  euro  – 
rather than global forces – have led to smaller differences in output gaps among euro area 
countries.  
The picture for the second driver of dispersion – i.e., differentials in trends – shows lasting 
differences,  with  a  gradual  increase  in  trend  growth  dispersion.  This  picture  also  differs 
across  euro  area  countries,  some  of  which  persistently  exhibit  trend  output  growth  either 
above or below the euro area average. It is here that the various sources of diversity that I 
have just mentioned play a role.  
To  sum  up,  first  there  is  evidence  of  a  stronger  common  euro  area  cycle.  Second,  the 
differences observed in trend growth – which are not due to the single monetary policy or the 
euro – have important implications. Macroeconomic policies have a limited role in addressing 
such differences in trend growth. Indeed, structural reforms by national authorities as well as 
sound fiscal policies are the primary means of dealing with such differences.  
c)  Changes  in  cost  and  price  competitiveness  mainly  reflect  changes  in  relative  unit 
labour costs and persistent inflation differentials. These demonstrate that there is significant 
leeway  for  influencing  relative  competitiveness,  even  in  the  absence  of  nominal  exchange 
rate  adjustments.  To  give  you  an  idea  of  the  magnitude  of  this  leeway,  looking  at  the 
cumulative growth of unit labour costs for the economy as a whole between 1999 and 2006, 
the difference between the countries with the largest increases and those with the smallest 
increases was around 20-25%. This is an important phenomenon, and a close examination 
of the driving factors is therefore required.  
Germany,  for  example,  has  seen  moderate  growth  in  unit  labour  costs  over  an  extended 
period, leading to a correction of the losses in competitiveness which arose in the aftermath 
of  German  reunification.  This  correction  –  and  the  corresponding  sustained  period  of 
relatively  low  inflation  –  is  of  course  fully  justified  and  most  welcome.  It  also  shows  that 
adjustment mechanisms in the euro area work. A higher degree of wage flexibility would help 
to accelerate such desirable adjustment processes.  
BIS Review 112/2007 
 3
At  the  other  extreme,  some  countries  are  to  some  extent  catching  up  with  others’  higher 
living standards and may, therefore, be experiencing some temporary differences in relative 
cost competitiveness, reflecting movement towards a new equilibrium. Some other sources 
of persistent inflation differentials may, however, not be justifiable – for example differentials 
attributable  to  insufficient  flexibility.  In  some  economies,  the  combination  of  weak  labour 
productivity  growth  and  strong  increases  in  nominal  wages  and  salaries  over  a  sustained 
period inevitably results in a significant loss of relative competitiveness. 
To  sum  up,  changes  in  relative  cost  competitiveness  provide  much  more  room  for 
manoeuvre than was foreseen prior to the launch of the euro. In several euro area countries, 
wage formation is still linked to indexation mechanisms or is influenced by the public sector. 
This limits the ability to respond to shocks. Structural reforms and the liberalisation of product 
and labour markets can and must contribute to significant increases in flexibility. 
The need for sound economic management 
The economic management of the euro area should reflect the increasing interdependence 
of  its  economies  and  should  ensure  that  excessive  differentials  in  inflation,  growth  and 
competitiveness are addressed. Let me now stress the importance of four guiding principles 
in this respect: first, the rigorous implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact; second, 
the full completion of the single market, including the area of services and financial services; 
third, the implementation of structural reforms in all markets; and fourth, the need to monitor 
carefully at country level the evolution of unit labour costs and competitiveness indicators in 
general.  
a) The first principle is the rigorous implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact as a 
prerequisite for sound fiscal policies. There are several reasons for supporting sound fiscal 
policies. They are, for instance, needed to reduce the risk of fiscal policy spillovers, both into 
monetary  policy  and  across  countries  more  generally.  They  are  also  needed  to  enhance 
flexibility and adaptability. Sound fiscal policies create the necessary conditions for flexibility, 
which  cushions  the  effects  of  the  economic  cycle  through  the  functioning  of  automatic 
stabilisers. Sound fiscal policies also ensure proper incentives. The tax and benefit system 
should avoid major distortions that would affect incentives to work, save, invest and innovate, 
thereby making fiscal policy more efficient and growth-friendly. Moreover, the public sector 
also functions as a role model, for example as regards wages or administrative prices. The 
behaviour  of  the  public  sector  can,  for  instance,  make  social  partners  more  aware  of  the 
trade-off between higher salaries and job creation. Furthermore, population ageing in most 
industrialised  economies  –  and  a  significant increase  in  the  old-age  dependency  ratio  and 
higher healthcare and long-term care expenditures – will exert growing pressure on public 
finances. Sound fiscal policies will need to make provisions for the effects from population 
ageing.  
b)  The  second  principle  pertains  to  the  full  completion  of  the  single  market.  This  will 
enhance not only competition and efficiency, but also adjustment mechanisms in the event of 
adverse shocks. We still have significant progress to make in this domain, despite the fact 
that the single market was the goal of the founding fathers of the European Union as set out 
in  the  Treaty  of  Rome  and  despite  the  fact  that  this  50-year  endeavour  was  very  strongly 
reaffirmed 20 years ago with the Single European Act. We still have a lot of work to do in this 
area.  
According  to  the  OECD,  product  market  regulation  remains  high  in  several  euro  area 
countries,  and  the  level  of  such  regulation  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  is  considered 
significantly higher than in the United States. Let me also mention the fact that the services 
sector,  which  represents  70%  of  euro  area  GDP,  is  far  from  being  fully  integrated  as  an 
effective  single  market.  We  attach  enormous  importance  to  the  full  integration  of  financial 
markets, particularly because these play a decisive role in shock absorption and adjustment 
dynamics in a large single currency area. Concerning cross-border labour mobility, empirical 
4 
 BIS Review 112/2007
evidence  suggests  that  it  is  still  low  in  the  euro  area  –  both  across  countries  and  within 
countries – due to several formal barriers across the euro area. This is in clear contrast to the 
situation in the United States where labour mobility is considerable and greatly contributes to 
the adjustment process. Hence, more needs to be undertaken to enhance labour mobility in 
Europe including by removing the remaining barriers and by undertaking structural reforms to 
which I now turn.  
c) The third principle is the need to monitor closely the implementation of structural reforms. 
Earlier I referred to some factors commonly contributing to inflation and growth differentials, 
such as the detrimental role played by pervasive price and wage rigidities, excessive labour 
market regulation and the imperfect competition observed in several important sectors of the 
euro area economies. This has been well known for quite some time. However, there is a lot 
at stake here and action is urgently needed.  
Put simply, all euro area countries could benefit from structural reform, although the extent 
differs from country to country. Reforms are essential in order to raise factor productivity and 
potential output, to create new jobs, to achieve lower prices and higher real incomes, and to 
increase the resilience and flexibility of the economy. The need for reform is clearly signalled 
by the fact that the euro area’s potential output growth appears to have moved to the lower 
bound of its previously estimated range of 2-2.5%. 
The urgent need for structural reforms was highlighted by the Lisbon agenda of 2000, which 
represents a fundamental and ambitious programme to draw Europe’s attention to the major 
areas where changes are required. However, the modest and uneven implementation of the 
Lisbon  agenda  to  date  has  clearly  shown  how  difficult  it  is  to  achieve  reforms  in  practice. 
More  recently,  the  Lisbon  agenda  has  been  refocused  in  the  direction  of  growth  and 
employment. Various attainable objectives have been set in order to enhance the flexibility 
and adaptability of labour markets, to raise competition in markets for goods and services, to 
increase  employment,  to  promote  innovation,  and  to  strengthen  growth  and  employment 
rates  in  all  participating  countries.  The  need  for  structural  reforms  and  liberalisation  also 
applies  to  financial  markets.  In  fact,  further  financial  integration  has  the  potential  to  foster 
economic growth.  
Governments are paying greater attention to the implementation of reforms. We appreciate 
this renewed impetus, which has now resulted in the more focused “Partnership for Growth 
and Jobs” and in the structural reform commitments of the national reform programmes. We 
also need to reinforce the benchmarking of good performance in order to identify with greater 
accuracy  the  areas  where  the  reform  challenges  are  most  urgent.  As  I  have  already 
explained,  a  successful  reform  programme  is  particularly  important  for  the  euro  area 
countries. 
d) The fourth principle is the need to monitor unit labour costs and national competitiveness 
indicators  to  prevent  or  correct  abnormal  deviations  where  necessary.  We  would  expect 
some dispersion and differentials among euro area countries. As I have already mentioned, 
in such a vast area there will always be some diversity, as in the United States. Countries 
catching up in terms of GDP per capita and price levels are always likely to have stronger 
output growth and higher inflation. Diversity may also extend to correcting past excesses in 
terms  of  overall  cost  and  price  competitiveness,  particularly  in  the  tradable  goods  and 
services markets. In such situations, national governments and social partners need to take 
action  to  address  excessive  wage  developments and  to strengthen  productivity  growth,  so 
that unit labour costs in those economies increase less rapidly than the euro area average.  
To  sum  up,  the  economic  management  of  the  euro  area  requires  a  combination  of 
appropriate monetary and fiscal policies, as well as structural reforms and the liberalisation of 
product  and  labour  markets,  in  order  not  only  to  foster  economic  stability  and  growth,  but 
also  to  reduce  the  impact  of  adverse  shocks  or  facilitate  the  adjustment  of  the  economy 
thereafter. The attentive monitoring of economic and financial developments – and changes 
in competitiveness in particular – must be an integral part of this economic management. The 
BIS Review 112/2007 
 5
public’s understanding and acceptance of these elements is also crucial. Consequently more 
needs to be done for information purposes.  
Three areas of strength  
There  are  three  main  areas  of  strength  that  can  be  seen  in  euro  area  countries  since  the 
launch of the euro. These support the economic management that I have just discussed.  
a) The first is the success of the monetary policy of the ECB and the Eurosystem. The ECB 
and the euro have been credible from day one. Inflation expectations – even looking far into 
the future – are well anchored and it is crucial for paving the way for sustainable growth and 
job creation.  
b) The second element of strength is the fact that the launch of the euro has coincided with 
a  remarkable  deepening  of  financial  integration.  The  financial  landscape  has  already 
changed  enormously  in  most  market  segments.  Well-integrated  financial  markets  and 
diversified portfolios reduce the extent to which firms’ and households’ saving and spending 
decisions  are  dependent  on  economic  and  financial  developments  in  a  specific  country, 
region  or  sector.  As  a  result,  credit  and  risk-sharing  channels  are  increasingly  helping  to 
attenuate  the  impact  of  shocks  in  a  specific  euro  area  country  or  sector.  This  financial 
market-based  mechanism  essentially  means  that  consumption  does  not  need  to  follow 
movements in regional output. There are two reasons for this: first, consumers can borrow 
from abroad; and second, their financial wealth is less dependent on local conditions thanks 
to well-diversified international portfolio allocation. This also gives rise to greater competition, 
resulting in more favourable financing conditions for consumers and firms.  
In this regard, there is a very interesting study looking at the United States that I like to cite. 
According  to  this  study,  the  US  capital  markets  smooth  out  39%  of  shocks  to  gross  state 
product (equivalent to our GDP), the credit channel smooths out 23% of such shocks, and 
the federal budget smooths out 13%. 25% of the shock is not smoothed out. Thus, according 
to this study, financial markets and financial institutions absorb 62% of idiosyncratic shocks 
in the United States: an effect much larger than that of the federal budget. The euro area is 
moving in this direction, and I am sure that financial market-based risk-sharing will become 
increasingly important over the coming years.  
c) The third area of strength is the fact that the euro area as a whole has become more 
resilient to external developments than its individual member countries ever were before the 
launch  of  the  euro.  National  economic  policies  have  become  better  coordinated,  and  of 
course the risk of possible speculative attacks on national currencies has been removed. Not 
so long ago, the impact of movements of the US Dollar vis-à-vis major European currencies 
was significantly aggravated by big tensions inside the Exchange Rate Mechanism namely 
between the currencies that have now merged to form the euro. This can no longer happen. 
This increasing resilience is illustrated by the fact that the major shocks of the last ten years 
have not played a significant role in the dispersion of output growth and have not contributed 
to economic divergence.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, let me now conclude.  
Although  there  is  still  some  persistent  diversity  across  euro  area  countries,  a  stronger 
common  euro  area  cycle  can  now  be  observed.  A  sound  economic  management  should 
reflect  the  increasing  interdependence  of  euro  area  economies  and  ensure  that  excessive 
differentials in inflation, growth and competitiveness are addressed.  
Four guiding principles should be heeded in order to ensure a sound economic management 
of the euro area as a whole: rigorous implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact; the 
completion of the single market; the implementation of the structural reforms in the Lisbon 
6 
 BIS Review 112/2007
agenda; and the need to monitor carefully at country level the evolution of unit labour costs 
and competitiveness indicators in general.  
We have to consider that the euro has already brought a number of benefits, including price 
stability,  favourable  medium  and  long-term  interest  rates,  and  a  remarkable  degree  of 
resilience  in  a  complex  international  environment.  These  achievements  make  a  significant 
contribution to ensuring sound economic management, but national economies also need to 
adapt and further liberalise their economies.  
Thank you for your attention.  
References 
Altissimo, F., M. Ehrmann and F. Smets (2006), “Inflation Persistence in the Euro Area: A 
Summary of the Inflation Persistence Network Evidence”, National Bank of Belgium Working 
Paper No 95.  
Anderton, R., F. di Mauro and F. Moneta (2004), “Understanding the impact of the external 
dimension  of  the  euro  area:  trade,  capital  flows  and  other  macroeconomic  linkages,”  ECB 
Occasional Paper No 12. 
Asdrubali,  F.,  B.  Sorensen  and  O.  Yosha  (1996),  “Channels  of  Interstate  Risk  Sharing: 
United States 1963-1990”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, November: 1081-1110. 
Baele, L., A. Ferrando, P. Hördahl, E. Krylova and C. Monnet (2004), “Measuring financial 
integration in the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper No 14, April. 
Baldwin, R. (2006), “The euro’s trade effects,” ECB Working Paper Series No 594. 
Benalal,  N.,  J.  L.  Diaz  del  Hoyo,  B.  Pierluigi  and  N.  Vidalis  (2006),  “Output  growth 
differentials  across  the  euro  area  countries:  some  stylised  facts”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper 
Series No 45.  
Bils, M. and P. Klenow (2004), “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices”, Journal 
of Political Economy 112, pp. 947-985. 
Blanchard, O. and F. Giavazzi (2003), “Macroeconomic effects of regulation and deregulation 
in goods and labor markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 118(3), pp. 879-907. 
Cappiello, L., P. Hördahl, A. Kadareja, and S. Manganelli (2006), “The impact of the euro on 
financial markets,” ECB Working Paper No 598. 
De Grauwe, P. and F. P. Mongelli (2005), “Endogeneities of Optimum Currency Areas: What 
Brings Countries Sharing a Single Currency Closer Together?”, ECB Working Paper No 468. 
De Santis, R. and B. Gérard (2006), “Financial integration, international portfolio choice and 
the European Monetary Union”, ECB Working Paper No 626.  
Dhyne, E. et al. (2005), “Price setting in the euro area: some stylized facts from individual 
consumer price data”, ECB Working Paper No 524.  
Duisenberg, W. “Jean Monnet Memorial Lecture” (2000) 
Duval, R. and J. Elmeskov (2006), “The effects of EMU on structural reforms in labour and 
product markets,” ECB Working Paper No 596. 
Dhyne  et  alii.(2006)  “Price  Changes  in  the  Euro  Area  and  the  United  States:  Some  Facts 
from Individual Consumer Price Data”, ECB Working Paper no. 525 
ECB (2003), “Inflation differentials in the euro area: potential causes and policy implications,” 
ECB report released on 16 September 2003.  
ECB  (2004),  “Sectoral  specialisation  in  the  EU:  a  macroeconomic  perspective”,  ECB 
Occasional Paper No 19. 
BIS Review 112/2007 
 7
ECB (2005), “Monetary policy and inflation differentials in a heterogeneous currency area”, 
article in the ECB Monthly Bulletin of May 2005. 
ECB (2007), “Output growth differentials in the euro area: sources and implications” article in 
the ECB Monthly Bulletin of April 2007. 
EU Commission (2006), “The EU Economy 2006 Review. Adjustment Dynamics in the Euro 
Area: Experiences and Challenges”, 22 November 2006. 
Giannone,  D.  and  L.  Reichlin  (2006),  “Trends  and  cycles  in  the  euro  area:  how  much 
heterogeneity and should we worry about it?”, ECB Working Paper No 595. 
McKinnon, R. (2001), “Optimum Currency Areas Revisited,” Stanford University, mimeo.  
Mundell, R. (1973), “Uncommon Arguments for Common Currencies”, in H.G. Johnson and 
A.K. Swoboda, The Economics of Common Currencies, Allen and Unwin, pp. 114-132. 
Obstfeld,  M.,  and  Giovanni  Peri  (1998)  “Regional  Non-Adjustment  and  Fiscal  Policy,” 
Economic Policy, Vol. 26 pp. 205-260.  
S. Kalemli-Ozcan, B. Sorensen and O. Yosha (2004) “Asymmetric shocks and risk sharing in 
a monetary union: Updated evidence and policy implications for Europe”, CEPR Discussion 
Paper No 4463.  
Rose, A. (2001), “Currency Unions and Trade: The Effect Is Large”, Economic Policy, 33, pp. 
449-461. 
Trichet, J.-C. (2006a), “Further integrating euro area economies: some reflections”, speech 
at the “57. Jahresversammlung des Ifo Instituts für Wirtschaftsforschung an der Universität 
München“ in Munich on 29 June 2006. 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2006/html/sp060629.en.html 
Trichet, J.-C. (2006b), “How to elevate the potential growth rate of Europe”, Ludwig Erhard 
Lecture delivered in Berlin on 16 October 2006. 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2006/html/sp061016.en.html 
Trichet,  J.-C.  (2006c),  “EMU  after  seven  years:  Successes  and  challenges”,  speech 
delivered  at  the  Frankfurt  Chamber  of  Industry  and  Commerce  on  5  May  2006. 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2006/html/sp060505.en.html 
8 
 BIS Review 112/2007
