Radovan Jelašić: Macroeconomic policy and export sector 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, a the First Summit 
of Serbian Exporters, Belgrade, 8 November 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Recent  debates  on  macroeconomic  policy  mainly  focused  on  assessment  of  its  export-
related  effects.  Basically,  macroeconomic  policy  incorporates  monetary  policy  (MPC 
decisions related to interest rates) and fiscal policy (government decisions related to taxes 
and public spending). In my comments, I shall concentrate on monetary policy related issues 
(and defend our own back yard) first, because the NBS is responsible for implementation of 
monetary policy and second, because it is the monetary policy that has been the subject of 
numerous debates and criticism, especially by exporters. On this occasion, I wish to give out 
six  main  messages  to  exporters  in  order  to  differentiate  what  can  from  what  cannot  be 
accomplished for their purposes by monetary policy.  
However,  before  I  proceed,  let  me  remind  you  of  the  events  during  last  forty  years  in 
Yugoslavia,  and  subsequently  in  Serbia,  when  our  currency  was  losing  value  almost  on  a 
daily  basis  resulting  in  an  automatic  growth  in  inflation,  while  exports  were  gradually,  but 
inevitably, declining. Is there a lesson to be learned from those events, and who are those 
who have not had enough of that experiment? 
My first message is in fact the answer to that question. I really think that there is no 
need for another déjà vu, another failed experiment. Unfortunately, not even forty years 
of failed experimentation are sufficient evidence to some that weak dinar cannot help support 
certain  business  activities  and  that  the  outcome  is  inevitable  inflation  and  chaos,  i.e. 
unpredictable and dangerous environment! The main role of monetary policy is, first and 
foremost, to maintain stability of prices as stated explicitly in the Law on the National 
Bank of Serbia adopted in mid-2003. There are at least two possible explanations as to 
why exactly is monetary policy expected to do just that. First, it has been widely accepted by 
economic  theory  and  practice  that monetary  policy  can  not  be  employed  to  achieve  either 
economic  growth  or  sustainable  growth  in  employment.  It,  however,  can  be  employed  to 
control  movements  in  inflation.  Second,  low  inflation  is  conducive  to  an  improvement  in 
exports  sector.  Why  is  it  so?  Because  it  helps  improve  competitiveness.  However, 
appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  neutralizes  positive  effects  of  low  inflation.  What  is  the 
point then of low inflation? The point is that low inflation is beneficial to everybody, including 
exports  sector,  and  such  beneficial  effect  has  two  aspects.  First,  it  increases  efficiency  of 
operations of economic entities. When inflation is low, changes in prices give an important 
signal to producers when taking decisions on what to produce, what to buy, how much to put 
aside for savings, etc. because changes in prices represent something concrete, a change in 
either demand or supply. On the other hand, when inflation is high, it is difficult to interpret 
changes  in  prices  –  we  cannot  know  whether  demand  for  such  product  is  increasing  or  a 
change  in  price  is  actually  a  result  of  the  general  increase  in  prices. Investment  decisions 
taken  in  the  environment  of  low  inflation  are  almost  always  better  than  those  taken  in  the 
environment  of  high  and  variable  inflation.  For  that  particular  reason,  most  economists 
believe that economies operating at a lower level of inflation have a higher average growth 
rate than those in which the rate of inflation is higher. Second, low inflation is beneficial to the 
exports sector as well as to the economy in general as it induces lowering of interest rates. 
I can safely say today that, despite all the shocks to which our economy (and not only ours) 
is  exposed,  inflation  is  under  control.  Many  may  ask:  If  inflation  is  under  control,  why  are 
interest  rates  still  high  in  real  terms?  There  is  not  much  enthusiasm  in  Serbia  today  for 
saving  money  even  though  interest  rates  are  quite  high,  but  people  are  very  enthusiastic 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 1
when it comes to borrowing at such rates. Thus, regardless of the fact that we assess current 
interest rates as high in real terms, we borrow more and save less. 
Therefore,  my  second  message  reads  as  follows:  the  best  option  for  the  NBS  is  to 
persist in its attempts to attain low and stable rate of inflation in order to ensure low 
interest rates in real terms. 
But what about the exchange rate? Is it true that appreciation of the exchange rate keeps 
inflation  under  control  by  putting  an  enormous  burden  on  the  exports  sector?  I  wish  to 
underline that the monetary policy implemented by the NBS aimed to  accomplish only the 
main objective which is defined by the law – „to achieve and maintain price stability“. During 
the  period  when  we  were  raising  the  key  policy  rate  because  of  increased  inflationary 
pressures  at  end-August,  we  managed  to  strengthen  the  dinar.  Tight  monetary  policy  was 
indispensable in order to keep inflation within the announced target range, which in this year 
is closer to the lower bound of the projected range, and at the same time, making sure that 
we will stay on targets announced for the next year as well! However, we could not estimate 
the  effect  of  tighter  monetary  policy  on:  (1) increase  in  interest  rates, without  affecting  the 
exchange rate, or (2) appreciation of the exchange rate, without affecting interest rates, or (3) 
appreciation,  if  at  the  same  time  interest  rates  are  declining,  or  (4)  depreciation,  if  at  the 
same  time  interest  rates  are  increasing.  The  policy  mix  to  be  applied  depends  on  the 
perception  and  reaction  of  many  people,  large  number  of  economic  entities  in  the  country 
and  abroad.  Such  fine  tuning  has  proved  to  be  too  much  even  for  the  European  Central 
Bank! 
However,  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  has  reduced  gross 
income of many exporters below the level that would otherwise have been achieved if there 
were  no  appreciation,  assuming  of  course,  that  they  have  not  protected  themselves  from 
currency risk by entering into forward trade agreements. At the same time, reduction in net 
income was much lower. The question is why is it so. Because strengthening of the dinar 
reduced not only gross income, but many costs as well – had there been no appreciation of 
the exchange rate for the dinar, price of fuel would have been much higher as well as the 
price of transport vehicles, transport services, computers and various chemicals, while wage 
levels would have been lower. Of course, in the short run, life would have been much less 
complicated  to  exporters  if  there  were  no  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  for  the  dinar. 
However, the following should also be taken into account: 
- 
Inflation has been under control in the course of several recent years despite strong 
inflationary  pressures,  both  external  (drought,  price  of  oil,  etc.),  and  internal 
(increase  in  public  spending  and  wages,  credit  expansion,  still  high  inflation 
expectations, etc.);  
Combating  strong  inflationary  pressures  requires  high  interest  rate  in  real  terms, 
which affects the exchange rate, namely discrepancy of the real exchange rate from 
its equilibrium long-term level;  
Many countries were and still are faced with appreciation and what is happening to 
us is only part of the usual process – both in terms of duration and intensity.  
  It  is  also  true  that  in  the  course  of  the  last  two  years  countries  with  currency  board 
arrangements  experienced  almost  50%  higher  inflation  and  lower  economic  growth  than 
countries  that  were  implementing  active  monetary  policy  and  the  floating  exchange  rate 
(check what Jürgen Stark said on this issue). For that particular reason my third message 
would be that the NBS has a limited impact on the real exchange rate in the longer run, 
and  can  have  a  significant  influence  only  in  the  short  run.  Adoption  of  alternative 
exchange rate regimes cannot resolve the problem of the real exchange rate.  
It  is,  of  course,  my  intention  to  also  tackle  on  this  occasion  the  other  aspect  of 
macroeconomic policy – fiscal policy. It deals with tax revenue which the state can extract 
from the economy and the amount of money it must spend. I do not wish to debate here the 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2007
optimum size of the public sector, though it is only natural that I should have an opinion on 
that matter. I wish to underline, however, that changes in fiscal policy have very important 
implications on monetary policy, real interest rate and the real exchange rate as specified by 
the government in both the budget and the Memorandum on economic policy for 2008-2010. 
Hence comes my fourth message that monetary policy can be applied to keep inflation 
under control at low and stable level, but how tight should such policy be to achieve 
its aim, depends to a large extent on fiscal policy, too. The increase in public spending 
that is not covered by an increase in regular public receipts, or a significant reduction in tax 
receipts without comparable reduction in public spending, shall have its implications on the 
level of interest rates and the exchange rate for the dinar. I think that many exporters are 
aware of the significance of this dependence. 
My  fifth  message  is  that  an  exporter-friendly  macroeconomic  environment  assumes 
low  rate  of  inflation,  gradual  decrease  in  real  interest  rates  and  implementation  of 
responsible fiscal policy. However, these can provide only indirect help in view of the 
reality facing the ever increasing number of exporters. The fact is that, in the longer 
run,  world  prices  are  falling  in  real  terms.  It  is  a  long-term  trend,  of  course,  and  has 
nothing  to  do  with  macroeconomic  policy.  Improvement  in  productivity,  product  quality 
adjustments  to  market  requirements  and  better  marketing  are  at  least  as  important  as 
macroeconomic  policy.  These  are  the  real  challenges  facing  the  exports  sector 
worldwide! 
My sixth and final message is that the role of the NBS is not to hermetically isolate 
Serbia from exchange rate changes coming from abroad but to secure conditions that 
would  protect  the  economy  from  such  risks.  The  price  of  oil  has  been  continually 
increasing  since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  prices  of  metals  are  several  times  higher  now 
than  few  years  ago,  electricity  prices  are  three  times  higher  now  than  on  the  onset  of 
transition. “Market is merciless place and carries a lot of stress” said Alan Greenspan in his 
autobiography, as “each produces both winners and losers”. Are we fully market-oriented or 
are we still feeling nostalgic for various subsidies, incentives and agreements? Unfortunately, 
the market and the economy at large have no sympathy for our past or future challenges, 
Serbian market reacts like any other market in the world would!  
Conclusions 
I am aware that some of you and maybe even many of you – I sincerely hope not all of you – 
are disappointed since I can not promise a simple and fast solution in the form of stimulative, 
adequate  and  stable  exchange  rate  that  would  suit  all  exporters.  Few  days  ago  I 
discussed this topic with some economists and we remembered mistakes made when 
“monetary  policy  of  associated  labour”  was  implemented.  Should  we  now  invent 
“monetary policy of exporters”!? 
As for exchange rate fluctuations, they are simply a part of the regular market mechanism 
(oil, gold, dollar....). But, if these fluctuations are not to somebody’s liking, there is a solution! 
First, nowadays it is possible for exporters to fix several months in advance the exchange 
rate  at  which  they  will  convert  their  export  proceeds!  By  doing  so  they  are  protecting 
themselves  from  the  strengthening  of  the  dinar,  but  at  the  same  time,  they  forsake  the 
chance of profiting from possible weakening of the dinar. Of course, exporters may opt not to 
avail themselves of this chance and decide to gamble hoping for a much more favourable 
exchange rate in the future. They are free to make their own choices. What is important is to 
know that in such case they are assuming the whole of the foreign exchange risk as they 
have  decided  to  step  out  of  the  body  of  their  professional  knowledge.  Assumption  of  the 
foreign  exchange  risk  by  exporters  is  an  example  of  irresponsible  behaviour.  It  is  a  job  of 
banks, just like payment operations, granting of credits, etc.  
BIS Review 133/2007 
 3
What  about  the  real  exchange  rate  trends?  Real  appreciation  is  something  that  many 
countries  in  the  region  and  wider  are  currently  faced  with.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the 
exchange rate of RSD 77 for EUR1 is as unacceptable as RSD 83 or RSD 100 for EUR 1. 
None represents the equilibrium rate. But stronger dinar is an encouragement to exporters 
and  forces  them  to  restructure  and  specialize  in  exports  of  specific  products  which  would 
reward them with a higher price (mark up). Stronger dinar also means easier restructuring, 
as import of high technology is cheaper and thereby more accessible.  
Most often asked questions 
I am sure some of you think that MPC members do not care much about exporters – I must 
prove you wrong. The real issue here, however, is something quite different. Can monetary 
policy help and what it is that monetary policy cannot do? Let me reply to three most often 
asked questions. 
1. 
If the MPC were to relax its monetary policy and set higher target for inflation, would 
that help exporters?  
The answer is: No. The problem that many exporters are faced with is that prices of 
products  and  profit  margins  are  too  low  relative  to  input  costs  which,  to  a  certain 
extent, reflects the strength of the dinar. Higher inflation can induce an increase in 
prices  of  products  but  it  would  also  induce  higher  costs  as  higher  prices  are  the 
outcome of higher wages and higher costs of intermediate goods. High inflation in 
earlier years did not result in higher profitability of exports sector. Quite the contrary, 
it  led  to  a  cycle  of  „boom  and  crashes“  which  made  life  much  more  difficult  for 
exporters.  
Would it help exporters if MPC were to set the target in respect of something else 
instead of inflation?  
The answer is: No. I hope that everybody now understands that the MPC sets the 
level  of  its  key  policy  rate  with  respect  to  achieving  core  inflation  within  the  2-8% 
range.  That  should  help  anchor  inflationary  expectations.  If  the  level  of  the  key 
policy rate were specified with respect to achievement of some other objective, for 
example a certain level of the exchange rate, the rate of inflation would overshoot 
the target. Inflation expectations would increase, we would loose our anchor and we 
would be back battling inflationary cycles of the past.  
Should the MPC try to depreciate the exchange rate for the dinar? 
The answer is again: No. The value of the dinar is determined in the market and 
reflects expectations with regard to future steps by the NBS. The only way the MPC 
could depreciate the exchange rate for the dinar is by giving up inflation targeting. 
Who  can  trust  a  central  bank  which  erodes  the  value  of  its  own  currency  and 
denounces  its  “main  objective”?  Let  me  remind  you  that  currency  depreciation 
increases  exporters’  income  only  if  all  else  –  all  inputs  needed  to  manufacture  a 
product or render an export-oriented service, such as wages, energy prices, credits, 
intermediate  goods,  etc.  –  were  to  remain  unchanged.  And  we  all  know,  and  our 
history confirms, that such a thing is impossible! In the light of our own and world 
experience,  we  in  the  NBS  appeal  to  all  of  you  to  renounce  taking  drugs  called 
inflation,  to  renounce  short  term  effects,  the  so-called  “better  export  performance” 
for the sake of long term sustainability and stability. By the way, if the exchange rate 
of the dinar were to be changed, would you, the exporters, be prepared to promise 
that you will achieve a significant increase in exports? Is the government prepared 
to  promise  to  substantially  cut  public  spending  and  not  give  in  to  the  requests  of 
trade unions regardless of the effects of depreciation? The answer is NO! We have 
already seen all of that and, in my view, transition is not going back to the past but a 
way to the future!  
BIS Review 133/2007
2. 
3. 
4 
 There is a latent pressure on the MPC members to involve themselves with current problems 
and to act fast. However, the task of the MPC is to look ahead into the future and to secure 
stability  in  the  long  run.  The  support  for  low  inflation  will  weaken  if  it  is  based  only  on 
memories  of  consequences  of  high  and  unstable  inflation  of  the  past.  There  is  a  need  for 
understanding  of  the  essence  of  positive  features  of  low  inflation  and  long-term  stability 
particularly by those who seem not to remember our inflationary past. Hence, the main task 
of the MPC is to explain the significance of stability of prices and to gradually shape public 
attitude towards low rate of inflation. 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 5
