Michael C Bonello: The euro and beyond  
Welcome address by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the 
Conference  “EMU  Governance  and  Euro  Changeover  –  Malta  on  the  Path  to  the  Euro”, 
Valletta, 1 October 2007. 
 Prime  Minister,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Mr.  Jean-Claude  Trichet, 
Commissioner  for  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs,  Mr.  Joaquin  Almunia,  Excellencies, 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Malta’s forthcoming adoption of the euro represents the final step in the country’s integration 
in  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  is  clearly  a  major  milestone  in  its  economic  history.  The 
presence here today of such a distinguished gathering indeed testifies to the importance of 
the occasion. I therefore would like to start by joining the Prime Minister in extending a warm 
welcome  to  President  Trichet,  Commissioner  Almunia  and  our  other  guests  from  abroad, 
including  the  Governors  and  other  senior  officials  of  twenty-two  national  central  bank 
members of the European System of Central Banks.  
Reaching this milestone has by no means been an easy task. At the level of macroeconomic 
policy, difficult decisions were called for, and taken, to start addressing existing imbalances 
and other impediments to growth in order to satisfy the Maastricht criteria. As for the logistics 
involved in preparing for the change of currency, a wide-ranging effort has been undertaken 
during the past two years to mobilise both the public and private sectors and to coordinate 
preparations at a national level. It is, therefore, appropriate on this occasion to acknowledge 
the valuable work carried out by the National Euro Changeover Committee and its Steering 
Committee. I would also like to pay tribute to the staff of the Central Bank of Malta for their 
contribution in preparing the Bank for its role as a member of the Eurosystem and in planning 
and executing the currency changeover. 
During more than two millennia the Maltese people have used many different currencies in 
circumstances  often  dictated  by  the  changing  balance  of  power  in  the  Mediterranean,  and 
reflective of Malta’s status as a dependency of some larger and more powerful nation. The 
adoption  of  the  euro,  however,  is  a  change  of  currency  with  a  difference.  This  time  it  will 
occur because Malta, out of its own choice, will join fourteen other sovereign Member States 
of the EU in an economic and monetary union designed to complement the Single European 
Market,  a  venture  that  could  rightly  be  described  as  an  epoch-making  development  in  the 
history of our continent. 
Since Malta joined the EU in 2004, and particularly since the Maltese lira entered ERM II in 
2005, the Central Bank of Malta has been making the case for an early adoption of the euro. 
And  for  good  reason.  For  a  start,  the  economy  was  clearly  well  suited  to  participate  in 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU):  it  has  a  long  history  as  a  market  economy;  it  is 
already  closely  integrated  with  the  euro  area  through  trade  and  finance;  it  has  close 
similarities with the euro area in the sectoral composition of output and employment as well 
as in terms of business cycle synchronisation; it enjoys a relatively high level of development, 
with a per capita GDP close to the euro area average; and its currency has a long history of 
stability. 
The  euro,  furthermore,  offered  the  prospect  of  enhancing  the  economy’s  potential  to  grow 
faster. The elimination of exchange rate risk and currency conversion costs should result in 
increased trade, while the low interest rate and inflation environment of the euro area should 
make for reduced business costs and greater macroeconomic stability. Combined with the 
fiscal  discipline  associated  with  monetary  union,  this  is  expected  to  translate  into  higher 
credit  ratings  and  improved  investment  prospects.  From  a  central  banker’s  perspective, 
moreover, a key benefit of euro area membership will be the elimination of the risks inherent 
BIS Review 110/2007 
 1
in  managing  a  small,  vulnerable  currency  and  their  replacement  by  the  greater  security 
afforded by the world’s second most important currency. 
Finally, the object of our quest, that is participation in EMU, was desirable for another reason. 
We were aware that we would thus become part of a framework that has been successful in 
fostering economic growth and employment creation. Much of the credit for this belongs to 
the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  whose  steadfast  commitment  to  price  stability  has 
created an environment conducive to investment, reflected in the fact that interest rates are 
low  across  the  yield  curve.  The  ECB’s  credibility  in  fighting  inflation  is  now  so  well 
established, moreover, that long-term inflation expectations are well anchored at around 2%. 
Price stability clearly yields important welfare benefits. 
So there are both advantages and opportunities for policy makers and economic agents in 
the euro area. But in setting out on this new phase of Malta’s economic development, we 
must be aware that, while the ECB can, and indeed has, delivered low and stable inflation, it 
cannot  use  the  interest  rate  to  permanently  increase  growth.  From  Malta’s  perspective, 
therefore, the adoption of the euro must be viewed as but one in a continuum of challenges 
to  be  faced.  The  purpose  of  this  conference  is  precisely  to  focus  attention  on  the  policy 
choices that need to be made in the years ahead. 
Put simply, the task that Malta faces is to bridge the remaining income gap with the more 
advanced members of the euro area. The success of this endeavour will depend importantly 
on  how  effectively  the  public  and  private  sectors  work  together,  both  in  assimilating  the 
lessons learned during these first years of EU membership and in implementing appropriate 
policies.  In  this  regard  it  is  helpful  that  in  a  monetary  union  the  parameters  within  which 
action  can be  taken  are  defined  in  the  sense  that  the  interest  rate  and  the  exchange  rate 
instruments  are  not  available  to  governments,  and  fiscal  policy  can  only  be  used  for 
adjustment purposes within the limits set by the Stability and Growth Pact. Given the limited 
room for manoeuvre, therefore, any adjustments necessary in order for the Maltese economy 
to  achieve  the  growth  rates  that  will  ensure  a  more  rapid  pace  of  convergence  and  to 
respond successfully to asymmetric shocks will have to take place in the real economy. And 
since  in  a  resource-poor  and  open  economy  like  Malta’s,  growth  must  be  predominantly 
export-led, 
the 
international 
competitiveness. 
The starting position for addressing this challenge is relatively favourable. In the words of the 
Commission’s  Convergence  Report,  Malta  has  achieved  a  high  degree  of  sustainable 
convergence;  and  more  recently,  the  IMF  Article  IV  Mission  Report  concluded  that  The 
economic recovery is gaining traction, owing largely to cyclical strength and some structural 
change. The economy has indeed been growing at more than 3% for almost three years and 
broad-based reforms have helped to mitigate structural impediments in a number of areas. 
After the upgrading of the physical infrastructure during the past two decades, recent reforms 
have  included  the  restructuring  of  the  public  and  public-enterprise  sectors,  a  wide-ranging 
privatization  programme,  port  reform  and  the  first  stage  of  a  pension  reform,  and  the  full 
liberalisation of the trade and capital accounts. As a result, the public sector’s profile in both 
product  and  resource  markets  has  been  reduced,  and  the  price  mechanism  now  has  an 
increased role in the allocation of resources. At the same time, and this is arguably the most 
impressive development, the fiscal deficit has been reduced to a quarter of its size in 2003. 
Looking beyond the introduction of the euro, therefore, the task is to maximize the benefits of 
participation  in  monetary  union  by  making  further  progress  on  the  path  of  reform.  The 
National Reform Programme provides a good basis for this purpose, as do the recent reports 
by the Commission, the ECB and the IMF. A common conclusion of these reports, and one 
which is shared by the Central Bank of Malta, is that further fiscal consolidation is necessary 
in order to achieve a balanced budget by the set date. In this regard, there needs to be a 
greater emphasis on expenditure-based adjustment, particularly in view of rising pressures 
caused by ageing-related factors such as pension and health care costs. It will be equally 
focus  of  policy  must  be  on 
the  country’s 
increasing 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2007
important,  in  both  the  private  and  public  sectors,  for  wage  growth  to  be  compatible  with 
productivity growth, labour market conditions and cost developments in competitor countries. 
The  further  strengthening  of  competition  in  both  product  and  resource  markets  and  the 
creation of more incentives to work are also necessary in order to raise the participation rate. 
It  also  needs  to  be  realized  that  these  reforms  are  essential  for  safeguarding  our  social 
model.  In  recent  decades  we  have  been  successful  in  reducing  income  inequality  and  in 
securing universal access to all levels of education, to health care and to pensions. These 
benefits,  however,  can  only  continue  to  be  enjoyed  by  future  generations  if  today’s 
generation implements the necessary reforms. 
The next phase in Malta’s economic history, therefore, promises to be a challenging one, but 
it should also be an exciting time. For a country with a population of 400,000 and a GDP of 
just  four-and-a-half  billion  euro,  having  a  major  reserve  unit  as  its  domestic  currency  is 
indeed  a  significant  advantage.  We  thus  have  good  reason  to  feel  encouraged  and,  as  a 
people  that  has  suffered  repeatedly  as  a  consequence  of  divisions  on  the  European 
mainland,  also  reassured  that  we  are  about  to  reinforce  our  integration  in  Europe  with  full 
economic  and  monetary  union.  For,  while  the  EU  has  for  fifty  years  brought  peace  and 
stability to the peoples of Europe, the Single Market and Economic and Monetary Union have 
created a congenial environment in which economies can grow and people prosper. 
BIS Review 110/2007 
 3
