Rudolf Böhmler: Islamic finance – the European challenge 
Speech  by  Mr  Rudolf  Böhmler,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  2nd  Islamic  Financial  Services  Forum:  The  European  Challenge, 
Frankfurt am Main, 5 December 2007. 
 Dear Governor Dr. Zeti,  
Dear Governors,  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
First I would like to thank Professor Rifaat from the Islamic Financial Services Board and Mr. 
Tošovský  from  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  and  their  teams  for  organising  this  Forum. 
They’ve done a very good job, I think. 
On behalf of the Deutsche Bundesbank, I would like to warmly welcome you to the second 
Islamic Financial Services Forum in Europe. I am particularly delighted that we are joined by 
numerous  guests  from  the  Middle  and  Far  East  who  have  travelled  so  far  to  be  here  in 
Frankfurt.  This  reflects  the  great  importance  attached  to  the  market  for  Islam-compliant 
finance products here in Europe.  
The interaction between financial investment and religious and ethical issues was and still is 
a key topic in Europe. At the beginning of the 20th century, Max Weber, one of Germany’s 
most  influential  sociologists  of  religion,  described  the  intertwining  of  economic  activity, 
including saving and investment, and religious beliefs. He and other academics and scholars 
made  us  aware  that  religious  traditions  are  never  “carved  in  stone”  but  are  constantly 
evolving  to  provide  insight  and  answers  to  contemporary  questions.  This  is  true  for  the 
churches’  codes  of  law,  the  Jewish  Halakha  and  also  the  Islamic  Sharia.  “Sharia”  means 
“path to the water source” and this in itself proves that it is not a finished, petrified work but is 
constantly searching for responsible solutions for issues affecting our daily lives. That we can 
come here today to learn with one another and from one another in mutual respect sends out 
a positive and powerful signal which extends beyond daily economic activities. 
The forum is entitled “The European Challenge”. This maxim has been carefully selected as 
Islamic finance indeed poses great challenges in more ways than one for Europe and thus 
also for the German financial centre, Frankfurt. 
1. 
The banking industry – not only in Europe – is faced with the task of providing an 
adequate range of Sharia-compliant finance products to meet the growing demand 
and to develop new customer bases. 
Legislators are called upon to lay the foundations for a level playing field for Islamic 
finance. 
European banking supervisors have to rise to the challenge of adequately assessing 
the risks associated with Islam-compliant finance products. 
2. 
3. 
I would like to start with a few ideas as to what the reasons for the existing gap between the 
supply  of  and  demand  for  Islamic  finance  products  may  be  and  the  challenges  that  this 
poses for the banking industry in Europe. 
As you are all well aware, demand for Halal finance products has been skyrocketing across 
the globe for years. This is hardly surprising considering that approximately one  person in 
four in the world is Muslim. In addition, wealth has increased in a number of – predominantly 
Arabic  –  countries  not  least  due  to  rising  commodity  prices.  This  has  meant  that  both  the 
need  for  Halal  investment  opportunities  has  grown  as  well as  the  desire  to  finance  mostly 
larger projects, such as building hotel complexes, in accordance with Sharia principles. This 
trend  is  being  supported  by  the  various  possibilities  of  emulating  more  and  more 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 1
conventional  products  in  a  way  that  complies  with  Islamic  law  through  the  use  of  modern 
techniques to structure relatively complicated financial transactions.  
Furthermore, growing interest in Halal finance products has also been observed among non-
Muslims. Private investors who also wish to factor ethical and/or religious aspects into their 
investment decisions can be sure that with products which have been approved by a Sharia 
board  they  are  not  investing  in  certain  business  areas,  such  as  gambling.  And  devout 
Christians and Jews can be sure that the interest ban, which can also be valid for them has 
been  observed.  There  is  also  an increasing  number  of  professional  investors  who  want  to 
include Islamic finance products in their portfolios for reasons of diversification. This is true 
despite  the  reservation  that  many  Sharia-compliant  finance  products  cannot  yet  fully 
compete with conventional products as far as the price-performance ratio is concerned due 
to their intrinsically complicated structure.  
The  first  challenge  confronting  the  financial  community,  not  just  in  Europe,  with  regard  to 
Islamic  finance  is  that  the  range  of  Sharia-compliant  finance  products  is  currently  not 
sufficient to meet the substantial rise in demand. This is firstly because there is a shortage in 
the  number  of  financial  service  providers  offering  solely  Halal  finance  products  or  offering 
these products via Islamic windows. Secondly, there is a lack of qualified specialists for the 
Islamic  finance  market  segment.  Hopefully,  institutions  such  as  the  “Institute  of  Islamic 
Banking and Insurance”, which is supported by German banks, will remedy this situation in 
the medium-term.  
In addition to the two reasons I have just given for why the supply of Halal finance products 
does  not  yet  meet  the  demand,  in  my  opinion,  there  are  two  further  aspects  which  pose 
challenges, particularly for financial centres in the European continent. Firstly, the supply of 
Sharia-compliant  finance  products  is  still  largely  geographically  constrained.  The  bulk  of 
Islam-compliant  financial  transactions  take  place  in  financial  centres  in  the  Middle  East, 
Malaysia  and  –  at  European  level  –  in  London.  Consequently,  it  is  difficult  for  the  large 
number  of  Muslims  who  live  in  continental  Europe,  for  example  in  France  or  Germany,  to 
access these services. German financial institutions’ involvement in Islamic finance has so 
far  also  largely  been  limited  to  these  financial  centres.  There  have  been,  and  still  are, 
initiatives  –  for  example,  by  the  federal  state  of  Saxony-Anhalt  and  by  Commerzbank  and 
Deutsche Bank – to establish Halal finance products in Germany as well. However, so far 
these efforts have had rather limited success.  
One reason for this brings me to the second aspect of why, in my opinion, a gap still exists 
between  the  supply  of  and  demand  for  Halal  products:  the  products  are  still  aimed  at  a 
limited target demographic. The bulk of Islam-compliant financial products that are available 
outside  traditional  Islamic  states  and  the  United  Kingdom  are  primarily  aimed  at  wealthy 
private  and  institutional  investors,  mostly  in  the  form  of  “Sukuks”,  also  known  as  Islamic 
bonds.  Hardly  any  services  are  aimed  at  the  more  middle-class  Muslim  population  of 
continental Europe. Thus for the approximately 3.5 million Muslims who make their home in 
Germany,  an  estimated  15-20%  of  whom  have  a  keen  interest  in  Islam-compliant  bank 
products,  there  are  hardly  any  possibilities  for financing  homes  or  to  invest  their  assets  in 
accordance  with  the  rules  of  their  faith,  while  at  the  same  time  productively.  Although  the 
above-average  saving  rate  of  Muslims  living  in  Germany  clearly  indicates  that  market 
potential is waiting to be tapped, the investment products available to this target group are 
virtually inaccessible or not known.  
One explanation is that institutions that offer Islam-compliant finance products in Germany do 
not  advertise  these  products.  Therefore,  anyone  who  wants  to  invest  in  Halal  finance 
products  in  Germany  still  has  to  explicitly  ask  for  them  at  a  bank.  Furthermore,  since,  as 
already mentioned, the products are almost exclusively aimed at very wealthy investors from 
Islamic countries abroad and not at the German Muslim population, the product information 
is  mostly  only  written  in  English.  Above  all,  banks  located  in  continental  Europe  face  the 
challenge of using attractive Islam-compliant services – especially in the retail banking area – 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2007
as  well  as  target  group-oriented  marketing  to  tap  the  dormant  capital  of  the  Muslim 
population.  
However, a flourishing Islamic finance market is predicated on the existence of a comparable 
legal framework for conventional and Halal finance products. This brings me to the second 
“European  challenge”:  the  creation  of  a  uniform  level  playing  field  by  legislators.  The 
example of the UK shows that a market for Halal finance products can also function in non-
Muslim  countries.  Back  in  2004,  the  Islamic  Bank  of  Britain  obtained  a  licence  from  the 
Financial  Services  Authority  (FSA),  making  it  the  first  Sharia-compliant  bank  to  open  for 
business in the UK. Since then, the European Islamic Investment Bank has been established 
and numerous credit institutions (eg HSBC) have a so-called “Islamic window”. The British 
government’s  efforts  to  create  a  level  playing  field  for  Islamic  finance  and  conventional 
products  have  been  successful  in  the  City  of  London.  The  Deutsche  Bundesbank  would 
welcome a similar development here in Frankfurt, the German banking centre. However – as 
the example of the United Kingdom also shows – a precondition for this is a corresponding 
legal and, in particular, tax law framework. Existing obstacles must be analysed and – where 
reasonable – removed or mitigated.  
Last but not least, banking supervisors, too, face new tasks as a result of Islamic finance. 
This brings me to the third aspect of these “European challenges”. German credit institutions 
already  keep  Halal  finance  products  in  their  books  or  –  as  mentioned  earlier  –  offer  them 
themselves. The German supervisor – and, as you know, the Deutsche Bundesbank plays a 
particularly  important  role  here  –  must  now,  therefore,  begin  to  figure  out  how  to  assess 
Islamic finance products, their risks and amount of capital these institutions need to hold. As 
the turmoil on the markets for structured finance products has shown dramatically over the 
last few months, a decisive factor for adequate risk assessment is that banking supervisors 
and, in particular, institutions are able to fully comprehend the structure of the products on 
offer.  For  this  reason  too,  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  welcomes  the  fact  that  the  Islamic 
Financial Services Board has organised this forum here in Frankfurt.  
The  German  government  and  German  banking  supervisors  were  quick  to  recognise  the 
increasing  importance  of  Islamic  finance  for  the  German  and  European  markets.  For  this 
reason  we  –  along  with  the  UK  –  successfully  pressed  for  the  inclusion  of  provisions 
governing  Halal  finance  products  in  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive,  which  transposes 
the Basel II framework into European law.  
Please allow me to conclude this welcome speech with a personal observation. Before I was 
appointed to the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank in the middle of this year, I 
worked for many years as State Secretary in the federal state of Baden-Württemberg where, 
above all, I dealt with issues relating to the integration of citizens with migrant backgrounds. I 
have always taken these issues very seriously. In fact, in 2004, I was the first politician in the 
Baden-Württemberg  government  to  hold  a  speech  at  the  Yaruz  Sultan  Selim  mosque  in 
Mannheim  –  Germany’s  largest  –  on  intensifying  cooperation.  As  I  mentioned  previously, 
there  are  currently  around  3.5  million  Muslim  citizens  in  Germany.  According  to  a  study 
carried  out  by  the  University  of  Tübingen,  by  2030  this  number  will  have  almost  doubled. 
Although a large part of the Muslims living in Germany have integrated well, unfortunately, 
there  is  also  often  a  tendency  for  Muslims  to  segregate  themselves  from  their  Western 
surroundings.  Often  families  and  young  people  whose  parents  or  grandparents  came  to 
Germany from the Arab states and Turkey shut themselves off from German society. To be 
quite honest, it was for this reason that I was initially rather sceptical towards the issue of 
"Islamic  finance  in  Germany".  My  concern  was  that  the  creation  or  support  of  additional 
Islamic financial services would support the creation of parallel societies in Germany. 
I now believe that the development of a range of Halal finance products – particularly in retail 
banking – would make an important contribution to supporting the integration of our Muslim 
fellow citizens. If this enables these citizens to play an active role in business life in Germany 
and  to  build  up  material  assets  without  conflicting  with  their  beliefs,  it  will  support,  in 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 3
particular, those middle-class Muslims who are ready and willing to integrate. The example of 
a stable and financially successful middle class, in my opinion, will provide positive incentives 
which should prevent the development of parallel societies.  
Ladies and gentlemen 
“Islamic finance – the European challenge”: the challenges faced by banks, supervisors and 
legislators as a result of Islamic finance are by no means minor. I do believe, however, that it 
is  worth  the  effort  to  face  these  challenges,  not  only  both  from  a  business  and  financial 
perspective  but  also  most  significantly  for  socio-political  reasons.  Let  us  take  on  these 
challenges together.  
I would like to finish by wishing you all a successful and fruitful conference and hope you are 
able to make useful contacts. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2007
