Rundheersing Bheenick: Honouring Dr Yaga Venugopal Reddy 
Address  by  Professor  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the 
University of Mauritius proposing the conferment of the degree of Doctor of Civil Law honoris 
causa upon Dr Yaga Venugopal Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Port Louis, 
3 December 2007. 
 It is my honour to present to you, assembled here today, at the University of Mauritius, the 
distinguished and scholarly Dr Yaga Venugopal Reddy, academic at Universities in India and 
in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India, for  conferment  of  the 
degree of Doctor of Civil Law, honoris causa. 
The  conferment  of  such  a  degree  is  a  coveted  distinction  and  brings  Dr  Reddy  into  the 
illustrious company of Dr Nelson Mandela, Dr Indira Gandhi and Dr I G Patel, on whom, in 
the  recent  past,  this  University  has  seen  fit  to  bestow  this  honour.  The  occasion  also 
confirms the importance that this University attaches to its International role in promoting the 
application  of  intellectual  endeavours  into  the  processes  of  human  and  economic 
development.  The  University  was  founded  on  the  application  of  agricultural  science  to 
national  development.  Today  in  this  conferment  we  see  that  process  being  extended  into 
fields  of  applied  economics  and  finance  in  keeping  with  the  structural  transition  of  this 
country further into the industrial, business and service sectors in keeping with the original 
vision of this institution as a “developmental” university. 
Dr  Reddy  has  an  outstanding  international  record  in  academic  and  financial  affairs, 
principally in a nation thousands of miles from our island state. India is a country over 1,500 
times the size of Mauritius, and with a population nearly 1,000 times as great, and I dare not 
try to compute how many times our small financial capital, expressed in Mauritian rupees, 
can  be  divided  into  the  vast  riches  over  which  Dr  Reddy  has  served  as  Governor  of  the 
Reserve Bank of India. Moreover, we must recognise that India is a nation whose civilisation 
stretches back to the dawn of history itself, some 5000 years before man set foot on little Ile 
Maurice. 
Despite  these  differences  our  two  countries  have  much  in  common,  as  the  first  Prime 
Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, recalled 60 years ago at that historic Independence day 
assembly in 1947: 
“We  think  of  our  brothers  and  sisters  who  have  been  cut  off  from  us  by 
political boundaries…they are with us and will remain of us whatever may 
happen and we shall be sharers in their… fortune.” 
Mauritius is a part of the great Indian Diaspora, with enduring links to the motherland, from 
which more than half our population are derived, and who continue to cherish many of the 
cultural and religious traditions, and I am told, even cricket here, is now seeing some reviving 
interest. 
Allow  me  to  detail  some  of  the  most  notable  points  in  Dr  Reddy’s  life  and  work  which 
commend him so strongly to us in this formal assembly today. His career in the past 43 years 
embraces  service  in  India  at  state  level  in  Andhra  Pradesh  and  in  national  administration, 
finance, planning, monetary policy and public enterprise reforms. Since 2003, he has been 
Governor of the Reserve Bank of India and prior to this he was India’s Executive Director on 
the  Board  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  He  has  been  internationally  honoured  and 
noted  as  one  of  the  key  players  in  the  restructuring  and  reform  of  the  Indian  economy  in 
recent  years,  now  so  better  placed  on  the  world  stage  in  terms  of  high  growth  and  low 
inflation. 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 1
Dr Reddy has been especially concerned to recognise the plight of the poor in India and to 
protect the stability of banking in the face of the global financial turbulence of recent times. 
For him banking and money, in a social democracy, are means to the end of securing social 
welfare,  not  ends  in  themselves.  For  Dr  Reddy,  a  safe  bank  is  a  secure  stronghold  for 
sustainable development and its reliability must be continually tested against the changing 
pattern of risks. 
Dr Reddy is a well-travelled adviser and counsellor in the banking and finance sector world 
wide, working with the IMF on fiscal policies in China, Bahrain, Ethiopia and Tanzania. He 
also contributes significantly to the work of the Bank for International Settlements, the Bank 
for Central Banks, and in his regional role in ASEAN11 and SAARC22, which can serve for 
us as an important stimulus in our regional activities. 
Business  Week,  the  US  finance  journal,  this  year  placed  him  amongst  the  elite  group  of 
leaders helping to transform India into a 21st century power in Asia. It depicted him as: 
“the jovial governor walking that fine line between holding on to his integrity 
as  the  central  banker  and  giving  in  to  the  pressures  of  a  populist 
government. Reddy won!” 
Dr  Reddy  in  addition  to  his  distinguished  banking  career,  at  home  and  abroad,  has 
maintained a strong commitment to academic activity, through published work, teaching and 
research. He has been visiting Professor in international relations at the London School of 
Economics,  Visiting  Professor  in  the  Department  of  Business  Management,  at  Osmania 
University and a visiting Faculty member at the Administrative Staff College of India. 
It is most fitting that in the 40th Anniversary year of the central Bank of Mauritius and the 
60th Anniversary year of Independence in India, we have such as distinguished visitor who 
will be assisting us in the future in our regional development work at the Bank of Mauritius 
and for banking education for small and island states. We shall greatly benefit from his vast 
store of knowledge, experience and wisdom, applying the lessons from so great a country to 
one so small, but with so much in common in our joint heritage and personal links. 
[May I add, as an aside, that in just the last 24 hours, in meeting with Dr Reddy here, we 
have  established  a  close  accord,  exchanging  ideas  and  reviewing  opportunities  for  the 
future. He has been inspired, I believe, by the range of our 40th anniversary activities, and 
we have learned of a fresh mechanism for policy review; he engages his Minister of Finance 
in dialogue, by inviting him to a meeting of the Board of the Reserve Bank of India after the 
annual Budget speech. I wonder if we might just try that here as an anniversary gift from a 
firm friend! A Bon Entendeur, Salut!] 
Mr  Vice-Chancellor,  it  is  now  my  very  great  pleasure,  to  present  to  you  today,  Dr.  Yaga 
Vengopal Reddy, as a most worthy candidate for you to confer on him the degree of Doctor 
of Civil Law, honoris causa. 
                                                 
1   The Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
2   The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2007
