Nils Bernstein: Globalisation, the Danish economy and Danish 
agriculture  
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting and Congress of Danish Pig Production, Herning, 30 October 2007.  
Basis for the speech. The spoken version applies. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak here today. 
I  would  like  to  start  with  globalisation.  This  will  be  followed  by  a  snapshot  of  the  Danish 
economy,  and  an  account  of  why  Denmark  is  doing  relatively  well  in  an  increasingly 
globalised world. Finally, I will turn to Danish agriculture, primarily pig production.  
Globalisation is a dynamic process whereby the global markets for goods, services, capital, 
labour, technology, knowledge and ideas are being liberalised and integrated. Globalisation 
opens  up  new  possibilities  and  strengthens  global  competition,  while  productivity  is 
enhanced  via  a  better  and  more  efficient  distribution  of  the  factors  of  production. 
Consequently,  globalisation  does  not  only  lead  to  new  trade  flows.  It  also  means  that 
production  moves  to  the  places  that  offer  the  best  conditions  for  producing  the  relevant 
goods or services. 
It is important to understand that globalisation is not a zero-sum game where we just share 
the  existing  production opportunities.  If  each country  produces  what  it  is  relatively  best  at, 
overall output, and thus real income, increases, compared with a situation where all countries 
try to be self-sufficient. 
In the transition process there will always be people who lose their jobs or companies. Not 
surprisingly, they are against these changes. But the sooner they realise that they would be 
better off doing something else, the sooner they can reap the benefits of specialisation.  
The  best  safeguard  against  the  changes  brought  on  by  globalisation  is  to  acquire  training 
and skills to avoid getting stuck in an unprofitable job function.  
Society as a whole benefits from being able to buy the same goods elsewhere at a lower 
price, and naturally society should therefore facilitate the adaptation process – by promoting 
education, supplementary training, the establishment of new companies, etc. These relatively 
simple mechanisms have been acknowledged for a long time, and since World War II trade 
restrictions have indeed been phased out, some more rapidly than others. 
It is no secret that agriculture is among the sectors where the pace of liberalisation has been 
slowest, in spite of the large potential gains from phasing out agricultural subsidies and the 
rich  countries  accepting  that  much  food  production  is  relocated  to  less  affluent  countries. 
There  are  many  reasons  for  this  sluggishness  –  but  they  are  outside  the  scope  of  this 
speech.  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  Danish  agriculture  supports  a  controlled  phasing-out  of 
agricultural subsidies. As we know, agriculture is one of the major hurdles to be overcome in 
the  current  Doha  negotiations.  To  me  there  is  no  doubt  that  liberalisation  will  come  some 
day. It is simply a question of when.  
Globalisation is not a new phenomenon; in Denmark's case it has been going on for about a 
century – albeit with some setbacks (slide 1). This period has been characterised by major 
technological advances, e.g. within transport and communication. As you will know, cheap 
transport via the new railways opened up for exports of wheat from the US prairie in the latter 
half of the 19th century. This called for restructuring of Danish agricultural production from 
mainly  crops  to  mainly  livestock.  Danish  agriculture  was  able  to  exploit  the  opportunities 
offered  by  globalisation,  and  C.F.  Tietgen's  establishment  of  a  telegraph  connection  from 
Copenhagen to China was part of a clear globalisation strategy. 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 1
Following  a  period  of  protectionism,  the  last  half  century  has  been  characterised  by  an 
international political environment that has promoted free trade, and free movement of capital 
and  –  to  a  lesser  extent  –  people.  Growing  international  trade  and  investments  are 
indications of increasing international division of work. Low-technology production moves to 
countries  whose  strength  is  inexpensive  labour.  In  turn,  production  in  more  developed 
countries  becomes  increasingly  concentrated  on  high-technology  products  and  complex 
services.  
In  the  last  few  years,  globalisation  seems  to  have  gained  further  momentum  as  populous 
nations  such  as  China  and  India  are  increasingly  becoming  part  of  the  global  market 
economy.  Once  again,  technological  leaps  within  transport  and  communication  have  been 
the catalysts for the process.  
International integration is particularly advanced in the financial markets, and the last decade 
has seen a tremendous rate of development (slide 2). The conditions for free movement of 
capital are probably better than ever. Liberalisation of the international financial markets over 
the last few decades has enabled more efficient employment of capital from a global point of 
view.  Savings  are  placed  where  the  largest  returns  can  be  achieved,  and  borrowers  can 
raise  capital  from  a  wider  range  of  investors.  For  investors,  more  open  financial  markets 
mean more placement opportunities.  
Typically,  investments  in  foreign  production  capacity  are  still  placed  in  neighbouring 
countries. The shares of Danish direct investments in countries such as China and India are 
increasing, but still at a low level overall. This also applies to Eastern Europe, actually. 
The many borrowing and placement opportunities can be used to increase, reduce or spread 
financial  risks.  This  is  generally  an  advantage,  but  also  involves  risks,  as  the  current 
subprime  crisis  illustrates.  This  began  as  an  isolated  phenomenon  on  the  US  housing 
market,  where  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  made  it  attractive  to  offer  loans  to  less 
creditworthy homeowners. Many of the loans were "teaser loans", i.e. loans where the rate of 
interest  is  artificially  low  for  the  first  2-3  years  and  then  raised  to  the  normal  level  for 
borrowers in this category. 
When interest rates began to normalise, many borrowers were unable to service the loans at 
the new, higher rate, and since housing prices were falling at the same time, losses were 
incurred  on  these  mortgages.  The  losses  soon  proved  to  be  spread  on  many  different 
investors, including a number of European banks that had purchased bonds with top ratings 
based on "restructured" subprime mortgages.  
In addition to the risk of loss, some banks had taken on considerable liquidity risk by issuing 
guarantees  to  investment  firms  investing  in  credit  bonds,  among  other  things.  In  several 
cases,  theses  guarantees  were  exercised.  This  led  the  banks  to  exert  greater  restraint  in 
lending  to  other  banks  as  they  might  need  the  liquidity  themselves.  In  the  UK,  the  lack  of 
borrowing opportunities in the money markets led to the first run on a bank, Northern Rock, 
for more than 100 years.  
The authorities have been compelled to provide extraordinary guarantees to the depositors.  
Danish investors are only to a very limited extent directly involved in subprime investments, 
but may be hit by derived effects. The course of events shows that globalisation also entails 
less protection against ill-fated external dispositions.  
Right now there is believed to be a growing risk that the slowdown in the US housing market 
will spread to the rest of the US economy. If this happens, the rest of the world will also be 
adversely affected.  
For some time, the dollar has been depreciating vis-à-vis the euro. This is basically a natural 
reaction  to  interest-rate expectations  in  Europe  and  the  USA.  In  view  of  the  large  current-
account deficit in the USA and the corresponding surplus in e.g. China, the Chinese currency 
would be expected to appreciate against the dollar. However, this effect has been postponed 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2007
due  to  massive  Chinese  intervention  in  the  foreign-exchange  market  to  keep  the  renminbi 
stable  against  the  dollar.  Consequently,  the  euro  has  also  strengthened  vis-à-vis  the 
renminbi and the yen. 
There are many speculations as to whether the dollar will fall further against the euro – and 
thus the krone. I will not venture any opinion on this. Exchange-rate forecasts are notoriously 
unreliable. 
At present, the US annual current-account deficit is around 6 per cent of GDP, which is not 
sustainable  over  a  prolonged  period.  At  some  point  an  adjustment  process  is  required, 
involving  not  only  the  exchange  rate.  This  process  has  already  set  in.  We  must  keep  our 
fingers  crossed  for  a  gradual  process,  for  if  the  adjustment  is  too  abrupt,  it  may  have 
significant negative consequences for the global economy.  
Now  I  would  like  to  turn  to  the  Danish  economy,  which  is  booming  with  high  growth  and 
rapidly rising employment. Private-sector employment has increased strongly since 2005 and 
unemployment is at the lowest level for 30 years. At the same time, the government surplus 
was around 4 per cent of GDP in 2006 and will presumably also be among the highest in the 
industrialised world this year.  
There are, however, several indications that the economy has reached its capacity limit. The 
shortage  of  labour,  combined  with  rising  interest  rates,  will  dampen  growth.  The  current-
account surplus is receding. This reflects the fact that demand must increasingly be met via 
imports  because  domestic  output  cannot  keep  up  with  demand.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
prospects  for  many  of  Denmark's  key  export  markets  are  good.  This  means  that, capacity 
allowing, the sales opportunities are there. Denmark has been leading the economic cycle 
compared to the rest of Europe, and the economies of Germany and several other euro area 
member states have only recently begun to take off. 
As  a  result  of  the  capacity  pressures,  Danish  prices  and  wages  have  begun  to  show  an 
upward trend. The collective agreements concluded for parts of the private labour market in 
the spring thus point to a substantially higher rate of wage increase than in the preceding 
agreement  period.  Now  the  collective  bargaining  for  the  public  sector  is  approaching,  and 
very high wage expectations among large groups of public-sector employees point to tough 
negotiations.  
Wage  developments  contribute  to  a  stronger  domestic  price  pressure,  which  is  set  to 
intensify further. So far, low import price increases, due to e.g. the weakening of the dollar, 
have  kept  inflation  below  2  per  cent  p.a.  However,  wages  are  undoubtedly  the  one  single 
factor  that  could  potentially  derail  the  economy.  History  shows  that  a  high  rate  of  nominal 
wage increase is by no means synonymous with higher real wages, i.e. higher purchasing 
power (slide 3).  
Against this background, Danmarks Nationalbank has recommended fiscal policy that is not 
expansionary. After all, we want to maintain our favourable economy. 
One of the main reasons why the Danish economy has been relatively sound in recent years 
is  that  we  have  created  favourable  framework  conditions  for  the  economy  –  even  better 
conditions than many of our European partners offer. Let me highlight a few important areas. 
Traditionally,  Denmark  has  adhered  to  liberal  industrial  policies  and  no  political  measures 
have  been  taken  to  artificially  keep  struggling  sectors  and  individual  business  enterprises 
alive. Restructuring has been permitted to take its course, which means that resources have 
been  moved  from  areas  with  little  added  value  to  industries  with  high  added  value,  to  the 
benefit of the overall economy. 
This  process  has  been  underpinned  by  a  flexible  labour  market  which  supports  such 
restructuring  instead  of  impeding  it.  The  Danish  labour-market  model,  referred  to  as 
"flexicurity",  is  well-known  even  outside  Denmark's  borders.  Flexicurity  combines  liberal 
access  to  hiring  and  firing  employees  with  a  social  safety  net  and  active  labour-market 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 3
policies. The dynamics of the Danish labour market are e.g. reflected in a very large number 
of job shifts – approximately 600,000 a year. Consequently the average employment in the 
same job is just 4.8 years, which is very low by international standards.  
In the last 10 years, fiscal policy in Denmark has been based on a "medium-term orientation", 
whereby not only current, but also future expenditure is taken into account. This is a sound 
principle.  Government  finances  are  very  sensitive  to  economic  trends,  oil  prices  and 
fluctuations in interest rates and securities prices in the financial markets. For this reason, 
among others, it is not appropriate to plan fiscal policy on the basis of the government budget 
balance in any single year. The large surpluses seen these years are of a temporary nature 
and will decline in the future, partly on account of population ageing. The surplus does not 
mean  that  there  is  scope  for  unfunded  tax  reductions  or  lasting  improvements  of  public-
sector services.  
The final framework condition for the economy that I would like to emphasise is the fixed-
exchange-rate  policy.  This  policy  has  been  a  tremendous  success,  and  I  doubt  if  anyone 
would  question  it  today.  Maintaining  a  fixed  exchange  rate  against  the  D-mark,  and  since 
1999 the euro, has anchored inflation expectations at a level close to 2 per cent p.a., and in 
recent years the yield spread to Germany has been negative at times. 
Success  in  the  global  economy  is  not  merely  a  question  of  economic  policy  in  a  narrow 
sense, and nor is it purely a question of wage competitiveness. In recent years other issues 
have  increasingly  come  into  focus.  These  include  the  importance  of  a  sound  institutional 
framework, e.g. an efficient public sector, suitable business regulations, infrastructure, non-
corruption  and  more  intangible  concepts  such  as  "social  capital",  a  measure  of  whether 
people basically trust each other and the authorities.  
Numerous  efforts  are  being  made  to  capture  all  these  factors  in  one  single  weighted 
measure of a country's competitiveness. Typically Denmark performs well in such surveys. In 
a global index prepared by the World Economic Forum, Denmark came 4th overall in 2006 
(slide 4). And in fact, The Economist's recent survey of the countries with the best framework 
for  operating  a  business  put  Denmark  in  1st  place.  In  other  words,  a  small  country  with  a 
large  public  sector  and  thus  a  high  tax  burden  can  actually  perform  well  in  international 
competition. It is worth noting that the top performers on the list include both small and large 
countries, and countries with both large and small public sectors.  
The  pharmaceutical  industry  is  one  of  several  Danish  success  stories.  In  volume  terms, 
production and exports of medicine have more than doubled over the last 10 years. As if that 
was not enough, sales prices in the export markets have risen by approximately 40 per cent 
in the same period (slide 5).  
Another example is the textile industry, which at one time employed a very large number of 
people, particularly in Jutland. Today, most low-wage jobs in the textile industry have been 
relocated  to  countries  with  lower  hourly  wages  than  Denmark,  but  over  the  last  decade 
export  volumes  have  risen  at  almost  the  same  rate  as  medicine  exports.  This  shows  that 
Danish textile production has moved further up the value chain. The remaining Danish labour 
is engaged in design, marketing, branding, etc., which are areas with high added value.  
An export-oriented economy such as Denmark's has benefited from the general increase in 
international trade. Unlike many other industrialised countries, Denmark has also benefited 
from better overall terms of trade (slide 6). This also applies if energy is excluded. Not only 
the pharmaceutical companies, but also a wide range of other Danish enterprises have been 
able  to  sell  their  products  at  still  higher  prices,  while  the  prices  of  Danish  imports  have 
stagnated  or  even  fallen.  Often  imported  goods  are  manufactured  in  low-wage  countries, 
which  keeps  prices  at  bay.  Improved  terms  of  trade  contribute  to  Danish  affluence  just  as 
higher production does since both boost real incomes. 
Agricultural production is not part of the explanation for the improved terms of trade. In this 
sector,  prices  have  been  stagnant  or  even  receding,  and  in  many  cases  the  prices  of 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2007
agricultural products fluctuate strongly. As you all know, this is certainly true of the price of 
pork (slide 7).  
In a global perspective, pig farmers are currently faced with strong increases in feed prices, 
partly  reflecting  more  extensive  international  use  of  feed  for  bioethanol  production.  In  the 
longer term, higher feed prices can be expected to pass through to pork prices, but in the 
short term contribution margins will be squeezed. Looking ahead, the development may give 
Denmark a competitive edge, since I understand that Danish pig farmers are close to holding 
the world record for transforming feed units into pork.  
The upward pressure on feed prices may intensify further if China, which is by far the world's 
largest pig producer, abandons its self-reliance strategy and opens up its market for imports 
of  grain  and  feed.  In  general,  the  development  in  less  industrialised  countries  will  gain 
importance  in  relation  to  the  future  development  in  pork  prices.  Today,  industrialised 
countries account for only around 1/3 of global production of and demand for pork, and their 
share is falling.  
In the longer term, population growth and rapidly rising incomes, and thus meat consumption 
per  capita,  in  the  low-  and  middle-income  countries  will  buoy  up  pork  prices,  although 
production is also increasing in these countries.  
The OECD, and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, FAO, have projected food prices 
over  the  next  7-8  years.  The  OECD/FAO  expect  the  price  of  pork  to  rise  slightly  to 
somewhere in the range of kr. 9.5-10 per kg. These are current prices, which means that in 
actual fact pork prices will continue to fall. 
Such projections are, of course, subject to considerable uncertainty, and particularly in the 
short term they can be affected by exchange-rate fluctuations, diseases, weather conditions, 
etc., and likewise changes in agricultural policy and trade restrictions may have an impact. 
Nevertheless, the projection serves as a key indicator for pig farmers. If the expected price 
level cannot provide a satisfactory profit, the farmer will eventually be squeezed out of the 
market.  
On a global scale, Danish pig farmers produce 2 per cent of all pork, but account for almost 
13 per cent of exports. It may seem surprising that Denmark, which has one of the highest 
wage levels in the world, has been able to maintain and strengthen its position as one of the 
world's largest exporters of pork in a fully commercial international market. 
The explanation is that pig farmers have been able to increase productivity at an astounding 
pace. For many years, productivity has been far higher in agriculture than in the rest of the 
economy, including the industrial sector (slide 8).  
Paradoxically,  however,  the  individual  farmer  has  gained  very  little  from  the  increase  in 
productivity  since  fierce  competition  means  that  most  of  it  is  immediately  passed  on  to 
consumers via lower food prices. The situation resembles that of a hamster in a treadmill: it 
runs and runs, but never gets anywhere. But if it stops running, it is slung out.  
According to accounts statistics for pig farmers, the "profit per hour" has been just under kr. 
50 over the last five years, i.e. only half the minimum wage in the industrial sector. The profit 
per  hour  reflects  the  farmer's  hourly  income  after  deduction  of  costs  and  return  on  capital 
employed.  According  to  the  accounts  statistics,  income  generation  in  pig  farming  is  thus 
lagging behind many other sectors. However, there are considerable differences within the 
sector.  
Statistical extracts show that the average profit per hour for the third of farms that in 2005 
exceeded the kr. 50 threshold was kr. 140, while the rest averaged kr. 40 (slide 9). 2/3 of the 
farms had a negative profit per hour. The most profitable third of the farms produced 60 per 
cent  of  the  pigs.  The  figures  speak  for  themselves  about  the  advantages  of  economies  of 
scale. Moreover, there is a tendency for the farms that produce their own piglets to achieve 
the best profits. 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 5
One third of all farms, accounting for just under 25 per cent of production, have a negative 
profit per hour combined with high debts. How long can they last, I wonder. The structural 
development will continue. Others will take over and form larger units. This will be necessary 
if the Danish pig-farming sector is to remain competitive.  
You  might  safely  say  that  Danish  agriculture  has  embraced  the  opportunities  in  the 
liberalised capital markets. Indebtedness has risen substantially over the years, particularly 
in  the  period  when  interest  rates  were  falling.  Lower  debt-servicing  costs  have  not  led  to 
consolidation, but to higher indebtedness.  
Farmers  are  among  the  most  frequent  customers  for  adjustable-rate  and  deferred-
amortisation loans. In addition, a large part of the debt is denominated in foreign exchange. 
For some years, the Swiss franc has been a popular currency for Danish farmers to borrow 
in  (slide  10).  Whereas  other  sectors  often  seek  to  hedge  foreign-exchange  risks,  many 
farmers take on such risks on a large scale. But this is not the whole issue. In some cases, 
foreign-exchange  loans  are  not  used  to  finance  operations,  but  are  invested  in  high-yield 
currencies. This is a purely financial transaction that is unrelated to running a farm. 
For  a  number  of  years  it  has  indeed  been  possible  to  profit  from  these  "carry  trades", 
whereby money is borrowed in a low-yield currency such as the Swiss franc or the yen and 
invested  in  a  high-yield  currency  such  as  the  Turkish  lira,  the  Icelandic  krona  or  the  New 
Zealand dollar. However, such transactions always entail considerable risk, and much is to 
be said for exercising caution, even in favourable periods. Exchange-rate adjustments can 
be abrupt and substantial. The question is whether everyone has been sufficiently aware of 
these risks when chasing "cheap money". In any case, if a farm primarily yields a profit as a 
result  of  purely  financial  transactions,  it  is,  perhaps,  time  for  the  farmer  to  find  other 
employment. The banks are short of staff!  
The future for Danish pig farming will be a continued elimination race in which only the fittest 
will survive. In addition to external competition and sustained price pressures, environmental 
and  animal  welfare  regulations  are  becoming  stricter.  The  pig-farming  sector  will  have  to 
accept  this,  even  if  the  requirements  sometimes  exceed  those  imposed  on  foreign 
competitors.  
As  you  already  know,  it  will  be  increasingly  difficult  to  attract  Danish  labour  to  the  farms. 
Around one fourth of all work permits for people from Eastern Europe are exercised within 
agriculture and horticulture. 
Pig production can have a serious adverse impact on the environment and in many cases 
also on the local environment – it smells. With more than two pigs per capita, Denmark has a 
high pig density. In some parts of the country, the figure is much higher, and the problems 
much  greater,  than  elsewhere.  At  the  same  time,  the  public  are  very  sensitive  to  animal 
welfare issues, as reflected in the recent years' cases of pig transports and shoulder ulcers in 
sows. These issues must be addressed by the sector. 
Unless  the  environmental  and  animal-welfare  issues  are  resolved,  the  restraints  on  pig 
farmers  will  become  even  tighter,  and  it  will  be  increasingly  difficult  to  continue  to  expand 
production as in the last decades.  
Some  take  the  consequences  and  invest  in  places  like  Poland  and  Ukraine.  This  is 
globalisation in the true sense of the word and offers good growth opportunities.  
With  the  initiative  and  enterprising  spirit  that  characterises  Danish  agriculture,  and 
particularly the strong technological foundations that the pig-farming and processing industry 
rest  on,  I  have  no  doubt  that  pigs  will  also  be  farmed  and  slaughtered  in  Denmark  in  the 
coming years. However, you will probably need a smaller and smaller venue. 
I wish you a good congress. 
6 
 BIS Review 125/2007
   BIS Review 125/2007 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 125/2007
    BIS Review 125/2007 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 125/2007
    11
BIS Review 125/2007 
  12 
 BIS Review 125/2007
