David Dodge: Credit market turbulence and policy challenges ahead 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Institute  of 
International Finance, Washington DC, 21 October 2007. 
 I'm  delighted  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  the  Institute  as  it  celebrates  25  years  of 
important contributions to the stability of the global financial system. 
Given the Institute's membership and its focus on financial stability, I feel safe in saying that 
all of us here today watched this summer's turbulence in credit markets with interest, to put it 
mildly. What began in the spring as a repricing of credit risk turned into dislocations that have 
yet to fully run their course. Because of our shared interest in these events, what I thought I'd 
do today is discuss some of the challenges that these events have posed, not just for central 
bankers, but for policy-makers and private sector institutions more generally. My goal today 
is to try to identify some of the questions and issues that we need to consider. 
to  pricing 
Credit market turbulence – a brief review 
As a point of departure, it would be useful to have a common understanding of the factors 
behind this summer's turbulence. I'll be brief here. Ten days ago, Charles Dallara did a nice 
job of summing up one of these factors in his letter to Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, the new 
Chair of the International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC). Dallara wrote: "Strong 
global growth, plentiful liquidity, and a search for yield together led to a relaxation of credit 
standards  and 
that  was  not  commensurate  with  underlying  risks  and 
fundamentals." 
There  were  other  key  factors  that  led  to  the  events  of  this  past  summer.  In  a  couple  of 
previous  speeches,  I  have  noted  the  complexity  and  opacity  of  some  of  the  structured 
products at the heart of the recent turbulence. Because of this complexity and opacity, it is 
extremely difficult for investors to determine, with confidence, both the creditworthiness of the 
assets  backing  a  particular  security  and  the  market  value  of  the  security  itself.  Even 
supposedly  sophisticated  investors  did  not  understand  the  nature  of  the  assets  underlying 
these structured products. 
The  other  factor  I'd  point  to  is  the  increasing  use  of  securitization  to  meet  the  growing 
demand  for  structured  products.  This  allowed  higher-risk  assets  to  appear  to  take  on  the 
qualities of lower-risk assets, fuelling the demand for the creation of higher-risk assets and 
leading  to  the  relaxation  of  credit  standards.  To  be  clear,  the  problem  was  not  the  use  of 
securitization per se; rather, it was that originators of the securitized loans at times did not 
have  the  proper  incentives  to  carefully  assess  the  creditworthiness  of  borrowers.  In  many 
cases,  once  the  loan  had  been  securitized  and  sold,  the  originator  no  longer  faced  the 
consequences if the borrower defaulted. 
It seems to me that in recent years, we at the Bank of Canada and, I suspect, other monetary 
authorities  as  well,  may  not  have  fully  appreciated  just  how  much  the  increase  in 
securitization  represented  an  easing  of  credit  conditions.  Loans  were  being  sold  and,  to  a 
greater  or  lesser  extent,  moved  off  balance  sheets,  allowing  more  loans  to  be  made.  If 
securitization led to the creation of loans that would not otherwise have been made, then this 
was a source of demand in the economy that we as central bankers may have only partially 
taken  into  account.  Any  given  policy  rate  would  thus  have  been  less  restrictive  than  was 
earlier judged, implying that, in hindsight, interest rates globally might have been a little lower 
than would have been optimal. However, since both global and domestic inflation have been 
largely contained over this period, we should not exaggerate the magnitude of this effect. 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 1
But following recent events, a reduction in securitization globally is now likely, along with a 
degree of re-intermediation by financial institutions. Indeed, in the Bank of Canada's latest 
Monetary  Policy  Report,  published  on  Thursday,  we  projected  that  the  cost  of  credit  for 
Canadian  firms  and  households  relative  to  our  policy  interest  rate  will  be  about  25  basis 
points higher over the projection horizon than it was prior to the summer. The challenge for 
monetary authorities is to determine the persistence of this tightening and re-intermediation, 
because it could affect the conduct of monetary policy going forward. 
Policy challenges ahead 
Aside  from  this  issue  for  monetary  authorities,  this  summer's  events  have  led  to  policy 
challenges in other areas that are of mutual interest to central banks, regulators, and private 
sector  financial  institutions.  Let  me  spend  some  time  now  discussing  two  of  them:  those 
related to transparency and those related to liquidity. 
Transparency 
Let me begin with transparency. Following the events of this summer, it may take awhile to 
achieve  an  appropriate  pricing  of  risk,  because  it  will  take  time  to  unravel  some  of  the 
complex, opaque structured products to get to the underlying assets, and then find values for 
the assets themselves. Over time, market forces can be expected to work this out. But, to 
operate efficiently, markets need information. So, it is in the interest of market participants to 
make sure that parties have access to all the necessary information. Once again, Charles 
Dallara  put  it  well  in  his  letter  to  the  IMFC.  He  wrote:  "disclosure  practices  need  to  be 
improved so as to allow investors and other market participants to properly assess and price 
risk, thus effectively exercising market discipline." 
The  desired  outcomes  are  clear  enough:  Investors  should  demand  greater  transparency 
where it is now lacking. Vendors of financial instruments will then need to structure them in 
such a way that market players can clearly see what they are buying and what leverage is 
embedded  in  the  instrument.  And  credit-rating  agencies  will  have  to  be  clearer  about  the 
basis  on  which  their  ratings  are  assigned.  But  fundamentally,  investors  and  investment 
advisers  must  take  on  more  responsibility  for  diligent  research,  so  that  they  can  better 
understand the nature of their investments, instead of simply relying on the word of credit-
rating agencies. 
Many, indeed, perhaps most, of these desired outcomes can, and should, be accomplished 
through  natural  market  forces  responding  to  these  events.  For  example,  when  investors 
demand much higher rates of return for opaque products, there will be a strong incentive for 
vendors  to  provide  products  that  are  more  transparent.  However,  markets  will  work  only  if 
issuers  follow  the  basic  principle  of  providing  clear,  straightforward,  pertinent  information 
about the security that they are selling. Further, this information needs to be provided in a 
way  that  is  understandable  to  the  reasonably  informed  investor.  Put  another  way,  the 
prospectus or term sheet should inform, not obfuscate. If I can draw an analogy, just as food 
companies  are  required  to  list  all  ingredients  on  their  labels,  so  should  issuers  list  the 
"ingredients"  of  a  security.  And  just  as  food  companies  are  required  to  provide  that 
information  in  a  sufficiently  clear  manner,  so  that  people  who  can't  tolerate  peanuts,  for 
example,  know  that  there  are  peanuts  in  a  product,  so  should  securities  issuers  be 
sufficiently  clear.  But  I  want  to  emphasize  my  key  point  –  the  best  route  to  increased 
transparency is the use of  market forces, rather than detailed, prescriptive, and potentially 
burdensome regulations. 
Similar principles of transparency should apply in terms of the role of credit-rating agencies. 
And again, market forces can be quite useful in achieving appropriate levels of transparency. 
Let me elaborate on this point by referencing our experience with ratings for asset-backed 
securities in Canada. We had a situation where the same rating system was being used for 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2007
very  different  types  of  securities.  At  one  end  of  the  spectrum  were  the  most  basic,  plain-
vanilla asset-backed securities, where the nature of and risks associated with the underlying 
assets were clear. At the other end of the spectrum were the most complex securities, where 
the risks were less clear, the underlying assets could be synthetic and could not be readily 
traded, and where significant leverage may have been embedded. 
It seems obvious that the same rating system is not appropriate in these different cases. So 
credit-rating agencies should make it clear that their ratings for complex, opaque securities 
ought not to be used in the same manner as ratings for conventional bonds issued by single-
names. 
There  have  been  calls  for  stricter  regulations  for  credit-rating  agencies.  After  significant 
market  events,  it's  always  appropriate  to  review  the  regulations  and  our  roles  as 
governments,  central  banks,  and  regulators  in  terms  of  these  ratings.  But  I  would  caution 
against  any  knee-jerk  regulatory  response.  Given  recent  events,  it  seems  likely  that  those 
credit-rating agencies that do not work harder to ensure that users understand the nature of 
their ratings will soon have fewer clients willing to pay for their services. The general principle 
in securities markets is that disclosure should be clear and transparent. And insofar as credit-
rating agencies observe this principle, the use of market forces is once again the preferred 
route to the desired outcome, rather than burdensome regulation. 
Liquidity issues 
Now let me discuss some issues related to liquidity. I'll start with a point that may appear to 
be obvious, but is quite important, given this summer's events. Ultimately, it is banks, and 
only  banks,  that  can  provide  liquidity  throughout  the  financial  system,  because  it  is  only 
banks  that  have  access  to  the  ultimate  source  of  liquidity:  the  central  bank.  Why  is  this 
important? The financial system has evolved steadily over the past few decades. If you think 
back about 50 years or so, the lion's share of financing was provided through banks. Now, 
most financing is done through markets. But securities markets do not access central bank 
liquidity  facilities.  And  so,  when  market  liquidity  dries  up,  as  it  did  in  money  markets  this 
summer, it falls to the banking sector to provide liquidity. The recent market turbulence has 
shown  that  this  re-intermediation  back  to  banks  has  had  implications  that  had  not  been 
anticipated. Indeed, these events have highlighted the increased importance of liquidity in a 
market-based financial system and the risks to the system when there is a rapid erosion of 
market liquidity and banks are called upon to quickly provide liquidity and credit. 
This  re-intermediation  has  taken  place  following  a  period  that  saw  an  expanding  use  of 
securitization,  where  assets  such  as  loans,  credit  card  receivables,  and  derivatives  were 
bundled  and  sold  as  asset-backed  securities,  often  with  significant  amounts  of  leverage 
embedded.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  this  process  allowed  banks  and,  in  particular,  non-
deposit-taking  financial  institutions,  to  originate  more  loans  than  they  would  have  if  it  had 
been necessary for them to hold these assets on their balance sheets. And it is the greatly 
expanded  use  of  this  securitization  process,  where  loans  were  being  originated  for  the 
purpose  of  distribution,  that  led  to  the  relaxation  of  credit  standards  that  Charles  Dallara 
referred to. 
Again,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  expanded  use  of  securitization  per  se  is  a  bad  thing. 
Indeed,  there  are  many  examples  of  well-structured  products  that  have  dealt  with  the 
principal-agent problem that was, in many ways, the root cause of the relaxation of standards 
in the U.S. subprime-mortgage market. But the question can be asked: "Are there ways to 
encourage the more appropriate use of securitization?" It may be possible, for example, to 
have asset-backed securities carry some manner of "branding" or "certificate of origination" 
that  would  provide  a  clear  incentive  for  the  loan  originator  to  exercise  due  diligence  in 
extending  the  loan  before  it  is  securitized.  Or,  we  can  look  for  ways  to  encourage  more 
originators or conduits to keep a portion of the product they are selling on their books – in 
particular, a portion of the riskiest tranche. 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 3
So, there are market-based ways that could help to resolve the problems in the market for 
asset-backed  securities.  Given  time  and  increased  transparency,  the  market  for  asset-
backed  securities  should  normalize,  since  it  serves  an  important  function  for  market 
participants by helping to distribute and diversify risk. This entire market is not dead. But it 
seems clear that investors will, at the very least, seek greater returns for opaque, complex 
instruments than for well-branded, plain-vanilla asset-backed securities. 
The  specific  market  for  asset-backed  commercial  paper  is  a  somewhat  different  story. 
Because  this  short-term  paper  must  be  redeemable  at  maturity,  despite  the  longer-term 
assets that back it, it must carry a guarantee from a liquidity provider. So, there is a question 
of how liquidity providers should take into account the potential for liquidity calls to be made, 
both in terms of the capital they hold against this potential, and the liquidity of the assets on 
their  balance  sheet.  This  issue,  which  came  to  the  fore  this  summer,  represents  a  key 
challenge for the members of the IIF. How do you make provisions for liquidity calls that may 
come against the guarantees that your institutions provide, and for the support of products 
that represent a reputational risk should they fail? These are not easy questions to answer, 
but it is important that you provide your own answers and be prepared to discuss them with 
your regulator in the context of the implementation of Basel II. And I am pleased to see that 
the IIF has been working hard on these particular issues. 
Finally,  this  summer's  turbulence  has  raised  a  number  of  system-wide  issues  related  to 
liquidity.  In  the  event  of  a  serious  disruption  in  securities  markets  that  would  threaten 
financial stability, are there policies that would be helpful? The Financial Stability Forum has 
been looking at this issue. And of course it is not only commercial banks that need to worry 
about  this,  it  is  also  a  problem  for  central  banks  in  their  role  as  the  ultimate  providers  of 
liquidity to the banking system. 
Over the summer, central banks have seen that their standing liquidity facilities have worked 
quite  well  with  respect  to  the  market  for  overnight  funds.  Different  central  banks  have 
different practices and facilities in place to provide liquidity to the banking sector. 
In Canada, we have clear rules for accessing our Standing Liquidity Facility to cover routine 
overnight liquidity needs. And we have clear rules regarding emergency lending assistance 
for individual solvent banks with acute liquidity problems. But are there principles that would 
suggest that some  market failures would be best dealt with if we had a readily accessible 
facility that would provide liquidity to banks at terms longer than overnight, collateralized with 
a  possibly  wider  range  of  securities?  Such  a  facility  would  have  to  allow  for  suitable  term 
premiums and penalties. 
The  types  of  market  failure  that  such  a  facility  would  be  designed  to  deal  with  would 
obviously need to be thoroughly examined and discussed, as would the pros and cons of any 
specific proposal, including a consideration of all other issues that might be generated. The 
experience of other countries suggests that it is difficult to avoid having a stigma attached to 
the users of such a facility. But such a facility would be designed to help to mitigate system-
wide tightness. And such a facility would have to be set up so that it is clear that the Bank 
would not use it as a backdoor route to easing monetary policy. I would be very interested in 
hearing your views on this topic. 
Of course, the events of this summer have raised concerns beyond the issues I have just 
mentioned. The Bank of Canada is working closely with the Department of Finance and other 
Canadian regulatory authorities in reviewing this summer's events and the issues that they 
have raised. 
I hope the IIF will address these liquidity issues, because I truly believe that effective, private 
sector, market-based solutions are more likely to be efficient and are more likely to provide 
scope for institutions such as yours to achieve the desired outcomes without choking off the 
innovations that have proven so helpful to the financial system over the years. 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2007
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The challenges that have been posed by the recent market turbulence are 
global  in  nature.  And  so  it  follows  that  the  responses  to  these  challenges  should  also  be 
global in nature. 
The logical forum for policy-makers to deal with this issue is the Financial Stability Forum. 
And indeed, the FSF has formed a working group to look at the risk-management practices 
of  financial  institutions  in  terms  of  liquidity,  market,  and  credit  risk,  including  how  complex 
credit products and investment vehicles are treated and disclosed. The group will look at a 
number  of  issues,  including  accounting  and  valuation  procedures  for  financial  derivatives, 
particularly those that are narrowly traded or difficult to price in times of stress. They will also 
look  at  the  role  of  credit-rating  agencies  in  evaluating  and  rating  structured  products.  The 
FSF working group is also looking at the basic principles of prudential oversight for regulated 
financial entities, especially relating to exposures and contingent claims and liabilities, both 
on- and off-balance sheet. The working group hopes to complete an interim report in the next 
few months, and then present a final report to G-7 ministers and central bankers at the spring 
meetings of the IMF next year. 
But,  as  I  noted  throughout  my  remarks,  it  may  well  be  that  the  best  responses  to  the 
challenges I've mentioned come, not from policy-makers, but from the financial institutions at 
the heart of the turbulence. And so I ask the membership of the IIF to continue to think about 
and work on the challenges I've mentioned today. Is there a way to accomplish the outcomes 
we all desire primarily through the use of market forces? 
Much of the groundwork may have already been laid. I know that, back in March, the IIF put 
out a report on the principles of liquidity-risk management. This report touches on many of 
the challenges and issues I outlined today, and makes recommendations for both the private 
sector and policy-makers. The report also says that the IIF hopes to generate a constructive 
dialogue.  I  applaud  this  sentiment,  and  I  hope  that  my  comments  today  can  further  that 
dialogue, so that we can move forward together to find answers to the challenges that face 
us all. 
BIS Review 119/2007 
 5
