John Hurley: Capital markets and financial integration in Europe 
Opening remarks by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services 
Authority of Ireland, at the Ninth Conference of the ECB-CFS Research Network on Asset 
Management, Private Equity Firms and International Capital Flows: Their Role for Financial 
Integration and Efficiency, Dublin, 8-9 October 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, good morning and you are all very welcome to this ninth conference 
of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Centre  for  Financial  Studies  research  network  on 
Capital Markets and Financial Integration in Europe. We are delighted in the Central Bank 
and Financial Services Authority of Ireland to be hosting this event in Dublin and I would like 
to particularly welcome those of you who are visiting us here for the first time. I would also 
like congratulate the organisers on having the foresight to choose, as long ago as last year, a 
topic  for  this  conference  which  would  prove  so  timely  and  interesting  in  the  current 
environment!  
The  conference  programme  is  notable  for  both  its  diversity  and  its  topicality.  This  is  a 
testament  to  the  work  of  the  ECB-CFS  research  network  and  represents  a  successful 
collaboration  on  research  in  the  area  of  financial  market  integration  and  international 
linkages. The Centre for Financial Studies conducts and facilitates excellent independent and 
internationally-oriented research on financial markets, financial intermediaries and monetary 
economics, and the promotion of dialogue between academia and the financial community. It 
is  a  natural  partner  to  collaborate  with  the  ECB  in  sponsoring  this  research  network.  The 
ECB has, since its inception, maintained a focus on encouraging research which is directly 
relevant to understanding the workings of the global economy. The ECB has a strong track 
record of interacting with both academics and market participants in this regard. 
In the five-and-a-half years since its inception, the ECB-CFS research network collaboration 
has resulted in nine conferences, including today's. These have consistently been composed 
of top-quality research, covering a myriad of topics in the area of the structure and integration 
of financial systems in Europe and its international linkages. I was impressed to see that, as 
far  back  as  2004,  the  network  was  exhibiting  its  talent  for  foresight,  which  I  have  already 
mentioned,  in  investigating  a  number  of  issues  on  bank  contagion  in  Europe,  interbank 
exposures, liquidity and systemic risk. And as far back at 2003, when the issue was still low 
on the financial markets radar, the network was examining private equity issues. Also, and 
more intriguingly, it looked at "heatwaves and meteor showers" - something we were in short 
supply of here over the past summer.  
Back to the present, I am delighted that the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of 
Ireland  has  been  involved  in  the  development,  organisation  and  hosting  of  this  latest 
conference. I know that we have benefited significantly from collaborating with the ECB and 
CFS in this field and I look forward to further developing these links in the future.  
All three organisers certainly set themselves a significant task when they undertook to "co-
ordinate and stimulate top-level and policy-relevant research that significantly contributes to 
our understanding of financial system structures and integration". From the programme for 
this event, however, I can see that you have certainly provided plenty of material to stimulate 
debate  and  consider  policy  implications  on  issues  related  to  asset  management,  private 
equity firms and international capital flows.  
There has, of course, been a considerable amount of innovation recently in the private equity 
and  hedge  funds  industries,  and  in  complex  financial  instruments  and  asset  management 
strategies  generally.  These  innovations  serve  to  more  fully  complete  the  financial  markets 
landscape,  although  when  used  imprudently  can  present  extra  risks,  as  evident  in  recent 
market  developments.  This  innovation  has  been  led,  to  a  significant  degree,  by  market 
BIS Review 115/2007 
 1
participants  and  has  presented  a  number  of  challenges  for  policymakers,  especially 
regarding  the  implications  of  risk  transfer  developments,  valuation  strategies  and  market 
disclosure  rules  for  financial  stability  and  the  efficacy  of  policy.  There  is  much  that  central 
bankers  and  academics  can  learn  from  market  participants  in  these  areas  and  a 
collaboration  such  as  this  research  network  provides  an  excellent  forum  for  a  sharing  of 
ideas and an opportunity to contribute to these debates. 
Turning to just a couple of the issues for discussion at this conference, the performance of, 
and risk and disclosure practices in, the hedge fund industry were of course a major focus of 
attention  earlier  this  year,  but  have  been  pushed  out  of  the  headlines  somewhat  in  recent 
months. However, I am sure that they will return - albeit hopefully not in an environment of 
disruptive  market  conditions.  We  can  expect  a  renewed  focus  on  the  risks,  which  hedge 
funds can pose for highly-exposed counterparties and for markets generally, and on the type 
and extent of policy responses that can realistically be taken to help alleviate some of these 
risks. Earlier in the year, market disclosure issues and questions about the adequacy of the 
indirect  model  of  regulation  -  where  the  focus  was  on  the  exposures  of  counterparties, 
especially banks, to hedge fund risks - was a major focus of the debate about possible policy 
responses. There are very differing views about both the effectiveness of further disclosure 
measures  and  the  moral  hazard  risks  associated  with  increased  disclosure.  I  very  much 
welcome  the  contribution  which  this  conference  is  making  to  the  debate,  with  both  a  full 
session  and  of  course  the  keynote  address  devoted  to  hedge  fund  issues,  including  the 
disclosure issue. 
With  regard  to  private  equity  deals  and  leveraged  buyouts,  even  though  recent  market 
events appear to have halted the dramatic rise in deals, when normal market conditions are 
restored one wouldn't prejudge a return to the previous high level of activity. A major concern 
for central bankers and financial regulators in this area is whether the growth in these deals 
has been accompanied by any significant increase in credit risk for entities, such as banks, 
which are providing significant leverage to private equity deals and funds. While research, 
published by the ECB, suggested that large banks' exposures in this area are manageable 
relative  to  their  capital  buffers,  there  is  also  the  issue  of  "warehousing  risk",  whereby  the 
movement  of  these  risk  exposures  away  from  banks  and  into  markets  are  contingent  on 
liquidity in credit risk transfer markets and on the effectiveness of risk syndication processes. 
Clearly,  the  area  of  private  equity  is  one  where  we  need  a  greater  degree  of  analysis  to 
inform our judgment about the financial stability issues arising, and I am very pleased to see 
that you have quite a significant degree of empirical research being presented here on an 
extensive range of issues in the private equity arena.  
With so much interesting research to be presented and debated, I don't propose to take up 
any more of your time this morning. To the organisers, I congratulate you on your efforts on 
bringing this collaborative event together and I wish you every success with the conference. I 
look forward to hearing the full conclusions of your deliberations, and especially to reflect on 
the policy messages.  
Many thanks for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2007
