Randall S Kroszner: Innovation, information, and regulation in financial 
markets  
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Philadelphia  Fed  Policy  Forum,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania, 
30 November 2007. 
 Good  afternoon.  I  am  pleased  to  participate  in  the  excellent  annual  Philadelphia  Federal 
Reserve Policy Forum to discuss this year’s timely topic of innovations in financial markets. 
Innovations in financial markets have created a wide range of investment opportunities that 
allow capital to be allocated to its most productive uses and risks to be dispersed across a 
wide  range  of  market  participants.  Yet,  as  we  are  now  seeing,  innovation  can  also  create 
challenges if market participants face difficulties in valuing a new instrument because they 
realize  that  they  do  not  have  the  information  they  need  or  if  they  are  uncertain  about  the 
information they do have. In such situations, price discovery and liquidity in the market for 
those innovative products can become impaired.  
In my remarks today, I would like to explore the role of information in the development of new 
financial  products  and  then  draw  some  lessons  about  risk  management  and  regulation.  In 
particular, I will examine the role that investment in information gathering, processing, and 
evaluating plays in supporting the price discovery process and how such investment can lead 
toward  a  tendency  to  greater  standardization  as  markets  for  innovative  financial  products 
mature.  Examples  from  both  history  and  current  experience  will  help  to  illustrate  this 
tendency  with  respect  to  loan  work-outs  and  restructurings.  I  will  then  conclude  by 
considering  how  a  regulatory  approach  that  encourages  transparency  and  sound  risk 
management,  such  as  Basel  II,  can  be  valuable  in  fostering  a  robust  environment  for  the 
introduction of innovative financial products.  
Experimentation and learning in new instrument development  
Typically, when a new product is being developed, there is an initial experimentation phase 
in  which  market  participants  learn  a  great  deal  about  the  product’s  performance  and  risk 
characteristics. This phase involves gathering and processing information and modeling the 
performance of the product in various scenarios and under different market conditions. It may 
then  take  time  for  market  participants  to  understand  what,  exactly,  they  need  to  know  to 
value a product. During the early phases, a fair amount of due diligence is appropriate, given 
the  greater  uncertainty  associated  with  innovative  products.  The  investment  in  gathering, 
processing,  and  evaluating  information  then,  as  I  will  discuss,  often  leads  to  greater 
standardization of products and contract terms, which can enhance liquidity of products as 
their markets mature.  
In  the  initial  experimentation  phase,  the  terms  and  characteristics  of  a  new  product  are 
adjusted  in  response  to  market  acceptance  –  or  lack  thereof.  During  this  period,  market 
participants  are  seeking  and  providing  information  so  that  they  can  properly  value  the 
product,  judge  its  potential  for  risk  and  return,  assess  its  market  acceptance  and  liquidity, 
and determine the extent to which the risks of the product can be hedged or mitigated.  
When  a  product’s  track  record  is  not  well  established,  there  should  be  a  strong  market 
demand for information in order to facilitate price discovery. Price discovery is the process by 
which  buyers’  and  sellers’  preferences,  as  well  as  any  other  available  market  information, 
result in the “discovery” of a price that will balance supply and demand and provide signals to 
market participants about how most efficiently to allocate resources. This market-determined 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 1
price  will,  of  course,  be  subject  to  change  as  new  information  becomes  available,  as 
preferences evolve, as expectations are revised, and as costs of production change. 
In order for this process to work most effectively, market participants must utilize information 
relevant  to  value  that  product.  Of  course,  searching  out  and  using  relevant  sources  of 
information  –  as  well  as  determining  what  information  is  relevant  –  has  its  own  costs.  To 
underscore  the  last  point,  with  new  instruments,  it  may  not  even  be  clear  exactly  what 
information is needed for price discovery – that is, some market participants may not know 
what  they  do  not  know  and  they  may  therefore  terminate  the  information-gathering  stage 
prematurely, unwittingly bearing the risks and costs of incomplete information.  
Price discovery 
Due diligence is an important part of the price discovery process. The due-diligence process 
allows market participants to “trust but verify” market-provided information through a range of 
activities,  from  assessing  risks  and  exposures  through  stress-testing  to  assessing  the 
enforceability of the contracts that define the legal relationship among originators, sponsors, 
investors,  and  guarantors.  The  due  diligence  is  complemented  by  risk-management 
structures that allow participants to interpret, understand, and act appropriately in response 
to the information in the market.  
Recently  we  have  seen  how  a  lack  of  information  and  inadequate  due  diligence  and  risk 
management  have  created  problems  in  the  market  for  certain  structured  finance  products. 
Let me focus a moment on structured investment vehicles, or SIVs. SIVs have been created 
with a variety of terms and characteristics – for example, different underlying assets, different 
levels of liquidity support or guarantees, and various triggers that require the forced sale of 
assets or liquidation of the structure. Although SIVs or similar vehicles have existed for many 
years,  many  recent  SIV  structures  involved  a  much  higher  level  of  complexity  of  the 
underlying  credit  risks,  legal  structures,  and  operations.  This  complexity  –  and  the  lack  of 
information about where the underlying credit, legal, and operational risks resided – made 
these  products  more  difficult  and  costly  to  value  than  many  investors  originally  thought. 
Investors suddenly realized that they were much less informed than they assumed and, not 
surprisingly, they pulled back from the market. 
We  have  seen  similar  problems  in  the  subprime  residential  mortgage-backed  securities 
market  and  the  related  derivatives  markets.  The  lack  of  long  historical  data  on  the 
performance of these instruments, and their correlations with other assets and instruments, 
made  it  difficult  to  assess  their  overall  risk-return  profile,  especially  in  times  of  stress. 
Moreover,  in  the  subprime  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  market,  many  market 
participants  were  willing  to  proceed  without  conducting  robust  due  diligence  and  without 
establishing  appropriate  risk-management  structures  and  processes.  They  did  not  follow 
“trust  but  verify,”  that  is,  they  instead  accepted  the  investment-grade  ratings  of  these 
securities  as  substitutes  for  their  own  risk  analysis.  Ratings  keyed  to  expected  default  or 
credit loss do not adequately capture the full range or magnitude of risks to which a product 
may be subject, including – as we have seen most dramatically – market liquidity risks. In 
addition,  some  originators  may  not  have  demanded  sufficient  information  about  the 
purchased assets underlying these structures and therefore may not have fully appreciated 
the credit risk of the assets and the consequential risk that the structures would come back 
on balance sheet when the assets defaulted. 
When the problems in the subprime mortgage market began to emerge and delinquencies 
exceeded rating agency estimates and the defaults predicted by limited historical data, we 
had moved beyond our past experience with these instruments. Information was not readily 
available  about  the  extent  to  which  the  economic  context  had  changed,  or  even  whether 
underlying  loans  would  or  could  be  modified  to  prevent  default.  When  ratings  were 
downgraded, investors lost confidence in the quality of the ratings and hence the quality of 
the information they had about subprime investments. Lack of information, a disrupted price-
2 
 BIS Review 142/2007
the  use  of  option-adjusted  spreads,  moved 
discovery process, and a stressed environment led to a reassessment of risk, not only in the 
subprime market but also in the residential mortgage market across the board. 
Of course, this is not the first time that participants in a market for an innovative product have 
suffered  losses.  In  the  early  1990s,  participants  in  the  collateralized  mortgage  obligation 
(CMO)  market  and  the  markets  for  structured  notes  and  certain  types  of  interest  rate 
derivatives did not have adequate information about the potential volatility and prepayment 
risk involved. Consequently, market participants did not appropriately model these risks and 
suffered significant losses when market interest rates rose sharply in the mid-1990s. As in 
the  case  of  the  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  market  today,  the  general  market 
reaction  was  a  flight  away  from  these  instruments.  However,  over  time,  the  market  was 
restored  as  market  participants  came  to  better  understand  the  risks  and  as  standardized 
methods  were  developed  to  measure  the  risks  and  model  the  value  of  these  instruments 
under  alternative  scenarios.  Increased  information  and  standardized  pricing  conventions, 
such  as 
the 
experimentation and learning phase to the phase of broad market acceptance. 
When market participants realize that they do not have the information necessary for proper 
valuation  of  risks,  the  price-discovery  process  can  be  disrupted,  and  market  liquidity  can 
become  impaired.  A  significant  investment  in  information  gathering,  processing,  and 
evaluation may be necessary to revive the price discovery process. This revival is likely to 
take time and the market may not look the same when it re-emerges. 
Let me describe in a bit more detail the ways in which these investments will take place and 
hence why recovery of price discovery may be a gradual process. First, market participants 
will likely need to collect more-detailed data in a more systematic manner in order to better 
understand  the  nature  and  risks  of  the  instruments  and  their  underlying  assets.  Second, 
investments in enhanced systems to warehouse and model data related to these instruments 
will facilitate a better understanding of their risks, particularly under stress conditions. Third, 
investors need to ensure that they have the so-called human capital expertise – that is, the 
people – to understand, interpret, and act appropriately on the results of the modeling and 
analysis  of  the  information  gathered.  The  pay-off  from  these  investments  will  be  a  greater 
understanding of risks and greater ability to value the instruments.  
instruments 
these 
from 
is  a 
tendency 
information 
investments 
The development of greater standardization in a market 
Another  consequence  of 
towards  greater 
standardization  of  many  of  the  aspects  of  an  instrument,  which  can  help  to  increase 
transparency  and  reduce  complexity.  As  was  demonstrated  in  the  CMO  market,  as  the 
market  gains  information  about  a  product  and  develops  a  level  of  confidence  in  that 
information, the product tends to become increasingly standardized. Standardization in the 
terms and in the contractual rights and obligations of purchasers and sellers of the product 
reduces the need for market participants to engage in extensive efforts to obtain information 
and  reduces  the  need  to  verify  the  information  that  is  provided  in  the  market  through  due 
diligence. Reduced information costs in turn lower transaction costs, thereby facilitating price 
discovery  and  enhancing  market  liquidity.  Also,  standardization  can  reduce  legal  risks 
because litigation over contract terms can result in case law that applies to similar situations, 
thus reducing uncertainty.  
The  benefits  of  the  development  of  standardization  for  enhancing  the  liquidity  of  financial 
markets have a long history. One particularly clear example dates back to the development 
of exchange-traded commodities futures contracts in the mid-1800s. The standardization of 
the  futures  markets  improved  the  flow  of  information  to  market  participants,  reducing 
transaction costs and fostering the emergence of liquid markets.  
In the early days of the Chicago Board of Trade, in the mid-1850s, standardization took the 
form of creating “grades” or quality categories for commodities such as wheat, allowing for 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 3
the fungibility of grains stored in elevators and warehouses, and breaking the link between 
ownership  rights  and  specific  lots  of  a  physical  commodity.  Traders  no  longer  needed  to 
verify that a certain quantity of grain was of a sufficiently high grade because the exchange 
established a system of internal controls in the form of grain inspectors and a self-regulatory 
system to arbitrate disputes. The grain inspectors charged a set fee to certify the quality of 
the  grain  for  any  receipt  traded  at  the  board,  a  system  with  parallels  to  the  mechanisms 
employed today by the rating agencies.1  
In effect, standardization and related controls reduced traders’ information requirements and, 
thus, their transaction costs. In 1865, the Chicago Board of Trade standardized the delivery 
dates for the contracts, thus fostering the emergence of liquid markets in which traders could 
readily hedge the risk of price changes in the commodities and contracts. A final step toward 
standardization came years later with the adoption of the clearinghouse for the exchange as 
the  common  counterparty  to  all  of  the  contracts  traded  on  the  exchange.  With  a  central 
counterparty,  the  costs  and  uncertainties  of  failures  and  restructurings  were  significantly 
reduced, thereby reducing work-out costs and enhancing liquidity of the contracts traded on 
the exchange.2
The benefits of standardization can be realized not only on organized exchanges but also in 
over-the-counter markets. In more recent times, for example, the creation of the International 
Swaps  and  Derivatives  Association  (ISDA)  master  agreement  for  over-the-counter  swaps 
and  derivatives  contracts  has  brought  about  the  benefits  of  standardization  while  also 
allowing  for  product  flexibility  and  customization.  The  ISDA  master  agreement  provides 
standard definitions and a general outline for the contract but allows latitude in customizing 
terms.  The  master  agreement  also  sets  forth  a  template  for  workout  procedures  if  a 
counterparty  defaults,  allowing  parties  to  the  agreement  to  adjust  their  risk-management 
strategies  in  light  of  the  agreed-upon  work-out  process.  This  standardization  reduces 
uncertainty  about  the  instruments,  which  lowers  transaction  costs  and  facilitates  price 
discovery and market liquidity. 
The examples from the long- and more recent- past may hold some valuable lessons for how 
improvements  in  standardization  could  help  to  address  some  of  the  challenges  in  the 
subprime market. Uncertainty about the work-out process and the options that are available, 
for example, could be contributing to the difficulties in reviving price discovery and liquidity in 
the  market  for  subprime  residential  mortgage-backed  securities.  Part  of  the  valuation 
challenge is gauging the extent of the difficulties that borrowers will have in making payments 
and being able to stay in their homes given the reduction in house price appreciation – or 
actual declines in some areas – and the large number of interest rate resets coming on many 
adjustable-rate  mortgages.  From  now  until  the  end  of  next  year,  monthly  payments  for  an 
average of roughly 450,000 subprime mortgages per quarter are scheduled to undergo their 
first  interest  rate  reset.  In  addition,  tightening  credit  conditions  as  reported  in  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Surveys  on  Bank  Lending  Practices  suggest  that 
refinancing may become more difficult. 
Lenders  and  servicers  generally  would  want  to  work  with  borrowers  to  avoid  foreclosure, 
which, according to industry estimates, can lead to a loss of as much as 40 percent to 50 
percent  of  the  unpaid  mortgage  balance.  Loss  mitigation  techniques  that  preserve 
homeownership  are  typically  less  costly  than  foreclosure,  particularly  when  applied  before 
default. Borrowers who have been current in their payments but could default after reset may 
                                                 
1   See Randall S. Kroszner (1999), “Can the Financial Markets Privately Regulate Risk? The Development of 
Derivatives  Clearing  Houses  and  Recent  Over-the-Counter  Innovations,”  Journal  of  Money,  Credit,  and 
Banking, vol. 31 (August), p. 600. 
2   See Kroszner, “Can the Financial Markets Privately Regulate Risk?”, p. 601. 
4 
 BIS Review 142/2007
be able to work with their lender or servicer to adjust their payments or otherwise change 
their loans to make them more manageable.  
It is imperative that we work together as a financial services community to look for ways to 
help  borrowers  address  their  mortgage  challenges,  particularly  for  those  who  may  have 
fewer alternatives, such as lower-income families. The Federal Reserve and other regulators 
have been active in encouraging lenders and servicers to take a proactive approach to work 
with borrowers who may be at risk of losing their homes. For example, the agencies have 
issued statements underscoring that prudent workout arrangements that are consistent with 
safe  and  sound  lending  practices  are  generally  in  the  long-term  best  interest  of  both  the 
investor and the borrower and have had numerous meetings with interested parties to foster 
the development and implementation of work-out arrangements. 
Given the substantial number of resets from now through the end of 2008, I believe it would 
behoove  the  industry  to  go  further  than  it  has  to  join  together  and  explore  collaborative, 
creative efforts to develop prudent loan modification programs and other assistance to help 
large  groups  of  borrowers  systematically.  I  am  not  suggesting  a  one-size-fits-all  approach, 
but a bottom-up approach designed to appropriately balance the needs of all parties. Getting 
to borrowers who have been making payments but are at risk of falling behind before they 
actually do become delinquent, for example, can help to preserve work-out and refinancing 
options.  
Some  industry  participants  and  consumer  groups  have  begun  to  work  collaboratively  to 
develop  loan-modification  templates,  standards,  and  principles  that  can  help  to  streamline 
the  work-out  and  modification  process.  This  can  reduce  transaction  costs  and  potentially 
provide  timely  relief  to  a  wider  range  of  borrowers.  A  systematic  approach  to  loan 
modifications would likely reduce some of the uncertainties in the market for such subprime 
mortgage-backed securities, helping to restore price-discovery and liquidity. This would help 
to ease the tightening of credit conditions in the market. 
I am privileged to serve as a board member of NeighborWorks America, a national nonprofit 
that partners with the HOPE NOW Alliance. This alliance is developing ways to facilitate the 
flow  of  information  between  servicers  and  distressed  borrowers  and  to  work  toward 
clarification  of  loan-modification  procedures.  Increased  standardization  and  certainty  could 
also benefit investors in the mortgage market by improving information flows and the price-
discovery process, thereby improving market liquidity while at the same time helping to avoid 
foreclosures and promoting sustainable homeownership. 
A regulatory environment that encourages sound risk management and transparency 
Recent market events have underscored the need for better market information about new 
products, robust due diligence to verify that information, and risk-management strategies to 
utilize  the  information  in  management  decisionmaking.  The  supervisory  agencies  and  the 
industry both are addressing the need for improved risk management in light of the market 
disruptions 
The  newly  adopted  Basel  II  capital  framework  for  large  internationally-active  banking 
organizations, for example, is an important advance that encourages the types of investment 
in information I discussed earlier. The Basel II framework is comprised of three pillars. Pillar 
1 requires information gathering and robust modeling techniques to better take into account 
the  risks  of  different  types  of  instruments  and  securities  than  under  the  traditional  Basel  I 
framework. It also provides incentives for more robust risk management in connection with 
certain  higher-risk  activities,  such  as  securitization  and  other  off-balance-sheet  activities. 
Pillar 2 emphasizes the further stress testing and analysis of the data in conjunction with an 
ongoing evaluation of the institution’s capital adequacy in light of its risks through the internal 
capital  adequacy  assessment  process.  Pillar  3  reflects  the  need  for  better  information 
through  investments  in  data  gathering  and  analysis  that  are  reflected  in  enhanced  public 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 5
disclosures and regulatory reporting. More-comprehensive and more-transparent information 
allows investors to better understand the banking organization’s risk profile and thus reduces 
transaction  costs  and  facilitates  price  discovery  and  market  liquidity.  The  three  pillars  of 
Basel II promote precisely the three types of investment in information discussed earlier that 
facilitate the price discovery process. 
In  addition  to  supervisory  initiatives,  industry  leaders’  efforts  to  influence  the  adoption  of 
sound  practices  and  codes  of  conduct  can  efficiently  and  effectively  facilitate  market-
correcting behaviors. To this end, the industry is actively engaged in efforts to improve sound 
practices for risk management through improved stress-testing practices to cover contingent 
exposures,  marketwide  events,  and  potential  contagion  and  enhanced  due  diligence  and 
modeling for new products. As they look into the causes of the recent market disruptions and 
determine  the  appropriate  response,  both  supervisory  and  industry  groups  are  carefully 
analyzing  the  weaknesses  in  risk  management  and  the  lack  of  transparency  in  complex 
structures – and the implications of that lack of transparency for proper valuations. 
Conclusion 
The  recent  market  disruptions  have  dramatically  underscored  the  importance  of  gathering 
and analyzing information about innovative products. When the price-discovery process for a 
product  is  disrupted,  both  investors  and  sellers  need  to  engage  in  a  period  of  information 
gathering,  processing,  and  analysis  in  order  to  re-establish  a  market  price.  This  can  be  a 
gradual process and one that results in fundamental changes to the market for the product. 
Efforts  underway  by  both  supervisors  and  the industry  should  encourage  improvements  in 
risk analysis and management and, thus, price discovery. We are hopeful that our efforts to 
increase the standardization of loan-modification options and processes for subprime loans 
will  help  to  provide  more  information  to  lenders,  investors,  homeowners,  and  communities 
faced with potential mortgage loan defaults while at the same time helping to provide more 
timely relief for borrowers in distress.  
6 
 BIS Review 142/2007
