David Dodge: Reflections on developments in the Canadian financial 
system 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian  Club  of 
Toronto and the Empire Club of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, 10 December 2007.  
 I'm  happy  to  be  here  in  my  home  town  of  Toronto  to  deliver  my  final  public  speech  as 
Governor of the Bank of Canada. Nearly seven years ago, I gave my first public speech in 
Toronto, so it is fitting that I should be here for my last. 
It  has  become  a  tradition  that  I  deliver  a  speech  late  in  the  year  on  issues  related  to  the 
financial  system.  When  I  say  "financial  system,"  I  mean  financial  institutions  and  markets, 
together with the clearing and settlement systems through which financial assets flow. This 
tradition of speaking about the financial system began in 2004 with a speech I gave to a joint 
meeting of the Empire and Canadian Clubs about the need to promote economic efficiency in 
Canada.  
You may be asking why the Bank of Canada, with its well-known responsibility for monetary 
policy, would put such emphasis on financial system issues. The answer is that the two are 
tightly linked. We care a great deal about the financial system because a serious disruption 
in it would affect our ability to conduct monetary policy, and because increasing the efficiency 
of the financial system can increase the effectiveness of our monetary policy. At the same 
time, contributing to a stable economy through sound monetary policy helps reduce the risk 
of instability in the financial system. I'll talk about monetary policy a bit later. But first, I want 
to look back over the past seven years – in particular, the past seven months – and discuss 
some of the developments that we have seen in terms of financial system issues. To begin, I 
will give a brief overview of the Bank's role in the financial system, and review some of the 
issues  I've  raised  in  the  past  few  years.  Then,  I  will  discuss  the  dislocations  in  financial 
markets that began during the summer, and talk about how problems related to information 
contributed to the market turbulence. Finally, I'll look at the effects that these events continue 
to have, both on financial markets and on the outlook for the Canadian economy. 
The Bank and the financial system 
One reason for giving these financial system speeches near year-end is so that they coincide 
with the publication of the December edition of the Bank's Financial System Review (FSR). 
The purpose of my previous speeches was the same as the Bank's purpose in publishing the 
FSR; that is, to improve public understanding of financial system developments and trends, 
to point out potential vulnerabilities in the system, to highlight some of the Bank's research, 
and  to  promote  discussion  of  financial  system  issues  in  general.  Ultimately,  the  goal  is  to 
help provide the context that will lead to stronger financial system policies in Canada. The 
latest  issue  of  the  FSR  was  published  last  week,  and  it  deals  extensively  with  the  market 
turbulence that began during the summer. 
The Bank actively works to promote a financial system that is both stable and efficient. I've 
already mentioned that financial instability can impair the Bank's ability to conduct monetary 
policy. But most importantly, a stable financial system is crucial for an economy to function 
well. In Canada, the responsibility for promoting financial stability is shared by a number of 
agencies. Our partners include the Department of Finance, the Office of the Superintendent 
of Financial Institutions, the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation, and provincial regulators 
and securities commissions. The Bank is also the ultimate provider of liquidity to facilitate the 
settlement of financial transactions and is the lender of last resort for financial institutions. 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 1
Despite the importance of financial system efficiency, there is no single body responsible for 
promoting  it.  What  do  I  mean  when  I  say  "efficiency"?  An  efficient  system  is  one  where 
scarce economic resources can be allocated to the most productive uses in a cost-effective 
way. In an efficient financial system, investors can get the highest risk-adjusted returns on 
their investments, and borrowers can minimize the costs of raising capital. Inefficiencies can 
stunt investment and cut into economic growth. 
The Bank of Canada contributes to financial system efficiency through our monetary policy, 
which keeps inflation low, stable, and predictable. We also have a legislated role to oversee 
Canada's  most  important  clearing  and  settlement  systems.  These  systems  have  been 
designed to provide certainty that large-value payments or securities transactions will settle 
in real time, while using relatively small amounts of liquidity. This frees up resources that can 
be put to better use elsewhere. 
Over  the  past  four  years,  I  have  tried  to  highlight  some  important  efficiency  issues  for 
Canada.  In  2004,1  I  spoke  of  the  need  to  promote  efficiency  in  our  financial  institutions, 
arguing  that  our  policy  framework  should  provide  greater  incentives  for  innovation  by 
encouraging competition while, at the same time, giving our financial institutions the scope to 
improve  efficiency.  There  remains  much  work  to  do  to  encourage  innovation,  competition, 
and efficiency. 
I also spoke about the need to improve Canada's securities regulation so as to have uniform 
laws  and  regulations,  based  on  principles  that  apply  to  everyone,  but  tailored  to  take  into 
account  the  differing  size  and  complexity  of  firms.  There  has  not  been  as  much  progress 
here as I would have hoped. So, Canada remains at risk of seeing its capital markets eroded 
as business migrates to other financial centres.  
I've  also  talked  about  the  need  to  improve  enforcement  in  securities  markets,  because 
markets work more efficiently when they operate under clear, transparent, and reasonable 
rules  and  principles,  which  are  enforced  and  are  seen  by  all  as  being  enforced.  Some 
progress has been made here, and I welcome the commitment of the RCMP to improve and 
to implement many of the recommendations set out by Nick Le Pan in his report last week. 
However,  much  better  co-operation  and  coordination  of  efforts  among  securities 
commissions,  law-enforcement  agencies,  Crown  prosecutors,  and  ministers  of  justice  and 
attorneys general is absolutely crucial.  
Another efficiency issue I've raised is the need to strengthen Canada's regulatory, legal, and 
accounting  frameworks  related  to  private  defined-benefit  pensions,  so  that  risks  are  dealt 
with  in  an  appropriate  way.2  Pension  funds  can  generate  important  gains  in  terms  of 
economic  efficiency.  They  help  to  achieve  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  savings;  they  are 
invested by asset managers who have the incentive and the ability to invest across varied 
asset classes; and, with their very long investment horizons, pension funds can be used to 
finance  long-term  investment  projects  at  competitive  rates  of  return.  Reviews  of  pension 
regulations are under way at both the provincial and federal levels. If we can collectively get 
these changes right, sponsors would have the appropriate incentives needed to manage risk 
effectively,  thus  enhancing  the  viability  of  our  system  of  private,  voluntary  defined-benefit 
pensions  for  the  good  of  Canadian  workers  and  firms,  and  for  the  benefit  of  our  capital 
markets. 
These  issues  are  critical  for  Canada's  future  economic  prospects.  The  role  of  the  Bank  of 
Canada has been to do the research and provide the analysis to inform public policy in these 
areas. I am confident that this work will continue at the Bank in the years ahead. It is up to 
                                                 
1   David Dodge, "Financial System Efficiency: A Canadian Imperative," (Bank of Canada, 2004). 
2   David  Dodge,  "Economic  and  Financial  Efficiency:  The  Importance  of  Pension  Plans,"  (Bank  of  Canada, 
2005). 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2007
the  responsible  authorities  to  act  on  these  research  findings,  and  to  move  these  issues 
forward. 
At  the  heart  of  many  of  the  issues  that  I've  just  mentioned  are  problems  related  to 
information.  Indeed,  one  of  the  key  lessons  of  the  past  seven  months  is  how  information 
asymmetries can lead to, or exacerbate, disruptions in financial markets. So let me now turn 
to a discussion of these recent events, and look at how problems with information contributed 
to the market turbulence. 
Market dislocations and the role of information 
To  truly  understand  these  events,  it's  important  to  have  some  context.  You  can  find  a 
detailed  account  of  recent  events  in  the  December  issue  of  the  FSR.  The  turbulence  in 
financial  markets  came  about  against  a  backdrop  of  remarkable  strength  in  the  global 
economy. We had seen continuing robust demand for Canadian goods and services that led 
to a significant improvement in our terms of trade, helping to support the Canadian dollar. 
Despite this positive backdrop, there were signs of potential trouble in the global economy. 
As early as 2003, the Bank had flagged concerns about global imbalances.3 The high level of 
global  desired  savings  relative  to  desired  investment  naturally  served  to  drive  down  real 
longer-term  interest  rates,  even  as  central  banks  around  the  world  were  in  the  process  of 
raising short-term policy rates. 
With the decline in longer-term interest rates, investors stepped up their demand for riskier 
assets that would deliver greater returns. This search for yield led to a narrowing of spreads 
between the yields on risky assets and government bonds. This narrowing of risky spreads 
became  so  pronounced  and  so  persistent  that  many  central  banks  began  to  question 
whether  they  adequately  reflected  the  credit  risks  that  were  involved.  In  fact,  the  Bank  of 
Canada highlighted this precise concern as far back as our June 2004 issue of the FSR.4 A 
repricing of risk appeared necessary, but the real question was how, and in what manner, it 
would take place. 
Besides  the  need  for  a  repricing  of  risk,  other  factors  have  contributed  to  the  market 
turbulence  that  began  this  summer.  Originators  of  loans  –  both  bank  and  non-bank 
institutions – were increasingly opting to securitize the loans they made in the form of highly 
structured  asset-backed  securities,  some  of  which  embedded  very  significant  leverage. 
These  were  often  sold  in  tranches  that  provided  varying  degrees  of  protection  from  the 
default  risk  involved.  Such  structures  allowed  higher-risk  assets  to  appear  to  take  on  the 
qualities  of  lower-risk  assets.  The  increased  use  of  leveraged  structured  products  was 
pioneered  in  major  financial  centres  such  as  New  York  and  London,  although  eventually, 
non-bank institutions began to market these products elsewhere, including here in Canada. 
The ease with which these highly structured products were sold fuelled the demand for the 
creation  of  higher-risk  assets,  including  U.S.  subprime-mortgage  loans.  This,  in  turn, 
contributed to the global decline in lending standards. 
At  times,  the  originators  of  these  loans  had  fewer  incentives  to  carefully  assess  the 
creditworthiness of borrowers. This is because the originators were sometimes distributing all 
of the loans they had made. In these circumstances, once the loans had been securitized 
and sold, the originator no longer faced the consequence if the borrower defaulted. I'll return 
to  this  point  a  bit  later. But  for  now,  suffice  it  to  say  that  the  decline  in  standards  for  loan 
origination, combined with financial engineering, was helping to spur greater lending. 
                                                 
3   David Dodge, "Past Adjustments and Future Trends in the Canadian Economy," (Bank of Canada, 2003). 
4   Bank of Canada: "Financial System Review" (June 2004), p.4. 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 3
The  process  of  securitization  is  not  new.  Securities  backed  by  mortgages,  credit  card 
receivables, or other types of assets, have been around for years. Indeed, the development 
of a market for "plain vanilla" asset-backed securities was important since it allowed for the 
expansion  of  credit  through  the  market.  Initially,  this  market  developed  in  a  reasonably 
transparent way, in that the nature of, and risks associated with, the underlying assets were 
clear. Here in Canada, for example, an investor could know with certainty that the mortgages 
backing  securities  met  the  lending  standards  set  by  Canada  Mortgage  and  Housing 
Corporation, or that the loans backing a security were of high enough credit quality that  a 
bank or a retailer was prepared to stake its reputation on the securities. These plain-vanilla 
asset-backed  securities  continue  to  exist  and  remain  an  important  source  of  high-quality 
market-based financing. 
But  more  recently,  we  have  seen  the  emergence  of  increasingly  complex  structured 
products, which were developed in response to the demand for higher returns. And as these 
securities have become more complex and opaque, in many cases, it has become harder to 
assemble and understand all the information needed to determine what kinds of assets are 
backing the security, the quality of those assets, and the counterparty risk involved. 
A final point here has to do with how these complex securities are valued. Trading of these 
securities  in  secondary  markets  is  rare.  Thus,  prices  for  these  securities  are  not  very 
transparent.  Most  of  these  highly  structured  securities  are  valued  on  a  "marked-to-model" 
basis, meaning that statistical models are used to provide values. But the models typically 
provide only estimates of values, and these estimates can vary widely if there are changes in 
the  underlying  assumptions.  Indeed,  many  of  the  models  assume  that  the  assets  backing 
these securities can be readily traded in a liquid secondary market – an assumption that is 
clearly not always valid. So it becomes extremely difficult to put a firm value on a particular 
security at any given time. 
So,  we  can  now  see  that  many  factors  made  credit  markets  vulnerable  to  the  recent 
dislocations. The repricing of risk I mentioned earlier was, in fact, under way before August. 
By  late  spring,  the  spreads  on  lower-rated  corporate  bonds  had  begun  to  widen  to  levels 
closer  to  historical  averages.  As  we  moved  into  summer,  however,  we  saw  rising 
delinquency rates and higher probabilities of default on U.S. subprime mortgages. And so, 
there were rising expectations of losses for holders of securities backed by these mortgages. 
But because of the complexity and opacity of some of these securities, it is extremely difficult 
for even sophisticated investors to determine, with confidence, both the creditworthiness of 
the assets backing a particular security and the market value of the security itself. In these 
circumstances,  uncertainty  led  to  contagion  and  dislocations  in  money  markets  more 
generally, even those markets that have no link to U.S. subprime mortgages. Liquidity, which 
was  recently  thought  to  be  too  abundant,  became  scarce.  Some  investors  found  that  the 
assets  that  they  assumed  were  liquid  were,  in  fact,  frozen.  Investors  suddenly  became 
extremely  risk  averse,  leading  to  a  surge  in  demand  for  the  least-risky  assets,  such  as 
government bonds and treasury bills. 
The  lack  of  transparency  and  problems  with  information  have  clearly  contributed  to  the 
ongoing market turbulence. The global repricing of credit risk is taking longer than many of 
us initially expected. This is because it is taking more time to unravel some of these complex 
and  opaque  instruments  to  get  to  the  underlying  assets,  and  then  to  find  values  for  the 
assets  themselves.  In  addition,  uncertainty  remains  about  the  extent  to  which  banks  are 
holding these securities, how much they may be required to take onto their balance sheets, 
and what value to place on them. This uncertainty has exacerbated problems in the global 
interbank funding market, but because of their strong balance sheets, Canadian banks have 
been  somewhat  less  affected.  Over  time,  market  forces  can  still  be  expected  to  work  out 
these problems. But markets need information to operate efficiently. So, it is in the interest of 
market participants to make sure that parties have access to all necessary information. 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2007
Globally, markets for structured asset-backed securities remain under stress. In Canada, the 
problems  have  been  most  acute  in  the  market  for  structured,  non-bank-sponsored,  asset-
backed commercial paper. The information needed to properly price these products is only 
now  beginning  to  be  made  available.  With  this  information,  investors  and  the  providers  of 
assets and liquidity are now progressing towards restructuring agreements.  
As we go forward, we can expect that investors will demand greater transparency where it is 
now lacking. Vendors of financial instruments will then need to structure them in such a way 
that  market  players  can  clearly  see  what  they  are  buying.  More  fundamentally,  investors 
must take on more responsibility for diligent research, so that they can better understand the 
nature of their investments. Put another way, investors must demand access to appropriate 
information so that they can do their own homework, and then they must do that homework. 
It seems to me that many of these desired outcomes will be accomplished through natural 
market  forces  responding  to  these  events.  For  example,  when  investors  demand  much 
higher  rates  of  return  for  opaque  products,  there  will  be  a  strong  incentive  for  vendors  to 
provide products that are more transparent. 
Let me touch briefly on the role of credit-rating agencies in all of this. There is an article in the 
current  FSR  that  expands  on  the  issues  related  to  the  possible  reform  of  the  credit-rating 
process.5 One thing that is clear is that in the future, credit-rating agencies will find it to their 
advantage to explain more clearly the rationale for, and limitations of, their ratings for highly 
structured  products.  There  are  some  natural,  self-correcting  market  forces  at  work  that 
should  lead  the  rating  agencies  to  improve  their  processes.  Indeed,  those  credit-rating 
agencies  that  do  not  work  harder  to  improve  their  processes  will  likely  have  fewer  clients 
willing  to  pay  for  their  services.  As  I  understand  it,  most  agencies  are  working  on  such 
improvements.  
But  credit-rating  agencies  are  not  to  blame  for  the  lack  of  information  about  those  highly 
structured products that were sold to highly-sophisticated investors in the so-called exempt 
market.  In  the  retail  market,  securities  regulators  impose  strict  requirements  about  the 
information that must be provided through a prospectus or term sheet. But there are no such 
requirements  in  the  exempt  market.  It  seems  to  me  that  some  very  basic  disclosure  is 
needed  in  every  market.  And  since  securities  designed  for  the  exempt  market  are  usually 
required  to  carry  a  rating  from  a  credit-rating  agency,  one  way  to  ensure  that  appropriate 
information is available could be to require issuers to publicly disclose the same information 
that they make available to credit-rating agencies. In this way, investors would have access 
to the information they need in order to make informed decisions. 
Another issue that we need to think about is how to get the right incentives in place for loan 
originators,  so  that  credit  quality  is  maintained  and  credit  can  be  appropriately  priced.  I 
mentioned  earlier  that,  in  some  cases,  the  creation  of  loans  largely  for  immediate 
securitization  reduced  the  incentive  for  originators  to  maintain  credit  standards.  Since  the 
originators were immune from default risk once the loan was completely securitized and sold, 
they lacked the proper incentives to adequately assess the creditworthiness of the borrower. 
It may be that natural market forces will go a long way towards rebalancing incentives, but 
the  question  can  be  asked:  Are  there  ways  to  encourage  the  more  appropriate  use  of 
securitization? It may be possible, for example, to have asset-backed securities carry some 
type  of  "branding"  or  "certificate  of origination" that  would  provide  a  clear  incentive  for  the 
loan originator to exercise due diligence in extending the loan before it is securitized. Or, we 
can  look  for  ways  to  encourage  originators  to  keep  a  substantial  portion  of  the  riskiest 
tranche of the product they are selling on their own books.  
                                                 
5   Mark Zelmer, "Reforming the Credit-Rating Process." Bank of Canada “Financial System Review” (December 
2007): p 51-57. 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 5
Implications for monetary policy and the economy 
Let me now discuss the impact of these recent market dislocations, both on our work at the 
Bank of Canada, and on the Canadian economy. The impact on the Bank has been two-fold. 
First, we have undertaken open-market buyback operations and made sure that Canadian 
banks have had access to our Standing Liquidity Facility, so that they have been able to deal 
with any overnight liquidity difficulties. This is a normal role for any central bank, and it will 
continue. But, in the wake of recent events, we are currently looking at whether some types 
of  liquidity  disruptions  in  Canada  might  be  better  addressed  if  the  Bank  of  Canada  had  a 
facility  that  would  provide  liquidity  at  terms  longer  than  overnight.  We  are  also  examining 
changes necessary to allow the Bank to accept a wider range of securities for our buyback 
operations. 
The Bank's other role, of course, is to conduct monetary policy with the aim of delivering low, 
stable, and predictable inflation. We have been working to ensure that the financial system 
has the proper amount of liquidity so that the overnight interest rate – our key policy rate – 
remains  close  to  target.  But  what  we  have  seen  since  this  summer  is  a  widening  of  the 
spread between short-term market interest rates, such as the rate for commercial paper, and 
our target for the overnight rate. This is important, because these short-term market rates are 
a crucial link in the way monetary policy is transmitted: from our key policy rate, to the cost of 
credit, to spending, production, employment and, ultimately, to the rate of inflation.  
These wider spreads have persisted, and they represent a tightening of credit conditions in 
Canada.  These  tighter  credit  conditions  have  come  as  financial  market  difficulties  have 
intensified over the past few weeks and as bank funding costs have increased globally. At 
the same time, there is an increased risk attached to the prospects for demand for Canadian 
exports because the outlook for the U.S. economy – particularly the U.S. housing sector – 
has weakened. Uncertainty related to all of these factors has led to exceptional volatility in 
financial and currency markets globally. 
While  there  remain  upside  risks  to  inflation  in  Canada,  all  factors  considered,  the  Bank 
judges that there has been a shift to the downside in the balance of risks around our October 
projection for inflation. In light of this shift, we lowered the target for the overnight rate last 
week.  Before  our  next  interest  rate  decision  in  January,  we  will  assess  all  economic  and 
financial developments and the balance of risks, and do a full projection for the economy and 
inflation. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, as you know I will be stepping down as Governor of the Bank at the 
end of January, and concluding more than thirty-five years of involvement in economic policy 
within the public service. Since this is my last public speech as Governor, I thought it might 
be apt to conclude my remarks today with three of the most important lessons for economic 
policy that I – and I believe many Canadians – have learned over the past thirty-five years. 
The first lesson is that both individuals and firms must always be prepared to adjust quickly 
to changing global economic circumstances. The world will evolve in  ways that we cannot 
predict, so we must be prepared to deal with change and seize new opportunities as they 
arise.  Perhaps  even  more  importantly,  we  should  not  cling  to  activities  that  are  no  longer 
economically justified, however difficult and painful adjustment may be. Not adjusting is not 
an option. In the end, rapid adjustment is less painful than prolonging activities where we no 
longer hold a comparative advantage. This is the lesson that I and many other Canadians 
learned from our difficulties in the 1970s and the early 1980s. 
Second, we have all learned the importance of achieving and maintaining sustainable levels 
of public debt. Canadians paid a very real price in the 1990s to control the growth of public 
debt, and have wisely used the favourable conditions of the past decade to bring down the 
ratio of public debt to GDP. Although conditions will not necessarily be as favourable over the 
6 
 BIS Review 147/2007
next  decade  as  they  have  been  recently,  nonetheless,  further  efforts  to  reduce  the  debt-
service burden are needed in order to prepare for the inevitable effects of the aging of our 
population. 
Third, we have all learned that the most important contribution a central bank can make to 
economic welfare is to maintain confidence in the future value of money. In the 1970s, we all 
witnessed  the  economic  and  social  instability  caused  by  high  and  volatile  inflation.  In  the 
1980s, we paid the price of recession to get inflation under control. Since the early 1990s, 
our  inflation-targeting  regime  has  kept  inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable  at  2  per  cent. 
This, together with fiscal consolidation, has helped to keep growth more steady, employment 
to rise to historically high levels, and unemployment to fall to levels not seen for decades. My 
colleagues  at  the  Bank  will  continue  to  search  for  technical  improvements  in  our  inflation-
targeting  regime,  but  I  am  confident  that  the  Bank  and  my  successor,  Mark  Carney,  will 
continue to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable, for the benefit of all Canadians. 
Finally, let me close by saying that it has been an enormous privilege for me to be able to 
serve Canadians for three and a half decades. I am grateful for having had that opportunity, 
and  I  am  hopeful  that,  in  some  way,  my  efforts  over  the  years  may  encourage  others  to 
follow in the service of Canada and its people. 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 7
