Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Unlocking opportunities 
Opening address by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia,  at  the  10th  ASEAN  Insurance  Regulators  Meeting  and  33rd  ASEAN  Insurance 
Council Meeting, Kuala Lumpur, 15 November 2007. 
 It is my great pleasure to be here today at the 10th ASEAN Insurance Regulators meeting 
and  the  33rd  ASEAN  Insurance  Council  Meeting  in  Kuala  Lumpur.  Let  me  first  extend  a 
warm welcome and "Selamat Datang" to all the delegates from abroad as well as to fellow 
Malaysians here today. During this “˜Visit Malaysia Year” which is also the year of Malaysia's 
50th Anniversary celebrations of our independence, I do hope that our foreign delegates will 
make  time  to  enjoy  Malaysia's  diverse  culture  and  the  many  unique  sights,  sounds  and 
flavours. 
I am indeed honoured to be officiating the opening of the 10th ASEAN Insurance Regulators 
Meeting and the 33rd ASEAN Insurance Council Meeting. I understand that several fruitful 
meetings and exchange of ideas have already taken place yesterday, and several meetings 
have been outlined over the next two days to discuss various matters, revolving around the 
theme towards moving the ASEAN insurance industry forward.  
The ASEAN region has recorded significant growth with member countries growing at an 
average  rate  of  6%  in  2006.  ASEAN  countries  have  grown  stronger  and  our  trade  and 
cooperation  have  expanded  further.  Building  on  these  existing  strong  linkages,  ASEAN  is 
expected to further progress in deepening and broadening its economic pie within ASEAN 
and in the region.  
The  ASEAN  region  as  a  group  accounted  for  approximately  8.3%  of  Asia's  total  GDP  in 
recent  years  and  generated  around  22%  of  Asia's  total  export,  placing  the  region  second 
behind China, Asia's largest exporter. In 2006, ASEAN foreign direct investment rose by 27% 
to  reach  USD52  billion  and  total  exports  increased  by  16.5%  to  reach  USD758.04  billion. 
Trade among ASEAN countries has also increased tremendously. In fact for Malaysia , our 
trade with the ASEAN region comprised about 25% of our total trade. As we move towards 
AFTA and the removal of tariffs, the economic integration between countries in the region will 
deepen further.  
The  encouraging  economic  growth  prospects  of  ASEAN  present  tremendous  growth 
potential and opportunities for the ASEAN insurance market. This increases the need to 
accelerate  the  development  of  insurance  markets  in  the  region  to  support  the  explosive 
growth  in  trade  within  ASEAN.  Over  time,  the  aim  should  be  to  achieve  a  better  balance 
between reliance on foreign insurance markets and the domestic insurance markets within 
ASEAN  to  support  economic  activity.  This  will  contribute  towards  achieving  greater  risk 
diversification,  while  at  the  same  time,  reaping  more  benefits  for  ASEAN  economies  from 
increasing economic integration.  
ASEAN currently has a total population of 568 million, and a large proportion comprising of a 
young  workforce  in  the  middle  income  group.  The  changing  priorities  and  lifestyles  of  this 
new generation, growing wealth and increasing proportion of middle income population will 
also  support  continued  and  further  growth  in  demand  for  investment-linked  and  wealth 
management products. As a result, the insurance industry has, and will continue to, expand 
its role beyond merely providing protection products. Against this backdrop, prospects for 
increasing the insurance penetration rate in our economies are clearly positive. However, this 
will  hinge  on  the  ability  of  the  industry  to  respond  to  these  changing  demographics  and 
dynamics in the financial system. In 2006, the insurance premiums averaged 2.95% of GDP 
in South East Asia as compared with 8.8% in the U.S. or 16.5% in the U.K. Compared to the 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 1
banking sector, the insurance industry remains relatively less developed and commands a 
significantly smaller percentage of the total financial assets of the region's financial system.  
To  tap  these  opportunities,  appropriate  strategies,  new  thinking  and  approaches  will  be 
required.  In  this  regard,  a  significant  development  has  been  the  evolution  of  alternative 
distribution mechanisms for insurance products and services in the region, notably through 
bancassurance. Indeed, bancassurance has developed in a number of ASEAN markets into 
a viable alternative distribution approach to the traditional agency force. Perhaps, in those 
markets where the insurance distribution channels through agency force have yet to be firmly 
established, bancassurance could provide a quantum leap to allow insurers to rapidly widen 
their outreach by tapping into an established banking network and client base. Worldwide, 
insurers have been successfully leveraging on bancassurance to gain a foothold in markets 
with low insurance penetration and a limited variety of distribution channels. Bancassurance 
can  increase  market  penetration  given  the  relatively  higher  level  of  public  confidence  in 
dealings  with  banks.  For  the  banks  and  insurers,  capitalising  on  synergies  derived  from 
tapping into the banks' extensive customer base to offer consumers comprehensive financial 
solutions  while  optimising  on  the  branch  network  have  proven  to  be  highly  successful 
strategies towards mutually improving productivity and profitability.  
In  Malaysia,  bancassurance  constitutes  a  significant  feature  of  Malaysia's  financial 
landscape,  and  continues  to  develop  rapidly  in  terms  of  market  reach  and  operational 
sophistication.  These  developments  have  contributed  towards  significantly  raising  the 
nation's insurance penetration level and enhancing the competitive structure of the insurance 
industry.  
In addition to bancassurance, the Internet is emerging as a promising medium for insurers 
to  advertise  products  and  service  policyholders.  With 
technological 
advancements and increasing consumer demands for more efficient delivery of products and 
services, it offers the potential for insurers to target a wider market, improve client service 
and conduct business seamlessly across borders.  
While planning for effective distribution channels may become the key differentiating factor in 
the growing region today, one must not overlook the implications of the changing demands of 
the general public. The ageing of the population is an issue of increasing importance in the 
developing world. All across Asia , the number of people aged 65 and above is expected to 
grow dramatically over the next 50 years. For the region as a whole, the population in this 
age  group  will  increase  by  314  %  from  207  million  in  2000  to  857  million  in  2050.  Many 
nations are finding it increasingly difficult to provide adequately for the needs of their aged 
through state-provided social security. Faced with such prospects, planning for retirement 
has  become  more  important,  both  for  individuals  as  well  as  public  policy  to  ensure 
sustainable financing and management of retirement and healthcare needs in the long term. 
In  this  context,  the  development  of  deep  financial  markets  among  ASEAN  countries  is 
critical. One of the significant challenges currently facing the insurance industry in this region 
has  been  the  shortage  of  long  term  assets  that  match  the  duration  of  insurance  liabilities. 
While the bond markets in several ASEAN economies have been extensively developed over 
the last decade, longer-dated papers remain scarce in most countries. This has been a key 
impediment to the development of private pension products needed to meet the increasing 
demand for channels through which the population can save for retirement. While there are 
significant  efforts  being  made  to  further  develop  the  longer  end  of  the  bond  market,  the 
engagement between the industry, regulators and Government needs to be maintained and 
intensified  further  to  take  this  agenda  forward.  This  is  critical  both  for  the  management  of 
risks in the industry, and to support sustainable growth in the longer term.  
Another untapped segment of the market is the takaful sector in view of the fact that Muslims 
constitute more than 40% of the population in ASEAN, mainly in Malaysia , Indonesia and 
Brunei . Globally, the Muslim population accounts for about 24% of the total population. This 
has  supported  the  growth  of  the  takaful  market  in  recent  years  as  an  alternative  to 
rapid 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2007
conventional insurance. The global takaful market is expected to grow between 15 and 20 
per cent per annum. Based on the market penetration level which is at 6.8% in Malaysia and 
less than 5% in many Muslim countries, this represents significant market potential for the 
future growth of takaful business.  
The  expansion  of  insurance  markets  in  ASEAN  will  need  to  be  reinforced  by  further 
consumer education to increase awareness among the public on the importance of long-
term financial planning as  well  as  to  equip  them  to  evaluate  product  features  and  make 
informed decisions. The insurers must recognise that it is an important responsibility on their 
part  not  just  to  ensure  that  adequate  information  is  provided  to  the  consumers,  but  that 
consumers are suitably advised in the sales process. This includes ensuring that information 
about insurance products is presented in a manner that is meaningful and easily understood 
by consumers. This distinction between quantity and quality is important. In this respect, we 
should  learn  from  the  unsatisfactory  outcomes  that  have  emerged  in  some  of  the  more 
developed  markets  where  product  disclosures  can  run  into  60-page  documents,  which  no 
one can reasonably expect an average consumer to read, let alone understand. Ultimately, 
the purpose of disclosures must be to help consumers understand the risks associated with 
different  product  options.  In  this  context,  more  information  is  not  necessarily  better.  The 
quality of information and financial capability of consumers must be enhanced in tandem with 
improved disclosures. Of course, increasing product innovations also need to be matched by 
strong  risk  and  portfolio  management  capabilities  critical  to  ensure  the  long-term 
sustainability  and  viability  of  the  products  offered  in  the  market  as  well  as  the  financial 
soundness of insurance companies.  
The operating landscape in which we operate has also changed significantly. Convergence 
in financial services has blurred the boundaries between insurance, banking and capital 
market  activities. In  this  environment,  financial  sector  regulation  and  supervision  has 
become significantly more challenging. The increasing linkages between insurance and the 
banking systems as well as capital markets have increased the importance of achieving a 
harmonised regulatory approach and standard across sectors to minimise possibilities of 
regulatory  arbitrage  between  different  types  of  institutions.  Under  such  environment,  the 
approach towards regulatory and supervisory framework also has to evolve in tandem with 
the change in the environment.  
Recognising these dynamic changes, Bank Negara Malaysia took efforts to strengthen our 
regulatory  and  supervisory  capabilities  as  well  as  sharpen  our  focus.  The  organisational 
structure  for  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  functions  within  the  Bank  were  realigned  in 
November  2006  to  move  from  the  previous  institutional  based  approach,  to  one  that 
integrates the Bank's regulatory functions for the different financial sectors under its purview 
along functional lines. The new functional based, cross-sector regulatory structure allows us 
to modernise the regulatory framework for both the insurance and banking sectors at a more 
equal  pace.  The  increased  synergies  created  will  enable  the  Bank  to  apply  the  best 
regulatory  practices  in  both  the  banking  sector  to  the  insurance  sectors.  Under  the  new 
structure, the Bank is able to leverage on the more advanced developments in either sector 
to  enhance  the  regulatory  framework  for  both  sectors,  simultaneously  if  possible.  At  the 
same  time,  it  allows  us  to  develop  and  train  our  personnel  to  be  better  equipped  in  the 
constantly  changing  operating  environment.  These  efforts,  will  promote  a  more  consistent 
regulatory regime for both the banking and insurance sectors.  
A  positive  side  effect  that  can  accrue  from  this  move  is  the  enhancement  of  public 
confidence  on  the  insurance  sector  which  augurs  well  towards  increasing  the  level  of 
insurance penetration. Achieving a more integrated approach to cross-sector regulation was 
relatively easy in Malaysia as Bank Negara is the single regulator for both the banking and 
insurance industries. In other countries, greater coordination and collaboration between 
separate regulatory agencies can similarly contribute towards a more consistent approach to 
regulation and supervision across sectors in dealing with similar risks.  
BIS Review 134/2007 
 3
While consistency in regulatory and supervisory approaches will contribute towards overall 
financial stability and increased regulatory as well as business efficiency, it is important to 
appreciate the fundamental differences between different market players. As someone put it, 
notwithstanding current trends in financial conglomeration, banks will always be banks, and 
insurers  will  always  be  insurers.  As  such,  the  risks  stemming  from  the  liability  side  of  an 
insurance company is far more significant than the asset side, while the reverse is generally 
true  for  banks.  While  some  dimensions  of  this  are  changing,  such  differences  must  be 
properly  catered  for  in  the  regulatory  framework  as  well  as  in  insurers'  own  internal  risk 
management practices.  
Human  intellectual  capital  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  driving  the  industry's  future  and 
competitiveness.  The  environment  of  increasing  complexity  in  financial  services  that  is 
accompanied  by  increasingly  sophisticated  consumer  expectation  place  new  demands  on 
the  skill  sets  and  competencies  of  regulators  and  industry  professionals.  Adoption  of  the 
highest  standards  of  professionalism  and  integrity  is  essential  in  generating  public 
confidence  in  the  insurance  industry.  It  is  therefore  critical  for  us  to  continuously  invest  in 
human  capital  as  the  pace  of  progression  for  the  insurance  industry  would  to  a  large 
extent  depend  upon  the  capability  of  those  working  in  the  industry  -  their  skill  set, 
expertise and competency. 
Unfortunately  for  all  of  us,  similar  to  other  emerging  economies,  there  is  a  scarcity  of 
qualified and well trained personnel to meet the growing and increasingly complex needs of 
the industry. Therefore human capital development should not be viewed as an expense but 
as an investment for the future. Without such investment, our insurance industries will not be 
able to quickly make the leap forward and we risk losing the opportunities to players from 
more  sophisticated  economies  that  are  ready  on  the  sides  to  take  advantage  of  our 
inadequacies.  
On this note, I am pleased to note that in the short span since its establishment in December 
2004, the ASEAN Insurance Training and Research Institute, or AITRI, has successfully 
conducted technical training and seminars on insurance for over 200 insurance regulators, 
supervisors and practitioners to date. AITRI has also received recognition from international 
organisations  such  as  the  International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  and  First 
Initiative for the training programmes that were conducted. Despite its limited capacity and 
funding, AITRI has continued to serve as the regional network centre for insurance education 
and research, providing opportunities for regulators to meet, learn and share experiences. I 
wish to urge ASEAN countries to leverage on AITRI as the regional platform for greater 
interaction  and  collaboration  and  continue  to  provide  support  to  enable  the  institute  to 
expand and play the role expected of it.  
In addition to building capacity within our own respective economies, there is great potential 
for  the  ASEAN  insurance  industry  to  increase  our  competitiveness  as  a  region  in  order  to 
retain  a  greater  share  of  the  insurance  business  particularly  in  reinsurance  and 
underwriting of large, specialised risk which traditionally flows out of the region. In order to 
increase our capacity and expertise to underwrite such risks, greater collaboration in the form 
of  technical  assistance  and  information  sharing  are  important.  Great  value  can  be  derived 
from  the  pooling  of  experiences  and  resources  to  develop  our  own  probability  models 
which will enable us to better price risks based on the unique characteristics of our region. 
Through such collaboration, the ability for the insurance industries in ASEAN to underwrite 
and  reinsure  risks  to  serve  the  needs  of  the  ASEAN  businesses  and  individuals  can  be 
significantly  enhanced.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  encourage  the  industry  to  work 
together with the regulators to explore ideas to build our capabilities and capacities as well 
as  enhance  our  competitiveness  towards  developing  a  robust  insurance  industry  in  the 
region.  
To further support the development of ASEAN's insurance industry, initiatives to harmonise 
standards across countries should continue to remain as an important agenda. Exchange 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2007
of  information  on  insurance  development  and  statistics  among  regulators  would  enable 
members to benchmark on their current progress and leverage on each others' experiences 
to advance forward. A more systematic and structured information sharing mechanism 
though  a  regional  centre  can  serve  as  a  catalyst  for  the  development  of  insurance  and 
reinsurance  business  among  ASEAN  members.  The  mechanism  could  form  a  core 
infrastructure for the region to build on its insurance data, enable trend analysis and support 
product  pricing  that  better  reflects  the  region  claims  experience  and  pricing  environment. 
These  initiatives  should  be  further  supported  by  efforts  to  mutually  recognise  insurance 
coverage across borders to facilitate trade and transfer of goods between our countries. 
This  is  an  important  area  that  should  continue  to  be  focused  on  by  the  practitioners  and 
authorities  in  our  shared  vision  towards  developing  ASEAN  as  an  integrated  economic 
region.  
Another important element is for the regional insurance industry, as institutional investors, to 
play  an  important  role  to  help  foster  the  development  of  the  regional  capital  and  bond 
market  by  investing  in  the  regional  securities.  This  should  go  along  efforts  towards 
diversifying  the  risk  in  the  financial  systems  from  becoming  overly  reliant  on  the  banking 
system to fund the growing member economies.  
The  South  East  Asia  region  is  developing  at  a  rapid  pace  and  changes  in  the  global 
economic and financial environment are driving us to continuously adopt new strategies and 
approaches. To quickly respond to these demands, enhanced regional cooperation is the 
key  foundation  towards  achieving  greater  collective  growth  and  economic  prosperity. 
I'm confident that the gathering of regulators and industry practitioners at this 10th ASEAN 
Insurance Regulators Meeting and 33 rd ASEAN Insurance Council Meeting will see further 
concrete  steps  taken  towards  promoting  cooperation  and  building  strong,  stable  and 
competitive  insurance  industries  within  ASEAN.  I  wish  all  of  you  a  fruitful  and  stimulating 
meeting in the coming day. 
On  this  note,  I  declare  the  10th  ASEAN  Insurance  Regulators  and  the  33rd  ASEAN 
Insurance Council meeting opened. 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 5
