John Hurley: Prospects for the Irish economy and banking sector 
Address by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, at a Bloomberg Business Lunch, Dublin, 16 October 2007. 
 The  economic  outlook  remains  broadly  positive  at  the  global  level  but  the  international 
environment  is  clearly  somewhat  more  uncertain  following  the  financial  market  turbulence 
that began in early August. Central banks have sought to limit the impact of financial market 
developments  on  real  economic  activity.  The  provision  of  additional  liquidity  has  brought 
some measure of stability and there are signs of improvement in the key inter-bank market, 
although some difficulties still remain It is impossible to say how long it will be before such 
markets  will  fully  return  to  their  normal  functioning;  market  participants  remain  uncertain 
about where exposure to risk lies and, while this continues to be the case, some tensions 
may  persist.  With  regard  to  monetary  policy,  as  far  as  the  euro  area  is  concerned,  more 
information will be needed on the impact of recent developments before drawing any further 
conclusions in that regard. The turbulence also seems to signal the need for changes in the 
financial system that are likely to centre on issues such as transparency – including the links 
between  on-  and  off-balance-sheet  vehicles  –  making  improvements  to  risk  management 
frameworks, valuation standards and market functioning including looking at the role of rating 
agencies.  
Although the Irish banking system had relatively little direct exposure to many of the original 
sources of turbulence, there has inevitably been some pressure on interest rates, resulting 
from  the  tensions  in  the  inter-bank  market  and  some  generalised  tightening  of  credit 
conditions seems likely as a result. One cannot rule out other possible direct effects on the 
economy, such as a reduction in confidence for example, but the main concern centres on 
indirect  effects  at  this  stage,  in  particular,  the  possibility  of  a  sharper  than  expected  US 
slowdown.  This  could  impact  on  the  domestic  economy  through  its  extensive  trade  and 
investment links with the US. There are other risks that could affect the prospects for growth 
domestically also, including exchange rate movements and oil price developments. 
In its most recent Bulletin, the Bank projected some deceleration in domestic growth. GNP is 
likely to expand by about 4¾ per cent this year but the growth rate will probably drop to about 
3¼ per cent next year. This arises from the combined effect of declines in housing output 
and  a  likely  slowing  of  consumption  growth  next  year  from  its  current  very  high  levels. 
Inflation is likely to ease, however, with an average HICP rate of 2.8 per cent this year falling 
to about 2¼ per cent next year, effectively eliminating the inflation differential with the euro 
area. This is likely to reflect an easing in services inflation and generally reduced inflationary 
pressures as the economy slows. Unemployment is likely to rise modestly, probably to about 
5¼ per cent next year from an average of about 4¾ per cent this year. This would, however, 
still represent close to full employment conditions. 
As regards the housing market, the current situation reflects a return to a more sustainable 
position.  Prices  have  levelled  off  and  are  declining  modestly  and  output  is  falling  back  to 
levels that are more in line with medium-term demand. Fortunately, this is happening against 
what  has  been  a  relatively  favourable  backdrop.  The  rest  of  the  construction  sector  is  still 
experiencing favourable demand conditions, particularly as regards large public and private 
projects. The remainder of the economy is also continuing to experience strong growth with 
overall employment still expanding.  
It is important to take a balanced view of prospects and not to concentrate disproportionately 
on the downside risks to the economy. The economy also has many positive aspects. It has 
also  shown  itself  to  be  flexible  in  the  past  and  should  be  able  to  adapt  to  adverse 
developments, if they were to occur. For example, the current fiscal position should allow the 
BIS Review 117/2007 
 1 
authorities  to  put  a  fiscal  buffer  in  place  to  help  deal  with  the  impact  of  any  such 
developments, while still continuing to fund key infrastructural improvements.  
Over the medium-term, the economy still has the potential to grow by around 4 to 4½ per 
cent. In order to realise this potential, there will have to be a re-balancing of growth with a 
strengthening  of  the  country’s  external  trade  performance.  This,  in  turn  implies  a 
concentration on maintaining and improving the competitiveness of the economy. The key to 
a  continued  improvement  in  living  standards  is  maximising  productivity  growth  through 
appropriate policies, including investment in infrastructure and education, measures to boost 
competition in the non-traded sectors, providing a support environment for R&D, as well as a 
continuing  focus  on  stability  in  the  public  finances.  The  current  phase  of  globalisation 
involves the reallocation of activities across countries with many low-skill activities moving to 
low cost locations where the supply of low-skilled labour is plentiful. This leaves countries like 
Ireland increasingly competing for more high-value-added activities and the country needs to 
position itself appropriately in order to pick up a significant share of this type of investment. 
There are also medium-term challenges to be faced, most notably perhaps, the implications 
of  population  ageing.  Although  occurring  somewhat  later  in  Ireland  than  elsewhere,  the 
impact  is  likely  to  be  significant.  Some  measures  have  already  been  taken,  such  as 
increasing  the  retirement  age  in  the  public  sector  and  the  setting  up  the  National  Pension 
Reserve Fund to meet future public pension liabilities. 
In  summary,  the  outlook  for  the  domestic  economy  remains  positive,  if  somewhat  more 
uncertain.  Some  slowdown  in  growth  seems  inevitable  but  its  extent  and  duration  will  be 
affected both by developments in the international environment and our response to them. 
The risks have increased in recent times but if there is an appropriate response domestically 
and a continued focus on boosting productivity growth over the medium term, the prospects 
for continued growth and improvements in living standards remain good.  
2 
 BIS Review 117/2007
