Stanley Fischer: A brief look at the Israeli economy and the vital 
importance of employment 
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Third Annual 
Jewish-Arab Business Conference, Herzliya, 13 November 2007. 
 Since 2003 Israel’s economy has been enjoying economic growth, and since 2004 GDP has 
been  rising  by  more  than  5  percent  per  year.  At  the  same  time  price  stability  has  been 
maintained, and the economy has shown impressive financial and economic stability. Israel 
is well integrated in the global economy, exports are increasing and in the first half of 2007 
reached  about  45  percent  of  GDP,  and  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments 
shows a healthy surplus of about 5 percent of GDP. The economy continues to benefit from 
the  inflow  of  investments  from  abroad,  which  halfway  through  2007  had  reached  some  8 
percent  of  GDP.  The  fact  that  the  government  can  obtain  Knesset  approval  for  the  2008 
budget according to the targets it set, particularly in light of the implications that the credit 
crisis could have for the global economy, is an auspicious and important achievement. 
The positive economic developments are reflected in the labor market. The unemployment 
rate  has  fallen,  and  reached  7.6  percent  in  the  second  quarter,  a  far  cry  from  the  level  of 
about 11 percent in 2003, and this has occurred in the time when the rate of participation in 
the labor force rose from 54 percent to 57 percent; a very important development. 
Employment  is  of  vital  importance  both  economically  and  socially.  Economically,  because 
employment per se contributes to economic growth; socially, since one of the direct ways of 
dealing  with  poverty  is  to  place  those  capable of  working in  employment.  That  is because 
there  is  a  clear  negative  link  between  poverty  and  employment.  In  2006,  for  example,  the 
poverty rate among families with no wage-earner was about 76 percent; among families with 
one  breadwinner,  about  37  percent;  and  among  families  with  two  breadwinners,  about  4 
percent. These figures paint a very clear picture. 
Poverty in Israel, however, is closely related to Israel’s demographic features. Based on the 
Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) Income Survey, the majority of poverty is concentrated in 
two groups in the population: the Arab sector and the ultra-orthodox sector (Haredi). While 
the  incidence  of  poverty  among  the  Jewish,  non-Haredi  population  (based  on  the  relative 
measure of poverty generally used in Israel) in 2006 was only 13 percent, among the Arabs 
and the ultra-orthodox the rates were 57 percent and 58 percent respectively. This is linked 
to  the  low  employment  rates  in  those  two  sectors,  mainly  among  ultra-orthodox  men,  and 
Arab women. 
A  closer  look  at  employment  among  Arabs  reveals  an  even  more  complex  picture.  An 
analysis of the figures in the CBS Income Surveys and the Manpower Surveys reveal several 
findings worthy of attention: 
1) 
The  participation  rate  among  Arab  women  is  rising,  but  it  is  still  lower  than  that 
among  Jewish  women.  Moreover,  the  rise  in  their  participation  rate  is  reflected 
mainly in an increase in unemployment among Arab women, with only a moderate 
increase  in  their  employment.  Thus,  in  2006  the  employment  rate  among  Arab 
women was about 17 percent, compared with 51 percent among all women in the 
population. 
In contrast to Arab women, the participation rate among Arab men is declining, and 
since the beginning of the decade it has been lower than that among Jewish men. 
This is most prominent among older men. 
2) 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 1
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
The Arab labor force has a lower educational level, with most having between nine 
and  twelve  years  of  schooling,  compared  with  the  Jewish  labor  force,  the  highest 
proportion of which has more than twelve years of education.  
The unemployment rate is higher among Arabs than among Jews. 
Employment among Arabs is concentrated in low-paid industries. 
On average, the wage of Arab employees, as well as the hourly wage, is lower than 
that of Jewish employees. 
Furthermore, many studies highlight employment inequality and wage inequality between the 
Arab population and the Jewish population. There are several reasons for this, and I will not 
be revealing any new discovery if I mention the word "discrimination". 
The  picture  arising  from  the  integration  of  the  Arab  population  in  the  work  force  in  Israel 
indicates the necessity to pay special attention to this issue and to find appropriate solutions 
based  among  other  things  on  a  proper  system  of  incentives.  The  purpose  must  be  to 
increase the participation rate of the whole Arab population and at the same time to remove 
the barriers to their absorption in the workplace, and this is of particular relevance to women. 
At the same time it is essential to place education as a high priority, and I mean particularly 
education  and  training  in  professions  and  skills  that  will  help  the  integration  of  the  Arab 
population  into  the  labor  market,  especially  in  those  industries  and  occupations  requiring 
relatively  high  levels  of  skill,  and  which  command  high  pay.  I  am  referring  both  to 
technological and non-technological education. In this context I would like to mention that in 
the  last  few  years  technological  education  has  been  sorely  neglected.  I  hear  this  from 
different  sources,  both  in  the  education  system  and  industrialists  who  need  workers  with 
technical and technological qualifications. 
If we, as a society, do not take steps to absorb the Arab population into the labor market, 
larger  segments  of  the  population  will  be  caught  up  in  the  poverty  situation.  It  should  be 
noted  that  Israeli  society  cannot  succeed,  certainly  not  in  the  long  run,  if  it  creates  large 
differentials, with a big sector of the population existing at a very low standard of living. 
It  is  clear  that  we  must  also  relate  to  the  removal  of  labor  market  and  cultural  barriers, 
including anti-minorities discrimination, anti-Arab employment discrimination at all levels, as 
well as doing business across the sectors. The Bank of Israel, for example, after years when 
no Arabs were employed in professional capacities – economists, accountants, lawyers – is 
currently making genuine efforts to increase their chances of employment in these jobs. We 
publish tenders for the populations entitled to affirmative action, and in other tenders too the 
approach to candidates from those sectors is one of affirmative action. Tenders are passed 
directly to several organizations that represent those populations, and are published also in 
Arabic.  The  purpose  of  all  the  above  is  to  make  the  Bank  of  Israel  more  accessible  to 
members  of  the  relevant  groups  in  the  population  and  to  give  them  the  opportunity  to  be 
represented fairly among the Bank’s professional employees. This conference also has an 
important contribution to make in promoting employment and business between the various 
sectors of Israel’s population. 
Employment is not the only issue when dealing with poverty. In the case of extremely low-
paid employees, the solution lies in the system of negative income tax, or earned income tax 
credit (EITC), which would raise the return on labor. This subject, together with many others, 
features  in  the  government’s  socio-economic  agenda.  It  should  be  advanced  and 
implemented as quickly as possible, along with the other important issues. 
At  the  same  time,  appropriate  support  must  be  provided  for  those  genuinely  incapable  of 
working, including the handicapped and the elderly. 
In  a  broader  perspective,  and  with  a  view  to  the  long  term,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  the 
importance of education – which is the key to improving anyone’s chances to integrate into 
the labor market and to earn a higher wage – and that of sustainable growth. We must face 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2007
many  difficulties,  in  the  area  of  security,  welfare,  etc.  We  will  not  succeed  in  overcoming 
them, especially not in the long term, if we do not manage to grow at a relatively fast rate of 
over 5 percent a year. The subject of long-term growth is critical, as only that can provide the 
means  required  to  solve  the  problems  mentioned.  Nothing  is  more  important  for  Israel’s 
economy  and  for  the  welfare  of  Israeli  society,  certainly  in  the  long  run,  than  rapid  and 
sustained growth. Hence the importance of creating the conditions required to enable each 
individual to contribute to the maximum to the economy and society. 
BIS Review 133/2007 
 3
