V Leeladhar: The evolution of banking regulation in India – a retrospect 
on some aspects 
Special address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Bankers’ Conference (BANCON) 2007, Mumbai, 26 November 2007. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  this  afternoon  on  the  occasion  of  the  Bankers’ 
Conference, which has become a landmark annual event in the Indian banking industry. I am 
indeed grateful to the organisers for their kind invitation, which provided me an opportunity to 
share my thoughts on the evolutionary path of the banking regulation in India over the past 
several decades. The topic, to my mind, appears particularly relevant today when India has 
completed  60  years  of  its  Independence  this  year.  While  during  the  last  six  decades,  the 
Indian banking system has indeed come a long way traversing an arduous and tortuous path, 
it would perhaps be appropriate to assess in retrospect and take stock of how far we have 
come from where we started and what more remains to be achieved. I would, therefore, like 
to briefly present a bird’s eye view of the salient milestones crossed in the long journey of our 
banking system and to take stock of the current status of the industry. I would also like to 
take  this  opportunity  to  briefly  touch  upon  certain  doubts,  which  somehow  seem  to  have 
crept in, about certain aspects of the current regulatory dispensation for the Indian banking 
sector.  
Institutional evolution of the Indian banking  
As most of you would, no doubt, be aware, the indigenous system of banking had existed in 
India for many centuries, and catered to the credit needs of the economy of that time. The 
famous  Kautilya  Arthashastra,  which  is  ascribed  to  be  dating  back  to  the  4th  century  BC, 
contains  references  to  creditors  and  lending.  For  instance,  it  says  "If  anyone  became 
bankrupt, debts owed to the state had priority over other creditors". Similarly, there is also a 
reference to "Interest on commodities loaned" (PRAYOG PRATYADANAM) to be accounted 
as revenue of the state. Thus, it appears that lending activities were not entirely unknown in 
the medieval India and the concepts such as “priority of claims of creditors” and “commodity 
lending” were established business practices.  
During the period of modern history, however, the roots of commercial banking in India can 
be traced back to the early eighteenth century when the Bank of Calcutta was established in 
June  1806  –  which  was  renamed  as  Bank  of  Bengal  in  January  1809  –  mainly  to  fund 
General Wellesley’s wars. This was followed by the establishment of the Bank of Madras in 
July 1843, as a joint stock company, through the reorganisation and amalgamation of four 
banks viz., Madras Bank, Carnatic Bank, Bank of Madras and the Asiatic Bank. This bank 
brought about major innovations in banking such as use of joint stock system, conferring of 
limited  liability  on  shareholders,  acceptance  of  deposits  from  the  general  public,  etc.  The 
Bank of Bombay, the last bank to be set up under the British Raj pursuant to the Charter of 
the  then  British  East  India  Company,  was  established  in  1868,  about  a  decade  after  the 
India’s first war of independence. The three Presidency Banks, as these were then known, 
were amalgamated in January 1921 to form the Imperial Bank of India, which acquired the 
three-fold role: of a commercial bank, of a banker’s bank and of a banker to the government. 
It is interesting to note here that merger of banks and consolidation in the banking system in 
India, is not as recent a phenomenon as is often thought to be, and dates back to at least 
1843 – and the process, of course, still continues. With the formation of the Reserve Bank of 
India in 1935, some of the central banking functions of the Imperial Bank were taken over by 
the RBI and subsequently, the State Bank of India, set up in July 1955, assumed the other 
functions of the Imperial Bank and became the successor to the Imperial Bank of India. 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 1
Evolution of legislative regulation of banking in India 
In  the  very  early  phase  of  commercial  banking  in  India,  the  regulatory  framework  was 
somewhat diffused and the Presidency Banks were regulated and governed by their Royal 
Charter,  the  East  India  Company  and  the  Government  of  India  of  that  time.  Though  the 
Company  law  was  introduced  in  India  way  back  in  1850,  it  did  not  apply  to  the  banking 
companies. The banking crisis of 1913, however, had revealed several weaknesses in the 
Indian  banking  system,  such  as  the  low  proportion  of  liquid  assets  of  the  banks  and 
connected lending practices, resulting in large-scale bank failures. The recommendations of 
the  Indian  Central  Banking  Enquiry  Committee  (1929-31),  which  looked  into  the  issue  of 
bank failures, paved the way for a legislation for banking regulation in the country.  
Though  the  RBI,  as  part  of  its  monetary  management  mandate,  had,  from  the  very 
beginning, been vested with the powers, under the RBI Act, 1934, to regulate the volume and 
cost of bank credit in the economy through the instruments of general credit control, it was 
not until 1949 that a comprehensive enactment, applicable only to the banking sector, came 
into existence. Prior to 1949, the banking companies, in common with other companies, were 
governed  by  the  Indian  Companies  Act,  1913,  which  itself  was  a  comprehensive  re-
enactment of the earlier company law of 1850. This Act, however, contained a few provisions 
specially  applicable  to  banks.  There  were  also  a  few  ad  hoc  enactments,  such  as  the 
Banking Companies (Inspection) Ordinance, 1946, and the Banking Companies (Restriction 
of  Branches)  Act,  1946,  covering  specific  regulatory  aspects.  In  this  backdrop,  in  March 
1949, a special legislation, called the Banking Companies Act, 1949, applicable exclusively 
to the banking companies, was passed; this Act was renamed as the Banking Regulation Act 
from March 1966. The Act vested in the Reserve Bank the responsibility relating to licensing 
of banks, branch expansion, liquidity of their assets, management and methods of working, 
amalgamation, reconstruction and liquidation. Important changes in several provisions of the 
Act were made from time to time, designed to enlarge or amplify the responsibilities of the 
RBI or to impart flexibility to the relative provisions, commensurate with the imperatives of the 
banking sector developments. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  till  March  1966,  the  Reserve  Bank  had  practically  no  role  in 
relation to the functioning of the urban co-operative banks. However, by the enactment of the 
Banking  Laws  (Application  to  Co-operative  Societies)  Act,  1965,  certain  provisions  of  the 
Banking Regulation Act, regarding the matters relating to banking business, were extended 
to the urban co-operative banks also. Thus, for the first time in 1966, the urban co-operative 
banks too came within the regulatory purview of the RBI.  
Prudential policy framework for banking regulation and supervision 
The  basic  rationale  for  exercising  fairly  close  regulation  and  supervision  of  banking 
institutions,  all  over  the  world,  is  premised  on  the  fact  that  the  banks  are  "special"  –  for 
several reasons. The banks accept uncollateralised public deposits, are part of the payment 
and  settlement  system,  enjoy  the  safety  net  of  deposit  insurance  funded  by  the  public 
money,  and  are  an  important  channel  for  monetary  policy  transmission.  Thus,  the  banks 
become a keystone in the edifice of financial stability of the system – which is a “public good” 
that  the  public  authorities  are  committed  to  provide.  Preventing  the  spread  of  contagion 
through the banking system, therefore, becomes an obvious corollary of regulating the banks 
to  pre-empt  any  systemic  crisis,  which  can  entail  enormous  costs  for  the  economy  as  a 
whole. This is particularly so on account of the inevitable linkages that the banks have by 
virtue of the nature of their role in the financial system. Ensuring safety and soundness of the 
banking  system,  therefore,  becomes  a  predominant  objective  of  the  financial  regulators. 
While the modalities of exercising regulation and supervision over banks have evolved over 
the  decades,  in  tandem  with  the  market  and  technological  developments,  the  fundamental 
objective  underlying  the  exercise  has  hardly  changed.  Of  course,  a  well-regulated  and 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2007
efficient  banking  sector  also  enhances  the  allocative  efficiency  of  the  financial  system, 
thereby facilitating economic growth.  
In this backdrop, as the functions of the RBI evolved over the years, the focus of its role as a 
regulator and supervisor of the banking system has shifted gradually from micro regulation to 
macro prudential supervision. A journey through the major landmarks in the evolution of the 
RBI’s  role  vis-à-vis  the  commercial  banks  provide  interesting  insights.  Allow  me  to  very 
briefly dwell on the salient aspects of this evolutionary process.  
As regard the prudential regulatory framework for the banking system, we have come a long 
way from the administered interest rate regime to deregulated interest rates, from the system 
of  Health  Codes  for  an  eight-fold  judgmental  loan  classification  to  the  prudential  asset 
classification  based  on  objective  criteria,  from  the  concept  of  simple  statutory  minimum 
capital and capital-deposit ratio to the risk-sensitive capital adequacy norms – initially under 
Basel I framework and now under the Basel II regime. There is much greater focus now on 
improving the corporate governance set up through "fit and proper" criteria, on encouraging 
integrated  risk  management  systems  in  the  banks  and  on  promoting  market  discipline 
through more transparent disclosure standards. The policy endeavor has all along been to 
benchmark our regulatory norms with the international best practices, of course, keeping in 
view the domestic imperatives and the country context. The consultative approach of the RBI 
in  formulating  the  prudential  regulations  has  been  the  hallmark  of  the  current  regulatory 
regime which enables taking account of a wide diversity of views on the issues at hand.  
On  the  supervisory  side,  we  have  traversed  vast  territory  in  progressively  refining  our 
supervisory focus to ensure a safe and sound banking system, comparable with the best in 
the world. Thus, we have continually graduated from the system of on-site Annual Appraisal 
of  the  banks  by  the  RBI  followed  in  the  1970s  to  the  system  of  Annual  Financial  Review 
during the 1980s, then on to the Annual Financial Inspection of stand-alone banks during the 
1990s  and  further  on  to  the  consolidated  supervision  of  financial  conglomerates  so  as  to 
address  the  supervisory  concerns  on  a  group-wide  basis.  The  off-site  monitoring  of  the 
banking system was also introduced in 1995 as a part of the supervisory strategy of ongoing 
supervision  of  the  banks,  so  as  to  supplement  the  periodical  full-scope  on-site  bank 
examinations.  The  supervisory  rating  models  (CAMELS  and  CACS),  based  on  crucial 
prudential  parameters,  were  also  developed  by  the  RBI  to provide  a  summary  view  of  the 
overall health of the banks. The Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) Framework was put in place 
to enable timely intervention in case of any incipient stress in a bank. The latest supervisory 
initiative  has  been  the  introduction  of  risk-based  supervision  of  the  banks  so  as  to  move 
away from transaction audit and to enable the modulation of the supervisory efforts in tune 
with the risk profile of the banks and to achieve optimal deployment of the scarce supervisory 
resources.  Last  but  not  the  least,  the  Board  for  Financial  Supervision,  constituted  in  1994 
under  the  Chairmanship  of  the  Governor,  RBI  has  been  the  guiding  force  in  securing  the 
transformation in the regulatory and supervisory apparatus of the banking system.  
While the multi-dimensional regulatory and supervisory measures are justifiably reflected in 
the significantly improved prudential parameters of the Indian banking system, be it the level 
of NPAs or the capital adequacy ratios, there is hardly any room for complacence. In the era 
of ever-increasing financial globalisation and in the face of rapid financial innovations, all of 
us  will  continually  need  to  remain  on  a  steep  learning  curve  and  upgrade  our  skills  and 
knowledge to be able to meet the emerging challenges in the financial world.  
Some elucidation regarding the regulatory environment 
Let  me  now  digress  a  little  to  address  a  somewhat  different  aspect  of  our  regulatory 
environment. The Reserve Bank of India has earned, in the service of our country, a proven 
track record of professionalism, which has lent it considerable credibility – both domestically 
and globally. This credibility enables the RBI to confidently carry on with the reform process 
to be able to maintain price and financial stability, while enabling a self-accelerating equitable 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 3
growth at elevated levels. However, as I mentioned earlier, in certain quarters, there seem to 
be some misunderstandings, regarding certain dimensions of the extant prudential regulatory 
framework of the RBI. I would like to briefly address some of the salient ones and explain as 
to how the perceptions and the reality may not often converge.  
Branch authorisation policy 
As you are aware, the RBI announced a new Branch Authorisation Policy in September 2005 
under which certain changes were brought about in the authorisation process adopted by the 
RBI  for  the  bank  branches  in  the  country.  As  against  the earlier  system,  where  the  banks 
approached the RBI, piece meal, through out the year for branch authorisation, the revised 
system provides for a holistic and streamlined approach for the purpose, by granting a bank-
wise,  annual  aggregated  authorisation,  in  consultation  and  interaction  with  each  applicant 
bank.  The  objective  is  to  ensure  that  the  banks  take  an  integrated  view  of  their  branch-
network needs, including branch relocations, mergers, conversions and closures as well as 
setting  up  of  the  ATMs,  over  a  one-year  time  horizon,  in  tune  with  their  own  business 
strategy, and then approach the RBI for consolidated annual authorisations accordingly.  
There seems to be some misunderstanding in some quarters that, under the new policy, the 
banks  have  to  wait  for  the  annual  authorisation  exercise  and  are  constrained  in 
approaching the RBI for any emergent authorisation in between. Since the branch expansion 
planning of the banks is expected to be a well thought out, Board-approved annual process, 
normally, there should be no need for any emergent or urgent authorisation being required 
by the banks, in the interim. However, I would like to emphasise that the new policy does not 
preclude the possibility of any urgent proposals for opening bank branches being considered 
by the RBI even outside the annual plan, specially in the rural / under-banked areas, anytime 
during  the  year.  This  flexibility  has  been  clearly  articulated  in  our  policy  guidelines  as 
contained in the Master Circular of July 2007 but somehow, it seems to have got overlooked.  
There also seems to be a feeling among some banks that under the new authorisation policy, 
the process adopted is more cumbersome and, as a result, there have been delays in issuing 
authorisations.  Since  the  banks  are  required  to  approach  the  RBI  only  after  obtaining  the 
approval of their respective Boards for their annual branch expansion plan, it is possible that 
the preparatory time required for filing their annual plan with the RBI might be a little longer. 
The processing time at the end of the RBI, however, has been generally in the range of one 
to two months – which I consider to be reasonable, given the element of consultation with the 
banks built into the process. However, the actual number of authorisations issued by the RBI 
under the new policy has been much higher than before. For instance, as against the a total 
of 881, 1125 and 1259 authorisations given by the RBI under the old policy regime during 
2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06, respectively, the number of authorisations issued under the 
new policy during 2006-07 was 2028. Thus, as against the general perception that the new 
policy has been more restrictive in granting authorisations, the fact is that there has been a 
sharp increase of about 61 per cent in the total number of authorisations granted last year.  
I am afraid, however, that similar improvements can not be said about the performance of the 
banks  in  utilising  the  authorisations  received.  Even  though  the  banks  were  granted 
authorisations to the extent of 97 per cent and 62 per cent of the authorisations sought by 
them for the years 2004-05 (April-March) and 2005-06, respectively, as at end-March 2007, 
as much as 30 per cent and 38 per cent of the authorisations granted for those years had still 
not been utilised, even after more than a year or two of grant of the authorisations. As on that 
date, the extent of non-utilisation for the year 2006-07 was much higher at 61 per cent when 
only 69 per cent of the authorisations sought had been granted. Though I presume that many 
more licences would have been utilised since March 2007, I would, nonetheless, like to urge 
the  banks  present  here  to  ensure  expeditious  and  fullest  utilisation  of  the  authorisations 
granted.  
4 
 BIS Review 137/2007
You would recall that under the old authorisation policy, the banks were free to install off-site 
ATMs, at the places of their choice, without the prior approval of the RBI but only needed a 
licence from the concerned Regional Office of the RBI before operationalising the ATM, so 
as to ensure compliance with the provisions of Section 23 of the B R Act. Under the revised 
authorisation policy, however, the banks are required to obtain prior approval of the RBI even 
for  the  off-site  ATMs.  Some,  therefore,  expressed  a  view  that  the  requirement  of  prior 
authorisation  of  the  ATMs  in  the  new  policy  is  not  quite  justified,  as  an  ATM  is  not  a  full-
fledged place of business for the banks. Let me hasten to mention here the RBI has been 
liberal  in  authorising  setting  up  of  the  ATMs  and  all  the  requests  received  by  the  RBI  for 
establishing as many as 7443 ATMs were fully acceded to for the year 2006-07.  
As we know, the ATMs, in the format they are used today in India, already provide for deposit 
and  withdrawal  of  cash,  balance  enquiry,  account  statements,  etc.  However,  as  seen  in 
some of the advanced countries, the technology permits and can be leveraged to deploy the 
ATMs for delivering a much wider variety of banking services to the banks’ customers and 
thus, have the potential of becoming a much fuller place of banking business. In any case, 
since  the  ATMs  constitute  an  important  channel  for  delivery  of  banking  services,  it  is  only 
logical  that  the  network  planning  of  the  banks  also  captures  the  plan  for  setting  up  their 
ATMs and reflects it in their annual plan furnished to the RBI for authorisation. Besides, in 
India’s  WTO  commitments  in  regard  to  banking  services,  the  Market  Access  limitations 
provide for specific licensing of the ATMs of the foreign banks, though the ATM licences are 
not counted within the ceiling of 12 licences per year, as committed by India. In the emerging 
global context, therefore, it is only appropriate that the ATMs continue to be kept within the 
purview of regulatory authorisation policy.  
Operations of foreign banks in India 
At present, there are 29 foreign banks operating in India with a network of 273 branches and 
871 off-site ATMs. Among some circles, a doubt is sometimes expressed as to whether the 
regulatory environment in India is liberal in regard to the functioning of the foreign banks and 
whether the regulatory approach towards foreign participation in the Indian banking system is 
consistent  with  liberalized  environment.  Undoubtedly,  the  facts  indicate  that  regulatory 
regime followed by the Reserve Bank in respect of foreign banks is non-discriminatory, and 
is,  in  fact,  very  liberal  by  global  standards.  Here  are  a  few  facts  which  bear  out  the 
contention; 
• 
India issues a single class of banking licence to foreign banks and does not require 
them  to  graduate  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  category  of  banking  licence  over  a 
number of years, as is the practice followed in certain other jurisdictions.  
This single class of licence places them virtually on the same footing as an Indian 
bank and does not place any restrictions on the scope of their operations. Thus, a 
foreign bank can undertake, from the very first day of its operations, any or all of the 
activities permitted to an Indian bank and all foreign banks can carry on both retail 
as  well  as  wholesale  banking  business.  This  is  in  contrast  with  practices  in  many 
other countries.  
No  restrictions  have  been  placed  on  establishment  of  non-banking  financial 
subsidiaries in India by the foreign banks or of their group companies.  
Deposit  insurance  cover  is  uniformly  available  to  all  foreign  banks  at  a  non-
discriminatory  rate  of  premium.  In  many  other  countries  there  is  a  discriminatory 
regime.  
The prudential norms applicable to the foreign banks for capital adequacy, income 
recognition  and  asset  classification,  etc.,  are,  by  and  large,  the  same  as  for  the 
Indian  banks.  Other  prudential  norms  such  as  those  for  the  exposure  limits, 
investment valuation, etc., are the same as those applicable to the Indian banks.  
    BIS Review 137/2007 
 5
   Unlike some of the countries where overall exposure limits have been placed on the 
foreign-country related business, India has not placed any restriction on the kind of 
business that can be routed through the branches of foreign banks. This has been 
advantageous to the foreign bank branches as the entire home-country business is 
generally routed through these branches. Substantial FII business is also handled 
exclusively by the foreign banks.  
In  fact,  some  Indian  banks  contend  that  certain  amount  of  positive  discrimination 
exists in favour of foreign banks by way of lower Priority Sector lending requirement 
at  32  per  cent  of  the  adjusted  net  bank  credit  as  against  a  level  of  40  per  cent 
required for the Indian banks. Unlike in the case of Indian banks, the sub-ceiling in 
respect  of  agricultural  advances  is  also  not  applicable  to  foreign  banks  whereas 
export credit granted by the foreign banks can be reckoned towards priority sector 
lending obligation, which is not permitted for the Indian banks.  
Notably, in terms of our WTO commitment, licences for new foreign banks may be 
denied when the share of foreign banks’ assets in India, including both on- as well 
as off-balance-sheet items, in the total assets (including both on- and off-balance-
sheet  items)  of  the  banking  system  exceeds  15  per  cent.  However,  we  have 
autonomously not invoked this limitation so far to deny licences to the new foreign 
banks  even  though  the  actual  share  of  foreign  banks  in  the  total  assets  of  the 
banking  system,  including  both  on-  and  off-balance-sheet  items  (on  Notional 
Principal basis), has been far above the limit. This share of foreign banks stood at 
49  per  cent,  as  at  end-January  2007,  as  mentioned  in  the  India’s  Trade  Policy 
Review, 2007.  
It is thus very obvious that the Indian regulatory regime is essentially non-discriminatory as 
between branches of foreign banks and domestic banks, in regard to their authorisation or 
the scope of their operations, though some hold that there is some positive discrimination in 
favour  of  the  foreign  banks.  As  explained,  Indian  regulatory  regime  is  in  fact  much  more 
equitable and provides a far more level playing field to the foreign banks, than in many other 
jurisdictions both developed and emerging economies.  
As regards the market share of the foreign banks in the Indian commercial banking system, 
the share, as at end-June 2007, in the deposits and advances stood at 6.11 and 6.83 per 
cent,  respectively.  However,  the  foreign  banks  were  far  more  dominant  in  the  off-balance 
sheet business with a market share of as high as 72.66 per cent. Besides the foreign banks, 
there are also two large Indian private sector banks in which the non-resident ownership is 
very close to 74 per cent permitted, which could, therefore, be considered as incorporated in 
India but predominantly foreign owned banks. These banks together with the foreign banks, 
have  a  combined  market  share  in  the  country  in  the  deposits,  advances  and  off-balance-
sheet business of 17.46, 18.65 and 76.63 per cent, respectively, which, by no means, are 
insignificant  levels.  Moreover,  there  are  also  about  10  large  listed  public  sector  banks  in 
which the non-resident / FII shareholding was close to the permitted ceiling of 20 per cent, as 
at March-end 2007. In these public sector banks, resident private shareholding would thus be 
close to thirty per cent only. 
Furthermore, the share of the foreign banks in the foreign exchange market in India was also 
significant and had registered a rising trend. For instance, as against their share of 41 per 
cent in the total foreign exchange turnover during 2005-06, their share during the first half of 
2007-08 stood at 52 per cent.  
Thus, viewed in totality, it would be extremely difficult to justify the notion that the foreign and 
non-resident participation in the Indian banking markets is insignificant or restricted and that 
the policy or regulatory environment is not conducive to it.  
Another dimension of the foreign banks’ functioning in India is the returns generated from 
their Indian operations. Let me mention a few interesting facts here. The net profit per branch 
6 
 BIS Review 137/2007
for  the  foreign  banks  in  India  for  the  year  2005-06  was  Rs.  11.99  crore  as  against  the 
corresponding  figure  of  Rs.  0.33 crore  for  the public sector  banks  (PSBs).  Further,  for  the 
year 2006-07, the Return on Assets (ROA) of the foreign banks was 1.65 per cent while the 
Return on Equity (ROE) was 14.02 per cent, as against the corresponding figures of 0.82 per 
cent and 13.62 per cent for the PSBs. These returns need to be viewed in the context of the 
international  benchmarks  for  these  parameters,  which  are  generally  considerably  lower. 
Thus, the Indian operations of the foreign banks are very remunerative and the returns are 
notably higher than that of their domestic counterparts as also the customary international 
levels.  While  this  could  be  attributed,  to  an  extent,  to  the  level  of  domestic  market 
development  and  lack  of  contestability  in  the  Indian  markets,  this  is  also,  in  no  small 
measure, on account their business mix and a dominant share in the off-balance business, 
which is more regulatory-capital efficient, and the pattern of their branch presence, which is 
so far largely confined to the major cities of the country.  
Yet another aspect of the foreign banks’ operations is the authorisation of their branches 
in India. As you might be aware, as per India’s existing WTO commitments, which came into 
effect from 1997-98, our obligation is to permit to foreign banks only 12 licences per year, 
including both – the new entrants and the existing banks. As per the commitment made by 
India, this obligation of 12 licences does not include the ATMs that might be permitted by the 
RBI. RBI has, however, consistently been granting authorisations at levels higher than our 
obligation, not counting the numbers of ATMs set up by the foreign banks. Thus, during the 
period  2003  to  October  2007,  RBI  had  authorised  as  many  as  75  branches  of  the  foreign 
banks in India, excluding the off-site ATMs set up by them. Thus, branch authorisation policy 
for  the  foreign  banks  in  India  may  even  be  described  as  quite  generous,  and  not  merely 
liberal.  
Notwithstanding the WTO obligations, permitting foreign banks’ presence in a country is in 
some senses also guided by the extent of reciprocity amongst the nations – which simply 
means that there should be some defensible proportionality in the authorisations granted for 
the banks of each other’s countries. In this context, an illustration would be revealing of the 
ground  realities.  During  the  period  2003  to  October  2007,  India  had  granted  19 
authorisations to the USA-based banks, most of which also stand utilised. However, during 
the same period of five years, USA did not authorise any office of the Indian banks in the US 
territory,  vis-à-vis  the  requests  from  the  Indian  banks  for  setting  up  three  branches,  two 
subsidiaries and nine representative offices. Some of the requests have been pending with 
the US authorities for more than five years.  
Yet  another  aspect  of  the  foreign  participation  in  the  Indian  financial  sector  is  the  foreign 
ownership of the non-banking finance companies (NBFCs) operating in India, quite a few 
of which are the subsidiaries of the foreign banks. It is interesting to note that, as of August 
2007, in the category non-deposit-taking systemically important (ND-SI) NBFCs, the NBFCs 
with  some  element  of  foreign  ownership  had  an  asset  base  of  Rs.  87,542  crore  and 
accounted for more than 26 per cent of the total assets of this class of NBFCs. Of these, the 
NBFCs with majority foreign ownership had an asset base of Rs.34,095 crore accounting for 
9.2  per  cent  of  the  total  assets  of  this  class  of  companies  –  a  level  which  could  not  be 
considered to be insignificant. The ND-SI NBFCs, which are not closely regulated by the RBI, 
therefore, provide, in certain ways, a means of expanding the reach of the foreign banks in 
India. Thus, the current policy environment enables a fair level of foreign participation even in 
the non-banking financial sector of the country. 
Securitisation guidelines of the RBI  
As  you  are  well  aware,  the  RBI  had  first  issued  the  draft  guidelines  for  securitisation  of 
standard  assets  in  April  2005,  for  public  comments  and  after  an  extensive  consultative 
process, the final guidelines were issued in February 2006, in order to facilitate an orderly 
development of this market. In certain quarters, however, a view has been expressed that 
these guidelines, tend to negate the benefits envisaged in the very concept of securitisation, 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 7
and thus, are hindering the growth of securitisation market in the country. Let me attempt to 
briefly present today the international perspective vis-à-vis  RBI guidelines and the thinking 
and rationale underlying our formulation.  
RBI’s  guidelines  are  broadly  in  tune  with  the  stipulations  of  several  regulators  in  other 
jurisdictions.  For  instance,  concept  of  "true  sale"  and  the  independence  of  the  Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) from the originator of the assets, prescribed in our guidelines is also 
embedded,  in  one  form  or  the  other,  in  the  regulatory  guidelines  obtaining  in  Australia, 
Malaysia, Singapore, the UK and the USA. Similarly, the prudential treatment of the credit 
enhancement provided to the SPVs and the requirement of capital charge thereagainst, as 
prescribed  in  our  guidelines,  is  also  echoed  in  the  regulatory  framework  in  Australia,  the 
United Kingdom and Singapore. Likewise, the provisions relating to the “Clean up Calls", or 
repurchase of the residual performing assets from the SPV by the originator, also figure in 
the regulations in Australia, the United Kingdom and Singapore. The restrictions placed by us 
on  purchase  of  securities  issued  by  the  SPV  by  the  originator  are  also  found  in  other 
jurisdictions such as Australia, Singapore and the UK. Similarly, the restrictions in regard to 
the provision of liquidity facility to the SPV, underwriting of the securities issued by the SPV 
and the servicing of the securitised assets are also found in several other jurisdictions, with 
variations in details and in the degree of stringency. I am citing all this at some length to point 
out that RBI’s guidelines on securitisation are broadly in line with the practices obtaining in 
several other jurisdictions, though they have some unique features.  
The accounting treatment prescribed in our guidelines provides for upfront recognition of any 
loss incurred on sale of assets to the SPV but the profit arising from such sale is required to 
be amortised over the life of the securities issued / to be issued by the SPV. Thus, we have 
not permitted the banks to recognise the profit upfront, on sale of assets to the SPVs. As you 
are  aware,  the  main  considerations  for  the  originator  in  undertaking  a  securitisation 
transaction  are  obtaining  the  regulatory-capital  relief  and  generating  liquidity  from  an 
otherwise illiquid loan book, and not the profit, per se. In this background, RBI’s guidelines 
have  justifiably  adopted  such  an  approach  in  order  to  ensure  that  profit-booking  does  not 
become the primary motive for undertaking securitisation transactions – which could perhaps 
lead  to  profit  smoothening,  possibly  through  inappropriate  valuations,  and  the  consequent 
window dressing of the financial statements – none of which is prudentially desirable. In brief, 
the  restrictions  in  our  guidelines  on  upfront  recognition  of  profit  on  sale  of  assets  by  the 
banks seek to create the right incentive framework for the banks so that the basic objective 
underlying the concept of securitisation does not get negated.  
In the aftermath of the recent sub-prime episode in some of the developed countries, caused 
also  by  wide  dispersal  of  credit  risk  throughout  the  system  through  complex  structured 
transactions, I am sure, you would appreciate the merit of adopting an appropriate incentive-
compatible prudential approach towards securitisation. We need to squarely recognise that 
securitisation,  after  all,  is  also  a  credit-risk-transfer  instrument  and  has  the  potential  of 
dispersing the risks from the originating banks to those parts of the system which might not 
necessarily be best equipped to manage that risk. Hence, RBI’s stand in creating the right 
incentive framework through prudential restrictions would seem to be an approach which has 
much to commend itself.  
Migration to Principles-Based Regulation (PBR) 
A view has been expressed in certain quarters that the Indian regulatory framework should 
migrate to principles-based regulation from the current rules-based approach. The merits of a 
principles-based  approach  are  that  in  a  dynamic  market  context,  where  the  product 
innovation  is  the  order  of  the  day,  the  principles-based  approach  to  regulation  provides  a 
more  enduring  regulatory  option  since  the  underlying  principles  would  not  need  to  change 
with  every  new  product  whereas  the  detailed  rules  may  have  to  be  constantly  modified  to 
address  the  unique  features  of  market  and  product  developments.  However,  despite  the 
stated superiority of the principles-based approach, so far very few countries have adopted 
8 
 BIS Review 137/2007
this model in a big-bang or comprehensive manner. The FSA of the UK which is one of the 
forerunners in adoption of principles-based regulation has a rule book which has over 8000 
pages. So, the PBR is not as simple to operationalise as it is to advocate.  
Thus,  in  any  regulatory  regime,  complete  reliance  on  a  principles-based  approach  would 
rarely be a feasible option since the high-level principles would need to be underpinned by 
the detailed rules at the operational level, to achieve the regulatory objectives. To illustrate, it 
might be easy to enunciate the principle that "Treat your customer fairly" but ensuring it at the 
ground level would invariably require specific rules and prescriptions to achieve the objective 
underlying the principle. Besides, a PBR approach also pre-supposes greater reliance on the 
discretion and judgment of the supervisors and regulators in interpreting the broad principles 
– an aspect with which the market players might not be very comfortable. On the other hand, 
the regulated entities too, in the absence of detailed regulatory prescriptions, would need to 
develop  a  certain  level  of  maturity  of  outlook  to  correctly  understand  the  spirit  of  the 
principles while implementing them at the operational level. This approach would, therefore, 
also  require  a  good  deal  of  skill  up  gradation  on  the  part  of  the  regulator  as  well  as  the 
regulated entities.  
Moreover, in any jurisdiction, there could be certain areas of regulation which would be more 
amenable  to  a  PBR  approach  while  certain  other  areas  might  inevitably  require  detailed 
prescriptive rules. Thus, the rules-based and principles-based approaches to regulation are 
not mutually exclusive options but could very well co-exist and complement each other. To 
illustrate, the Pillar 1 of the Basel II framework is essentially rule-based prescription while the 
Pillar 2 is more oriented towards principles-based regime. Within the RBI, we too are in the 
process  of  exploring  the  feasibility  of  adopting  a  principles-based  approach  to  banking 
regulation but it may be quite some time before we could be ready for adoption of the PBR 
approach on a significant scale in the Indian context.  
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  I  would  only  say  that  the  Indian  regulatory  regime  for  the  banking  sector  has 
come  a  long  way  over  the  past  six  decades.  The  current  regulatory  dispensation  is 
ownership  neutral,  non-discriminatory  and  provides  a  level  playing  field  for  the  market 
participants. In my presentation today, I have also tried to present some facts, with a view to 
dispel  certain  ill  informed  apprehensions  about  the  regulatory  environment  for  the  Indian 
banking system. Let me assure you that there is considerable scope for improvements in the 
regulatory systems in India and we have been pursuing a policy of constant improvements 
through  a  participative  and  consultative  approach  with  market  participants.  The  policy 
outcomes so far, in terms of contribution to growth, price stability, financial stability, efficiency 
and robustness of banking sector have been significant by all standards of measurements, 
but  the  search  of  excellence,  in  the  RBI’s  mission,  is  an  unending  journey.  I  would  urge 
banking community to join us in this great adventure of serving a billion people, with passion 
as well as positive and broader set of values.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 137/2007 
 9
