Shamshad Akhtar: Islamic finance – its sustainability and challenges  
Closing keynote address by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at 
Georgetown University, Washington DC, 18 October 2007. 
 Introduction 
In the closing session for this event on Islamic Finance, I propose to reflect on the growth 
and trends in Islamic Finance, its size and dimensions and prospects which are now evolving 
from regional to global scale and impacting the private capital flows. The renewed interest 
and hype in Islamic Finance is unprecedented. Since it coincides with commercial interest of 
Western financial institutions to attract flows generated from oil revenues and other savings, 
there  is  a  degree  of  skepticism  regarding  sustainability  of  interest  and  trends  in  Islamic 
Finance industry within and outside Muslim jurisdictions? Also there are concerns echoed on 
whether the industry will persevere the competition from the global financial world nurtured 
by  the  conventional  system  backed  by  strong  legal,  policy,  regulatory  and  institutional 
framework.  
In my assessment, the Islamic Finance now seems to be a reality and is on its way to be 
institutionalized, albeit at different levels in different countries, and the Western world is also 
now selectively and cautiously positioning to invest in this system. There are promising signs 
that Islamic Finance trends are sustainable. It is entrenched in a well conceptualized Islamic 
economic system whose mysteries are being unfolded with renewed academic interest in the 
subject. While undeniably faith driven, the Islamic finance system has great potential to meet 
the  financial  gaps  and  requirements  of  development  and  society  at  large  and  as  such  its 
demand would be robust going beyond religious grounds.  
Islamic  Finance  has  to  be  recognized  as  a  parallel  system  which  will  augment  and  be 
augmented by the deeper knowledge and experience of the conventional financial system. 
As such, the key challenge going forward to its growth and sustainability would lie in how it 
interfaces and benefits from complementing and supplementing the conventional system and 
how  it  adapts  and  conforms  to  the  international  regulations  and  supervision  adequately 
refined in line with the technicalities and nuisances of the Islamic financial instruments and 
their  associated  risks.  Exploiting  properly  the  unique  features  of  Islamic  finance  with 
appropriate  adaptability,  without  compromising  Shariah  principles,  will  be  critical  to  the 
growth and promising future of Islamic industry. 
Touching on some of these debates, I propose to first discuss the trends in Islamic Finance, 
lay  the  case  for  sustainability  of  Islamic  Finance  and  finally  discuss  some  of  the  key 
challenges facing the industry which the Islamic financial community at large is now trying to 
address. 
Global and regional growth and trends 
Spread across 70 countries, Islamic Finance has grown to almost a $ trillion industry. Despite 
its growth, given its current size and composition it is still a niche market in the overall global 
financial industry. Prospect for the industry are quite bright given strong demand for financial 
services from a large segment of about 1.4 billion Muslim populations and need to channel 
effectively rising foreign savings and high net worth individuals. 
The growth, level, interest and motivation to promote this industry vary across the globe. The 
growth in Gulf Cooperation Council has been exceptional with Bahrian emerging as a main 
centre adopting and implementing Islamic banking regulation, being the first central bank to 
issue  Sukuk  and  establishing  centre  for  Islamic  finance  education,  etc.  Iran  and  Sudan 
declared  sometime  back  100%  conversion  to  Islamic  banking.  Within  South  East  Asia, 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 1
Malaysia stands out with $31 billion Islamic banking assets, $1.7 billion Takaful industry and 
has the largest Islamic private debt market which constitutes 45.5% of its total debt market.1 
Other countries in South East Asia have smaller Islamic financial markets and Singapore has 
positioned  itself  to  offer  strong  wealth  management  potential.  Within  South  Asia,  Pakistan 
stands out for its proactive and systematic stance to evolve Islamic finance industry. In all 
these countries, assets of Islamic banking have grown faster than the overall banking assets 
and  scope  and  coverage  of  financial  services  has  been  extended  to  retail  and  consumer 
finance, private equity, structured products, insurance and project finance etc.  
Distinct from Islamic countries, is the interest of few global financial centers such as London 
that now provide policy and tax incentives to promote Islamic finance industry to attract funds 
from  high  net  worth  clients.  Same  motivation  seems  to  have  driven  global  banks  such  as 
HSBC, Standard Chartered, Deutsche Bank, Citibank etc. to set up special hubs to structure 
Islamic finance products.  
In reality, while current hype in industry may be partially driven by availability of surpluses 
generated by oil revenues, Islamic banking is emerging as an alternate financing option that 
coexists  alongside  the  conventional  financial  industry.  Moving  from  traditional  Islamic 
products,  now  the  industry  is  offering  consumer  financing  for  residential  purposes  and 
structuring financing vehicles for supporting infrastructure and housing finance projects etc. 
Product  innovation  is  emerging  with  several  different  types  of  hybrid  Sukuks  and  other 
combination  of  structures  which  involve  different  forms  of  Musharikas  with  other  products. 
Notwithstanding these developments, increasing share of equity based credit products, such 
as  Murabaha  and  Ijara,  remain  the  dominant  form  of  Islamic  financing  across  the  Islamic 
financing institution. 
These  trends  are  expected  to  persist  and  the  industry  is  set  to  grow.  Standard  &  Poor 
Services  Rating  Agency  estimates  that  industry  has  potential  to  grow  to  $4  trillion  over 
medium term.2 As highlighted above, the exceptional growth in Islamic Finance, particularly 
since 2000, which has coincided with growth in oil revenues, has raised questions whether 
interest  in  Islamic  Finance  is  one  time  phenomena?  And  what  the  future  prospects  and 
sustainability of the industry are?  
While  motivations  and  driving  factors  for  this  industry  vary  across  the  world,  this  round  of 
wave in Islamic finance industry is there to stay there. What lends one confidence is the large 
investments  by  financial  industry  across  main  hubs  in  GCC/Middle  East/South  East  and 
South  Asia,  within  countries  and  growing  foreign  ownership  and  joint  ventures  across 
borders, in infrastructure development in this industry through:  
(i) 
issuance of holistic banking licenses or opening of special windows or creation of 
hubs/dedicated  Islamic  asset  management  funds,  private  equity  funds  and  hedge 
funds  etc.  accompanied  by  Dow  Islamic  Index  to  which  all  such  transactions 
subscribe too are large;  
development of Shariah knowledge and understanding and engagement of Shariah 
advisors  and  scholars which  together  are  providing  required  consensus,  guidance 
and legitimacy to Islamic industry, products and structures; and 
development of Islamic standard setters such as the Islamic Financial Supervisory 
Board  and  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organization  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions 
(AAOIFI) and International Islamic Financial Market (IIFM) etc. by the central banks 
as well as a range of Multilateral Development Agencies including the Islamic Bank 
(ii) 
(iii) 
                                                 
1   Malaysia: Leading Islamic Finance – Price Water House Coopers; 
http://www.pwc.com/extweb/indissue.nsf/docid/1d681d874f24fda7ca25720a00158bfd
2   Standard and Poor: Islamic Finance Outlook 2006, 
http://www2.standardandpoors.com/spf/pdf/media/Islamic_Brochure_2006.pdf
2 
 BIS Review 128/2007
Development.  The  combined  efforts  have  helped  develop  and 
implementation  of 
frameworks, and inspection and supervision of financial institutions; 
initiate 
regulatory,  accounting  and  auditing 
Islamic  prudential 
All  these  regional  and  global  efforts  are  serious  long  term  initiatives  which  are  irreversible 
though maintaining and building momentum on these fronts would be critical to address the 
questions of sustainability and challenges facing this industry.  
Sustainability and challenges of Islamic finance 
Prospects  for  sustainability  of  Islamic  finance  appear  promising,  but  there  are  associated 
challenges which need to be concurrently addressed while one exploits and maximizes the 
opportunities created by this discipline.  
First, the sustainability of Islamic finance stems from recognition that Islamic economic and 
financial  architecture  has  a  lot  of  appeal  and  depth  going beyond  Muslim  countries.  While 
initially  conceived  to  be  solely  anchored  on  Riba  free  interest  rate  regime,  there  is  now 
appreciation that advocacy to move to Islamic business and finance structure – whether on 
religious  or  social  grounds  –  is  not  a  “slogan”  or  mere  religious  pronunciation  or 
condemnation  of  Riba  but  is  supported  by  a  complete  and  deep  Islamic  ideology.  When 
studied  carefully,  it  has  its  logic  and  basis  in  a  comprehensive  Islamic  economic  system 
which  deals  with  allocation  of  resources,  production  and  exchange  of  goods  and  services 
and distribution of wealth – all too familiar debates in conventional economic textbooks. 
Second, the confidence in sustainability of Islamic economic system emerges from the better 
understanding that this economic system is a well conceptualized, consistent and integrated 
framework.  More  interestingly,  it  is  accompanied  by  a  rich  and  an  elaborate  set  of  tenets 
which, among others, recognize the right to property supported by elaborate obligations for 
stakeholders, principles and rules of conduct, a contract system and institutional framework 
and  procedures  for  enforcement  of  rules  which  all  together  lay  the  foundation  for  Islamic 
business  and  financial  architecture.  It  is  this  substantive  Islamic  ideological  and  legal 
framework, governed by Shariah injunctions and principles that have translated into defining 
the  public  and  private  economic  and  social  affairs  that  eventually  help  frame  the  business 
and  financial  relations.  The  core  of  these  relationships  is  backed  by  solid  principles  of 
contracts, rights and obligations of parties to the contractual arrangements.  
Third, the sustainability of this system is reinforced by the business and financial relations 
that  are  guided  by  the  logically  defined  emphasis  on  the  preferred  modes  of  transaction 
which advocates profit sharing and as such relies on “ex-post” variability rather “than ex ante” 
fixity  in  returns  and  consequently  has  built  in  risk  sharing  as  a  central  element  of 
transactions. Relevance of contracts is at the core of Islamic transactions which define the 
rules  of  game  for  sale  and  purchase/trade/exchange  of  goods  and  services.  Financing 
contracts are than structured around the nature of transaction which could be either in the 
form  of  trade  financing;  asset  based  financing  or  different  forms  of  partnerships.  Under 
Islamic finance preference is given to trading of physical assets as well as trading of rights.  
Fourth, the confidence in sustainability emerges from the framework of enforcement implicit 
in  Islamic  system.  The  main  driver  of  enforcement  of  contracts  and  rules-compliance  in 
Islamic  system  is  ideology  and  faith  which  is  in  turn  influenced  by  Islam’s  emphasis  on 
establishing  an  equitable,  ethical,  just,  and  fair  socio-economic  system.  It  is  this  feature 
which  shapes  up  Islamic  finance  and  also  distinguishes  it  from  the  conventional  finance. 
Although one can argue that sustainability of interest in Islamic Finance is tied solely to the 
response  of  Muslim  population  to  their  religious  values  and  beliefs,  but  it  has  to  be 
recognized  that  attraction  in  this  discipline  is  now  widely  emerging  as  there  is  better 
understanding  of  Islamic  economics  and  finance  and  mechanisms  are  being  found  to 
juxtapose the knowledge of conventional economics and financial engineering.  
BIS Review 128/2007 
 3
Fifth, flexibility and innovation to structure different types of financial products which augur 
well for Islamic Finance’s sustainability. What distinguishes Islamic finance is its emphasis on 
trading  of  goods  and  services  and  its  advocacy  for  profit  and  risk  sharing  in  businesses 
supported by a variety of partnership arrangements – this is in sharp contrast to loan based 
financing  in  conventional  banks.  By  virtue  of  these  characteristics  Islamic  finance  offers 
prudent financing options being asset backed or equity based; particularly linkage of assets 
with  financing  ensures  that  transaction  is  less  prone  to  debt  crisis  and  funds  are  used  for 
their prescribed purpose minimizing defaults resulting from improper use of borrowed funds. 
Concurrently  it  offers  promising  potential  for  offering  alternate  avenues  for  saving  and 
investment for all segments of population.  
Sixth, market surveys confirm that the potential for retail, housing and project finance3 and 
innovation  emerging  in  these  markets  is  significant  and  augurs  well  for  economic  and 
financial  services  development.  Islamic  banks  have  registered  double  digit  growth  in  retail 
markets.  Penetration  has  occurred  faster  where  personal  banking  solutions  have  been 
structured  well  and  where  information  technology  is  used  to  offer  online,  ATMs  and 
telephone  banking  services.  By  and  large  products  are  structured  on  murabaha  principles 
where  funds  are  allocated  for  particular  projects  or  finance  an  asset  (such  as  home 
ownership and automobiles) in which depositor shares in the project rather than bank profits 
and to structure ijara (leasing) with appropriate asset backing and legal structures.  
Islamic housing finance for acquisition and other purposes has evolved to be a natural and 
promising market to cater for huge home financing demand in Muslim countries. This market 
is  gaining  momentum  following  some  interesting  facilitation/incentives  offered  by  some 
countries: for instance US has facilitated Islamic lease-to-own relationship by allowing bank 
to  take  title  to  property  and  in  the  UK  Bank  of  England  abolished  double  stamp  duty  on 
Islamic mortgages, ijarah and murabaha transactions, and rationalized of legal service fees 
and  risk  weightage  etc.  and  Australia  and  Canada  allowed  adoption  of  declining  balance 
partnership concepts to facilitate structuring Diminishing Musharaka contract etc.  
In some jurisdictions momentum for tapping retail market has been accelerated by partial or 
full conversion of conventional to Islamic banks such as Saudi Arabia – challenges of which 
cannot  be  underestimated  as  it  involves  converting  the  loan  book  to  Shariah  compliant 
modes of product. Stand alone Islamic banks have a challenging task of competing with the 
conventional players who have an edge of longevity and customer loyalty and economies of 
scale.  High  level  of  customer  service,  offering  full  product  range,  introducing  a  level  of 
transparency in transactions, devising unsecured personal loan products (a wave emerging 
with  adoption  of  tawarruq  product),  introducing  Shariah  compliant  credit  cards,  handling 
properly  the  unfunded  businesses  and  improving  efficiencies  are  some  of  responses  to 
challenge of competition.  
Large  scale  business  opportunities  however  lie  in  exploiting  project  finance.  Successful 
application and integration of Islamic instruments with the conventional financing has helped 
in  this  area  while  facilitating  closure  of  large  and  complex  multisource  financing  deals. 
Project  financing,  backed  by  asset  and  equity  and  structured  using  combination  of  Ijara, 
Istisna,, Sukuk and Musharika etc. has offered opportunities for risk diversification, avenues 
for  resource  mobilization  and  revenue  sharing  and  performance  of  services  between 
contractual parties. These deals have illustrated how conventional and Islamic financing can 
blend and coexist under common legal and regulatory arrangements.  
Finally,  more  than  conventional  finance,  Islamic  finance  emphasizes  just  and  equitable 
financial system. Among others, Islamic finance offers a financial inclusive option to Muslim 
                                                 
3  
Islamic  Finance:  The  Way  Ahead  –  Filed  under:  East  Asia/Pacific,  Middle  East,  Economics,  Religion. 
February 10, 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2007
who  have  excluded  themselves  from  financial  services  in  absence  of  riba  free  services.4 
Since a number of Muslim countries suffer from low financial services penetration, bringing in 
the appeal of Shariah compliant financing mechanism could turn out to be a powerful tool for 
enhancing access to development finance and empowering the poor and vulnerable groups.  
It  is  important  to  recognize  that  Islamic  finance  confines  itself  to  largely  socially  and 
development  projects  and  institutions  are  not  permitted  to  invest  in  prohibited  or  socially 
undesirable investments. Emphasis on ethical issues and rigorous self-regulation in terms of 
Shariah  supervision  ensures  fair  play  and  justice  and  offers  superior  consumer  protection 
model.  Furthermore  it  induces  higher  financial  discipline  and  places  stringent  ethical 
standards for all stakeholders that offers a strong and unique model of governance.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, encouraging developments and trends in Islamic Finance lend confidence that 
this industry has taken off. However, there are varying motivation and driving factors for the 
development  of  this  industry  ranging  from  religious  fervor  to  the  opportunities  that  exist  in 
Islamic finance for broadening and deepening the process of financial intermediation which 
augurs  well  for  financial  innovation  and  engineering,  enhancing  the  financial  services 
penetration  in  national  jurisdictions  and  for  cross  border  capital  flows.  While  the  size  of 
Islamic  financial  industry  is  still  quite  small  as  a  proportion  of  the  total  world’s  financial 
assets, the current growth trends and the investments in infrastructure in development of its 
Islamic Finance networks and its regulatory and supervisory systems, lend confidence that 
this industry has promising potential.  
Prospects for this industry appear comforting because of variety of factors – most significant 
being  the  strengths  of  Islamic  ideology  and  economic  system  which  offer  a  complete 
framework  for  the  Islamic  finance  industry.  Islamic  financial  system  lays  down  rules  of 
conduct  and  contractual  arrangements,  and  offers  feasible  financing  structure  which 
emphasize  trade  and  equity  financing  that  together  will  help  the  much  needed  financial 
diversification in Islamic countries.  
Islamic finance also has potential to blend economic and social objectives and address the 
ethical aspects of financing effectively. As such it is generally more acceptable in populations 
with moderate to strong inclinations toward managing their financial relationships in line with 
their beliefs. This can thus help in poverty alleviation through inclusion of a larger proportion 
of  population  into  the  banking  system  giving  them  access  to  credit  and  mobilizing  their 
savings effectively.  
The emerging solutions and application to structure Islamic finance innovatively have helped 
cater for all types of markets and financing requirements ranging from retail to project and 
home  financing  to  equity  funds  and  products  and  insurance.  Industry  effort  to  benchmark 
pricing and apply legal, regulatory service standards at par with conventional products and 
standards has also helped encouraged confidence in the system.  
Going  forward,  the  sustainability  of  Islamic  Finance  would  rest  in  how  the  international 
community builds on the momentum achieved thus far. This would require 
(i) 
Further  deepening  the  efforts  to  enhance  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  of 
Islamic finance consistent with the international practices.  
Continued  strive  to  conform  and  align  the  structures  and  products  in  line  with  the 
Shariah  principles  would  help  Muslim  population’s  motivation  to  turn  to  this 
(ii) 
                                                 
4   See  “Building  an  effective  Islamic  financial  system.”  Dr.  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan,  at the Global Islamic Financial Governor’s: Financial Regulators Forum in Islamic Finance,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 27 March 2007. 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 5
alternative  mechanism  of  financing,  while  attracting  others  to  product  and  risk 
management and mitigation innovation and additional option that this window offers.  
Recognizing  that  Islamic  finance  has  perpetuated  and  changed  the  dynamics  of 
cross  border  private  capital  flow,  this  industry  has  great  potential  to  augment  the 
process of globalization and financial integration, but this requires more cooperation 
and vigilance on the part of home and host regulators. 
Launching aggressive efforts to implement the evolving Islamic financial regulatory 
and supervisory standards and capturing the different types of risks associated with 
Islamic finance, while launching consumer protection frameworks. 
Promoting  more  financial  diversification  by  encouraging  financial  innovation  and 
Islamic capital market development. 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
6 
 BIS Review 128/2007
