Thomas Jordan: International money market disruptions, central bank 
reactions and lessons learnt 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 13 December 2007. 
 As early as the first half of 2007, turbulence could be observed now and then on international 
financial markets. However, each event was isolated and short-lived. In the second half of 
2007, there was a fundamental change in the situation. The sub-prime mortgage crisis in the 
US had a substantial impact on international financial markets, the extent of which had never 
been  anticipated.  I  will  cover  three  areas  in  my  following  remarks.  First,  I  will  discuss  the 
upheaval on the international money markets. Then I will talk about the reaction of central 
banks, in particular that of the Swiss National Bank. Finally, I will outline some of the lessons 
learnt from this crisis to date.  
Serious disruptions on international money markets 
At the beginning of August, the US sub-prime mortgage crisis spread like a shock wave into 
the money markets of the most important currencies. In doing so, it hit the vital nerve of the 
international financial system. Well functioning money markets are essential in ensuring that 
financial market participants can adjust their liquidity positions. Ultimately, they are crucial for 
banks'  solvency  and  long-term  commercial  viability.  With  attention  focused  on  money 
markets,  the  spotlight also  fell upon  central  banks  who  implement  their  monetary  policy  in 
money markets by influencing the level of interest, via the supply of liquidity. Moreover, the 
central  banks  are  the  only  market  participants  who  are  in  a  position  to  create  the  liquidity 
used in the interbank payment systems.  
The kind of upheaval observed in the international money markets over the past few months 
has  never  been  witnessed  in  living  history.  Rumours  and  reports  of  substantial  sub-prime 
positions  at  banks  led  to  a  sudden  loss  of  confidence  in  international  financial  institutions. 
Moreover,  these  banks  are,  to  some  extent,  uncertain  about  their  own  future  liquidity 
situation. Consequently, banks subsequently began hoarding liquidity and became extremely 
cautious  when  granting  credit  to  each  another.  The  market  for  unsecured  interbank  loans 
over longer terms collapsed and at times the market for foreign exchange swaps dried up. 
Since then, banks have been unable to obtain unsecured funds for terms of more than a few 
days or weeks – or have been able to do so only by paying substantial interest premiums.  
There  were  three  factors  that  exacerbated  the  money  market  disruptions.  First,  bank 
securities  holdings  that  had  supposedly  been  first  class  and  liquid  proved  to  be  illiquid, 
thereby failing to serve as a source of supplementary liquidity. Second, other participants in 
the financial markets also faltered in their supply of liquidity to the banks. Their confidence in 
banks suffered because money market investments that had been considered safe suddenly 
turned  out  to  be  risky.  This  led  to  the  third  exacerbating  factor:  Instead  of  helping  the 
situation, off-balance sheet investment vehicles established by the banks made it far worse. 
Suddenly, these investment companies could no longer refinance themselves in the market 
and the banks were therefore forced to inject their own liquidity. 
Initially, the liquidity bottleneck manifested itself in the US dollar money market, above all. On 
the one hand, this was due to the fact that sub-prime losses and refinancing needs mainly 
affected US dollar positions. On the other, it was because liquidity hoarding also occurred 
chiefly  in  US  dollars.  US  dollar  liquidity  was  particularly  tight  for  European  banks.  Thus 
BIS Review 150/2007 
 1
tensions spread rapidly from the dollar money market to the euro money market, but also to 
the Swiss franc money market. The extent of the upheaval on these three money markets 
can be seen in graph 1 which shows the path of risk premiums, using three-month funds as 
an example. Before the crisis, these risk premiums were almost negligible. They now amount 
to between 50 and 100 basis points, depending on the currency. The graph also shows that, 
so  far,  the  crisis  has  moved  forward  in  two  waves.  After  normalising  to  some  extent  in 
October, the situation became increasingly tense from  mid-November  onwards, after more 
bank losses had been reported.  
Stabilisation by central banks 
The turbulence on the money market is challenging central banks. Although the way in which 
they steer their individual money markets differs, ultimately they provide just the amount of 
liquidity that is necessary to maintain the key monetary policy rate at the targeted level.  
The SNB reacted rapidly, and was the very first central bank to provide additional liquidity, 
which it did on 9 August, by means of fine-tuning measures. In the course of the following 
days, we continued to provide the banking system with generous supplies of funds as part of 
our regular auction procedure. In this way, we succeeded in rapidly defusing tensions on the 
call money market. Since then, we have carrying out fine-tuning measures on a consistent 
basis, in order to dampen sharp fluctuations in the call money rate in either direction. This 
has allowed us to stabilise the very short-term Swiss franc money market.  
However, we were unable to prevent risk premiums in interbank business from rising, since 
this  is  largely  independent  of  our  measures.  As  can  be  seen  in  graph  2,  the  three-month 
Swiss franc Libor had risen to 2.90% by mid-September 2007, which was substantially above 
the  level  targeted  by  us.  By  international  standards,  however,  the  increase  in  Libor  was 
minimal.  Our  monetary  policy  decision  of  13  September  was  aimed  at  further  calming  the 
Swiss franc money market, by bringing the three-month Libor back down to around 2.75%. 
With this in mind, we made funds available to banks for a term of three months. We did this 
from the day of the monetary policy assessment onwards. It was the first time we had done 
so since the introduction of the repo as a monetary policy instrument. At the same time, we 
undertook a significant reduction in the repo rate used for our transactions. Our aim was to 
compensate  the  higher  risk  premiums  through  a  lower  repo  rate,  and  to  move  the  three-
month Libor back into the middle of the target range. The desired reaction ensued within a 
few  days  and  the  three-month  Libor  stabilised  at  2.75%.  We  thereby  neutralised  the 
monetary policy impact of the higher risk premium. As announced a short while ago, we will 
also be supplying the market with ample liquidity as we approach the end of the year, and 
will be conducting longer term repo transactions with this in mind.  
At the operational level, steering the three-month Libor proved to be a challenge, due to the 
high and fluctuating level of the risk premium. Simultaneously, the benefits of our operational 
flexibility became very clear. Since we are generally present in the market on a daily basis 
with  short-term  repo  transactions,  we  were  in  a  position  to  adjust  liquidity  measures  to 
individual market conditions. Over the past few months, we have made consistent use of this 
flexibility; first, by providing the banking system with generous amounts of seven-day money, 
gradually lowering the repo rates as we did so, and second, by absorbing liquidity that was 
no longer required as soon as the call money rate declined. In this way, it was possible to 
retain overall liquidity in the bank system at an appropriate level. As you will see in graph 3, 
the  average  level  of  bank  sight  deposits  changed  very  little  throughout  the  year,  if  we 
compare each minimum reserve period with the next.  
Our  other  operational  processes  have  also  stood  up  well  in  the  turmoil  of  the  past  few 
months. Payment transactions carried out between banks in the SIC system ran smoothly at 
all times, although banks have made greater use of SNB intraday loan facilities. In order to 
bridge  liquidity  bottlenecks  at  the  end  of  the  day,  the  National  Bank  provides  a  liquidity-
shortage financing facility to banks. This allows them to obtain liquidity on a temporary basis 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2007
when needed, provided they have a limit with the SNB and provided this limit is continually 
covered with eligible securities. The continual coverage of the limits ensures that the banks 
have  access  to  a  liquidity  cushion,  even  in  critical  situations.  Actual  use  of  the  limits  is 
generally restrained, and this has also been the case in recent months. 
Lessons learnt 
I would like to draw your attention to some of the lessons that we have already learnt from 
the  current  crisis.  I  will  mention  four  points.  First,  the  worldwide  money  market  upheaval 
clearly  shows  how  highly  integrated  international  financial  markets  are  today.  Local  crises 
can spread around the globe in a flash. The money market crisis is unlikely to have been 
overcome  yet.  Confidence  among  financial  market  participants  remains  insufficient.  The 
pressure on participants who are still only able to refinance themselves in the market on a 
very short-term basis remains high. As long as uncertainty with respect to the scope of the 
credit problems exists, the disruptions on the money market are likely to persist.  
Second,  the  central  banks  have  played  a  fundamental  role  in  calming  and  stabilising  the 
money markets through close consultation and targeted operations. The SNB reacted rapidly 
to  the  tensions  in  the  Swiss  franc  money  market.  The  flexibility  of  our  monetary  policy 
instruments demonstrated its value in this difficult setting. Above all, short-term interest rates 
calmed  as  a  result  of  the  measures  taken.  The  difficulties  in  bank  refinancing  over  longer 
terms  and  the  rise  in  risk  premiums  in  the  money  market  came  about  through  the  loss  of 
confidence.  Central  banks  can  not  compensate  this  lack  of  confidence  simply  by  injecting 
additional liquidity. On the contrary, the financial market participants themselves must take 
the fundamental steps needed to restore this confidence. 
Third,  the  crisis  in  the  money  market  once  again  clearly  demonstrates  that  liquidity 
management is a core task of each and every bank, falling within the direct accountability of 
bank executive management. Liquidity provisioning must begin in good times. It is critical that 
sufficient liquid assets be held. Only first-class securities are suitable for this purpose. These 
can be sold in the markets or mobilised via repo transactions, even in difficult conditions. In 
an  acute  crisis  situation,  the  availability  of  sufficient  liquidity,  together  with  a  strong  equity 
position, is absolutely crucial. 
Fourth  and  finally,  I  would  like  to  mention  that,  in  the  Swiss  franc  money  market,  repo 
business  via  the  Swiss  Value  Chain  has  proved  to  be  a  crisis-resistant  source  of  liquidity, 
thanks  to  the  consistent  minimisation  of  risks.  The  repo  market  allows  participants  to 
undertake  rapid  refinancing  in  the  interbank  market,  independent  of  credit  limits,  thereby 
making a major contribution to the stability of the financial system. That is why it is important 
for the SNB that all Swiss and foreign banks operating in the Swiss franc money market join 
the Swiss repo system.  
BIS Review 150/2007 
 3
  4 
 BIS Review 150/2007
 5
BIS Review 150/2007 
 