Zamani Abdul Ghani: Changes and challenges concerning the insurance 
industry in Malaysia 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, at the 23rd Pacific Insurance Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 29 October 2007. 
 Let me start by joining my colleagues from the Malaysian insurance industry in extending a 
very warm "Selamat Datang ke Malaysia" to all the guest speakers and conference delegates 
from abroad. It is my earnest hope that you will not only benefit from the deliberations during 
the conference, but also find time in between your short stay here to discover Malaysia and 
experience our rich diversity in colours and culture. 
I am indeed honoured to be with you this morning to officiate the opening ceremony of the 
23rd Pacific Insurance Conference – the first to be held in Kuala Lumpur in the conference's 
44-year  history.  I  must  congratulate  LIAM  for  its  efforts  in  organizing  this  prestigious 
conference involving insurance leaders from the Asia Pacific Region. The conference theme 
"New  Solutions  for  Traditional  Challenges:  Winning  Ideas  from  Industry  Leaders"  is  most 
appropriate  as  the  changing  financial  landscape  poses  significant  challenges  to  the 
insurance  industry  in  the  Asia  Pacific  Region.  It  is  indeed  timely  therefore  that  the  life 
insurance  fraternity  has  come  together  to  share  critical  insights  and  perspectives  of  key 
challenges  ahead  and  map  out  new  strategies  to  capitalize  on  the  opportunities  while 
avoiding the pitfalls. With a gathering of more than 300 industry leaders from 25 countries, I 
am confident that the deliberations will generate new solutions/strategies in an industry that 
is  undergoing  rapid  transformation,  underpinned  by  globalization,  broad-based  financial 
deregulation and increasing opportunities as well as uncertainties amidst an environment of 
heightened volatility.  
Rapid developments in technology and financial liberalization have played a catalytic role in 
transforming  the  financial  services  industry  worldwide.  Consequently,  traditional  business 
boundaries have become increasingly blurred, as demand for financial products and services 
become more diverse and sophisticated, transcending the traditional offering of stand-alone 
banking,  insurance  or  investment  products.  As  changes  in  the  global  financial  industry 
continue  to  occur  and  indeed  accelerate,  insurance  companies  in  the  region  will  face 
mounting  pressures  to  adapt  effectively  into  the  evolving  environment  by  embracing 
innovation and becoming strategically more focused. 
A key ingredient in supporting such transformation is to nurture strategic leaders who have 
the  foresight  to  anticipate,  influence  and  reshape  the  strategies  in  tune  with  these 
developments.  Charting  the  journey  forward,  insurance  leaders  need  to  consider  the 
following salient trends: 
• 
Firstly,  the  global  trend  seen  in  several  industries,  including  insurance,  to  reduce 
costs  and  increase  efficiency  and  productivity  in  an  increasingly  competitive 
environment. The traditional paradigm of pricing goods and services purely on cost-
plus basis should therefore be re-evaluated. Indeed the focus needs to be shifted 
towards providing products and services that provide superior value proposition to 
consumers,  made  possible  through  re-engineering  of  business  processes  and 
operating models that promote greater productivity and competitiveness. 
Secondly,  the  dynamics  of  the  market  place  have  already  resulted  in  alternative 
marketing  approaches  to  the  traditional  agency  system,  including  more  cost 
effective  distribution  channels  like  bancassurance.  This  concept  has  gained 
acceptance worldwide for the provision of a wide range of life and pension products 
via the distribution networks of banks.  
 BIS Review 123/2007 
 1
  in 
resulting 
the  emergence  of 
Thirdly, globalization of the world economy and financial markets, as well as trends 
towards  greater  financial  innovation  and  promoting  shareholder  value,  have 
contributed  to  a  wave  of  mergers  and  acquisitions  between  insurers,  banks  and 
asset  management  companies 
financial 
conglomerates.  These  integrated  entities  will  inevitably  raise  the  bar  in  the  entire 
business  value  chain,  including  product  design  and  pricing,  streamlining  of 
distribution  channels  and  integrating  valuable  databases  of  customer  information, 
thus accentuating further competitive pressures within the life insurance markets in 
the region. 
Finally, an area that will present significant opportunities as well as challenges to 
the insurance industry will be the evolving structure of social security systems and 
safety  nets  that  will  have  to  keep  pace  with  demographic  changes  as  well  as  the 
rising  cost  of  medical  care.  Many  nations  are  already  finding  it  difficult  to  provide 
adequately  for  the  needs  of  the  aging  population  through  state  provided  social 
security. 
the 
into 
Indeed, 
transformation  of  Asian  countries 
It has been reported that globally, life insurance premiums amounted to USD2,200 billion in 
2006,  and  Asia  as  a  region  is  the  fastest  growing  life  insurance  market,  in  line  with  rapid 
economic development  and growth. Financial services and economic liberalization in Asia, 
particularly  in  China,  India  and  South-East  Asia  have  significantly  widened  the  market 
outreach  for  life  insurance  whilst  unlocking  considerable  market  potential  in  new  growth 
areas. 
industrial  and  services 
powerhouses,  with  increasing  share  of  world  output,  will  present  abundant  insurance 
opportunities  within  the  region  as  countries  make  huge  investments  in  upgrading  their 
physical, financial and human capital infrastructure.  
On the domestic front, the Malaysian economy continued to be on a steady growth path with 
real GDP expanding by 5.7% in the second quarter of 2007 and an anticipated 6% for the 
entire year. In tandem with this growth, the insurance industry, including the takaful sector, 
recorded a combined premium growth of nearly 10% for both the life and general sectors to 
reach RM13 billion in the first half of 2007. The assets of the life and general insurance funds 
correspondingly  registered  a  double-digit  growth  of  14%  to  RM116  billion  as  at  end  June, 
2007, from 11% in the corresponding period in 2006. This growth momentum is expected to 
continue in 2008 in line with the sustained growth of the Malaysian economy. 
One of the key mandates of Bank Negara Malaysia is to develop the insurance industry into 
a  strong,  dynamic  and  innovative  component  of  the  financial  system.  In  this  respect, 
industrialization and real sector growth have to be complemented by  a strong and thriving 
services sector, especially in the area of banking and insurance. As a mobiliser of long term 
private  savings,  life  insurance  has  a  critical  role  in  providing  long  term  funding  for  the 
massive  investment  required  to  achieve  the  growth  and  income  objectives  of  Vision  2020, 
that is, in becoming a fully developed economy.  
In  line  with  the  rapid  changes  taking  place  in  the  business  landscape  of  the  insurance 
industry, the authorities have moved away from prescriptive regulation to one that allows for 
a  more  flexible  operating  environment.  Specifically,  insurers  are  now  operating  in  an 
environment  where  regulations  have  become  more  principle-based.  The  principle-based 
regime places greater expectation and demands on the leadership and senior management 
of insurers in driving fundamental changes required within the organization in response to the 
changing regulatory landscape. In particular, senior management of insurers must raise the 
bar  for  the  organization  to  achieve  best-in-class  practices  that  are  aligned  with  the 
organization's  strategic  orientations,  rather  than  merely  complying  with  a  minimum  set  of 
prescribed  requirements.  A  pre-requisite  for  this  transformation  is  that  senior  management 
acquires a thorough understanding of the relationship and inter-linkages between the various 
components  of  the  insurance  business,  and  to  manage  these  dynamics  in  a  manner  that 
optimizes performance.  
2 
 BIS Review 123/2007
The regulatory shift also places greater prominence on creating a strong risk management 
culture  that  is  fundamental  to  sound  insurance  operations.  In  Malaysia,  the  transition  to  a 
Risk Based Capital Framework and the implementation of the risk-based supervisory regime 
constitute important capacity building elements of this change. The transition taking place is 
in  tandem  with  emerging  trends  taking  place at  the  international  front,  as  well  as  the  core 
supervisory principles of the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), which 
collectively, provide a road map on the future direction of insurance regulation. 
Notwithstanding  the  move  to  a  more  principle-based  regime,  it  is  important  that  there 
remains a sufficient degree of regulatory oversight to maintain financial stability and public 
confidence.  It  is  equally  important  for  the  regulations  to  focus  on  facilitating  market-led 
adjustments that will allow the industry to evolve in response to market developments. This 
includes putting in place mechanisms that harness market forces and discipline, to reinforce 
prudential regulation whilst also promoting a more efficient and responsive financial system. 
As we prepare ourselves for the challenges arising from greater integration and increased 
competition, there will be regular review and re-assessment of the regulatory framework as 
we  benchmark  our  regulations  against  leading  business  practices  and  international 
standards  set  by  recognized  bodies  such  as  the  IAIS  and  the  International  Accounting 
Standards Board.  
Rapid  developments  in  technology  and  information  systems  coupled  with  the  forces  of 
globalization  have  made  the  world  increasingly  borderless.  While  such  developments  are 
welcome  as  they  provide  a  platform  to  hasten  the  pace  and  manner  through  which 
businesses  and  financial  transactions  can  be  efficiently  concluded,  they  can  also  facilitate 
money  launderers  and  terrorist  financiers  to  conduct  a  range  of  illegal  activities,  thus 
destabilizing  a  country's  financial  system  and  damaging  its  image  and  reputation.  As 
structured programs on Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Financing of Terrorism activities 
are  relatively  new  especially  among  many  developing  member  countries,  it  remains  a 
challenge for the financial industry and regulators alike to formulate adequate measures and 
mechanisms to counter these perpetrators. In this regard, compliance with the standards set 
by the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering help deter the Asia Pacific region 
from being targeted as a regional centre for money laundering and terrorism financing. In this 
regard, I am especially pleased to share with you that Malaysia has been ranked among the 
top  10  countries  in  terms  of  AML/CFT  compliance  in  the  recent  Mutual  Evaluation  Report 
2007 assessment exercise.  
Let me now turn to a subject close to us here in Malaysia, that is, Islamic insurance or better 
known as takaful. In recent years, takaful has grown significantly as the Islamic alternative to 
conventional  insurance  and  has  evolved  from  being  a  domestic  operations  to  becoming  a 
thriving global business. The global takaful market is expected to grow between 15 and 20 
per  cent  per  annum.  Nevertheless,  the  market  penetration  level  remains  low,  notably  less 
than  5%  in  many  Muslim  countries  and  6.8%  here  in  Malaysia,  thus  providing  significant 
market potential that remains untapped.  
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  continue  to  foster  the  continued  growth  of  takaful  business  by 
providing a conducive business and regulatory environment. However, there is a clear need 
for  the  takaful  industry  to  deliver  innovative  financial  products  and  services,  that  can 
effectively  compete  with  those  offered  by  conventional  insurers.  While  acknowledging  the 
necessity  of  having  different  rules  in  certain  areas  to  reflect  the  underlying  fundamental 
differences between the two systems, a key consideration of the Bank is to maintain a level 
playing  field.  Given  the  functioning  of  Islamic  finance  in  parallel  with  the  conventional 
financial system, neutrality in treatment between takaful and conventional insurance products 
is  considered  important  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  both  systems  in  the  economy.  The 
dual  system  would  also  serve  to  provide  a  comprehensive  array  of  financial  products  and 
services as well as intermediaries for the overall benefit of consumers. 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 3
Allow me to also share with you Malaysia's latest initiatives to strengthen its position as an 
international Islamic financial centre. In line with our efforts to enhance our inter-linkages with 
the global Islamic financial markets, the Malaysian Government has launched the Malaysia 
International Islamic Financial Centre or MIFC as part of the initiatives to position Malaysia to 
become  a  leading  international  Islamic  financial  centre.  It  is  our  objective  to  build  greater 
intermediation  linkages  between  East  Asia,  South  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  which  will,  in 
turn, further expand inter-regional trade and cross border investment flows. As part of these 
initiatives, foreign financial institutions are allowed to establish International Islamic Banks, 
International  Takaful  Operators,  as  well  as  International  Currency  Business  Units  to 
undertake international currency business in Islamic finance with non-residents in Malaysia 
or abroad through a locally incorporated entity or a branch. 
The Malaysian Government has also focused its efforts towards strengthening its position as 
an  international  takaful  and  retakaful  centre,  with  particular  emphasis  on  widening  and 
deepening the retakaful sector so as to effectively complement the growth and expansion of 
the takaful industry. In this regard, I wish to invite strong and qualified applicants to make 
Malaysia as their centre for retakaful activities. Foreign applicants with strong credentials are 
certainly welcome to conduct retakaful business in Malaysia.  
The  changing  global  investment  climate  continues  to  pose  challenges  for  life  insurers  in 
respect  of  their  life  fund  investment.  The  recent  sub-prime  crisis  in  the  US  has  induced 
greater fluctuations of the yield curve as well as higher volatility in the equity markets. Given 
the  increased  proliferation  of  innovative  products  with  investment  guarantees,  insurers' 
remain  very  vulnerable  to  the  movements  of  the  capital  markets.  As  for  traditional  non-
investment  linked  business,  asset-liability  management  and  duration  mismatch  continue  to 
pose a challenge, and insurers must seek new long term investment avenues to minimize the 
risk of mismatches.  
The  occurrence  of  global  warming  and  climate  change  is  of  particular  significance  to  the 
insurance industry which, has had to bear the brunt of severe losses arising from weather-
related catastrophes. Between the 1960s and 1990s the number of natural catastrophes has 
doubled  while  insured  losses  increased  nearly  seven-fold,  most  of  them  weather-related. 
While  the  property  and  casualty  insurers  have  been  the  hardest  hit,  life  insurers  are  not 
necessarily  spared  as  climate  change  has  also  taken  its  toll  on  human  lives  via  natural 
disasters,  epidemics  and  the  like.  While  the  global  insurance  industry  has  displayed 
remarkable  resilience  to  withstand  such  record  losses,  the  future  remains  fraught  with 
uncertainties  and  the  challenge  is  to  ensure  that  risk  management  strategies  remain 
adequate to counter the impact of unpredictable changes in global climate patterns. 
Allow me now to briefly share with you, some of the measures undertaken by Malaysia in 
responding to the evolving changes and challenges seen in the insurance marketplace.  
Firstly, in the area of structural reform, industry consolidation remains an area of priority for 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  in  its  efforts  to  foster  a  more  competitive  and  resilient  industry  to 
harness  economies  of  scale,  expand  distribution  capacity,  enhance  business  volume  and 
exploit opportunities for cost rationalization.  
Secondly,  the  shift  towards  principle-based  regulations  and  the  implementation  of  a  risk-
based capital and supervisory framework in Malaysia provides a greater degree of flexibility 
for insurers to exploit business opportunities arising from the changing financial environment, 
whilst not losing sight of the inherent risks. Moving forward, Bank Negara Malaysia will adopt 
an  increasingly  differentiated  regulatory  approach  where  insurers  that  exhibit  strong 
corporate  governance  and  risk  management  practices  will  be  given  greater  regulatory 
flexibility.  
Thirdly, the advent of bancassurance and bancatakaful has seen more players packaging life 
insurance and family takaful with innovative investment options that incorporate banking and 
investment product features. Bancassurance and bancatakaful provide immense potential for 
further  market  penetration  given  the  relatively  higher  level  of  public  confidence  in  financial 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2007
dealings  with  banks  and  the  significant  spin-offs  that  can  be  reaped  through  data  mining 
arrangements  with  banks.  Although  bancassurance  has  become  firmly  entrenched  in 
Malaysia  (accounting  for  45%  of  new  business  premiums  in  2007),  it  also  continues  to 
develop rapidly in terms of market reach and operational sophistication.  
Fourthly, with the rapid technological advancements and increasing consumer demands for 
more  efficient  delivery  of  products  and  services,  the  Malaysian  insurance  industry  has 
continued  to  transition  towards  information  technology-driven  solutions,  as  well  as, 
leveraging on more efficient payment and settlement systems such as e-payments. This has 
significantly  enhanced  the  delivery  of  personalized  and  customized  insurance  solutions, 
made  possible  through  the  utilization  of  new  delivery  channels,  including  those  that  are 
internet-based. In the area of general insurance for instance, the successful implementation 
of e-cover notes for motor insurance policies led to vast improvements in service efficiency, 
better  enforcement  of  cash-before-cover  regulations  as  well  as  reduction  in  premium 
collection fraud. 
In the area of capacity building, human capital development is key to the future development 
and  growth  of  the  financial  sector.  As  competition  intensifies,  the  role  of  human  capital  in 
defining  the  areas  of  comparative  advantage  will  become  more  prominent.  Recognizing 
these  trends,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  launched  the  International  Center  for  Leadership  in 
Finance  (ICLIF)  in  2003  to  accelerate  the  development  of  top  management  talent  for  the 
corporate and financial sector within the Asian region. At the management trainee level, the 
Bank has initiated the Financial Sector Talent Enrichment Programme or in short FSTEP, a 
joint collaborative effort undertaken with the industry and training institutes aimed at boosting 
the supply of well-trained and competent personnel for the financial services industry. This is 
complemented by the International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF) which 
was  established  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  the  increased  demands  of  Islamic  finance 
professionals as well as conducting research and consultancy in Islamic finance. I would very 
much  like  to  encourage  you  to  take  the  opportunity  of  participating  in  some  of  these 
programs. 
Finally,  no  less  important  an  area  for  consideration  in  re-engineering  financial  sector 
development,  is  consumer  education  and  protection.  Today,  we  experience  growing 
consumerism  as  well  as  changing consumer  preferences and  expectations  in tandem  with 
increased  education  levels  and  growing  personal  wealth.  These  and  other  developments 
collectively reinforce the need for greater financial literacy to ensure the efficient functioning 
of the financial system.  
An important aspect of Bank Negara Malaysia's regulatory strategy and approach therefore, 
has been to ensure that the continued growth of the financial sector is underpinned by fair 
market practices and conduct. In this regard, initiatives undertaken by Bank Negara Malaysia 
in 
towards  enhancing  product 
transparency and disclosure, improving sales practices, raising the bar of professionalism for 
insurers and intermediaries, as well as strengthening the consumer protection framework.  
Apart from promoting sound and fair market practices, considerable efforts have also been 
made  to  develop  the  necessary  infrastructure  to  facilitate  consumers  in  obtaining  redress, 
information  and  advice  on  matters  relating  to  financial  services.  These  include  the 
implementation  of  the  Consumer  Education  Programme  and  the  establishment  of  a 
dedicated customer service centre (Bank Negara Malaysia LINK) and contact centre (BNM 
TELELINK) to improve access to information on financial products and services by members 
of the public.  
As we advance forward, changes in the global economy and international financial landscape 
will  continue  to  be  dynamic  and  the  level  of  complexity  and  sophistication  in  the  financial 
markets  will  further  intensify.  Achieving  success  in  an  environment  fraught  with  greater 
uncertainty and more intense competition, will ultimately hinge on the ability of the industry 
players to continuously innovate and deliver enhanced value propositions to customers.  
insurance  sector  have  been  primarily  directed 
the 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 5
On that note, ladies and gentlemen, I hope that the 23rd PIC will not only be a platform for 
industry leaders to share and explore ideas for the benefit of the life insurance industry, but 
more  importantly,  to  be  followed  up  with  affirmative  actions  on  the  part  of  the  delegates 
involved. Sir Winston Churchill once said, "There are plenty of good ideas if only they can be 
backed with the power of action". With that, I wish you a fruitful Conference.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 123/2007
