Anselmo L S Teng: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Macao 
Opening speech by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at 
the annual meeting of the Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors, Macao, 30 October 2007. 
 Mr. Powell, Chairman of OGBS, 
Dear Delegates, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Welcome to Macao! 
On behalf of the Special Administrative Region Government, I wish to express our gratitude 
to members of the OGBS for choosing Macao to be the venue to hold its annual meeting. 
Apart  from  all  the  hard  work  that  lies  ahead,  please  spare  some  time  to  appreciate  the 
excitement and nostalgia provided by this fascinating city. 
Macao is no doubt in the lime light. After the lacklustre years before and in the wake of the 
new  millennium,  economy  picked  up  in  2004  in  which  GDP  jumped  by  28.4%  which  was 
mainly attributed to the opening of our gaming right and the “individual traveller” scheme of 
the Mainland. 2005 saw a consolidation of 6.9% growth. 2006 achieved flying colours again 
with a growth of 16.6%. In the first half of 2007, we achieved a GDP growth of 28.9%. The 
burgeoning  tourism  services  industry,  which  is  undergoing  diversification,  has  been  the 
locomotive of our thriving economy in the past years.  
The booming economy enables the banking sector to continue to burgeon. Banks in Macao 
made a total profit of MOP3.9 billion in 2006. A 21.7% growth in the first 6 months of 2007 
was  witnessed.  Both  assets  and  deposits  also  grew  by  double  digit  while  non-performing 
loan ratio stands at 0.9%. Against such a backdrop, the current capital adequacy ratio of the 
whole  sector  is  maintained  at  a  high  level  of  around  16%,  doubled  the  required  8% 
benchmark set by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision. 
The financial sector of Macao contributes about 10% to GDP. The sector is dominated by 
banks and insurance companies. At the moment, there are 27 banks operating in Macao of 
which  3  are  operating  under  offshore  regime.  Apart  from  local  participants,  you  will  find 
capitals  provided  by  investors  from  China,  Hong  Kong,  Portugal,  the  US,  the  UK,  France, 
Singapore  and  Chinese  Taiwan.  In  fact,  overseas  capitals  account  for  the  majority  in  our 
banking sector. Doubtless, from a global perspective, the financial sector of Macao is highly 
internationalized. 
The  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao  (AMCM)  is  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  these 
institutions. Banks no doubt account for the lion share of our financial sector. Banks in Macao 
are  regulated  under  the  provisions  of  the  “Financial  System  Act”  which  was  formulated  in 
accordance with the standards set by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Based 
on the Financial System Act, AMCM issues rules and guidelines to be complied by banks to 
ensure that they are operating in a prudent manner and in line with internationally accepted 
standards  and  practices.  These  rules  and  guidelines  are  being  constantly  revised  to  cope 
with the ever evolving international standards for prudential regulation and supervision. 
To  maintain  the  stability  and  integrity  of  our  financial  system,  AMCM  conducts  onsite 
inspections, offsite surveillance and bilateral and multilateral exchanges of information about 
banks to monitor their compliance with prudential rules and regulations, the adequacy of risk 
management processes, their performance and financial position. AMCM maintains regular 
contact  with  their  management  to  understand  their  corporate  strategies  and  to  detect  and 
rectify  problems  in  an  effective  and  timely  manner.  To  be  more  efficient,  specific  and 
effective,  AMCM  adopts  a  risk-based  approach  in  conducting  inspection  which  enables  its 
examiners  to  grasp  an  in-depth  and  thorough  understanding  of  the  principal  business 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 1
activities  of  the  bank  under  examination  and  assess  the  adequacy  of  the  relevant  risk 
management  processes  and 
internal  control  procedures.  When  warranted,  external 
professional firms would also be commissioned to conduct theme examinations. 
In the face of globalization of the financial sector, AMCM, as all of you around the table, has 
seen the need to exercise consolidated supervision and promote the integrity of our financial 
market through a close working relationship with other overseas central banks or supervisory 
authorities for mutual assistance and exchange of supervisory information which are made 
possible under the framework of a memorandum of understanding.  
The  MSAR  Government  realizes  that  to  maintain  sustainable  growth  of  Macao,  we  should 
enhance our credibility by fending off activities arising from money laundering and terrorism 
financing.  The  earliest  legislation  relating  to  this  issue  can  be  traced  back  to  1991.  More 
legislations  were  then  promulgated  which  culminated  in  the  enactment  of  comprehensive 
AML/CFT  legislations  in  2006  which  cover  major  economic  activities  in  Macao.  AMCM  is 
responsible  for  AML/CFT  in  the  financial  sector.  The  Financial  System  Act  carries  such 
provisions as well. Specific guidelines to this effect were first issued in 1996 and revised in 
2002.  In  2006,  the  revised  and  amended  guidelines  based  on  the  most  up-to-date  local 
legislations  and  international  standards  were  issued.  In  the  process,  AMCM  solicited 
technical  assistance  from  international  organizations  such  as  IMF  and  APG.  In  2001  and 
2006,  the  MSAR  Government  invited  OGBS  and  APG  to  conduct  joint  appraisal  on  our 
AML/CFT  efforts.  Macao  secured  positive  comments  in  these  appraisals.  Simultaneously, 
suggestions  for  improvement  were  raised.  These  suggestions,  particularly  those  related  to 
financial field, have been adopted in a practicable manner. A sector wide blanket check on 
the AML/CFT efforts of financial institutions was completed in 2006. All findings have been 
shared  with  financial  institutions  under  inspection  by  means  of  reports,  circulars  and  a 
seminar held in April 2007. The effort is still on going. 
All  these  arduous  and  assiduous  regulatory  efforts  are  conducive  to  maintaining  a  level 
platform to ensure fair play in the financial sector. 
Apart from being a regulator, AMCM is also vested with the responsibility of facilitating and 
nurturing the development of our financial industry. In this regard, AMCM has been a driving 
force  behind  closer  business  relationship  between  banks  of  Macao  and  the  Mainland  to 
exploit  new  business  opportunity  arising  from  the  continuing  and  accelerating  economic 
integration between Mainland and Macao. In this connection, AMCM has organized various 
meetings  and  visits  to  reinforce  efforts  from  both  sides  with  a  view  to  promoting  business 
opportunities  for  the  financial  industry.  To  make  use  of  the  special  relationship  between 
Macao and the Portuguese speaking countries, AMCM organized in July this year delegation 
of our financial sector to visit these areas to explore fresh business opportunities.  
Regulatory  work  is  an  ever  deepening  and  evolving  process  which  entails  our  relentless 
efforts. It is also a skill which needs honing through interaction. To achieve our mutual goal, 
members need to develop communication and co-operation. This is one of what the OGBS 
annual meeting is for. In the 2007 meeting, a wide range of topics will be covered. Apart from 
techniques  to  be  deployed  in  our  supervisory  work,  such  as  AML/CFT,  principles  based 
approach  in  supervision  and  governance,  we  shall  discuss  our  future  role  in  a  number  of 
areas with a view to perfecting our mission in upholding global financial integrity. In addition, 
we  shall  review  the  action  plans  of  individual  members,  including  that  of  Macao,  and 
accession  of  new  members.  Last,  but  not  least,  related  development  under  relevant 
international organizations, will be reviewed. I can envisage that this meeting in Macao will, 
under the chairmanship of Mr. Colin Powell and the participation from all delegates, as usual, 
be an informative, constructive and fruitful one. 
Again,  allow  me  to  say  once  more  welcome  and  thank  you.  Please  enjoy  yourselves  in 
Macao after all the hard work. 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2007
