Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Banking consolidation, innovation and access to 
credit 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at CESIFIN, Florence, 11 December 2007. 
 1.  
Introduction1
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank you for inviting me to take part in this conference, which is covering a 
very important topic, not only at European but also at local level.  
As  you  know,  the  financial  industry  is  going  through  an  unprecedented  period  of 
consolidation.  Fundamental  changes  in  regulation  and  technology  have  spurred  a  record 
number of bank mergers and acquisitions (M&As) in most countries. Very recently, we have 
even witnessed a significant series of cross-border M&As in the banking sector, especially in 
Europe.  
This  consolidation  has  not  only  brought  about  major  changes  in  the  banking  industry,  but 
also had important consequences for the economy as a whole. In my speech today, I would 
like to talk about the implications of these developments for the financing conditions of small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).  
After briefly describing the consolidation process, I will consider its impact on: i) the banking 
system as a whole, ii) shareholder value, iii) credit to SMEs, and iv) small banks. Moreover, I 
will offer some thoughts on the possible implications of the current credit turmoil. 
Banking consolidation 
2.  
Let me start with an overview of the banking consolidation that we are currently experiencing. 
In the last ten years, the number of banks in Europe (to be precise, in the 15 EU countries 
prior to 2004) has decreased by almost 30%, while at the same time the total assets held by 
the  banking  system  has  increased  by  more  than  100%.2  This  process  implies  that  the 
average bank size in terms of total assets has risen significantly, from €1.8 billion to more 
than €5 billion, an increase of approximately 200%.  
In  Italy,  banking  consolidation  has  not  been  as  strong  as  in  the  other  14  countries:  the 
number of banks has fallen by only 10%, banks’ total assets have increased by 75% and the 
average bank size has increased by 100%.  
Bank  mergers  and  acquisitions  are  the  main  path  to  bank  consolidation.  This  activity  has 
been buoyant in Europe, judging from the number of deals and the volume, and also in terms 
of cross-border transactions.3 Over 800 M&As have taken place in the past ten years, and 
their total value is put at €500 billion. Italy alone has seen 200 such deals, with a total value 
of  €100  billion.  All  in  all,  the  push  towards  consolidation  in  the  banking  sector  has  been 
substantial.  
                                                 
1   The  views  expressed  reflect  only  those  of  the  author.  I  thank  J.-L.  Peydró-Alcalde  for  his  input  into  the 
preparation of these remarks. 
2   ECB calculations. 
3   ECB calculations. 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 1
There has also been a large number of cross-border M&As in recent years: over 100 in just 
the past two years in Europe. In the last three years, the average value per transaction has 
increased significantly, even without considering exceptional cases such as the acquisition of 
ABN  Ambro  by  RBS,  Santander  and  Fortis.  In  Italy,  by  contrast,  cross-border  deals  have 
been few and of limited average value, both in comparison with other European countries as 
well as with domestic M&As.  
The  main  reasons  for  this  unprecedented  wave  of  consolidation  in  the  financial  sector  are 
common  to  most  countries.  In  response  to  fundamental  changes  in  regulation  and 
technology, financial institutions have attempted to improve their efficiency and attract new 
customers by expanding internationally and adding to their range of products. The desire to 
preserve falling margins by increasing market share and attracting new customers is often 
fulfilled by way of M&As, since they allow financial institutions to grow rapidly and to improve 
their knowledge of new products and markets.4  
By achieving economies of scale and scope, mergers can make banks more efficient5, not 
least  by  eliminating  poor  management,  and  might  also  help  financial  institutions  to  better 
diversify their portfolios.  
Effects on the banking system 
3.  
There  are  several  ways  in  which  bank  M&As  can  improve  efficiency.6  First,  bigger  banks 
may gain access to cost-saving technologies or spread their fixed costs over a larger base, 
thus reducing average costs. Efficiency gains may also result from economies of scope: the 
deal may allow the merging parties to enter new markets and cross-sell their products to a 
wider customer base. Finally, consolidation may improve managerial efficiency. However, the 
extent of exploitable scale and scope economies might be smaller than commonly thought, 
and  efficiency  gains  resulting  from  better  management  might  be  elusive  in  large,  complex 
institutions. 
The  direct  costs  arising  from  M&As  can  take  several  forms:  consolidating  different 
organisations is not an easy task and may lead to inefficiencies.  
There  are  also  external  costs.  These  can  take  several  forms.  First,  for  some  financial 
products  (in  particular,  deposits  and  small  business  lending)  markets  are  mainly  local. 
Therefore,  M&As  involving  banks  with  large  market  shares  might  cause  adverse  price 
changes,  harming  consumers.  Second,  M&As  might  distract  some  participants  from  small 
business  lending,  which  relies  on  soft  information  at  local  level,  to  less  custom-made 
products that are more easily manageable within large organisations, as I will elaborate on a 
little later. Third, depending on the type of business and geography, bank M&As could harm 
bank customers by reducing competition.  
Therefore,  since  bank  M&As  affect  not  only  banks  themselves  but  also  their  customers, 
quantifying the efficiency gains becomes difficult. An important first step towards analysing 
some potential externalities to the bank customers is to assess the value created for bank 
shareholders and depositors. This is what I am going to do now. Later on, I will analyse the 
impact of bank M&As on the financing of small firms and on entrepreneurship. 
                                                 
4   Focarelli, Panetta, and Salleo (2002). 
5   Jensen and Ruback (1983). 
6   See Amel, Barnes, Panetta and Salleo (2004). 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2007
Creating value for shareholders 
4.  
The main message from the academic literature is that banking consolidation is beneficial up 
to a relatively small size, but there is little evidence that mergers yield economies of scope or 
gains in managerial efficiency.7 However, value creation from bank mergers and acquisitions 
has improved over time, possibly because such activities are complex and because lessons 
have been learnt.8  
Moreover, most of the estimated value gains from bank mergers stem from cutting costs by 
eliminating overlaps and consolidating backroom operations.9 In addition, mergers that focus 
both on activity and geography enhance shareholder value.10  
With respect to risk, there is evidence that M&As reduce bank risk. The evidence indicates 
that the primary determinants in bank risk reduction comes from diversification gains, gains 
associated with achieving too-big-to-fail status, and, to a lesser degree, synergy gains.11  
5.  
Implications of mergers and acquisitions for small and medium-sized 
enterprises  
Now  let  me  turn  to  some  of  the  social  benefits  and  costs  stemming  from  banking 
consolidation, in particular with respect to the financing of small firms and entrepreneurship. 
Banking consolidation through bank M&As implies a reduction in the number of banks and an 
increase in bank size. This can have repercussions on the access to credit for small and new 
firms since bank M&As change bank efficiency and competition, but it also changes the way 
banks  evaluate  corporate  borrowers:  it  decreases  soft  vs.  hard  information  for  lending 
decisions,  i.e.  bank  M&As  might  distract  some  participants  from  small  business  lending, 
which relies on soft information at local level. 
The  academic  results  based  on  US  data  suggest  that  small  business  lending  increases 
following a merger of small banks, but decreases when large banks combine. Therefore, in 
the short run it looks as if small businesses are hurt by large bank mergers. This negative 
effect,  however,  can  partly  be  offset  by  lending  from  other  banks  in  the  same  market, 
especially  after  some  years.  That  is,  provided  the  banking  system  is  competitive,  so  that 
when  the  new  and  bigger  post-merger  bank  starts  cutting  its  lending  to  small  firms,  other 
banks in the system will step in and start lending to those companies.12  
As a consequence, in terms of lending volume to small businesses, bank M&As do not seem 
harmful  in  the  medium  term.  However,  it  could  be  the  case  that  other  lending  standards 
become  tougher  –  especially  loan  spreads  –  after  a  merger.  The  empirical  evidence 
suggests that there is a reduction in spreads if the acquirer and the target bank have some 
market overlap and, consequently, more potential for cost savings. However, spreads widen 
when  there  is  significant  market  overlap  and,  therefore,  increased  market  power  post 
merger.13  
In fact, when we look at megabank mergers in the US, empirical evidence suggests that this 
type of merger implies shareholder value creation for the banks involved but losses for loan 
                                                 
7   See e.g. Houston, Ryngaert (1994), Piloff (1996), Berger et al. (1999). 
8   DeLong and DeYoung (2004). 
9   Houston, James, Ryngaert (2001). 
10   DeLong (2001). 
11   Penas and Unal (2004). 
12   Berger, Saunders, Scalise, and Udell (1998). See also Berger, Goldberg and White (2001). 
13   Erel (2007). 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 3
customers, especially if they are small and credit-constrained, or if the acquisition is an in-
market  deal.14  All  in  all,  the  impact  of  bank  M&As  on  lending  to  small  firms  depends  on 
whether  the  reason  for  the  merger  was  to  increase  market  power  or  to  reduce  costs  and, 
therefore, improve efficiency. 
These  conclusions  appear  to  be  even  more  robust  when  we  also  analyse  the  European 
experience  since,  on  this  side  of the  Atlantic,  banks  play  a  special  role  in  the  financing  of 
many firms.15 Let me now consider some evidence from European countries.  
The  evidence  is  similar  to  the  studies  done  with  US  data,  and  sometimes  the  evidence  is 
even  stronger,  since  in  Europe  banks  are  the  key  source  of  finance  for  many  firms.16  For 
instance, Italian data show that bank M&As have an adverse effect on credit, especially if an 
M&A is followed by the termination of a business relationship. The effect lasts for three years 
and  by  the  end  of  that  period  it  has  been  absorbed,  suggesting  that  firms  are  able  to 
compensate for the negative shock.17 In addition, also based on Italian data, contract interest 
rates on bank loans fall when banks with small shares in the local banking market combine. 
The opposite result is observed for mergers between large banks.18  
Based on evidence from some countries, relationship customers of the target bank are more 
likely than acquirer customers to have their relationships terminated with their bank. These 
effects are more pronounced for smaller customers with no alternate lending relationships.19 
Furthermore,  mergers  reduce  the  equity  value  of  small  publicly  traded  firms  that  are 
customers of the target bank and the reduction in value increases with the size of the target 
bank.20  
Role of small banks 
6.  
All in all, the evidence from Europe is very similar to that of the US. If small businesses tend 
to suffer from bank M&As, especially when the banks involved are not small, then it seems 
that  there  is  a  role  for  small  banks.  The  key  characteristic  of  lending  to  SMEs  is  the 
“softness”  of  the  information  generated  in  the  decision-making  compared  with  large  banks 
that rely more on “hard” information. Hard information is based on accounting data and not 
on  personal  knowledge  and  repeated  interaction  between  lender  and  borrower.21 Because 
soft  information  is  important  for  lending  to  small  businesses,  the  supply  of  credit  to  small 
firms may be negatively affected by M&A activity because the resulting larger banks show a 
preference for transaction-based lending over relationship-based lending.  
In  fact,  evidence  suggests  that  small  banks  use  soft  information  for  lending  and  are, 
therefore,  key  for  SME  lending.22  Moreover,  as  I  said  earlier,  M&As  between  small  banks 
increase bank efficiency and lending to SMEs. Small banks also lend to riskier firms, which 
generally are SMEs.23
                                                 
14   See Carow et al. (2006). 
15   See ECB (2007). 
16   See ECB (2007). 
17   Bonaccorsi Di Patti, and Gobbi (2007). 
18   Sapienza (2002). 
19   Degryse, Masschelein, and Mitchell (2005). See also Sapienza (2002). 
20   Karceski, Ongena, and Smith (2005). 
21   Stein (2002). 
22   Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein (2005). 
23   Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró-Alcalde and Saurina (2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2007
We  have  seen  that  after  an  M&A  deal  a  bank  is  less  likely  to  extend  credit  to  small 
businesses.  Therefore,  it  could  be  especially  difficult  for  those  firms  with  almost  no  credit 
history (e.g., start-ups) to obtain credit, especially after M&As between large banks. Empirical 
evidence suggests that bank consolidation slows down the rate of new business formation 
and  that  it  is  primarily  driven  by  large  bank  acquirers.  Consolidations  between  small  or 
medium-sized banks show a positive impact on new business development. But in any case 
these effects are only short-term.24  
As a result, the effects of bank M&As on new firms resemble those on the financing of small 
firms. 
Outlook 
7.  
I would now like to touch upon developments in the current period of financial turbulence and 
offer  some  comment  on  its  potential  impact  on  consolidation  and  firms’  access  to  credit. 
Obviously,  it  is  very  difficult  at  this  stage  to  predict  developments  and  I  shall  refrain  from 
doing so, but I shall nevertheless try to draw some conclusions. 
The sub-prime mortgage crisis could give rise to three types of scenario. First, it would seem 
likely  that  for  a  certain  period  of  time  securitisation  will  decline.  The  valuation  of  these 
operations,  which  have  a  multiplier  effect  for  banks  and  allow  for  credit  to  be  used  more 
efficiently, has proved difficult, even for rating agencies. There will be a tendency for both the 
rating  agencies  and  the  banks  themselves  to  review  valuation  models  of  illiquid  assets  in 
general. 
Furthermore,  financial  intermediaries  –  in  particular  banks  –  will  need  to  overhaul  their 
liquidity  management  practices.  The  strong  demand  for  liquidity  which  we  are  currently 
witnessing, and which continues to prompt banks to obtain funds directly from the monetary 
authorities rather than from the interbank market, demonstrates that the risk of not being able 
to liquidate assets quickly and at low cost on the market has been underestimated. A return 
to normal conditions in the markets, hopefully in the New Year, will require some re-thinking 
by  financial  institutions  of  their  valuation  models  as  well  as  their  dependence,  for  their 
liquidity  management  requirements,  on  other  counterparties  which  could  experience  the 
same kinds of difficulty. 
Thirdly, some financial intermediaries may need to increase capital so as to absorb potential 
losses or to refinance investment vehicles which until now were off-balance-sheet items, and 
which, with Basel II as from next year, should appear on the balance sheet. 
What impact will these developments have on banking consolidation?  
On the one hand, banks could focus on themselves over the next few months and aim to 
review their internal organisation, improve their balance sheets and restructure. There could 
then  be  a  pause  in  the  consolidation  process.  Furthermore,  the  more  restrictive  financing 
conditions  could  discourage  mergers  and  acquisitions,  which  are  often  financed  over  the 
short term by bank loans. On the other hand, one way of reinforcing the solidity of the assets 
side of the balance sheet could be to proceed with either mergers or acquisitions. Recently, 
we have witnessed a strengthening of the capital of some large banks with the emergence of 
new  shareholders,  in  particular  foreign  shareholders.  The  emergence  of  large  sovereign 
funds  in  countries  where  the  financial  system  needs  to  be  strengthened  is  an  interesting 
development for the international financial system, even if it raises a number of questions in 
terms of transparency, objectives and stability. 
                                                 
24   See Francis, Hasan and Wang (2007) and Black and Strahan (2002). 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 5
Overall,  the  process  of  concentration  may  continue  over  the  next  few  months  and  affect 
some  of  the  major  financial  institutions.  Recent  developments  have  also  shown  that  the 
process  of  concentration  is  not  necessarily  all  in  one  direction,  i.e.  consolidation.  In 
particular, we have seen the break-up of one large European institution, which had perhaps 
grown disproportionately large. The need to strengthen the asset base of some banks could 
lead to the downsizing or elimination of some business lines, thereby creating opportunities 
for other institutions. 
What are the effects of these trends on credit to non-financial firms, in particular on small and 
medium-sized companies? 
On  the  one  hand,  the  need  for  the  restructuring  and  strengthening  of  assets,  beyond  the 
drying-up  of  securitisation,  could  lead  to  a  slowdown  in  lending  by  the  banks,  particularly 
those more affected by the recent turbulence. On the other hand, maintaining the profitability 
of  the  banks  could  lead  to  a  reinforcement  of  the  relationship  with  their  own  clients, 
particularly  the  high-quality  ones  in  terms  of  balance-sheet  profitability  and  transparency. 
From  this  point  of  view,  credit  to  small  and  medium-sized  companies,  which  is  less 
standardised, could suffer.  
However, if some banks cease to pursue certain types of activity, in particular larger banks 
which  have  more  options  with  regard  to  the  reorganisation  of  their  activities,  the  current 
turmoil  could  create  opportunities  for  competitors  to  enter  new  markets  in  search  of  new 
customers. Consequently, the level of bank competition could increase considerably in the 
coming months and this could benefit the end customer.  
It  is  still  too  early  to  predict  which  of  these  effects  will  prevail  in  the  coming  months.  The 
situation differs greatly across countries, sectors and institutions. 
The most recent data on credit conditions indicate a further increase in the cost of financing 
for  non-financial  corporations,  particularly  for  debt  instruments,  i.e.  excluding  financing 
through  the  stock  market.  Although  the  overnight  rate  remained  practically  unchanged 
between June and September 2007, short-term bank interest rates on loans to corporations 
increased  by  around  half  a  percentage  point  in  the  euro  area,  and  by  a  similar  amount  in 
Italy. As regards long term interest rates, market rates fell by around half a percentage point 
between  June  and  September,  but  long-term  rates  on  bank  loans  increased  by  15  to  30 
basis points. The Bank Lending Survey published by the European Central Bank at the end 
of  September  indicates  that  conditions  for  credit  to  corporations  have  become  more 
restrictive  as  a  result  of  the  market  turbulence.  This  tightening  seems  to  have  been  more 
pronounced  for  larger  corporations,  and  this  is  in  line  with  the  evidence  available  for  the 
United States and the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, the fact that the cost of bank financing 
has  increased  more  than  total  financing  costs,  which  also  include  market  financing,  might 
suggest  that  credit  conditions  have  become  on  the  whole  less  favourable  for  corporations 
that are more dependent on bank credit, in particular small and medium-sized corporations. 
As regards the reasons for differing attitudes among banks with respect to credit activity, the 
Bank Lending Survey  provides evidence of a certain reappraisal of expectations regarding 
growth, both in general and at sectoral level, as well as the cost and availability of financing 
for  banks, which  are  at  the  heart of  the  current  market  tensions. Indeed,  in  response  to  a 
question added to the latest version of the survey, banks reported a perceptible worsening of 
their  own  financing  conditions,  not  only  with  regard  to  the  interbank  market  but  also  to  all 
debt instruments and all maturities.  
Despite the less favourable supply conditions, demand for credit and credit actually granted 
remained very dynamic into the third quarter of 2007, not only in the euro area as a whole 
but also in Italy. This suggests that, overall, it cannot be concluded that a credit squeeze is 
currently occurring in the euro area. Credit supply conditions remain more favourable than in 
previous surveys. This does not rule out less favourable developments ahead, in line with the 
intentions recorded in surveys.  
6 
 BIS Review 147/2007
These considerations suggest that caution is needed when assessing future developments. 
Too  often  in  the  past,  hurried  forecasts  have  been  proved  wrong  in  one  way  or  another. 
Therefore,  it  is  important  to  closely  monitor  the  underlying  market  conditions  by  asking 
financial  institutions  to  clarify,  as  soon  as  possible,  not  only  their  current  balance  sheet 
positions  but  also  their  future  strategies,  in  particular  with  regard  to  their  relations  with 
customers. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Amel, D., C. Barnes, F. Panetta and C. Salleo (2004), “Consolidation and efficiency in the 
financial sector: A review of the international evidence”, Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 
28, n. 10. 
BCE  (2007),  “Il  finanziamento  delle  piccole  e  medie  imprese  nell’area  dell’euro”,  Monthly 
Bulletin, August.  
Berger, A.N., A. Saunders, J.M. Scalise and G.F. Udell (1998), “The effects of bank mergers 
and acquisitions on small business lending”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 50, n. 2, 
pp. 187-229. 
Berger,  A.N.,  L.G.  Goldberg  and  L.J.  White  (2001),  “The  Effects  of  Dynamic  Changes  in 
Bank Competition on the Supply of Small Business Credit”, European Finance Review, vol. 
5, n. 1-2, pp. 115-139. 
Berger, A.N., N.H. Miller, M.A. Petersen, R.G. Rajan and J.C. Stein (2005), “Does function 
follow  organization  form?  Evidence  from  the  lending  practices  of  large  and  small  banks”, 
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 76, n. 2, pp. 237-269. 
Berger,  A.N.,  R.S.  Demsetz  and  P.E.  Strahan  (1999),  “The  consolidation  of  the  financial 
services  industry:  Causes,  consequences,  and  implications  for  the  future”,  Journal  of 
Banking and Finance, vol. 23, n. 2. 
Black,  S.E.  and  P.E.  Strahan  (2002),  “Entrepreneurship  and  Bank  Credit  Availability”,  The 
Journal of Finance, vol. 57, n. 6, pp. 2807-2833. 
Bonaccorsi  di  Patti,  E.  and  G.  Gobbi  (2007),  “Winners  or  Losers?  The  Effects  of  Banking 
Consolidation on Corporate Borrowers”, The Journal of Finance, vol. 62, n. 2. 
Carow,  K.,  E.  Kane  and  R.  Narayanan  (2006),  “How  Have  Borrowers  Fared  in  Banking 
Megamergers?”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 38, n. 3. 
Degryse, H., N. Masschelein and J. Mitchell (2005), SMEs and bank lending relationships: 
The impact of mergers, Discussion Paper del CEPR, n. 5061. 
DeLong,  G.  (2001),  “Stockholder  gains  from  focusing  versus  diversifying  bank  mergers”, 
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 59, n. 2, pp. 221-252. 
DeLong,  G.  and  R.  DeYoung  (2004),  Learning  by  Observing:  Information  Spillovers  in  the 
Execution and Valuation of Commercial Bank M&As, Working Paper of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago, n. 17. 
Erel, I. (2006), The Effect of Bank Mergers on Loan Prices: Evidence from the U.S., Working 
Paper of the Charles A. Dice Center, Ohio State University, n. 19. 
Focarelli, D., F. Panetta and C. Salleo (2002), “Why Do Banks Merge?”, Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking, vol. 34. 
Francis, B., I. Hasan and H. Wang (2007), Bank Consolidation and New Business Formation, 
Working Paper. 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 7
Gorton,  G.  and  R.  Rosen  (1995),  “Corporate  control,  portfolio  choice,  and  the  decline  of 
banking”, The Journal of Finance, vol. 50, n. 5, pp. 1377-1420. 
Houston,  J.F.  and  M.D.  Ryngaert  (1994),  “The  overall  gains  from  large  bankmergers”, 
Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 18, n. 5. 
Houston, J.F., C.M. James and M.D. Ryngaert (2001), “Where do merger gains come from? 
Bank  mergers  from  the  perspective  of  insiders  and  outsiders”,  Journal  of  Financial 
Economics, vol. 60, n. 2-3, pp. 285-331. 
Jensen,  M.  and  R.  Ruback  (1983),  “The  market  for  corporate  control:  The  scientific 
evidence”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 11. 
Jiménez, G., S.  Ongena, J.L. Peydró-Alcalde and J. Saurina (2007),  Hazardous Times for 
Monetary  Policy:  What  Do  Twenty-Three  Million  Bank  Loans  Say  About  the  Effects  of 
Monetary Policy on Credit Risk?, CEPR Discussion Paper n. 6514. 
Karceski,  J.,  S.  Ongena  and  D.C.  Smith  (2005),  “The  impact  of  bank  consolidation  on 
commercial borrower welfare”, The Journal of Finance, vol. 60, n. 4, pp. 2043-2082. 
Penas, M.F. and H. Unal (2004), “Gains in bank mergers: evidence from the bond markets”, 
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 74, pp. 149-180. 
Piloff, S.J. (1996), “Performance changes and shareholder wealth creation associated with 
mergers of publicly traded banking institutions”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 
28, n. 3(1). 
Roll, R. (1986), “The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate Takeovers”, The Journal of Business, 
vol. 59. 
Ryan, S.J. (1999), Finding value in bank mergers, intervention at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Chicago conference on the structure and competition in the banking sector. 
Sapienza,  P.  (2002),  “The  effects  of  banking  mergers  on  loan  contracts”,  The  Journal  of 
Finance, vol. 57, n. 1, pp. 329-368. 
Stein,  J.  (2002),  “Information  production  and  capital  allocation:  Decentralized  versus 
hierarchical firms”, The Journal of Finance, vol. 57, n. 5, pp. 1891-1921. 
8 
 BIS Review 147/2007
