Randall S Kroszner: Legislative proposals on reforming mortgage 
practices 
Testimony by Mr Randall S Kroszner, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 24 October 2007. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the 
opportunity  to  appear  before  you  today,  to  discuss  recent  problems  in  the  subprime 
mortgage market, Federal Reserve actions that address these developments, and potential 
legislative  responses.  Promoting  access  to  credit  and  sustainable  homeownership  are 
important  objectives,  and  the  Board  believes  that  responsible  subprime  mortgage  lending 
can help advance both goals.  
Background 
Subprime  mortgages  are  loans  intended  for  borrowers  who  are  perceived  to  have  higher 
than typical credit risk. In recent years, the subprime market has grown dramatically because 
of advances in credit scoring and underwriting technology, which enables lenders to charge 
different borrowers different prices on the basis of calculated creditworthiness. These loans 
are recognized by the higher prices they carry, which reflect subprime lenders' decisions to 
seek additional compensation for the credit risk they incur. 
As  the  overall  mortgage  market  has  grown,  many  new  lenders  and  distribution  channels 
have developed and most of those are outside the direct jurisdiction of the federal banking 
agencies. A review of data provided by mortgage lenders pursuant to the Home Mortgage 
Disclosure  Act  reveals  that  lenders  that  are  not  subject  to  oversight  by  a  federal  banking 
agency originated just under half of the higher-priced conventional first lien mortgage loans 
reported in 2006. 
While the expansion of the subprime mortgage market over the past decade has increased 
access to credit, the subprime mortgage market during recent years was also accompanied 
by  a  deterioration  in  underwriting  standards.  In  some  cases,  abusive  or  fraudulent  lending 
practices resulted in homeowners taking on mortgage obligations they could not afford, with 
terms they may not have fully understood. Delinquencies and foreclosures have increased. 
During the past two years, serious delinquencies among subprime adjustable-rate mortgages 
(ARMs) have increased dramatically, reaching nearly 16 percent in August, roughly triple the 
recent low in mid-2005. For so-called near-prime loans in alt-A securitized pools (those made 
to borrowers who typically have higher credit scores than subprime borrowers but still pose 
more risk than prime borrowers), the serious delinquency rate has also risen, to 3 percent 
from  1  percent  only  a  year  ago.  These  patterns  contrast  sharply  with  those  in  the  prime-
mortgage sector, in which less than 1 percent of loans are seriously delinquent. 
Higher  delinquencies  have  begun  to  show  through  to  foreclosures.  About  320,000 
foreclosures were initiated in each of the first two quarters of this year (just more than half of 
them  on  subprime  mortgages),  up  from  an  average  of  about  225,000  during  the  past  six 
years. Foreclosure starts tend to be high in states with stressed economic conditions and to 
rise  where  house  prices  have  decelerated  or  fallen.  Adjustable-rate  subprime  mortgages 
originated in 2006 have performed the worst, with some of them defaulting after only one or 
two payments (or even no payment at all). Relative to earlier vintages, more of these loans 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 1
carried  greater  risks  beyond  weak  borrower  credit  histories  –  including  very  high  initial 
cumulative loan-to-value ratios and less documentation of borrower income. 
The recent increase in delinquencies and foreclosures has created personal, financial, and 
social  distress  for  many  homeowners  and  communities.  We  encourage  servicers  of 
securitized mortgages to reach out to financially stressed homeowners. Keeping families in 
their  homes  is  a  matter  of  great  importance  to  the  Federal  Reserve.  In  fact,  the  twelve 
Federal Reserve Banks are working closely around the country with community and industry 
groups dedicated to reducing homeowners' risks of foreclosure. Each of the Reserve Bank 
community  affairs  offices  provides  significant  leadership  and  technical  assistance  in  this 
area.  
I am also pleased to serve as the Federal Reserve's representative on the board of directors 
of NeighborWorks America, which has a program to encourage borrowers facing mortgage 
payment  difficulties  to  seek  help  by  making  early  contact  with  their  lenders,  servicers,  or 
trusted  counselors.  NeighborWorks'  Center  for  Foreclosure  Prevention  Center  recently 
launched  a  national  advertising  campaign  to  raise  awareness  about  its  24-hour  national 
hotline that connects struggling borrowers with homeownership counselors. Since the launch 
of  the  campaign  this  past  June,  the  daily  call  volume  has  almost  doubled  from  1,000  to 
almost 2,000 calls a day.  
The Board's response to problems in the subprime market  
The Federal Reserve has primary rule-writing authority for many consumer protection laws. 
Consumer protection laws take two complementary approaches to consumer protection: one 
focuses  on  the  provision  of  information,  and  the  other  involves  the  development  and 
enforcement of rules against abusive practices. The Board believes it is extremely important 
to strike the right balance by seeking to protect consumers from predatory lending practices 
without  restricting  credit  from  responsible  lenders  to  borrowers  with  shorter  or  lower-rated 
credit  histories.  To  achieve  that  balance,  we  coordinate  with  other  federal  and  state 
agencies,  and  consult  with  consumer  advocates,  lenders,  investors,  and  other  interested 
parties. 
Consumer protection regulations  
The  Board  believes  it  is  important  to  provide  consumers  with  pertinent  and  accurate 
information.  Clearly,  information  is  critical  to  the  effective  functioning  of  markets.  A  core 
principle  of  economics  is  that  markets  are  more  competitive,  and  therefore  more  efficient, 
when accurate information is available to both consumers and suppliers. When information 
on  alternatives  is  readily  available,  product  offerings  must  meet  customers'  demands  and 
offering prices must reflect those of market competitors. If consumers are well informed, they 
are  in  a  better  position  to  make  decisions  that  are  in  their  best  interest.  As  a  result,  a 
significant  component  of  the  rule-writing  process  involves  crafting  disclosure  requirements 
that provide consumers with consistent and relevant information about the terms and fees of 
financial products.  
To  be  effective,  disclosures  must  give  consumers  information  that  they  can  readily 
understand at a time when the information is relevant. To that end, the Federal Reserve will 
propose  improvements  to  the  rules  governing  the  disclosure  of  mortgage  loan  terms  and 
conditions and the timing of those disclosures. We will soon begin an extensive consumer 
testing process to ensure that the new disclosures we propose will be comprehensible and 
useful to borrowers. To further improve consumers' access to meaningful information, we are 
also  developing  proposed  changes  to  the  Truth  in  Lending  Act  (TILA)  rules  to  address 
concerns  about  incomplete  or  misleading  mortgage  loan  advertisements  and  solicitations, 
and to require lenders to provide mortgage disclosures more quickly so that consumers can 
get the information they need when it is most useful to them. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2007
The Federal Reserve is keenly aware, however, that disclosure alone may not be sufficient to 
combat  abusive  practices.  In  addition  to  providing  consumers  with  better  information,  the 
Federal Reserve plans to exercise its rulemaking authority under the Home Ownership and 
Equity  Protection  Act  (HOEPA)  to  address  unfair  or  deceptive  mortgage  lending practices. 
We plan to propose rules by the end of this year that would apply to subprime loans offered 
by all mortgage lenders. We share the concerns of Congress that certain lending practices 
may have led to the problems we are seeing in the subprime market today. We are looking 
closely at practices such as prepayment penalties, failure to offer escrow accounts for taxes 
and  insurance,  stated-income  and  low-documentation  lending,  and  the  failure  to  give 
adequate consideration to a borrower's ability to repay.  
To ensure that any new rules will protect consumers without inappropriately reducing access 
to credit, the Board has obtained input from a wide variety of interested parties. I chaired a 
full  day  hearing  in  June  that  yielded  valuable  insight  from  both  industry  and  consumer 
groups.  The  Board  also  solicited  written  comments  from  the  public  on  the  practices 
discussed at the hearing. The Board received nearly 100 comment letters, and staff is closely 
examining  the  issues  raised  and  discussing  possible  remedies.  Other  federal  and  state 
agencies have been consulted as part of our efforts under HOEPA. We have also sought the 
views of our Consumer Advisory Council, which advises the Board on matters in the area of 
consumer  financial  services.  The council's  members  represent  the  interests  of  consumers, 
communities, and the financial services industry. 
Indeed, 
lending. 
the  consumer 
financial  services 
Coordinated enforcement of consumer protection laws 
Enforcement of consumer protection measures is also critical to protecting consumers from 
irresponsible  or  predatory 
laws 
implemented by the Federal Reserve contain a number of substantive protections, reflecting 
carefully  considered  judgments  by  Congress  that  certain  practices  should  be  restricted  or 
prohibited. The Federal Reserve enforces these rules through oversight of the institutions it 
examines for compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations. 
The  regulatory  scheme  for  the  mortgage  industry  has  become  extremely  complex  as  the 
breadth and depth of this market has grown over the past decade and the role of nonbank 
mortgage  lenders,  particularly  in  the  subprime  market,  has  increased.  As  I  mentioned 
previously, data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act show that independent 
mortgage companies made about half of higher-priced mortgages in 2006. In addition, there 
has been an increased presence of mortgage brokers, often independent entities who take 
loan  applications  and  shop  them  to  depository  institutions  or  other  lenders.  These  market 
developments  have  resulted  in  mortgage  lending  extending  beyond  the  federal  banking 
agencies'  oversight,  and  this  underscores  the  importance  of  collaborating  with  the  state 
banking  agencies  and  other  organizations  to  address  concerns  in  the  subprime  mortgage 
market. 
To  this  end,  we  have  launched  a  cooperative  pilot  project  with  other  federal  and  state 
agencies  to  conduct  reviews  of  non-depository  lenders  with  significant  subprime  mortgage 
operations.  The  reviews  will  evaluate  the  companies'  underwriting  standards  and  senior-
management  oversight  of  risk-management  strategies  for  ensuring  compliance  with 
consumer  protection  laws  and  regulations.  Our  partners  in  this  initiative  are  the  Office  of 
Thrift  Supervision,  the  Federal  Trade  Commission,  and  state  agencies  represented  by  the 
Conference  of  State  Banking  Supervisors  (CSBS)  and  the  American  Association  of 
Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR). At the conclusion of the reviews, the agencies 
will analyze the results and determine whether to continue the project and, if so, how to focus 
future reviews. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 3
Loss mitigation efforts 
The  Board  also  has  worked  with  the  other  federal  financial  agencies  to  guide  federally 
supervised institutions as they deal with borrower mortgage default. In April 2007, the federal 
financial institution agencies issued a Statement on Working with Mortgage Borrowers. The 
statement encourages federally regulated institutions to work constructively with residential 
borrowers  at  risk  of  default  and  to  consider  prudent  workout  arrangements  that  avoid 
unnecessary foreclosures. In cooperation with CSBS, the federal financial agencies issued a 
Statement on Loss Mitigation Strategies for Servicers of Residential Mortgages in September 
2007  to  address  subprime  and  other  mortgage  loans  that  have  been  transferred  into 
securitization trusts. The statement calls on servicers of securitized mortgages to review the 
governing documents for the trusts to determine the full extent of their authority to restructure 
loans that are delinquent or in default or are in imminent risk of default. 
To the extent possible, efforts should be made to avoid foreclosure. We encourage servicers 
to reach out to financially stressed homeowners, to make every effort to keep them in their 
homes.  Lenders  and  servicers,  for  example,  may  be  able  to  assist  troubled  borrowers  by 
modifying  the  loan,  deferring  payments,  extending  the  loan  maturities,  converting  an 
adjustable-rate  mortgage  to  a  fixed-rate  or  fully-indexed  loan,  or  capitalizing  delinquent 
amounts. The best outcome is a loss mitigation strategy that results in a mortgage obligation 
that  the  borrower  can  meet  in  a  sustained  manner.  The  use  of  these  and  other  loss-
mitigation  techniques  is  consistent  with  the  interagency  guidance  that  emphasizes  the 
importance  of  prudent  underwriting  practices  to  help  ensure  that  borrowers  can  meet  the 
terms of their mortgage obligations and maintain homeownership.  
Legislative responses 
Congress is appropriately concerned about problems in the mortgage market. The Mortgage 
Reform  and  Anti-Predatory  Lending  Act  of  2007  takes  a  comprehensive  approach  and  is 
appropriately focused on the more problematic practices in the subprime mortgage market. 
We share Congress's concerns with these practices. As with regulations, it is important that 
new  laws  carefully  target  lending  abuses  without  unduly  restraining  responsible  lending. 
Getting  this  balance  right  is  particularly  critical  now,  as  many  borrowers  facing  rate 
adjustments may need to refinance into more affordable loans.  
The  Mortgage  Reform  and  Anti-Predatory  Lending  Act  of  2007  would  provide  greater 
oversight  and  regulation  of  mortgage  brokers,  an  approach  that  has  merit.  A  nationwide 
registration and licensing system for all mortgage loan brokers would help limit the ability of 
bad actors to move to a new state after having run afoul of regulators in other states. The 
CSBS  and  AARMR  have  a  promising  initiative  to  establish  a  national  registry.  It  would  be 
appropriate for any new legislation to ensure that all individual brokers are included in the 
same nationwide registry.  
The  Mortgage  Reform  and  Anti-Predatory  Lending  Act  of  2007  also  addresses  concerns 
about  loans  made  without  consideration  of  a  borrower's  ability  to  repay.  The  Board  firmly 
believes that lenders should give due consideration to a borrower's ability to repay a loan, 
before the loan is extended. We and the other regulators have emphasized this several times 
in a variety of guidance statements on mortgage lending. This is also one of the areas we are 
looking  at  in  our  revisions  to  the  HOEPA  rules.  In  developing  laws  or  rules  to  address 
repayment ability, the rules must be specific enough so that creditors can determine whether 
their practices are in compliance because legal uncertainty could have the unintended effect 
of reducing credit options for creditworthy subprime borrowers. At the same time, rules must 
be  flexible  enough  to  allow  creditors  to  consider  the  pertinent  factors  and  individual 
circumstances of particular consumers and to innovate prudently and fairly. 
The Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007 would require originators to 
present  borrowers  with  loans  that  are  appropriate  to  the  borrower's  circumstances.  In  the 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2007
for 
liable 
case of refinancings, the bill provides that the loan must provide a "net tangible benefit" to the 
borrower. As I have discussed, the Board supports the goal of ensuring that consumers do 
not receive unaffordable and abusive loans. However, it is critical to carefully craft such laws 
or rules to ensure that they do not inappropriately reduce credit availability in the mortgage 
market, to the detriment of consumers. 
The Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007 would hold securitizers and 
loan  purchasers  ("assignees") 
the  actions  of  mortgage  originators.  The 
securitization market is critical to increasing the resources available to fund home purchases 
and  great  care  should  be  taken  to  ensure  that  investors  in  the  securitization  market  can 
quickly  and  accurately  assess  and  mitigate  the  risks,  including  the  compliance  risks,  of 
mortgages sold in this market. Such laws should be very clearly delineated to ensure that 
they  do  not  have  a  detrimental  impact  on  the  ability  of  lenders  to  securitize  loans. 
Specifically,  assignees  must  be  able  to  conduct  due  diligence  and  determine  whether  an 
originator has complied with the law, so that they can evaluate and price for any risks.  
Finally, the bill would enhance HOEPA's protections by prohibiting abusive practices, such as 
prohibiting  the  financing  of  single-premium  credit  life  insurance.  HOEPA's  points  and  fees 
trigger would be lowered and additional fees added. These potential actions merit discussion, 
and we welcome the opportunity to continue to work with congressional staff on these and 
other provisions in new legislation. 
Conclusion 
The  Board  is  engaged  in  several  activities  to  assist  consumers,  and  continues  to  develop 
rules that will improve consumer disclosures, address unfair or deceptive practices, and help 
consumers  facing  default  and  foreclosure.  We  look  forward  to  working  with  Congress  to 
enhance consumer protection laws while maintaining access to credit. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 5
