Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Real and nominal convergence – policy challenges 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at 
Integration  2007,  Currency  and 
Competitiveness, Austrian National Bank, Vienna, 20 November 2007. 
the  Conference  on  European  Economic 
 Introduction1  
1.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a real pleasure for me to speak to you today at this conference.  
As you know, the Maastricht Treaty – and in this respect the Reform Treaty has not changed 
anything  –  says  very  little  on  the  real  economy,  aside  from  the  fact  that  growth  and 
employment are an objective of the Union. The articles contained in the monetary chapters of 
the Treaty all refer to nominal variables, be they monetary policy or inflation, and so does the 
section that describes the criteria and procedure for the adoption of the euro. This does not 
mean,  though,  that  the  underlying  developments  in  the  real  economy  are  unimportant.  In 
fact, there is a burgeoning literature on the impact that the euro has had on the convergence 
of the member economies. Among such a wide range of academic contributions, let me refer 
in particular to papers presented at a conference organised by the ECB in June 2005, which 
provide evidence of the changes brought about by the euro with respect to trade integration, 
structural  reforms,  financial  integration,  business  cycle  synchronisation  and  inflation 
differentials.2 I will not dwell on those topics today, but will certainly refer to the literature in 
addressing the specific issue of convergence towards the euro area.  
As I just mentioned, the criteria for adopting the euro refer to nominal variables – the inflation 
rate, the long-term interest rate and the exchange rate – and to the budget deficit and debt 
ratios. Is this a problem? Should the Treaty have been drafted differently? I will argue to the 
contrary.  However,  while  it  is  wrong  to  suggest  that  the  adoption  of  the  euro  solves  all 
problems, it is equally wrong to suggest that real convergence does not pose considerable 
challenges  in  the  path  towards  the  adoption  of  the  euro.  The  key  policy  message  is  that 
these  challenges  can  be  addressed  as  long  as  one  is  aware  of  them  and  explicitly  takes 
them  into  consideration.  Hiding  the  issues  does  not  help.  It  might  actually  backfire  if  and 
when difficulties arise as people might be inclined to think that the root of all problems lies 
with the euro and its early adoption, rather than inappropriate policy actions in other fields. 
This is not just a hypothesis. It’s what we observe every day, even within the euro area, with 
politicians claiming that Europe and the euro are to blame for their lack of success.  
In my speech today, I would like to consider the case of countries which are converging in 
real and nominal terms towards the euro area.3 Can both processes take place in parallel? 
What are the challenges? How can monetary, fiscal and structural policies best tackle them?  
Let  me  also  emphasise  that  the  issue  is  relevant  not  only  for  the  countries  concerned  but 
also for the whole of the European Union, in light of the existing strong economic ties. For 
example,  the  trade  share  of  the  new  EU  Member  States,  excluding  Slovenia,  is  18%  for 
Germany, 9% for France and 12% for Italy. These share are comparable to that of the US 
                                                 
1   The views expressed in this note reflect only those of the author. I thank L. Stracca, M. Darracq-Paries, M. 
Andersson, G. Fagan, O. Tristani, K. Masuch and F. Mongelli for input and comments. 
2   See Mongelli and Vega (2006), “What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member countries? An 
overview”, ECB Working Paper Series No 599. 
3   Note  that  I  will  not  touch  upon  demographics  in  my  speech,  given  that  the  central  and  eastern  European 
countries are not very different in that respect from the countries currently in the euro area. 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 1
and  more  important  than  China.  Links  through  financial  and  foreign  direct  investment  are 
also equally, if not more, important. Of course, the euro area is also very important for the 
New EU member states, representing 62% of their external trade. It is not far-fetched to say 
that to some extent we are “all in the same boat”. 
I will structure my remarks in two parts. I will first propose an analytical framework to examine 
the  issue  in  a  systematic  way.  I  will  then  discuss  some  examples  within  the  euro  area. 
Finally, I will try to draw some policy lessons from both theory and experience. 
Analytical framework  
2.  
Let me start by laying out a framework to interpret real and nominal economic convergence.  
Structural forces driving convergence, real appreciation and external deficits 
2.1  
Let us take two hypothetical countries, an advanced one, which I’ll call for simplicity West, 
and one that is emerging and catching up, named East. Real economic convergence should 
imply a higher marginal return on capital in East compared with West, due to the fact that 
capital  is  scarcer  and  due  to  decreasing  returns  on  capital  accumulation.  In  a  closed 
economy,  this  translates  into  a  higher  real  equilibrium  interest  rate  in  East  compared  with 
West.  In  a  world  with  full  financial  integration,  we  would  observe  large  capital  flows  from 
West  to  East.  Since  people  in  East  expect  to  be  richer  tomorrow  and  want  to  smooth 
consumption  over  time,  they  will  borrow,  the  more  so  the  higher  the  expected  economic 
growth rate.  
This phenomenon will not happen if there are financial frictions and borrowing constraints in 
East  which  prevent  the  real  interest  rate  from  rising  or  the  borrowing  demand  from  being 
satisfied. In that case we might even observe that the flow of capital is reversed, from East to 
West. This is the so-called Lucas paradox; it’s what we are currently observing, for example, 
in some eastern Asian economies, notably in China, and what we saw in western Europe in 
the 1950s and 1960s. In central and eastern European countries, there does not seem to be 
such a paradox. There are, by and large, no borrowing constraints as countries are bound by 
what  is  called  the  acquis  communautaire,  in  other  words,  all  the  laws  and  agreements, 
including  the  treaties  that  apply  in  the  EU.  Perhaps  what  is  more  important,  they  have 
implemented banking sector reforms that have led to an increase in banking competition.4 So 
in the case of the European Union the theory works. 
Another  element  of  the  theory  which  seems  to  be  working  to  some  extent  is  the  Balassa-
Samuelson effect, which contributes to a real exchange rate appreciation in East.5 The real 
exchange rate appreciation associated with real convergence can obviously happen in two 
ways (or a combination of them): first, with a stable nominal exchange rate and high inflation, 
as  in  Japan  in  the  postwar  period  up  to  the  early  1970s;  second,  with  an  appreciating 
nominal exchange rate and stable low inflation, as in Japan in the subsequent period up to 
the  early  1990s.  I  will  not  dwell  on  the  choice  of  the  exchange  rate  regime  in  my  speech 
today, apart from noting that the second channel of real appreciation is obviously precluded 
after a country joins the monetary union.  
                                                 
4   See Arratibel et al. (2007) for a survey of these developments. 
5   Egert,  Halpern  and  McDonald  (2006)  calculate  that  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  could  contribute  to  real 
exchange rate appreciation in some new Member States by around 1 to 2 percentage points annually, but not 
in all countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2007
“Disequilibrium” real appreciation 
2.2  
While  the  theory  suggests  that  real  appreciation  and  balance  of  payments  deficits  are  the 
natural consequences of real convergence, it does not follow that any such appreciation or 
deficit is justified in size. Real appreciation and external deficits may become excessive as a 
result  of  inappropriate  policies  and/or  excessively  optimistic  expectations  by  economic 
agents.6 Conceptually, this is no different from bubbles and busts in asset prices, which may 
be  initially  triggered  by  a  real,  fundamental  reason  (such  as  higher  productivity  growth  or 
monetary  policy  shocks)  but  may  then  be  inflated  disproportionately  by  excessive  self-
fulfilling expectations.  
In  our  example  of  East converging  to  West,  the  above  risk may  materialise  when investor 
exuberance in East, supported by expectations of rapid economic and monetary integration, 
generates  excess  demand  and  inflationary  pressures.  Risk  premia  in  East  may  be 
excessively  squeezed,7  leading  to  asset  price  misalignments  (e.g.  in  housing)  and  over-
indebtedness in a context of still abundant global liquidity and strong risk appetite. Irrational 
optimism on the side of wage earners can add to the risk. Such a scenario represents an 
“out-of-equilibrium” real appreciation, leading to an overshooting that is typically observed in 
boom-and-bust cycles. There is abundant literature on this phenomenon.  
The key question is what to do to avoid such a scenario.  
Adjustment in a monetary union 
2.3 
Let’s consider first the case of a monetary union which, as I mentioned previously, puts  a 
constraint  on  real  exchange  rate  movements  or,  more  precisely,  a  constraint  on 
competitiveness within the union. Let us go back to the idea that the expected real marginal 
product  of  capital  is  higher  in  East.  If  the  nominal  exchange  rate  is  fixed  and  there  is 
sufficient capital mobility within the union, capital inflows in East must be accompanied by a 
combination of (i) balance of payments deficits, and (ii) higher inflation. This should gradually 
be  reversed  as  the  real  convergence  process  runs  its  course  and  the  excess  return  on 
investment opportunities is absorbed.  
What is the adjustment mechanism? If inflation rises above the average, the country loses 
competitiveness and this has, over time, a dampening impact on inflation. The point can be 
illustrated  clearly  using  an  open  economy  Phillips  curve  where  the  real  exchange  rate 
appears as a determinant of inflation.8 What effect prevails, and at what speed, depends on 
the relative importance of the two channels in the Phillips curve. Ceteris paribus, the more 
integrated and flexible a country, the likelier it will be that the forces of convergence prevail 
over those of divergence. Research shows that in the euro area the competitiveness channel 
works satisfactorily and that, abstracting from trends related to Balassa-Samuelson effects, 
deviations from PPP are mean-reverting. According to this research, the adjustment in the 
euro area is actually found to be quicker in Economic and Monetary Union than in regions of 
the  United  States.9  However,  more  research  is  needed  on  this  important  issue; moreover, 
the situation is clearly different across countries, depending on the degree of integration and 
flexibility. 
                                                 
6   See Boz (2007) for a theoretical analysis related to emerging countries. 
7   See, for instance, Luengnaruemitchai and Schadler (2007). 
8   See  Flamini  (2007)  for  an  analytical  derivation,  and  Leith  and  Malley  (2007)  for  empirical  estimates  for  G7 
countries. 
9   See  Berk  and  Swank  (2007).  Note,  however,  that  this  conclusion  is  dependent  on  the  assumption  that  the 
PPP trends are entirely due to the Balassa-Samuelson effect and therefore reflect equilibrium phenomena. 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 3
Due  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  fact  that  the  adjustment  channels  might  be 
impaired in some cases. If nominal and real rigidities as well as financial frictions are limiting 
the scope for relative price changes, or weakening the expenditure-switching role of relative 
inflation differentials, the convergence process in a monetary union could be rather bumpy. 
This  may  occur,  for  example,  if  the  massive  inflow  of  capital  and  exceptionally  low  risk 
premia are rapidly reversed and followed by an equally large outflow as the adjustment takes 
place and as risks are re-appreciated .  
It is important to recognise that membership of a monetary union increases the likelihood of 
excessively low risk premia and a pro-cyclical behaviour of real interest rates, which might 
temporarily slow down or even destabilise the structural adjustment process. Indeed, within a 
monetary union, forces exerting upward pressures on inflation tend to become self-sustained 
and more likely to give rise to an abrupt adjustment. Since the nominal interest rate is fixed at 
the  union  level,  any  shock  bringing  inflation  above  the  union  average  will  reduce  the  real 
interest rate and fuel further inflationary pressures, in a self-reinforcing mechanism.10  
In  a  boom-and-bust  scenario,  such  as  the  one  I  have  described,  which  is  a  real  risk  in  a 
monetary  union  or  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  policy-makers  undoubtedly  face  the 
very  difficult  challenge  of  having  to  avoid  an  overheating  of  the  economy  in  the  face  of 
surging capital inflows and rapid credit growth. Monetary policy would be the ideal instrument 
to tackle such a problem but it is simply not available. Actually, monetary policy makes things 
even worse for East, because it is set by West with a view to ensuring price stability in West 
itself. Given the convergence process and the required higher rate of growth of productivity 
and  income  in  East,  as  compared  with  West,  the  monetary  policy  set  by  West  is  too 
expansionary  for  East.  As  an  illustration,  a  4%  interest  rate  might  be  appropriate  for  an 
economy  growing  at  a  steady  state  rate  of  2%  and  with  2%  inflation  –  I’m  giving  these 
numbers  for  purely  illustrative  reasons  –  but  is  certainly  not  appropriate  for  an  economy 
growing  in  real  terms  at  6%  or  more,  as  required  by  the  catching-up  process.  As  the 
inflationary  pressures  arise  in  East,  the  monetary  policy  becomes  pro-cyclical,  further 
destabilising the economy and making the adjustment more abrupt later on. 
The recent financial turbulence in the United States and Europe has shown the dangers of 
keeping interest rates too low, compared with the economy’s underlying rate of productivity 
and income growth, for a prolonged period of time. When I raised the issue myself, about two 
years ago, I noted that there was still very little literature on this issue.11 Some progress has 
been  made,  but  the  issue  is  still  not  sufficiently  recognised  in  academic  and  policy  fora. 
Indeed, when one looks at the current situation in many emerging market economies, one 
cannot but be struck by the huge gap between these two variables which, in my view, is the 
sign  of  a  major  distortion  in  the  allocation  of  resources  that  might  lead  to  future  abrupt 
adjustment. 12
Fiscal  policy  can  be  activated  to  attenuate  the  inflationary  pressures  arising  from  the 
monetary stimulus, but the size of the fiscal restraint might have to be quite ample. Banking 
supervision  and  related  prudential  measures  could  also  be  implemented  to  limit  credit 
expansion. Their quantitative impact is of course uncertain, especially in an environment of 
full  capital  mobility.  Capital  controls  might  be  applied  to  contain  inflows,  but  they  are  not 
allowed in the EU.  
                                                 
10   See Allsopp and Vines (1998). 
11   “Inflation, Expectations and Current Challenges to Monetary Policy”, speech at the European Inflation-Linked 
Conference, Rome, 10 October 2005. 
12   In addition, low nominal interest rates may be also, if not more, important that low real interest rates in leading 
to asset price misalignments; see Shiller (2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2007
Summing up 
2.4  
What can we learn from all this? Let me recap the reasoning in three main developments that 
can be expected from real convergence in a monetary union: 
• 
First,  real  convergence  may  entail  a  higher  return  on  capital  for  some  time  in  the 
catching-up country and a substantial appreciation of the real exchange rate, which 
is to be considered, to some extent, as an equilibrium phenomenon and a natural 
consequence of real catching-up dynamics.  
Second,  within  a  monetary  union  or  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate  system,  the 
appreciation of the real exchange rate may take place through a higher inflation rate.  
Third, as a consequence of the above, the inflationary process associated with the 
real  exchange  appreciation  may 
that  entails  an 
overshooting  of  inflation  and  a  boom-and-bust  cycle.  In  this  context,  nominal 
convergence is not consistent with the continuation of real convergence and might 
imply large adjustment costs. 
inflationary  spiral 
fuel  an 
  How can these last developments be avoided? 
The key word is flexibility. Let me elaborate on this. First, there must be flexibility in the wage 
and  price  adjustment  setting.  Since  the  process  of  real  convergence  requires  significant 
movements in the real exchange rate and since in a monetary union the nominal exchange 
rate  cannot  be  used  as  an  adjustment  tool,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  that  prices  can 
move quickly in the required direction. A key aspect is thus wage formation. Movements in 
the  real  exchange  rates  must  be  rapidly  reflected  in  movements  of  real  wages  –  in  the 
opposite direction (!) – in order to preserve the competitiveness of the economy. We do have 
some  evidence  that  some  new  Member  States  score  quite  well  in  terms  of  labour  market 
flexibility.13 However, the situation is not the same across countries.  
Movements in the real exchange rate should, and will, bring about demand shifts between 
tradable  and  non-tradable  goods  and  more  generally  between  different  sectors  of  the 
economy.  In  the  era  of  globalisation,  this  cannot  only  be  described  as  a  problem  for  EU 
countries. In fact, membership of the EU and of the monetary union can be characterised as 
a  “regional  globalisation”  due  to  the  trade-enhancing  effects  of  the  euro.14  It  is  of  great 
importance  that  the  economy  is  flexible  and  able  to  reallocate  physical  and  human  capital 
across different production locations. The ability to shift production seamlessly from the less 
competitive to the more competitive sectors is a hallmark of countries dealing successfully 
with globalisation. It is also true for success in the monetary union.  
A  study  of  the  administrative  burdens  in  the  new  EU  Member  States  on  the  basis  of 
indicators  published  by  the  Fraser  Institute  shows  that  the  business  environment  has 
significantly  improved  in  those  states  over  the  past  few  years.15  However,  on  average  in 
2004 it had still not reached the average level of the euro area countries and there remained 
significant differences between the new EU Member States. Another indicator, the OECD’s 
country score index on barriers to trade and investments, shows an overall decline from 1998 
to 2003 both in the euro area and in the four largest EU new Member States, but on average, 
they remain higher in the latter. This would suggest that more needs to be done to make the 
economies  of  the  New  Member  States  more  flexible  so  that  they  can  respond  to  the 
challenges they face in the process of real and nominal convergence. 
                                                 
13   Buettner (2007) finds that regional wage flexibility is significantly higher in new Member States (NMS) than in 
the  euro  area;  in  particular,  wage  formation  within  regions  is  more  sensitive  to  local  unemployment  in  the 
NMS. See also Blanchflower (2002) on the response of wages to unemployment in the NMS. 
14   See Rose (2000). 
15   O. Arratibel et al. (2007) ECB Occasional Paper Series No 61, in particular pp. 27-29. 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 5
Some interesting examples 
3.  
Let  us  now  see  how  the  conceptual  framework  that  I  have  just  described  works  out  in 
practice. 
Some stylised facts 
3.1  
Let me consider the experiences of countries that are already in the euro area. This might 
teach  us  something  useful  about  the  challenges  that  the  new  Member  States  may  face  in 
converging  towards  the  euro  adoption.  In  1995,  i.e.  a  few  years  before  the  launch  of  the 
euro,  there  were  a  handful  of  countries  with  a  real  GDP  per  capita  significantly  below  the 
euro area average: Greece, at 65%, Spain, at 79%, Portugal, at 65%, and Ireland, at 89%. If 
we  look  at  the  new  Member  States  (data  for  2006),  we  see  a  range  of  between  34% 
(Romania and Bulgaria) and 72% (Czech Republic) of euro area GDP per capita. For some 
of these countries, we are already in a situation similar to that of the countries catching up 
with the euro area in 1995; currently, the Czech Republic already has a higher income per 
capita than Portugal and is very close to Greece and Slovenia.16 For some other countries, 
however, and notably for Bulgaria and Romania, the degree of the required catching-up is 
nowhere near to the income gap for the original euro area members. We are therefore in a 
new situation here. 
A  stylised  fact  in  the  adoption  of  the  euro  in  1999  was  that  the  convergence  of  nominal 
interest  rates  was  accompanied  by  the  convergence  of  the  real  interest  rate.17  The  real 
interest rate of previously high-inflation countries such as Greece, Spain, Italy and Ireland fell 
substantially as these countries were able to slash inflation and exchange rate risk premia. In 
Italy, for example, the real short-term interest rate fell from over 5% in the nine years before 
the  euro  to  1%  in  the  nine  years  thereafter.  Nevertheless,  convergence  has  not  been 
completed. This is related to persistent inflation differentials among the euro area countries, 
which  has  been  the  subject  of  quite  some  attention  in  the  literature.18  Higher-inflation 
countries, such as Spain and Ireland, have experienced systematically lower (and in the Irish 
case  often  negative)  real  interest  rates  than  lower-inflation  countries  such  as  Germany, 
despite their higher (potential) growth.  
In  theory,  as  I  said  earlier,  the  self-sustaining  nature  of  real  interest  rates  in  the  different 
countries  of  a  monetary  union can  fuel  divergences  within  the  union.  But  these  forces  are 
partly countered by the loss of competitiveness, which has a dampening effect on inflation. If 
you  want  to  see  the  glass  half  empty,  you  could  argue  that  this  second  force  has  not  yet 
been strong enough to prevent persistent inflation differentials across countries. I prefer to 
see the glass half full by noting that inflation differentials within the euro area have remained 
at a relatively low level, fully comparable with divergence among US regions and well below 
the cross-country variation seen before the mid-1990s. This observation is also true when we 
look  at  business  cycle  fluctuations, which  appear  to  be  quite  synchronised  within  the  euro 
area. This is not to say – of course – that the differences between real interest rates across 
countries are of no concern.  
                                                 
16   The number for Poland, by far the largest new Member State, is 48% of the euro area average in 2006, up 
from 37% in 1995. 
17   See Arghyrou and Gregoriou (2007). However, they reject full real interest rate convergence for Greece, Spain 
and Italy as well as the UK. 
18   See  Angeloni  and  Ehrmann  (2002)  and  Ortega  (2003)  among  the  academic  contributions;  see  also  ECB 
(2003, 2005) especially on the policy implications. 
6 
 BIS Review 135/2007
Ireland v Portugal 
3.2  
In the remainder of my speech, let me focus on two extremely different performances within 
the  euro  area:  Ireland  and  Portugal.  Real  GDP  per  capita  in  Ireland  was  89%  of  the  euro 
area average in 1995, but was already above the average in 1998. Between 1998 and 2006, 
real income per capita increased by almost 25 percentage points, to reach 131% of the euro 
area  average  in  2006,  which  is  the  second  highest  after  Luxembourg.  (Based  on  these 
numbers, it is surprising how many people still speak of Ireland as a catching-up economy). 
As for Portugal, its income per capita was 65% of the euro area average in 1995, a figure 
which has changed little in over a decade (it was 67% in 1998 and 68% in 2006). The bottom 
line  is  that  real  per  capita  income  in  the  two  countries  was  not  very  different  in  the  early 
1990s but became twice as large in Ireland by 2006. How could that happen? 
The answer to this question may well matter since Ireland and Portugal in 1995 were in a 
situation  not  unlike  that  of  some  new  Member  States  now  (though,  as  we  have  seen,  for 
some of them the starting point is significantly lower).19 One approach to understanding the 
difference can be found in growth accounting exercises. The stellar growth performance of 
Ireland was not just due to higher labour and capital input but also, and mainly, due to labour 
productivity growth, which has been close to 3% per year since the introduction of the euro 
and, according to available estimates, almost entirely due to growth in total factor productivity 
(TFP). In Portugal, growth in labour productivity has been less than 1% per year on average, 
reflecting subdued TFP growth.  
In the decade before joining the euro area both Portugal and Ireland went through a boom, 
with  annual  average  GDP  growth  rates  at  2.8%  and  6.7%,  respectively  (1990–1998).  This 
strong  growth  masked  substantive  differences.  While  fiscal  policy  was  pro-cyclical  in 
Portugal, reinforcing domestic demand pressures, it was much more  disciplined in Ireland. 
While growth in unit labour costs and HICP inflation was high in Portugal (7.6% and 6.2% on 
average  between  1990  and  1998,  respectively),  cost  and  price  pressures  remained 
contained  in  Ireland  (1.4%  and  2.3%,  respectively).  Competitiveness  was  hurt  in  Portugal, 
resulting in a rising current account deficit (to 8.9% of GDP in 1999), while competitiveness 
was  relatively  well  preserved  in  Ireland  and  the  current  account  position  broadly  neutral 
(0.3%  of  GDP  in  1999).  Thus,  the  longer-term  track  record  before  joining  monetary  union 
regarding  low  inflationary  pressures  and  a  balanced  current  account  was  impressive  in 
Ireland.  This  shows  that  even  very  rapid  catching-up  does not  need  to  be  associated  with 
high inflation or large imbalances. 
After  the  euro  changeover  –  between  2000  and  2003  –  a  sharp  downward  adjustment 
occurred in Portugal as consumption and investment slowed considerably. Competitiveness 
problems  and  the  need  to  improve  the  fiscal  position  added  to  the  downturn.  Annual  real 
GDP  growth  in  Portugal  in  the  period  1999–2006  averaged  1.7%.  In  Ireland,  real  output 
growth continued instead at a strong pace (at 6.5% on average) in this period and the fiscal 
balance was in slight surplus. Following the slowdown in activity, ULC growth and inflation 
pressures  diminished  in  Portugal  (to  3.1%  and  3.0%  on  average,  respectively),  while  they 
gradually picked up in Ireland (3.2% and 3.5%, respectively, on average) in the period 1999–
2006.  Since  1999, 
its 
competitiveness and its sizeable current account deficit remains. 
In  principle,  one  could  imagine  that  stronger  productivity  growth  should  contribute  to 
containing unit labour costs, making Ireland more competitive than Portugal. This is true, but 
not  in  the  most  obvious  sense.  If  one  computes  unit  labour  costs  in  Ireland  and  Portugal, 
the  Portuguese  economy  has  not  succeeded 
improving 
in 
                                                 
19   In part, this might reflect the fact that the statistical data for real G DP are different from real G NP in the Irish 
case. Therefore, the increase in real domestic product has not necessarily entirely benefited the Irish people 
to the same extent. However, the quantitative importance of this discrepancy is low. We are therefore left with 
the task of understanding the causes of this divergence in economic performance. 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 7
numbers  are  approximately  the  same.  However,  export  performance  has  been  much 
stronger in Ireland than in Portugal, which has resulted in a trade surplus in the balance of 
payments (against a large deficit in Portugal). The large profit outflows in the factor income 
account in Ireland negatively affect the current account position. In 2006, the current account 
stood at -4.2% of GDP in Ireland, against -9.9% of GDP in Portugal. What has happened? 
Quite simply, cost competitiveness is not the only determinant of competitiveness. Shifting 
production to higher value-added sectors is as important as keeping unit labour costs under 
control,  if  not  more.  There  is  evidence  that  Ireland  and  Portugal  have  been  competing  in 
quite different products and markets in the past decade, with the latter country being subject 
to  stronger  competitive  pressures  from  new  Member  States  and  emerging  market 
economies. 
To a large extent, the divergence can be traced back to the key structural features of the two 
economies.  The  first  is  a  different  degree  of  flexibility.  Indicators  of  product  and  market 
regulation,  compiled  by  the  OECD,  signal  significantly  more  rigidity  in  Portugal  than  in 
Ireland; the same is true for other measures of market friendliness such as the World Bank’s 
Doing Business index.20 Another crucial difference is in the availability of physical and human 
capital, as evidenced by the discrepancy in educational attainment of the labour force, R&D 
expenditure,  penetration  of  information  technology,  etc.  Ireland  has  also  benefited,  in  part, 
from the removal of the exchange rate risk after the adoption of the euro, which has favoured 
large  FDI  inflows  (though  countries  like  Portugal  should  have  benefited  from  this  as  well). 
Labour  market  and  wage  and  price  flexibility  have  contributed  to  preventing  inflation  from 
rising excessively and becoming entrenched and ultimately unsustainable for the country’s 
competitiveness. 
Another interesting and telling difference between Ireland and Portugal has been in the field 
of fiscal policy. Public debt, public expenditure and budget deficits have all been significantly 
lower in Ireland than in the rest of the euro area, noticeably so when compared with Portugal. 
This shows that the discretionary use of fiscal policy is hardly a recipe for stimulating growth, 
especially when the “fiscal house” is not in order. 
At  the  same  time,  one  should  not  be  complacent  about  developments  in  Ireland.  Several 
years of very low and even negative real interest rates, coupled with buoyant growth, may 
have led some sectors of the economy, and the housing market in particular, to levels which 
are  unsustainable  over  the  medium  term.  We  still  do  not  know  of  policies  that  have  been 
reliably deployed to prevent the risk of misallocation of capital in an environment of very low 
real interest rates. Only time will tell. Moreover, the success of Ireland, a small country with 
little more than four million inhabitants, may not be easily replicated elsewhere, especially in 
larger countries. Nonetheless, it shows that equally flexible and dynamic economies in the 
east could do just as well if they were to join the euro area.  
To sum up, the differences between Ireland and Portugal are not so much in the behaviour of 
the real exchange rate and in standard measures of cost competitiveness. The Irish example 
shows  that  it  is  possible  to  prosper  in  the  monetary  union  while  having  a  higher  potential 
growth rate than the rest of the union. This does not need to be “paid” in terms of divergent 
or explosive inflationary outcomes and / or in unsustainable competitiveness for the country. 
The Portuguese example, in contrast, provides a stark warning that entering the monetary 
union per se does not guarantee a satisfactory growth performance. In order to obtain the full 
benefits of monetary union, the appropriate economic structures and national policies have to 
be in place. 
                                                 
20   Ireland  is  ranked  8th  and  Portugal  37th  in  the  World  Bank’s  ease  of  doing  business  index,  which  ranks 
economies from 1 to 178. The index is calculated as the ranking on the simple average of country percentile 
rankings 
topics 
See 
http://www.doingbusiness.org/economyrankings/. 
Business 
covered 
Doing 
2008. 
each 
ten 
on 
of 
in 
8 
 BIS Review 135/2007
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  conclude.  Economic  and  monetary  union  should  never  be 
considered as a final destination, but only as a departure point. Joining the euro area is not, 
in itself, a recipe for economic success. Countries need to be well equipped in order to thrive 
in it. The recipes for success are known: flexibility in the wage and price formation process, 
flexibility in the production structure, human and physical capital, dynamism. These features 
are  not  very  different  from  those  that  are  needed  anyway  in  an  era  of  globalisation,  but 
participation in EMU makes them even more compelling. Real convergence is therefore not, 
per se, an impediment to joining the monetary union. Nonetheless, there is no doubt that real 
convergence  creates  some  challenges  of  its  own  that  need  to  be  properly  addressed  by 
policy-makers before joining a monetary union. Not doing so will lead to both economic and 
political problems. 
The  recent  experience  of  Slovenia,  which  adopted  the  euro  on  1  January  this  year,  is  a 
confirmation of what I just said. The economy is growing fast and inflationary pressures are 
mounting, with the latest numbers exceeding 5%. Monetary policy evidently cannot cure this 
problem. On the other hand, fiscal policy in Slovenia is too lax, out of line with what would be 
required  for  macroeconomic  stabilisation.  Deregulation  of  the  product  and  labour  markets 
has not yet been completed. Wages are growing faster than productivity, in particular in the 
public sector. The risks of a boom-and-bust cycle are looming.  
In  the  face  of  this  worrying  scenario,  what  is  the  reaction  of  the  policy  authorities?  Very 
predictable: they blame the euro for the price increases.21 “Déjà vu all over again”: Whenever 
things go wrong in a country, the policy-makers blame Europe.  
It’s  obviously  not  the  right  response,  and  it  won’t  help  the  Slovenian  people  understand 
where the problems lie. Whether Slovenia will turn out to be more like Ireland than Portugal 
in the next few years depends entirely on Slovenia. And this will be true for any new member 
of the euro area. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Allsopp,  C.  and  D.  Vines  (1998):  “The  assessment:  macroeconomic  policy  after  EMU”, 
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 14, 3. 
Angeloni, I. and M. Ehrmann (2002): “Euro area inflation differentials, Working Paper No 388. 
Arghyrou, M. G., Gregoriou, A. and A. Kontonikas (2007): “Do real interest rates converge? 
Evidence from the European Union”, working paper.  
Arratibel, O., Heinz, F., Martin, R., Przybyla, M., Rawdanowicz, L., Serafini, R. and T. Zumer 
(2007). “Determinants of growth in the Central and Eastern European EU Member States – a 
production function approach”, ECB Occasional Paper No 61. 
Berk,  J.  M.  and  J.  Swank  (2007):  “Regional  real  exchange  rates  and  Phillips  curves  in 
monetary unions: evidence from the US and EMU”, DNB Working Paper No 147/2007. 
Blanchflower, D. (2002): “Unemployment, well-being and wage curves in eastern and central 
Europe”, Journal of Japanese and International Economy (?), 15, pp. 364-402. 
Boz,  E.  (2007):  “Can  miracles  lead  to  crises?  The  role  of  optimism  in  emerging  markets 
crises”, IMF Working Paper No 07/223. 
                                                 
21   See  the  statement  by  Slovenia’s  Prime  Minister  Jansa  on  16  November  2007:  “I  was  warned  by  other 
countries’ leaders that we would see price increases after euro adoption”. 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 9
Buettner, T. (2002): “Unemployment disparities and regional wage flexibility: comparing EU 
members and EU accession countries”, Empirica, 34, pp. 287-297. 
De  Broeck  and  Slock  (2006),  “Interpreting  Real  Exchange  Rate  Movements  in  Transition 
Countries”. Journal of International Economics 68, pp. 368-383. 
ECB (2003). “Inflation differentials in the euro area: potential causes and policy conclusions”, 
September. 
ECB (2004): “The natural real interest rate in the euro area” article in the Monthly Bulletin, 
May. 
ECB (2005): “Monetary policy and inflation differentials in a heterogeneous currency area”, 
May. 
Edison and Melick (1995), “Alternative Approaches to Real Exchange Rate and Real Interest 
Rates:  Three  Up  and  Three  Down”.  IFDP  No  518,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System. 
Egert, Halpern and McDonald (2006) “Equilibrium Exchange Rate in Transition Economies: 
Taking Stock of the Issues”, Journal of Economic Surveys, 20(2), pp. 257-324. 
Flamini,  A.  (2007):  “Inflation  targeting  and  exchange  rate  pass-through”,  Journal  of 
International Money and Finance, 26, pp. 1113-1150. 
Heinemann, F. and F. P. Huefner (2004): “Is the view from the Eurotower purely European? 
National  divergencies  and  the  ECB  interest  rate  policy”,  Scottish  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, 51, pp. 544-558. 
Leith, C. and J. Malley (2007): “Estimated open economy Phillips curves for the G7”, Open 
Economies Review, 18, pp. 427-451. 
Luengnaruemitchai  and  Schadler 
Perspectives on the New Members of the EU differ?”, IMF Working Paper WP/07/67. 
McDonald  and  Nagayasu  (1999),  “The  Long-Run  Relationship  Between  Real  Exchange 
Rates and Real Interest Rate Differentials: A Panel Study”, IMF Working Paper WP/99/37. 
Ortega,  E.  (2003):  “Persistent  inflation  differentials  in  Europe”,  Banco  de  España  Working 
Paper No 03/05. 
Rose, A. K. (2000): "One money, one market: estimating the effect of common currencies on 
trade", Economic Policy, 30. 
Shiller,  R.  (2007):  “Low  interest  rates  and  high  asset  prices:  an  interpretation  in  terms  of 
changing  popular  economic  models”,  paper  prepared  for  the  “Celebration  of  BPEA” 
conference, 6-7 September. 
“Do  Economists  and  Financial  Markets 
(2007), 
10 
 BIS Review 135/2007
