Y V Reddy: Developing debt markets in India – review and prospects 
Remarks by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a meeting of Central 
Bank  Governors  of  Asia,  Latin  America  and 
the  Caribbean,  Washington  DC, 
18 October 2007. 
 Governor Julio Velarde and fellow Governors, 
I am thankful to Governor Amando for giving me this opportunity to participate in the meeting 
of Central Bank Governors of Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean.  
I am conscious of the fact that the conditions prevalent in our economies are varied, and yet 
the  sharing  of  country  experiences  provides  us  valuable  insights  into  the  effectiveness  of 
public policy as well as the functioning of financial markets. 
The debt-market in India comprises of two segments, namely, government securities market 
and corporate debt market, but the size of the latter is currently very small, at about 14 per 
cent  of  the  total  debt  market.  This  is  reflective  of  both,  the  relatively  high  recurrent  fiscal 
deficits and the underdeveloped status of the corporate debt market. 
Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) are allowed to invest in the Indian debt markets subject 
to quantitative limits that are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Currently the ceiling is USD 2.6 
billion1  in  government  securities  and  USD  1.5  billion  in  corporate  bonds.  The  access 
provided to the FIIs in the debt market is to facilitate liquidity management arising from their 
operations in the equity market since they have liberal access to equity markets in India. The 
sovereign has not issued any foreign currency denominated bonds.  
Development of government securities market 
Before  the  1990s,the  government  securities  market  was  characterised  by  administered 
interest rates, high Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) requirements that led to the existence of 
captive investors in banks, and the absence of a liquid and transparent secondary market. 
The coupon rates offered on government securities were not market related.  
Reforms  in  the  government  securities  (G-Sec)  market  were  undertaken  as  a  part  of  the 
overall structural reform process that was initiated in 1991-92 and were aimed at redressing 
many of these infirmities. There are broad discernible phases before the recent initiatives in 
the development of the G-Sec market in India. The early initiatives in the reform of the G-Sec 
market  were  aimed  at  creating  an  enabling  policy  environment  and  included  (i)  the 
elimination of automatic monetisation; (ii) transition to market-related interest rates and (iii) 
reduction in SLR requirement to the then statutory minimum level of 25 per cent. 
The  second  phase  of  reforms  in  the  G-Sec  market  was  directed  towards  institutional 
development to enhance market activity, settlement and safety. These reforms included (i) 
establishment of a Delivery versus Payment system, to reduce settlement risk; (ii) institution 
of the system of Primary Dealers (PDs), and (iii) formation of market bodies such as Fixed 
Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA) and Primary Dealers 
Association of India (PDAI). Instrument persification was also seriously attempted during this 
phase of reforms. Prior to the 1990s, most of the government bond issuances were in the 
form of plain vanilla, fixed coupon securities. In order to meet the perse funding and hedging 
needs  of  participants,  various  types  of  instruments  such  as  zero  coupon  bonds,  capital 
                                                 
1   RBI has already announced enhancement of this limit to USD 3.2 billion. SEBI is in the process of notifying the 
same. 
BIS Review 127/2007 
 1
indexed  bonds,  floating  rate  bonds  and  bonds  with  call  and  put  options,  were  introduced. 
Floating  Rate  Bonds  (FRBs)  introduced  during  this  phase  did  not  evoke  much  response. 
Capital Indexed bonds (CIB) were first issued in 1997 but there were no further issuances 
mainly  due  to  the  lack  of  an  enthusiastic  response  from  the  market  participants,  both  in 
primary and secondary markets. Hence, plain vanilla bonds continue to be predominant in 
the issuances of government securities. 
The third phase of reforms in the G-Sec market is aimed at enhancing liquidity and efficiency. 
Some  of  the  important  initiatives  that  were  taken  during  this  phase  are:  (a)  introduction  of 
repo/reverse  repo  operations  in  government  securities  to  facilitate  participants  to  manage 
short-term  liquidity  mismatches;  (b)  operationalisation  of  the  Negotiated  Dealing  System 
(NDS),  an  automated  electronic  trading  platform;  (c)  establishment  of  the  Clearing 
Corporation  of  India  Limited  (CCIL)  for  providing  an  efficient  and  guaranteed  settlement 
platform;  (d)  introduction  of  trading  of  G-secs  in  stock  exchanges;  (e)  introduction  of  OTC 
and exchange-traded derivatives to facilitate hedging of interest rate risk; (f) introduction of 
Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) which addresses settlement risk and facilitates 
liquidity  management;  (g)  adoption  of  a  modified  Delivery-versus-Payment  mode  of 
settlement  which  provides  for  net  settlement  of  both  funds  and  securities  legs;  and  (h) 
announcement of an indicative auction calendar for Treasury Bills and dated securities.  
Recent initiatives 
Several initiatives have been taken in recent years. First, initiatives have been taken to widen 
the  investor  base  for  the  government  securities.  Traditionally,  commercial  banks  and 
insurance companies have been the largest holders of government securities. Major part of 
the holdings of these investors is generally in the nature of statutorily mandated investments. 
The  entry  of  mutual  funds  and  non-banking  finance  companies  in  recent  years  has 
broadened the base. In addition, the entry of 100 per cent Gilt Mutual Funds has broadened 
the  potential  for  retail  investor  base.  To  enable  small  and  medium  sized  investors  to 
participate in the primary auction of government securities, a “Scheme of Non Competitive 
Bidding”  was  introduced  in  January  2002,  which  is  open  to  any  person  including  firms, 
companies,  corporate  bodies,  institutions,  provident  funds,  trusts,  and  any  other  entity 
prescribed  by  RBI.  The  scheme  provides  for  allocation  of  up  to  5  per  cent  of  the  notified 
amount at the weighted average rate of accepted bids.  
With  a  view  to  further  promoting  liquidity  in  the  secondary  market  and  to  strengthen  the 
emergence  of  a  benchmark  yield  curve  across  maturities,  re-issuances  of  benchmark 
securities have been in place for quite some time. In furtherance of the objective, a scheme 
of  active  consolidation  of  government  securities  through  buy-backs  was  finalized.  This  is 
expected to be implemented during the current financial year. 
The  settlement  system  for  transactions  in  government  securities  was  standardised  to  T+1 
cycle with a view to provide the participants with more processing time at their disposal and 
therefore, to enable better management of both funds as well as risk. 
In  order  to  provide  banks  and  other  institutions  with  a  more  advanced  and  more  efficient 
trading platform, an anonymous order matching trading platform (NDS-OM) was introduced. 
The  NDS-OM  is  an  additional  facility  available  to  the  participants  and  the  participants 
continue to have the option of using the current telephone-trading platform. The settlements 
of both types of transactions are, however, integrated.  
Recently,  in  2006,  short  sale  was  permitted  in  dated  government  securities  to  provide  an 
opportunity  to  market  participants  to  manage  their  interest  rate  risk  more  effectively.  This 
measure is expected to further improve liquidity in the secondary market. “When issued” (WI) 
trading  in  Central  government  securities  was  also  introduced  in  2006.  This  is  expected  to 
contribute significantly to distributional efficiency in primary issuance, in addition to permitting 
PDs to manage their auction risk more effectively.  
2 
 BIS Review 127/2007
There is a fairly active interest rate derivative market in India. The market started with RBI 
permitting  interest  rate  swaps  and  forward  rate  agreements  (IRS/FRA)  in  1999.  Average 
daily  volumes  in  IRS  are  about  two  times  that  in  the  government  securities  market.  A 
reporting  platform  for  OTC  derivatives  has  been  set  up  recently.  This  will  enhance 
transparency and price discovery in the market. Interest rate Futures were permitted in 2003 
but has not taken off. RBI has now constituted a Group to suggest measures to activate the 
interest rate futures market. 
Current status of government securities market 
As  a  result  of  the  gradual  reform  process  undertaken  over  the  years,  the  Indian  G-Sec 
market  has  now  become  increasingly  broad-based,  characterised  by  an  efficient  auction 
process, an active secondary market and a fairly liquid yield curve up to 30 years. An active 
Primary  Dealer  (PD)  system  and  electronic  trading  and  settlement  technology  that  ensure 
safe settlement with Straight Through Processing (STP) and central counterparty guarantee 
support the market now. 
The outstanding stock of G-Secs is about fourteen times the level in 1992. Outstanding stock 
of  G-Secs  as  a  ratio  to  GDP  has  nearly  doubled  to  around  26  per  cent  over  this  period. 
Annual turnover of G-Secs has been placed at nearly 300 per cent of GDP in recent years as 
against 34 per cent in 1996. 
The  weighted  average  maturity  of  outstanding  stock  has  increased  consistently  from  6.5 
years in 1997-98 to 10.4 years in 2007-08. The elongation of maturity profile has been made 
possible largely on account of increase in market appetite from non-bank market participants, 
particularly  insurance  companies  and  provident  funds  and  improved  market  maturity.  It  is 
notable that despite substantial increase in the weighted average maturity, between 1997-98 
and  2003-04,  the  weighted  average  yield  of  the  dated  securities  issued  during  the  period 
declined from 12.01 % (1997-98) to 7.9 % (2006-07). However, in the subsequent years the 
weighted average yields have been increasing with increasing weighted average maturity. In 
2006-07, the weighted average maturity of new loans was 14.7 years with a range of 4 to 30 
years and the weighted average yield of new loans was 7.9 per cent. 
The Reserve Bank's efforts to elongate the maturity profile resulted in a smooth and reliable 
yield  curve,  which  acts  as  a  benchmark  for  the  other  markets  for  pricing  and  valuation. 
Market liquidity today compares well with other emerging economies with bid-offer spreads in 
benchmark securities at 1-2 bps.  
The holding of G-Secs among financial institutions has been more persified, particularly, with 
the  emergence  of  insurance  and  pension  funds  as  a  “durable”  investor  class  for  the  long-
term securities. This became possible due to the sustained efforts devoted to elongation of 
the maturity profile of government securities.  
Corporate debt market  
The development of a corporate bond market in India has lagged behind in comparison with 
other financial market segments owing to many structural factors. While primary issuances 
have been significant, most of these were accounted for by public sector financial institutions 
and  were  issued  on  a  private  placement  basis  to  institutional  investors.  The  secondary 
market,  therefore,  has  not  developed  commensurately  and  market  liquidity  has  been  an 
issue.  
The  Government  had  constituted  a  High  Level  Committee  on  Corporate  Bonds  and 
Securitisation (Patil Committee) to identify the factors inhibiting the development of an active 
corporate  debt  market  in  India  and  recommend  necessary  policy  actions.  The  Committee 
made a number of recommendations relating to rationalising the primary issuance procedure, 
facilitating  exchange  trading,  increasing  the  disclosure  and  transparency  standards  and 
BIS Review 127/2007 
 3
the  clearing  and  settlement  mechanism 
in  secondary  market.  The 
strengthening 
recommendations have been accepted in principle by the Government, RBI and SEBI and 
are under various stages of implementation.  
The  two  stock  exchanges,  namely,  the  Bombay  Stock  Exchange  (BSE)  and  the  National 
Stock  exchange  (NSE),  as  well  as  the  industry  body  Fixed  Income,  Money  Market  and 
Derivatives  Association  of  India  (FIMMDA)  have  since  operationalised  respective  trade 
reporting  platforms.  While  all  the  exchange  trades  in  corporate  bonds  get  captured  by 
concerned exchange’s reporting platform, OTC transactions can be reported on any of these 
platforms. The aggregated trade information across the platforms is being disseminated by 
FIMMDA on its website. BSE and NSE have  also started order driven trading platforms in 
July 2007. In practice, however, trading still continues to be largely OTC.  
SEBI has also implemented measures to streamline the activity in corporate bond markets by 
reducing the shut period in line with that of G-sec, reducing the size of standard lots to Rs. 
one lakh and standardising the day count convention. Further, to streamline the process of 
interest  and  redemption  payments,  Electronic  Clearing  Services  (ECS),  Real  time  Gross 
Settlements (RTGS) or National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) are required to be used 
by the issuers. 
Further  progress  is  anticipated  in  regard  to  rationalising  the  primary  issuance  procedures, 
which is a critical step for moving away from the pre-dominance of private placements.  
To reduce the settlement risk and enhance efficiency, the Patil Committee has also proposed 
setting  up  of  a  robust  clearing  mechanism.  The  settlement  was  proposed  to  be  initially  on 
DvP  I  basis  (i.e.  trade  by  trade  basis)  to  address  the  counterparty  settlement  risk  and 
gradually migrate to DvP III (net settlement of funds as well as securities) to impart enhanced 
settlement efficiency. (The delivery versus payment (DVP) modules can be broadly classified 
into three broad categories viz. DVP I, DVP II and DVP III. Under DVP I, the funds leg as well 
as the securities leg are settled simultaneously on a contract-by-contract basis. Under DVP 
2, while the securities leg is settled on a contract-by-contract basis, the funds leg is settled 
for the net amount). Under DVP III, both the funds and the securities legs are settled for the 
net amounts.)  
Outlook for development of corporate debt market 
Patil  Committee  has  recommended  two  important  measures  to  be  initiated  by  the 
Government, namely rationalization of stamp-duty, and abolition of tax deduction at source, 
as in the case of government securities. Hopefully, these would be acted upon soon.  
As  the  corporate  debt  markets  develop  and  RBI  is  assured  of  availability  of  efficient  price 
discovery through significant increases in public issues as well as secondary market trading, 
and an efficient and safe settlement system, based on DvP III and STP is in place, RBI is 
committed to permitting market repos in corporate bonds.  
In the medium term, considering the overall macro-economic situation, the ceiling for foreign 
investment in both government securities and corporate debt will continue to be calibrated as 
an  instrument  of  capital  account  management.  In  particular,  a  more  liberalized  access  to 
foreign  investment  would  be  appropriate  when,  among  other  things,  an  efficient  and  safe 
settlement  system  is  well  entrenched,  aggregate  consolidated  public  debt  to  GDP  ratio 
reaches  a  reasonable  level,  say  less  than  50  per  cent,  and  the  corporate  debt  market 
acquires depth and liquidity with significant role for insurance and pension funds in India. 
In the past, the government securities dominated the debt market in India, partly on account 
of  the  fiscal  dominance  and  the  absence  of  contractual  savings.  In  the  absence  of 
contractual savings only banks tended to deploy their funds in the corporate bond market, 
mainly  through  private  placement.  RBI  is  hopeful  that  the  recent  slow  but  steady 
development of insurance sector, mutual funds etc. coupled with the existence of a reliable 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2007
government securities market and the availability of robust reporting, trading and settlement 
mechanisms  would  lead  to  a  rapid  development  of  a  vibrant  corporate  debt  market.  A 
framework for the development is already available through the recommendations of the Patil 
Committee, the implementation of which has already been taken up by the various agencies.  
In support of my optimism in this regard, let me quote from a recent Working Paper of OECD: 
“…Well  functioning  government  securities  markets  give  public  support  to 
private  fixed-income  market  (both  cash  and  derivatives)  in  the  form  of 
pricing  benchmark,  while  they  also  provide  a  tool  for  interest  rate  risk 
management.  
For these reasons, the development of a well functioning government bond 
market will often precede, and very much facilitate, the development of a 
private-sector corporate bond market…”  
(New  Strategies  for  emerging  Domestic  and  Sovereign  Bond  markets, 
Working Paper No.260, OECD Development Centre, April 2007) 
As  regards,  policy  challenges  in  India,  they  may  be  similar  to  those  identified  by  a  recent 
report of the Committee on Global Financial Stability (CGFS).  
“Three  important  policy  challenges  that  remain  are:  to  improve  market 
liquidity of the new markets; to encourage greater private sector issuance; 
and to spread the risks of bond investment more widely.”  
(Financial Stability and Local Currency Bond Markets, CGFS Paper No.28, 
Bank for International Settlements, June 2007) 
Let me conclude with this optimistic note on the development of the corporate debt market 
also in India, sooner than the expectations of many in the financial markets.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 127/2007 
 5
