Kevin M Warsh: The end of History? 
Speech  by  Mr  Kevin  M  Warsh,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  to  the  New  York  Association  for  Business  Economics,  New  York, 
7 November 2007.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Scholars  have  debated  whether  the  end  of  the  Cold  War  constituted  the  end  of  History.1 
After the Soviet Union passed from the world stage, some suggested that an alluring new 
world  order  was  upon  us.  Sovereigns  were  purportedly  ready  to  put  historic  conflicts  in 
abeyance as cultures and ideologies coalesced around the principles of liberalism, freedom, 
and democracy.  
Detractors  have  argued  that  this  end-of-history  thesis  is  a  "mirage"  (Kagan,  2007). 
Intervening  geopolitical  events  appear  to  have  upended  the  notion  that  History  is  all  but 
written, that ideological conflicts will inexorably abate. At the very least, the experience of the 
past dozen years suggests that the hopes and aspirations for a less confrontational political 
and ideological era may be delayed. But even as the geopolitical situation has become more 
complex, and as conflicts among ideologies become more obvious, I wonder whether we are 
seeing  –  in  certain  other  spheres  of  social  interaction  –  some  coalescing  of  views,  some 
mutual  understanding  of  what  makes  for  a  strong  and  enduring  system.  Here,  befitting  an 
audience  of  business  leaders  and  economists,  I  am  thinking  of  economic  policy  and,  in 
particular, monetary policy in market-based economies.2
As  recently  as  several  months  ago,  some  may  have  been  tempted  to  believe  that,  in  the 
realm  of  economic  policy,  we  were  on  the  precipice  of  the  end  of  history.  The  seemingly 
benign  financial  and  economic  conditions  of  the  past  few  years  may  have  appeared  to  be 
approaching this nirvana.3
If  the  end  of  economic  history  were  at  hand,  what  would  it  look  like?  You  would  almost 
assuredly find strong, synchronized global economic growth; favorable inflation readings and 
anchored  inflation  expectations;  low  global  risk  premiums  and  low  term  premiums;  muted 
volatility across asset markets; a relatively free flow of products and services across national 
boundaries;  interconnected  financial  markets;  deep,  robust,  and  highly  liquid  secondary 
trading; the democratization of credit and growing access to capital; and, finally, a stance of 
monetary policy approximating its natural equilibrium. 
Think of the economic environment of several months ago, prior to the more recent financial 
turmoil.  The  appearance  of  these  sorts  of  benign  indicators  could  have  provided  useful 
testimony in support of the end-of-history thesis in the economic realm. But then what is to 
                                                 
1   Francis Fukuyama  advanced an affirmative view  of this  question  when  he  published "The End  of History?" 
(Fukuyama, 1989). Noting that the historical origins of the phrase can be found in the writings of Hegel and, 
later,  Marx,  Fukuyama  wrote  that  "what  we  may  be  witnessing  is  not  just  the  end  of  the  Cold  War,  or  the 
passing  of  a  particular  period  of  postwar  history,  but  the  end  of  history  as  such:  that  is,  the  end  point  of 
mankind's  ideological  evolution  and  the  universalization  of  Western  liberal  democracy  as  the  final  form  of 
human government" (p. 4). 
2   The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Board of 
Governors  or  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee.  I  am  grateful  for  the  assistance  of  Nellie  Liang  and 
Steven Sharpe, of the Board's staff, who contributed to these remarks. 
3   A discussion of this recent "nirvanic" period is in Beattie (2007). 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 1
be made of the global liquidity shock that crested in August and continues to manifest itself to 
this day? 
In my view, recent financial turmoil should not be considered an accident of history. Rather, it 
is History's latest reminder to policymakers and market participants alike that we ought to be 
humble in our convictions and cautious in our deeds as we seek a better understanding of 
what makes a strong and stable economic and financial system. The lessons learned from 
natural  experiments 
that 
macroeconomic  performance  can  be  improved.  But  as  empiricists  outside  of  our  "dismal 
science"  would  remind  us,  there  are  few  control  groups  in  economics.  As  a  result,  the 
definitive account has not been written. Nor has the practical conduct of policy yet evolved to 
the  point  at  which  financial  crises  and  economic  downturns  can  be  wholly  avoided.  As  a 
result, I will argue, the end of history may have to wait awhile.  
Let me first discuss the evolution of financial markets. Next, I will highlight the evolution of 
monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  Finally,  I  will  turn  to  more  recent  financial  and 
monetary events.  
in  economics  during  recent  decades  offer  great  promise 
Evolution of financial markets 
During the past several years, the cause of economic freedom and the culture of capitalism 
have  appeared  firmly  on  the  march.  Founding  ideologies  aside,  countries'  economies  are 
more  connected  by  virtue  of  increased  trade  of  products  and  services.  Free  markets, 
technological  innovation,  and  instant  communications  are  the  watchwords  of  the  global 
economy. And the dissemination of financial innovation has gained new converts. London, 
Hong Kong, Singapore, and Shanghai increasingly seek to challenge New York as the center 
of  global  financial  markets.  Competitive  national  ambitions,  perhaps,  have  demanded  an 
embrace of economic liberalism to build wealth even among those regimes that may prefer 
something  closer  to  autocracy  in  their  non-economic  dealings.  Democratizing  credit  to 
enlarge the global middle class, efficiently allocating capital, and dispersing risk exposures – 
these remain compelling practices for private market participants throughout the world. 
These financial market tailwinds bolstered worldwide economic growth, which is near record 
levels. In 2006, the U.S. economy grew 3 percent, while growth outside the United States 
averaged  nearly  4  percent  as  all  major  regions  racked  up  solid  gains.  So  far  this  year 
(through the third quarter in the United States and through the second quarter elsewhere), 
U.S. output growth managed to continue apace, while growth for the rest of the world picked 
up to more than 4 percent. Clearly the global economy has been firing on all cylinders, with 
emerging  Asia  taking  the  lead.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  macroeconomic 
performance is due, at least in part, to the increased adoption of liberal economic practices 
around  the  globe.  Perhaps,  then,  the  case  for  the  end  of  economic  history  is  not  without 
some evidentiary backing and persuasive appeal. 
Evolution of monetary policy and financial stability  
In  a  recent  survey  paper,  David  Laidler  identifies  three  tenets  that  embody  the  current 
consensus on the conduct of monetary policy in advanced economies (Laidler, 2007). First, 
market economies are inherently self-righting; second, open economies perform best under 
flexible  exchange  rates;  and  third,  central  bankers  should  focus  on  price  stability  as  their 
long-run objective.4  
Monetary  policy  in  the  past  couple  of  decades  can,  almost  assuredly,  claim  far  more 
successes  than  failures.  Look  no  further  than  measures  of  consumer  price  inflation  in  the 
                                                 
4   The Federal Reserve's dual mandate is not inconsistent with Laidler's third tenet. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2007
advanced economies. Median inflation (as defined by the International Monetary Fund) has 
held  near  2  percent  for  the  decade.  This  performance  has  helped  anchor  inflation 
expectations,  which,  in  turn,  has  helped  damp  the  pass-through  of  supply-related  price 
shocks. The low inflation rate has also permitted central banks to respond more forcefully to 
output fluctuations and more opportunistically to ensure low and stable prices.  
The improved inflation performance has come not at the expense of, but in conjunction with, 
output stability. Researchers have documented the so-called Great Moderation, in which the 
U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic 
product and core inflation over the past twenty years or so. Most economists would probably 
attribute  at  least  some  portion  of  the  Great  Moderation  in  the  growth  of  real  output  to 
monetary policy. 
Despite  the  record  of  steadier  economic  performance,  bouts  of  financial  market  instability 
continue to arise. Indeed, in my judgment, the inexorable march of technological change and 
creative destruction in a market economy all but assures the occurrence of such episodes 
(Schumpeter, 1942). To be sure, it is the recurrence of such episodes that supplies kindling 
to the debate on the appropriate balance between flexible, competitive financial markets and 
regulations that could limit the exuberance of market responses, irrational or otherwise. 
In  the  episode  at  hand,  early-cycle  increases  in  housing  prices,  escalating  returns  of 
leveraged  buyouts,  and  lower  all-in  financing  costs  made  possible  by  structured-finance 
products  highlighted  new  profit-making  opportunities  for  providers  and  users  of  capital.  As 
economic historians remind us, more entities are thus drawn into the activity until competition 
pushes its boundaries beyond the point of positive returns (Kindleberger, 1996). Eventually, 
some shock to the system exposes the fragility, and the shock is often followed by fear and 
overreaction before a new equilibrium is established.  
In these circumstances, financial markets often suffer from episodes of widespread illiquidity 
amid  a  rise  in  risk  aversion  among  investors.  Policymakers  and  market  participants  know 
with certainty that investors' risk perceptions and preferences will change and that stresses 
will  recur,  but  predicting  their  onset,  scope,  or  duration  is  exceedingly  difficult.  Surely, 
policymakers  and  market  participants  have  advanced  in  their  knowledge  and  in  the 
adaptability of their tools to help mitigate these negative effects on real economic activity. But 
as the events of 2007 make clear, the latest chapter in economic history should remind us of 
the habitual, but perhaps not immutable, drivers of human behavior in financial markets. 
Recent financial developments 
The  consequences  of  the  liquidity  shock  of  2007  on  the  financial  markets  and  the  real 
economy are still playing out in real time. It is premature to delineate lessons learned with 
complete  assurance.  The  facts,  nonetheless,  can  perhaps  be  placed  in  some  narrative 
context, drawing on the experience of prior bouts of financial instability. 
History, of course, is far from a perfect teacher. After all, history does not repeat itself; it only 
appears  to do  so.  In  that  regard,  the  causes and  consequences  of market  turmoil  are  still 
insufficiently  understood  for  the  end  of  history  to  be  declared.  And  as  I  briefly  discuss  the 
phases  often  accompanying 
turmoil  –  retrenchment,  reliquification, 
revaluation,  review  and  refinement  –  you  will  recognize  that  these  phases  are  neither 
discrete nor complete as year-end approaches. 
After several years of strong domestic and global growth, financial markets appeared highly 
accommodative  for  issuers  and  investors.  Many  willing  investors  purchased  complex 
financial  products  convinced  that  they  would  achieve  outsized  returns  because  the  future 
would look like the recent past. On the other side of the trade, originators operated under the 
presumption that secondary markets would remain liquid. And the resulting market-clearing 
prices across a range of asset classes were predicated on a world of modest risk premiums, 
financial  market 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 3
low  credit  spreads,  and  plentiful  liquidity.  Market  confidence  ultimately  begot  complacency 
(Warsh, 2007). 
By  mid-summer,  complacency  was  upended.  What  followed  was  a  rapid  period  of 
retrenchment,  the  first  phase  of  financial  market  turmoil.  As  concerns  about  losses  on 
subprime  mortgages  and  securitized  products  intensified,  investors  withdrew  liquidity  and 
markets  became  impaired.  Investors  revisited,  almost  anew,  the  quality  of  the  information 
about their assets. Financial intermediaries also pulled back from making markets in many 
products,  and  the  engines  of  financial  innovation  were  all  but  turned  off.  As  the  strains  in 
financial  markets  intensified,  many  of  the  largest  financial  institutions  became  jealously 
protective  of  their  liquidity  and  balance  sheet  capacity.  Amid  heightened  volatility  and 
diminished  market  functioning,  they  became  more  concerned  about  the  risk  exposures  of 
their counterparties and other potential contingent liabilities. For some, that process lasted 
days and weeks; for others, it may yet continue for many months. 
In the second phase – reliquification – financial institutions decided on the new liquidity levels 
and  capital  ratios  at  which  they  were  prepared  to  conduct  business.  Many  banks  became 
markedly less willing to provide funding to customers, including other banks. Given reduced 
confidence in their ability to quantify and price risks, balance sheet capital remained a scarce 
commodity. As a result, both overnight and term interbank-funding markets were pressured 
considerably.  Even  today,  some  banks  face  potentially  large  needs  for  dollar  funding,  and 
their  efforts  to  manage  their  liquidity  may  be  contributing  to  pressures  in  global  money 
markets  and  foreign  exchange  swap  markets.  More  broadly,  many  financial  institutions 
appear hesitant to put opportunistic capital to work.  
The next phase – revaluation – requires that the new prices be established in accordance 
with  the  new  financial  environment.  The  process  of  price  discovery  appears  to  be  quicker 
and more assured among corporate credits. Think, for example, of the markets for high-yield 
and leveraged loans, in which risk spreads have returned to more moderate levels. We have 
seen  significant  evidence  that  the  process  of  revaluation  in  other  previously  disrupted 
markets  is  also  under  way.  Investors  are  differentiating  risks,  for  example,  among  asset-
backed  commercial  paper  programs,  and  many  spreads  have  moderated.  Revaluation, 
however, may be a slower, tougher slog in the mortgage markets for those vintages in which 
the underlying asset quality is less certain. How quickly asset markets substantially complete 
the revaluation phase depends on the speed with which stakeholders regain comfort in their 
ability to value these assets.  
Financial  markets  rarely  normalize  in  a  steady,  linear  fashion.  More  often,  as  market 
sentiments sway between fear and greed, asset prices fluctuate and seek support (volume) 
before  establishing  new  trading  ranges.  That  pattern  is  particularly  pronounced  when  the 
underlying  economic  fundamentals  are  less  certain.  Hence,  the  next  phases  –  review  and 
refinement  –  are  the  hardest  to  predict  with  precision.  As  circumstances  dictate,  some 
financial  institutions  will  review  and  refine  their  capital  ratios,  risk  metrics,  and  business 
imperatives and proceed forward. Others may find that, in the course of review, they return to 
the phases of retrenchment and reliquification. Central bankers are prudent to stay alert to 
these changes.  
Without a doubt, then, this is a time of testing. Stakeholders will need to discern whether they 
are  witnessing  some  impairment  of  the  financial  sector,  or  merely  a  realignment  of  the 
competitive  landscape.  Moreover,  I  suspect  that  some  of  the  more  complex  structured 
products and investment strategies will be substantially modified; others will die. But, in the 
end, an improved understanding of how to create, bundle, distribute, and assess risk will not 
be forgotten, at least not for a cycle. 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2007
Recent monetary policy actions 
The financial shock of 2007 and its potential threat to the economy changed the view held by 
the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  of  the  most  appropriate  stance  of  monetary 
policy.  The  stresses  led  to  greater  financial  restraint  on  economic  growth.  Impaired  price 
discovery impeded the flow of capital. At the time of our September meeting, the downside 
risks  to  the  real  economy  appeared  to  have  increased;  greater  uncertainty  could  have  led 
lenders and investors to pull back further. Moreover, data on inflation were relatively stable, 
and  inflation  expectations  appeared  to  remain  anchored.  From  a  risk-management 
perspective,  these  circumstances  warranted  a  strong  policy  action.  By  doing  more  and 
sooner, the FOMC intended its policy action to counterbalance the tighter financial conditions 
and help forestall some potentially adverse effects of financial market disruptions on the real 
economy. To that end, the FOMC cut its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points at its 
September meeting. 
Subsequent  economic  information  received  suggests  that  activity  in  the  third  quarter 
expanded at a solid pace, even though housing activity subtracted about 1 percentage point 
from  real  activity.  Some  indicators,  however,  suggest  that  activity  may  have  slowed  in  the 
current quarter, and the prospect that such perceived softness may prove real and enduring 
is understood. In addition, stresses remain evident in certain asset and credit markets, even 
though  financial  market  conditions  today  appear  much  improved  from  their  August  nadir. 
There are also important reasons to be concerned about the outlook for inflation. Although 
recent  readings  on  core  inflation  have  been  favorable,  prices  of  crude  oil  and  other 
commodities have increased. These changes most likely will put upward pressure on overall 
inflation in the short run. Moreover, the decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar 
could  lead  to  higher  prices  for  imported  goods.  If  these  same  forces  cause  inflation 
expectations to become less reliably anchored, then inflation could increase in the longer run 
as well. 
As you know, last week, the FOMC reduced its target rate an additional 25 basis points, to 
4-/2 percent. Combined with the action of the September meeting, the FOMC judged that the 
cumulative policy easing of 75 basis points reduced the downside risks to growth, and that 
these risks were now roughly balanced by the upside risks to inflation. Should incoming data 
materially change our forecast, or risks to our forecast, for growth and inflation, so too would 
our view on the appropriate stance of monetary policy.  
Conclusion 
Ultimately the ability of the economy to withstand shocks is a function of the flexibility and 
resiliency of labor, product, and capital markets; strong and resilient market infrastructures; 
and good macroeconomic policies, not the least of which is monetary policy. Much progress 
has been made in our understanding of monetary policy in market-based economies. Indeed 
the economic trends of the past generation show great promise, albeit interrupted by periods 
of  genuine  distress.  In  my  view,  we  almost  invariably  end  up  with  better  macroeconomic 
outcomes than if we viewed stability as the sine qua non of policy. Recent events serve as 
an important reminder that the next chapter of history is still being written. Perhaps, that is 
always the case. As in the political realm, the path to the end of history may well prove to be 
prone to advance, overshoot, and correct. We must continue to deepen our understanding of 
financial markets and monetary policy, equipped with ample humility on a long, productive, 
and admittedly uneven path.  
References 
Beattie, Alan (2007). "Master of the Universe (Retired)," a review of The Age of Turbulence: 
Adventures in a New World by Alan Greenspan, in Financial Times, September 22-23. 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 5
(2007). 
"End  of  Dreams,  Return  of  History,"  Policy  Review 
Fukuyama,  Francis  (1989).  "The  End  of  History?"  National  Interest,  vol.  16  (Summer),  pp. 
3-18.  
Kagan,  Roger 
(August/September), www.hoover.org/publications/policyreview. 
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1996). Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, 
3rd ed. London: Wiley. 
Laidler,  David  (2007).  "Successes  and  Failures  of  Monetary  Policy  Since  the  1950s", 
University  of  Western  Ontario,  RBC  Financial  Group  Economic  Policy  Research  Institute 
Working Papers 20072. London, Ontario: University of Western Ontario, October. 
Schumpeter, Joseph (1942). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York: Harper. 
Warsh,  Kevin  (2007).  "Financial  Market  Developments",  speech  delivered  at  the  State 
University of New York at Albany's School of Business, Albany, N.Y., September 21.  
6 
 BIS Review 128/2007
