Ignazio Visco: Panel discussion on "Follow the money – global financial 
markets” 
Remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, at the High-level 
Conference on “Looking East, Looking West: Key Challenges Facing the Atlantic Partners”, 
organised by DGAP, American Council on Germany, The Council for United States and Italy, 
Berlin, 15-16 November 2007. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Over the last decade a new global financial landscape has emerged as a result of substantial 
changes  in  market  openness,  demography  and  technology.  Financial  deepening  has 
accompanied a marked increase in economic growth, with the emergence of new economic 
giants. This has been associated, however, with significant imbalances in current accounts 
and, as we have seen in the course of this year, a new bout of financial instability. 
I will briefly consider the main changes in the financial system. As these are not transitory, it 
is  important  to  inquire  into  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  what  appears  to  be  a  new 
financial  paradigm,  and  assess  the  main  challenges  for  monetary  authorities  and  financial 
regulators alike. 
2. 
The new financial landscape: main driving forces 
Economic and financial integration 
2.1. 
The first, key factor is market integration and financial globalization. This development has 
several dimensions:  
• 
On  the  trade  side,  imports  and  exports  of  goods  and  services  have  accelerated, 
growing much faster than world GDP. The emerging Asian economies now account 
for more than a fourth of world exports of manufactured goods, having doubled their 
share  since  1990.  The  effective  entry  into  the  global  labour  market  of  significant 
parts of the populations of China and India is an important element in what we mean 
by globalisation. This process is still far from complete. 
Foreign direct investment has expanded substantially, from less than 10 per cent of 
world  GDP  in  1995  to  about  25  per  cent  today;  the  increase  has  been  similar  in 
advanced and emerging economies. The share of foreign affiliates in world GDP has 
doubled since the early 1980s, from 5 to 10 per cent. 
Financial integration has been very intense in the industrialised countries, where the 
ratio  of  gross  foreign  assets  and  liabilities  to  GDP  has  risen  from  140 per  cent in 
1995 to over 300 per cent today. It is expected to increase sharply in the emerging 
and developing countries as well, as capital controls are gradually removed.  
  Greater international integration, in these three dimensions, has two main implications. The 
first is increased interdependence. Shocks are transmitted more rapidly across borders via 
trade, corporate outsourcing and financial markets. This implies that national policy decisions 
now have greater potential spillover effects. The second implication – partly a mirror image of 
the  first  –  is  greater  risk  diversification.  Trade  shifts  part  of  the  repercussions  of  domestic 
macroeconomic  shocks  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  Similarly,  investors  holding  global  asset 
portfolios  should  be  less  exposed  to  country-specific  shocks.  In  spite  of  the  significant 
increase in integration, however, there seems still to be ample scope for further gains from 
risk diversification, as domestic saving and investment are still very closely related. 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 1
 Population ageing  
2.2.  
Another major change that is shaping the global economy and financial markets is the ageing 
of population. A secular rise in longevity has been flanked, more recently, by lower fertility 
rates, with the result that world population is now ageing very rapidly, not only in industrial 
countries, but in a number of emerging economies as well, most notably China. In particular: 
The steep increase in the old-age dependency ratio observed in many countries has 
• 
brought a retrenchment in public pensions and a switch to supplementary schemes. 
These structural changes in pension schemes in turn affect the financial choices of 
households and have far-reaching effects on financial markets at large. 
In  order  to  secure  retirement  income,  households  have  significantly  increased  the 
portion of their financial assets managed by institutional investors, such as pension 
funds, mutual funds and insurance companies: in the three largest economies of the 
euro  area,  in  the  last  decade  this  share  increased  on  average  by  10  percentage 
points to more than a third. 
Due  to  these  demographic  and  financial  changes,  households  are  exposed  to 
considerable financial risk. This reflects the shift in composition of their portfolios in 
favour of riskier assets, held directly and via institutional investors, and the switch 
from  “defined  benefit”  to  “defined  contribution”  pension  schemes.  Together  with 
financial risk, longevity risk has also increased: as people live longer than expected, 
governments find it difficult to fund public pension schemes and this raises the need 
for private savings to provide retirement income. 
 The new economy and financial innovation 
2.3.  
A  third  driving  force  that  has  reshaped  financial  markets  over  the  last  decade  is  the 
interaction  between  technical  progress  and  financial  innovation.  The  breakthroughs  in 
information  technology  and  telecommunications  have  powerfully  affected  all  the  building 
blocks  of  the  financial  system:  payments  infrastructure,  intermediaries,  markets  and 
instruments. Foremost is the growth of asset securitization, which relies on complex financial 
instruments and on sophisticated risk management techniques, with several implications: 
• 
In the traditional intermediation model, banks raise funds in the form of short-term 
deposits  and  invest  in  longer-term  loans  that  are  held  to  maturity.  With  the 
extraordinary growth of securitization, banks have been moving to a new model of 
intermediation,  in  which  they  originate  loans  and  then  repackage  them  for  sale  to 
other investors. With this new “originate-to-distribute” (OTD) model, credit risk is not 
concentrated  on  banks’  books  anymore,  but  is  potentially  dispersed  among  a 
multitude of investors. 
The  development  of  asset  backed  securities  and  the  vast  array  of  financial 
instruments built on them (indices, derivatives, etc.), has made bank loans tradable. 
This  has  decreased  their  cost,  by  reducing  the  illiquidity  premium,  and  has 
contributed  to  the  narrowing  of  spreads  and  the  generally  favourable  credit 
conditions we have witnessed in the past few years. Overall, securitization has freed 
up banks’ capital, which has been used to back new loans. 
 Now  that  it  is  possible  to  trade  loans,  pent-up  demand  for  credit  risk  has  found  an  outlet. 
Thanks  to  greater  financial  integration,  pension  funds,  insurance  companies,  hedge  funds 
and even money market funds have shown an appetite for these products, partly as a form of 
diversification and partly as the result of intensified search for yield in a world of low interest 
rates and low volatility.  
2 
 BIS Review 135/2007
3.  
Strengths and weaknesses of the new financial paradigm: a “robust yet 
fragile” financial system 
The OTD model has many benefits for banks, investors and the financial system at large: 
• 
In  the  traditional  model  banks  hold  credit  risk,  while  other  investors  cannot  get 
exposure  to  it.  With  the  new  model,  banks  can  sell  part  of  the  risk  in  their  loan 
portfolio and enhance the liquidity of their assets. 
At the same time, investors can easily diversify by getting exposure to credit risks; 
hence, the OTD model is a further step towards complete financial markets. 
Credit  risk  should,  at  least  in  principle,  be  dispersed  among  a  large  number  of 
investors with different propensities for risk and different investment objectives and 
horizons. This variety should reduce the likelihood of large swings of asset prices 
caused by unidirectional trading strategies, making the financial system more stable. 
The decrease in financial volatility observed in recent years can be traced, among 
other things, to the new intermediation model. 
  The bottom line is that the OTD model permits more efficient allocation of credit risk. But it 
also  entails  a  number  of  dangers,  some  of  them  intrinsic  to  its  mechanism,  others  more 
generally related to the greater interdependence of the financial system.  
 New sources of risk brought by the OTD model 
3.1.  
The weaknesses of the OTD model have become evident during the recent financial turmoil: 
• 
The pricing of structured finance products (SF) such as ABSs, CDOs and CLOs is 
complicated.  These  instruments,  constructed  by  packaging  loans,  are  complex, 
illiquid  and  often  opaque.  Because  their  valuation  depends  on  data-intensive 
statistical models and on incomplete data for a host of possible scenarios, they may 
imply substantial “model risk”. 
Rating agencies play a key role, serving as third party certifiers of the quality of SF 
products, but face technical and incentive problems. Unlike traditional bonds these 
products are not generally traded in secondary markets, so no public information on 
their value is available. Conflicts of interest may therefore be more relevant in SF 
markets than in bond markets: as it is very difficult to verify the quality of the service 
provided, the standard reputational equilibrium that sustains the agencies’ business 
model is weakened. 
The  incentives  for  banks  to  act  as  delegated  monitors  of  their  borrowers  are 
weakened substantially, as the bank that originates the loan no longer holds its risk. 
Whereas in the traditional “buy-to-hold” model banks have an incentive to avoid the 
deterioration of quality of the loan, so as to prevent default, in the OTD model their 
interest in monitoring the borrower is greatly diminished.  
Risk might be more concentrated than we know. Once SF products are sold, there is 
no  telling  where  they  end  up.  Risk  might  be  widely  spread,  which  would  be 
beneficial  to  systemic  stability,  but  it  could  also  be  concentrated  among  a  few 
operators.  Unregulated  highly-leveraged  institutions  such  as  conduits,  SIV  and 
hedge funds may pile up substantial credit risk, maturity risk, and liquidity risk, and 
indeed they have done so. Ultimately, risk may return to banks, which remain the 
main source of credit. Lacking sufficient information, an adverse event might trigger 
losses in many dimensions. As has happened since this summer, this could lead to 
a  liquidity  squeeze  in  money  markets:  banks  would  not  be  willing  to  lend  to  one 
another even at short maturity.  
  All in all, OTD is a sophisticated mechanism that, in order to allocate risk efficiently, relies on 
complex products, liquid markets and a multitude of operators. But products may be opaque, 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 3
market  liquidity  may  dry  up,  and  some  operators  may  have  strong  incentives  and  be 
accordingly ready to place big bets. So although it is market-based, at least for now the OTD 
model  lacks  the  main  feature  of  well-functioning  financial  markets:  frequent  and  abundant 
trading, which at once requires and produces information and liquidity.  
As a result, while systemic events may have become less likely thanks to diversification and 
risk  dispersion,  their  costs  may  have  increased,  with  the  overall  increase  in  leverage  and 
interdependence  (more  on  this  later).  This  suggests  that  “tail”  risk  might  be  larger  than  is 
commonly 
is 
underestimated.  Shocks  that  would  otherwise  have  been  otherwise  easy  to  manage  may 
now become a threat to financial stability if they trigger a chain reaction, as could be the case 
of  a  shock  to  investors  with  large  unbalanced  positions  or  if  many  investors  have  similar 
models and strategies that lead them all to be on the same side of the market. 
the  probability  of  extreme  events 
in  other  words, 
thought;  or, 
that 
Greater interdependence 
3.2.  
The  ongoing  process  of  financial  consolidation  and  the  OTD  model  have  produced 
intermediaries  that  are  closely  intertwined  with  the  capital  markets.  The  large,  complex 
financial institutions resulting from consolidation offer a broad range of products – from asset 
management  to  corporate  finance  and  prime  brokerage  services  –  that  rely  on  well-
functioning capital markets. Therefore, the OTD model has increased banks’ dependence on 
capital markets. 
Today’s  global  financial  system  is  also  far  more  interconnected  than  in  the  past.  This  has 
some important consequences for financial stability: 
• 
Since banks now sell their loans and offer a range of financial services, an illiquid 
market  would  generate  substantial  risks,  such  as  warehouse  risk  (i.e.  the  risk  of 
being unable to find buyers and being stuck with products the bank might not want 
in  the  first  place)  and  additional  market  risks  (when  assets  sold  in  thin  markets 
would  send  prices  spiralling  down,  forcing  additional  sales  by  leveraged  investors 
and sharply reducing liquidity – something we have seen in recent weeks). To avoid 
this, at times banks may end up acting as a sort of “lender of last resort to markets”, 
with all the implicit effects on the availability of credit to other sectors of the economy 
and on financial stability.  
Since  the  intermediation  model  increasingly  relies  on  capital  markets,  market 
infrastructures  are  of  paramount  importance.  The  quality  and  reliability  of  both 
technical  infrastructures  –  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems  –  and  the 
organization of trading in public markets directly affect all players. 
A  more  connected  world  improves  risk  diversification  and  makes  markets  more 
resilient.  But  when  contagion  is  actually  set  off,  an  interlinked  financial  system 
heightens the risk that it may spread more widely. The very channels that in good 
times enhance resilience may also propagate, and possibly amplify, shocks.  
  Interdependence  thus  requires  more  international  coordination  of  policies  for  liquidity 
provision,  regulation  and  supervision  of  markets  and  intermediaries.  This  would  help  to 
impede opportunities for regulatory arbitrage and the situations of moral hazard. 
Challenges for authorities and regulators 
4.  
The  recent  financial  turbulence  has  posed  a  number  of  stiff  challenges  to  monetary 
authorities  and  financial  regulators.  So  far,  the  response  has  followed  a  two-pronged 
strategy:  central  banks  have  provided  liquidity  in  order  to  ensure  an  orderly  functioning  of 
money  markets  while  a  number  of  far-reaching  initiatives  have  been  launched  in  the 
international fora of cooperation to strengthen the financial system. 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2007
Short-term response to stabilise markets 
4.1.  
When  financial  and  credit  market  turmoil  produces  systemic  tensions  in  money  markets, 
distinguishing between the aims of liquidity provision and the reasons that stand behind the 
setting of policy interest rates – easy under normal circumstances – becomes more difficult. 
On the one hand, the actions needed to ensure orderly functioning of the money market may 
blur monetary policy signals. On the other, decisions on interest rates could be interpreted as 
revealing  major  information  unknown  to  the  market  and  hinder  its  normal  functioning.  In 
particular: 
• 
Recent  events  have  demonstrated  that  modern  central  banks,  and  the  ECB  in 
particular, are well-equipped to deal with these problems, at least as far as short-
term  money  market  rates  are  concerned.  Since  August,  the  major  central  banks 
have  provided  ample  liquidity  to  the  interbank  system,  keeping  short-term  rates 
under control. While very short-term rate volatility has increased significantly since, 
in  the  euro  area  the  differential  between  the  overnight  and  the  official  rate  has 
generally remained very low, in line with pre-crisis levels. 
In the United States, the Fed has lowered its target rate twice, for a total of three 
quarters  of  a  point.  In  the  euro  area,  meanwhile,  the  policy  rate  has  been  kept 
unchanged. In neither case has day-to-day liquidity management impaired signalling 
of the monetary policy stance.  
The  situation  is  more  problematic  on  longer  money  market  maturities,  where  a 
substantial premium on official rates has emerged. Central bank interventions have 
been effective in avoiding market disruptions, but they could not address the lack of 
disclosure  underlying  these  tensions,  resolution  of  which  requires  additional 
information of the size and distribution of exposures, an assessment of the impact 
on banks’ balance sheets, and the completion of the process of risk repricing. 
  All in all, by their prompt interventions the central banks were able to preserve orderly market 
conditions  and  avert  a  liquidity  crisis,  without  endangering  the  markets’  medium-term 
expectations in a period of volatility and generalized uncertainty. 
Strengthening the foundations of the financial system 
4.2.  
The ongoing financial turbulence has not come as a surprise. For some time the supervisory 
authorities  had  been  emphasizing  the  increasing  strains,  stressing  the  rise  in  sub-prime 
mortgage defaults in the United States and warning that investors’ perception of risk might 
have changed suddenly, leading to abrupt portfolio adjustment and destabilizing effects. But 
the interaction between the difficulty to value SF products, the evaporation of liquidity and the 
“rush to exit” to reduce risk exposure could not have been foreseen, and nor could the speed 
at which the crisis spread across institutions and markets.  
To tackle the fragilities highlighted by the current turbulence, the financial community has put 
a number of initiatives in place in recent months. In particular: 
• 
At  the  request  of  the  Group  of  Seven,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  is 
reviewing  several  important  issues  such  as  the  management  of  risks  –  especially 
liquidity risk – by the institutions subject to regulation, the appropriateness of capital 
requirements,  the  full  consolidation  of  the  assets  and  liabilities  currently  kept  off 
banks’  balance  sheets,  and  the  transparency  and  valuation  of  structured  financial 
products. 
The  EU  Finance  Ministers  have  asked  the  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  to 
examine a number of issues raised by the recent turbulence, analysing them in a 
way  that  is  complementary  to  the  mandate  of  the  FSF  by  taking  a  European 
perspective  and  covering  slightly  different  areas,  including  the  implications  of  the 
 BIS Review 135/2007 
 5
new Capital Requirements Directive, which implements the Basel 2 framework in the 
European Union. 
In fact, it was not properly anticipated that commercial banks could be the weak link in the 
system:  other  financial  institutions,  hedge  funds  first  of  all,  were  thought  to  be  more  likely 
candidates  to  set  off  a  crisis.  To  some  extent,  the  tensions  experienced  in  recent  weeks 
reflect  banks’  attempts  to  exploit  regulatory  arbitrage  permitted  by  the  Basel  1  framework, 
transferring outside their balance sheets, to unregulated entities, activities that would have 
required substantial capital otherwise. Searching for the direction to follow in addressing the 
issues that have emerged, we can advance the following considerations: 
• 
The Basel 2 framework will certainly mitigate the problem, as the risks associated 
with the innovative, complex activities undertaken by banks in recent years will be 
easier  to  capture.  With  respect  to  capital  requirements,  for  example,  Basel  2 
improves on the treatment of mortgage exposures and introduces a capital charge 
on  liquidity  lines  extended  to  conduits  funded  through  asset-backed  commercial 
paper.  Additional  capital  will  be  required  to  match  operational  risks  in  order,  for 
example, to cover legal losses. To enhance market discipline banks will be induced 
to disclose information about their risk management policies and systems. This will 
include the risks associated with securitization exposures. As a development of the 
new  regulatory  approach,  before  the  turmoil  the  Basel  Committee  had  begun  a 
review of the existing supervisory approaches to liquidity risk.  
While  the  Basel  2  framework  will  represent  a  considerable  improvement  on  the 
previous discipline of capital requirements, steps need to be taken in other areas to 
avoid  excessive  risks  and  make  banks  more  resilient  to  shocks.  To  improve 
transparency on risk exposures, particular attention must be paid to the obligation to 
consolidate the accounts of financial vehicles, even if not affiliated, whenever banks 
exercise  substantial  control  and  bear  the  ultimate  risk.  To  take  account  of  the 
effective risk for prudential purposes, vehicles that are largely controlled by banks 
should also be consolidated when capital requirements are established. In order to 
contain model risk, additional efforts must be directed at refining the methods used 
to  value  SF  products.  Banks’  liquidity  management  must  also  be  improved,  with 
reference  to  liabilities  no  less  than  assets,  to  increase  our  understanding  of  the 
relation  between  market  liquidity  and  banks’  funding  liquidity  risk.  Also,  public 
authorities  and  market  participants  should  thoroughly  review  existing  incentives  in 
the financial industry at large, to find ways to prevent the accumulation of excessive 
risks. 
An additional area of policy intervention that is becoming as important as the regulation and 
supervision  of  markets  and  intermediaries  is  financial  literacy.  As  individuals  become 
increasingly  responsible  for  their  retirement  income  and  the  allocation  of  wealth,  so  their 
financial needs are becoming increasingly complex. The financial industry is responding with 
a wide range of instruments, many of them complex as well. A few remarks on this point are 
appropriate:  
• 
Survey evidence suggests that the majority of consumers lacks financial capability in 
key  areas,  even  in  countries  where  there  is  a  strong  tradition  of  stock  market 
participation  as  in  the  United  States  or  the  United  Kingdom.  For  poorer  and  less 
educated  households  the  lack  of  knowledge  is  greater  and  has  more  serious 
potential consequences.  
By  improving  financial  education,  policy-makers  can  affect  economic  behaviour. 
Evidence  shows  a  positive  correlation  between  financial  literacy  and  retirement 
planning abilities, the likelihood of buying risky assets and investing efficiently. 
Financial  education  is  helpful  but  its  impact  should  not  be  overestimated. 
Regulations  to  protect  consumers  –  such  as  by  reducing  conflicts  of  interest  for 
   6 
 BIS Review 135/2007
financial  advisers,  introducing  rules  of  disclosure,  and  making  provision  for 
investment default options – are complementary to financial education. For example, 
policies to increase the transparency of financial products can improve households’ 
welfare both on the asset and liability side. Regulation should be designed keeping 
in mind the trade-off between consumer protection and the inhibition of innovation.  
Conclusions 
5.  
The increasing complexity and interdependence of the world financial system is channelling 
resources to the most productive investments, thus supporting efficiency and growth globally. 
However,  the  financial  system  may  also  become,  at  times,  a  source  of  instability.  Policy-
makers  are  already  adjusting  regulation  and  supervision  practices  to  deal  with  a  rapidly 
evolving financial system; cooperation to secure a level playing field and to reduce the scope 
for competition in laxity is required. Coordination when intervening on interlinked markets is 
necessary.  
Institutional and retail investors should be made aware of the new set of risks they are facing, 
in order to make informed decisions. Crises can not always be prevented; as recent events 
have shown, once they occur swift action can stem the damage and work towards restoring 
confidence.  Again,  cooperation  and  coordination  are  the  only  way  to  deal  with  systemic 
events  that  have  the  potential  to  wreck  the  global  financial  system.  Indeed,  while  we 
recognize that an efficient financial market is a fundamental driver of economic growth, we 
are also aware that financial instability must be limited if it is not to hamper economic activity. 
BIS Review 135/2007 
 7
