James D Rogers: Accountability, transparency and governance in Sierra 
Leone 
Keynote  address  and  statement  by  Dr  James  D  Rogers,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sierra 
Leone,  at  the  Second  Audit  Risk  and  Governance  Africa  Conference,  Zanzibar,  Tanzania, 
17-20 July 2007.  
 Mr Chairman, Conference Organisers, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I wish firstly to thank the conference organisers for their kind invitation to deliver the keynote 
address at this conference on this very topical and important subject.  
My remarks will be in six parts. After an Introduction, the First Part will consider the Meaning 
and Scope of Accountability, Transparency and Governance. The Second Part will examine 
the relationship between Governance and Development. Part Three will present Aspects of 
Governance  in  Sierra  Leone.  This  will  be  followed  by  General  Remarks  in  Part  Four.  Part 
Five concludes.  
Introduction  
Accountability  and  transparency  have  occupied  a  very  high  lead  in  discussions  of  state 
management. Hardly would a speech be delivered, at domestic or international gatherings, 
articles written, in the popular press or in professional and academic journals, on issues of 
state  management,  without  at  least  an  allusion  to,  if  not  an  extensive  treatment  of,  these 
concepts. Indeed, serious examination of these concepts takes us into the complexities of 
governance,  aid  conditionalities  and  effectiveness,  international  economic  cooperation, 
sovereignty of developing countries, economic development, achievement of the millennium 
development goals, and associated issues.  
It  is  within  the  context  of  these  considerations  that  a  fuller  analysis  and  understanding  of 
these concepts can be obtained. This, however, is a very wide agenda. There is an extensive 
and  growing  literature  giving  varying  perspectives  on  the  subject,  and  one  can  only  be 
selective in the examination of the issues.  
Meaning and scope  
Accountability  and  transparency  are  major  pillars  in  the  architecture  of  governance.  While 
governance itself is not uniquely defined in its various uses, as we shall discuss shortly, most 
definitions  of  the  term  implicitly  or  explicitly  embrace  the  principles  of  accountability  and 
transparency. Many examples can be cited in support of this position. A typical example of 
this  is  provided  by  Paul  Wolfowitz,  former  President  of  the  World  Bank,  who  in  a  2006 
speech  in  Jakarta  stated  as  follows:  In  the  last  half-century,  we  have  developed  a  better 
understanding  of  what  helps  governments  function  effectively  and  achieve  economic 
progress.  In  the  development  community,  we  have  a  phrase  for  it.  We  call  it  good 
governance.  It  is  essentially  the  combination  of  transparent  and  accountable  institutions; 
strong skills and competence, and a fundamental willingness to do the right thing.  
Governance itself is not a new phenomenon. While its genesis may be traced to the Greek 
city-states,  its  meaning,  purpose,  practice  and  extent  have  evolved  over  the  centuries, 
reflecting changing circumstances and specific concerns.  
In  the  context  of  developing  country  relationships  with  the  international  donor  community 
however,  we  are  dealing  with  a  recent  manifestation,  which  surfaced  in  the  1990s.  Hyden 
and  Court  in  their  2002  Discussion  Paper,  Governance  and  Development,  relate  the 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 1
emergence  of  this  dimension  of  governance  to  the  changing  paradigms  in  thinking  on 
development.  
They  trace  the  evolution  of  development  thinking  from  the  emphasis  on  projects  to 
programmes, then to policies, and the latest recognition that in addition to these, politics is 
also important. The inclusion of the political dimension in development practice has altered 
the  development  landscape,  prompting  intrusion  into  aspects  of  policy  earlier  deemed 
beyond the limits of donor activity; with concomitant protests of violation of sovereignty and 
related controversies.  
The  concept  of  governance  arising  from  this  process  is  not  precise  in  meaning.  Despite 
attempts  at  distinguishing  between  the  political,  economic  and  administrative  aspects  of 
governance,  its  analytic  and  operational  dimensions,  and  its  constitutive  and  distributive 
elements,  in  the  final  analysis  governance  is  essentially  all-embracing  in  its  essence.  It 
percolates  through  the  entire  fabric  of  the  political,  economic  and  social  life  of  a  nation. 
Recognition of this is reflected in the diversity of definitions given to the concept. While it may 
be too time-consuming to provide a sampling of these definitions, the flavour of the concept 
can  be  savoured  from  the  following  statement  of  Vivien  Collingwood  of  Nuffield  College, 
Oxford in the paper, Good Governance and the World Bank. It states:  
There  are  many  competing  views  on  what  the  term  “good  governance”  should  mean,  but 
most  donors  agree  that  it  should  include  some  (if  not  all)  of  these:  Increased  public 
accountability  and  transparency;  respect  for  and  strengthening  of  the  rule  of  law  and  anti-
corruption  measures;  democratisation,  decentralisation  and  local  government  reform; 
increased  civil  society  participation  in  development;  and  respect  for  human  rights  and  the 
environment.  
Further, we are reminded that apart from the lack of precision in the meaning of governance, 
it is also an evolving concept, embracing new elements with the passage of time. This arises 
from  its  normative  conception  and  the  observation  that  “the  values  that  provide  the 
underpinning for governance are the values postulated by international donor institutions”.  
When it was initially embraced by the donor community in the early 1990s, it was seen as 
limited to the exercise of authority with respect to the management of resources for sound 
economic  development.  In  the  mid-1990s  the  requirements  of  transparency,  accountability 
and  participation  were  added  to  its  characteristics.  By  2000,  the  Development  Assistance 
Committee  of  the  OECD  adopted  a  perception  of  good  governance  as  requiring  “a  broad 
approach  to  partnership  extending  beyond  government  and  parliaments  to  include  civil 
society and the private sector”, and adding to the notions of transparency and accountability 
that of predictability. 
Given their centrality in the governance agenda, it would be advisable to expand a little on 
transparency and accountability.  
Transparency refers to the need for openness in government policies and decisions. Such 
openness, and making available required information to the populace, will reduce the scope 
for misuse of resources and enhance public capacity for holding governments to account. 
One of the crucial areas highlighted for attention in this regard is the budget. It is through the 
budget that the management of national resources is mainly implemented and the absence 
of transparency in budgeting processes can engender corruption, inefficiency and inequity, 
and compromise the provision of public services and the development effort. Particular focus 
is advised on public procurement. The use of open tender processes, publication of relevant 
information regarding award of contracts, easily accessible complaints procedures when foul 
pay  is  suspected,  are  among  the  crucial  considerations  for  ensuring  good  governance  in 
public financial management.  
Similar approaches should be adopted in the management of revenues accruing from natural 
resources  such  as  oil  and  other  mineral  wealth,  forestry  and  fisheries  resources.  The 
contracts signed with foreign partners for the exploitation of these resources, the revenues 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2007
accruing there from and the uses to which they are put should be readily accessible to the 
populace. Absence of transparency in these matters creates breeding houses for conclusion 
of arrangements which may not be of general national benefit, encourage misappropriation 
and exploitation of national resources in the interest of an elite minority, with a potential in the 
long run of threatening national cohesiveness and precipitating instability.  
The case for transparency and good budgetary management assumes further significance in 
the evolving advocacy for channelling aid through the domestic budget. The provision of aid 
in  the  form  of  general  budgetary  support  confers  greater  independence  in  the  use  of 
resources  on  recipient  countries,  stronger  national  ownership  of  development  policies  and 
programmes, and lower costs than those associated with multiple aid delivery modalities. For 
this  intention  to  be  achieved  on  a  wide  basis  and  the  proffered  benefits  realised,  donor 
governments  and  institutions  must  have  confidence  in  mechanisms  in  place  in  recipient 
countries for the management of the budget. Worries about corruption and mismanagement 
are  antithetical  to  this  objective;  hence  the  need  for  strengthened  budgetary  procedures, 
improved governance and transparency.  
There is a strong perception in the donor community that international assistance is required 
to help strengthen the public financial management systems and processes in aid receiving 
countries,  including  oversight  by  parliament,  audit  boards  and  civil  society.  Apart  from  the 
technical dimensions of the intervention, it is considered pertinent that, as may be relevant, 
the  recipient  countries  should  subscribe  and  adhere 
internationally  sanctioned 
arrangements,  such  as  the  Extractive  Industries  Transparency  Initiative  (EITI),  to  ensure 
appropriate  disclosure  of  revenue  accruals  and  maximisation  of  inflows  from  national 
resources.  
Accountability 
the  purpose  of 
transparency is essentially the facilitation of accountability. In general, accountability refers to 
the obligation of those in authority to account to those on whose behalf they exercise such 
authority,  for  the  discharge  of  the  responsibilities  entrusted  to  them.  We  can  distinguish 
between  financial,  political  and  administrative  elements  of  accountability.  The  exercise  of 
accountability  requires  a  system  of  laws,  regulations  and  codes  of  conduct.  In  addition, 
mechanisms should be established for monitoring compliance and deviations, and institution 
of corrective measures.  
Financial  accountability,  which  tends  to  be  the  main  focus  in  this  context,  pays  special 
attention to budgetary processes. It is deemed a necessary condition for good governance; 
prudent management of public resources; reduced corruption; better delivery of services; and 
a  support  to  efforts  at  poverty  alleviation.  Strengthening  financial  accountability  requires 
reforms almost across the board, touching on the parliamentary, judicial and administrative 
structures and modalities of government, and could thus entail a far-reaching revamping of 
governance systems.  
the  natural  concomitant  of 
transparency. 
Indeed, 
to, 
is 
Governance and development  
We  may  now  wish  to  address  some  thoughts  on  the  reasons  for  the  recent  emphasis  on 
governance  in  the  development  discourse.  We  have  already  alluded  to  the  relationship 
between  changes  in  the  development  paradigm  and  the  evolution  of  the  governance 
concept. Specifically in the context of World Bank interventions to foster development in the 
third world, various strategies had been pursued since about the 1960s, but the effort had not 
yielded  the  expected  results.  In  grappling  with  this  problem,  the  perception  gained  ground 
that the institutions of the state were fundamental to the development process and the use of 
aid, hence the “institutions matter” perspective that eventually emerged. The 1989 “crisis of 
governance” in Sub-Saharan African report was a landmark in this evolution, which triggered 
the  mainstreaming  of  governance  in  the  Bank’s  development  work.  As  the  major 
development  finance  institution  in  the  world,  and  a  dominant  influence  in  thinking  on 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 3
economic  development,  its  ideas  soon  permeated  not  only  the  international  financial 
institutions (IFIs) but the aid community generally.  
The precise link forged between good governance and economic development is the raison 
d’etre of the central place accorded good governance in current international development 
discourse.  Various  formulations  of  this  relationship  have  been  propounded.  Doorknobs  for 
instance justify good governance, namely the fight against corruption, nepotism, bureaucracy 
and  mismanagement,  and  the  promotion  of  transparency,  accountability  and  proper 
procedures,  as  ensuring  the  effective  utilisation  of  aid  for  the  achievement  of  poverty 
reduction.  Other  writers  variously  state  that  good  governance  is  a  pre-requisite  for 
sustainable development in Africa. They stress the importance for growth and development 
of  a  predictable  regulatory  framework,  efficiency  and  transparency  in  public  administration 
and an independent judiciary. Others remark on the pressures arising from globalisation and 
the competition for aid and investment as major driving forces for good governance; and the 
comparative  attractiveness  to  investors  of  a  corrupt-free  country,  with  sound  policies  and 
well-managed administrative and judicial systems.  
The  link  between  good  governance  and  development  is  however  not  universally  accepted 
and its implications are not always viewed positively.  
It  has  been  argued  that  the  link  between  governance  and  poverty  reduction  is  at  best 
tenuous.  While  in  some  areas  empirical  evidence  tends  to  suggest  that  good  governance 
leads  to  positive  growth  outcomes,  other  evidence  suggests  that  this  may  not  be  so.  The 
case of some Asian countries, whose governance record is a far cry from the accepted blue 
print,  but  have  posted  impressive  and  sustained  growth,  has  been  cited  as  part  of  the 
contrary evidence.  
Against this background, it is proposed that further research is needed to provide a definitive 
position  on  the  matter.  The  possibility  is  expressed  that  though  governance  and  poverty 
reduction may be correlated, the direction of causation may not be so clear.  
Further, it is claimed that governance is a multi-dimensional concept and provides an avenue 
for intrusion into virtually every aspect of state functioning. It thus essentially compromises 
sovereignty  in  decision-making,  and  transfers  accountability  of  government  from  its  own 
citizens to the donor community.  
Given  the  imprecision  of  the  meaning  and  instability  of  the  concept,  approaches  to  its 
measurement run into difficulties and yield results of doubtful validity and reliability. Yet these 
measurements  have  become  the  basis  for  further  conditionality  in  aid  distribution  and  the 
introduction  of  selectivity  in  determining  aid  recipients.  With  the  wide-spread  inclusion  of 
governance criteria in aid conditionality, there is a measure of stress imposed on recipient 
countries, which generally lack the capacity to pursue the wide range of reforms required, the 
urgency of some of which have been called into question by some informed observers.  
Some critics see a more sinister dimension in the governance discourse, claiming that the 
whole  purpose  of  the  approach  is  to  create  in  the  developing  countries  the  state-market 
relationships typical of Western neo-liberal systems. This is seen as exploitation by the donor 
community  of  developing  countries'  need  for  investment,  aid  and  debt  relief,  to  create 
conditions that will facilitate their infiltration by globalised financial interests.  
The following statement in the July 2004 issue of South Bulletin is typical of this perspective:  
“Whence  this  striking  paradox,  inherent  in  good  governance,  of  calls  going  out  from  the 
international  organisations 
indeed 
“appropriate”,  neo-liberal  economic  policies  imposed  from  without  while  the  globalised 
financial  markets  dispossess  them  of  their  sovereignty  and  insinuate  themselves  into  the 
countries' ownership structure of capital”.  
to  national  governments 
latter  adopt, 
these 
that 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2007
The controversy continues on the link between governance and development, and while its 
proponents claim strong empirical evidence for it, there is strong assertion of the contrary, or 
at least agnostic, view in other quarters. It would seem that the jury is still out on this debate.  
Aspects of governance in Sierra Leone  
The  principal  donor  institutions  in  Sierra  Leone,  as  in  most  developing  countries,  are  the 
World Bank, and the IMF. Donor support programmes coordinated by the World Bank are 
provided  within  the  framework  of  the  Bank’s  Country  Assistance  Strategy  and  the  Poverty 
Reduction  Strategy  Paper.  Following  implementation  of  an  Interim  Poverty  Reduction 
Strategy Paper, the Bank approved a full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper for Sierra Leone 
in  February  2005,  covering  the  period  2006  –  2009.  The  major  instrumentality  for  Fund 
assistance  to  Sierra  Leone  is  the  Poverty  Reduction  and  Growth  Facility  (PRGF).  A 
successor  arrangement  under  this  facility  was  agreed  with  Sierra  Leone  in  2006,  covering 
the period 2006-2008.  
It is important to stress that in their country intervention, the IMF and World Bank liaise with 
major players in the donor community and, to a greater extent than not, their programmes 
define  the  parameters  for  entry  by  other  donors  into  the  country’s  assistance  programme. 
Consequently, although the overall assistance package usually involves inputs by a number 
of other parties, including the African Development Bank, bilateral donors and other donor 
agencies,  the  content  and  direction  of  the  Fund  and  Bank  programmes  constitute  the 
framework for essentially all other donor assistance.  
Reflecting  their  concerns  with  governance,  and  predicated  on  their  assertion  that  bad 
governance lies at the heart of the poverty problem in Sierra Leone, both the Bank and Fund 
programmes for the country lay stress on the governance factor in the PRSP and PRGF.  
The PRSP, for example, has three pillars, the first of which is Promoting Good Governance, 
Peace  and  Security;  the  other  two  being  Promoting  Pro-Poor  Sustainable  Growth;  and 
Promoting  Human  Development.  One  may  note  that  within  its  wider  interpretation,  some 
commentators  may  include  aspects  of  human  development  promotion  under  the  general 
rubric of governance. The PRGF also contains a measure of governance requirements.  
The governance dimensions of the PRSP emcompass a number of the standard elements of 
the  governance  package.  It  thus  calls  for  action  on  public  service  reform;  tax  reform; 
strengthening  public 
financial  management  and  procurement;  decentralisation;  anti-
corruption measures; and improvement of the statistical base. Specific measures include the 
institution  of  Public  Expenditure  Tracking  Surveys  (PETS);  Medium  Term  Expenditure 
Framework  (MTEF);  Strengthening  the  Internal  Audit  Function;  Improved  Parliamentary 
Oversight of Budgetary Processes; and Procurement Reform.  
Within the sphere of transparency, accountability and democracy, the anti-corruption agenda 
is emphasised, as well as strengthening the capacity of the National Electoral Commission. 
The decentralisation process should be pursued through the formulation and implementation 
of  a  devolution  plan.  A  comprehensive  civil  service  reform  programme  should  also  be 
formulated  and  implemented.  There  are  also  requirements  for  anti-money-laundering 
measures,  as  well  as  adoption  and  adherence  to  the  Kimberley  process  for  diamond 
marketing, and the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). Similar requirements 
are built into the PRGF.  
Three points should be noted at this stage.  
(1) 
The  governance  aspects  built  into  the  basic  programmes  of  assistance  from  the 
World Bank and IMF are extensive and comprehensive; 
These requirements are conditionalities for release of funds and other assistance;  
In some cases they are triggers for other lines of action.  
(2) 
(3) 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 5
The  following  statement  reflects  the  importance  attached  to  governance  issues  in  Sierra 
Leone’s assistance programme by the donor community:  
“To underline the importance of the quality of governance, government and its four budget 
support  donors  (ADB,  DFID,  EC  and  the  World  Bank)  issued  a  joint  communiqué  in  July 
2006 referred to as the “Improved Governance and Accountability Pact”. This pact reasserts 
the commitment of the government to good governance and it sets out a number of activities 
to be pursued through July 2007 in ten key areas. These include efforts related to: free and 
fair elections, anti-corruption, anti-money laundering, procurement, the Office of the Auditor-
General,  civil  service  reform,  decentralisation  and  the  role  of  non-state  actors  (notably  the 
private sector and civil society), the creation of a more conducive investment environment, 
implementation  of  the  extractive  industries  transparency  initiative  and  better  public  service 
delivery in health and education. The Pact also commits the four budget support donors to 
further harmonisation around the government’s programme”.  
Enforcement of the governance agenda is consequently exercised by the donor community 
through inclusion of governance requirements in the programmes of assistance agreed with 
the  country;  establishing  them  as  conditionalities  and  trigger  requirements  for  release  of 
funds;  providing  technical  assistance  to  ensure  the  performance  of  these  elements  of  the 
programme, including provision of personnel in some cases. We may  note in passing that 
action on all these requirements is in progress and the related programmes are in varying 
stages of implementation.  
Civil society is also becoming increasingly important in trying to put pressure on government 
to deliver on governance issues. In the Sierra Leone context, special mention may be made 
of the Campaign for Good Governance, the Civil Societies Organisation, the 50/50 Group, 
the Lawyers Centre for Legal Assistance (LAWCLA) and other bodies. A recently established 
chapter of the Institute of Directors pays particular attention to the improvement of corporate 
governance.  The  press  has  continued  to  wage  a  governance  campaign,  especially  with 
respect to anti-corruption matters.  
Some general remarks  
The governance debate is a difficult one, not least because of the imprecision of the concept 
and its multi-dimensionality. This opens room for a range of interpretations and the inclusion 
of diverse elements, rendering the basis of discussion somewhat fragile.  
There is also a measure of ambivalence regarding its practical application and suspicion in 
some case of the motives underlying the significance attached to it by the donor community. 
Its link with poverty reduction is not uncontested, and questions also arise as to whether it is 
not really the Washington Consensus and structural adjustment in new clothing.  
In  the  African  context,  there  is  admission  of  mis-governance  in  many  areas  of  state 
management.  In  particular,  corruption  and  impunity  in  public  administration,  conduct  of 
elections,  financial  management  and  judicial  processes,  are  bemoaned  on  a  wide  scale. 
Serious observers agree that there is a need to correct the institutional arrangements that 
create an avenue for some of the negatives observed in the governance of many countries. 
This admission notwithstanding, questions continue to be raised as to whether the range of 
measures  subsumed  in  the  governance  package  is  appropriate  to  correcting  these 
deficiencies.  
The emphasis, it is believed in some quarters, should be on capacity building and helping 
countries  to  pursue  home-grown  development  programmes.  While  admittedly  there  is  a 
capacity  building  element  in  the  governance  package,  the  relevance  of  some  specifics  is 
brought  into  question.  Thus,  complaints  are  heard  that  some  measures  ignore  the  socio-
cultural context in which the institutional changes are to be effected, thereby constituting an 
illegitimate transplantation of institutions into developing countries. Issue is made of the use 
6 
 BIS Review 109/2007
of governance indicators as conditionality for assistance, and the onset of selectivity, rather 
than an attempt at providing more meaningful support for relevant institutional development.  
Countries  that  accept  the  governance  framework  programme  proposed  by  the  donor 
community receive funding and support, while those more sceptical are more or less left out 
in  the  cold.  Thus  arises  the  questionable  extent  of  linkage  between  governance, 
development  and  poverty  alleviation.  The  fact  that  most  African  countries  are  so  aid 
dependent compels acceptance of the governance conditionalities. Thus they are forced into 
a situation, which divests them of control of their economies, adopting policies that may not 
conduce  to  their  long-term  development,  and  making  them  easy  prey  for  the  interests  of 
global capitalisation.  
Yet  the  need  for  governance  reforms  in  most  African  countries  cannot  be  denied. 
Inadequacies  in  the  institutional  set-up  undoubtedly  need  attention  and  correction  to  bring 
about efficiency and competence in the management of the state, and hence the ability to 
provide citizens with the services they require for their well being.  
The  plight  of  the  developing  countries  compels  resort  to  external  assistance.  Some 
economists, prominent among them Jeffrey Sachs, have proposed the need for a “big push” 
to help alleviate their problems. But the provision of such resources would inevitably require 
some conditionality, perhaps even more so the greater the resource injection. Yet there is the 
contention  that  the  assistance  should  be  in  support  of  local  reform  efforts,  based  on  local 
circumstances and priorities. Some observers assert that some of the governance problems 
in  these  countries  arise  from  the  very  fact  of  poverty  itself  and  that  is  the  problem,  which 
requires urgent and direct attention, and not the panoply of governance reforms.  
But  the  approach  to  providing  the  assistance  remains  a  polemical  issue,  opposing  among 
others, sovereignty and resource provision. As Martin Wolf stated in the Financial Times of 
London in March 2004:  
“If  the  sovereignty  of  such  dysfunctional  states  is  protected,  their  people  will  remain 
impoverished.  If  their  people  are  to  be  helped,  the  sovereignty  of  their  states  must  be 
challenged”.  
But we may ask, do we have to confront such extremes? Could there not be a mean that 
could  lead  to  a  compromise  that  reduces  the  divergence  in  these  polarised  positions?  Or 
must the payer of the piper continue to have exclusive control over the tune?  
What  seems  really  at  issue  is  what  Kemal  Dervis  has  identified  as  the  continuation  of  an 
ideological  struggle.  His  statement  in  his  book,  A  Better  Globalisation,  encapsulates  the 
problem when he asserts:  
“Humanity has not exhausted the great ideological debates; they are only changing in nature. 
The beginning of the 21st century is being shaped by a greater ideological debate about the 
nation-state  and  global  governance,  about  the  legitimacy  of  the  use  of  power,  and  about 
public policy at the local, regional, national and supranational levels, all against a backdrop of 
huge inequalities in wealth, income and power that divide the world."  
Conclusion  
There certainly are governance challenges in Africa, which must be addressed. Fortunately, 
action  is  in  progress  with  respect  to  many  of  these.  Weak  administrative  structures,  out-
moded legal systems, poor financial management, corruption and impunity can only further 
stifle and impede the attraction of investment, the provision of public services, and alleviation 
of the plight of the bulk of our populace.  
The  extant  approaches  to  resolving  these  problems,  as  championed  by  the  international 
donor  community,  may  not  be  adequate.  We must  consequently  continue  the  international 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 7
development  dialogue  in  a  bid  to  find  more  acceptable  modalities  for  improvement  in 
governance that will recognise, respect and incorporate legitimate concerns of aid recipients.  
8 
 BIS Review 109/2007
