Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: The monetary policy strategy of the 
Eurosystem 
Speech  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  Second 
Summit  Meeting  of  Central  Banks  on 
Inflation  Targeting,  Santiago  de  Chile, 
14 November 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me thank Governor Corbo for his kind invitation to speak at this Second Summit Meeting 
of Central Banks on Inflation Targeting, hosted by the Central Bank of Chile. It is for me a 
privilege and a great pleasure to be here in Santiago and to have the opportunity to address 
this distinguished audience.  
I would like to begin my intervention today by recalling two important events that took place 
in  1999.  In  that  year,  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  adopted  a  full-fledged  inflation  targeting 
strategy with a floating exchange rate. This monetary regime has served Chile well, providing 
a  coherent  and  transparent  framework  that  is  credible  in  society  at  large  because  all  the 
economic agents clearly understand the policy objectives and the rationale for decisions.  
1999 was the same year that the Governing Council of the European Central Bank took up 
the  responsibility  for  conducting  a  single  monetary  policy  for  the  entire  euro  area,  after  a 
prolonged  period  of  intensive  preparations  and  successful  economic  convergence.  A  few 
months  earlier,  in  October  1998,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  newly-created  central  bank 
had dismissed the adoption of either inflation or monetary targeting and had decided instead 
to develop its own strategy, which aims at maintaining price stability over the medium-term.  
Today I will provide you with an overview of the monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem. I 
will  comment  on  some  of  the  core  principles of  sound  monetary  policy  that  our  respective 
strategies share and will point out some specific aspects in which they differ. And let me just 
note at this point that the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy – combined with its strong 
institutional  set-up  –  has  provided  the  right  foundations  for  an  effective  and  successful 
monetary policy in the euro area. I will conclude my remarks with some brief comments on 
the challenges ahead which have been brought about by the recent episodes of turbulence in 
financial markets. 
Needless to say, my remarks today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the 
ECB’s Governing Council. 
Introduction 
In June 2006 – just a few days before I took office as Governor – Banco de España hosted 
an  International  Conference  on  "Central  Banks  in  the  21st  Century",  to  mark  the  150th 
anniversary  of  the  adoption  of  its  current  name.  At  the  Conference  –  which  discussed  the 
main challenges facing central banks today – Professor Allan Blinder provided a survey of 
relevant  questions  around  monetary  policy.  His  paper  "Monetary  Policy  Today:  Sixteen 
Questions and About Twelve Answers" followed up on a previous assignment he discharged 
in the form of a key-note dinner speech in Frankfurt in 1999, at what was the first research 
conference  organised  by  the  then  brand-new  European  Central  Bank.  What  I  found 
noticeable from Professor Blinder’s 2006 presentation was that the list of issues had grown 
longer rather than shorter since 1999 (from 15 to 16), although he noted that this should not 
be misinterpreted as lack of progress. It was the result of dropping four issues from his list – 
because, in his view, they were either resolved or had moved out of the radar screen – and 
BIS Review 132/2007 
 1
adding five. Most remarkably, among the issues that had been dropped were low and stable 
inflation as the central goal of monetary policy, and central bank independence. 
I  think  Professor  Blinder  was  right  to  remove  these  issues  from  his  list.  There  is  a  broad 
agreement  among  academic  economists  and  policy  makers  alike  that  maintaining  price 
stability is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to support sustainable growth 
and  job  creation.  This  consensus  reflects  the  fundamental  tenet  that,  as  the  rational 
expectations literature has helped us understand1, there is no trade-off between growth and 
inflation at horizons longer than the short run, and that the real effects of monetary policy are 
short-lived and uncertain. It is also now conventional wisdom that the public good of price 
stability  is  best  safeguarded  by  delegating  monetary  policy  to  independent  central  banks2, 
which are not subject to interference from short-sighted political concerns. These consensual 
points  –  which  are  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and,  hence,  have  a  constitutional 
character  in  the  case  of  the  EU  –  are  a  reflection  of  the  painful,  central  bank  led 
disinflationary processes that in many countries followed the so-called “Great Inflation” era of 
the 1970s and early 1980s3. They are also a sign of a more general dissatisfaction with the 
experience during those years of stop-and-go policies, where policy-induced booms proved 
later on to be unsustainable and short-lived. 
In keeping with the primary objective of price stability, a number of central banks – following 
the  lead  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  –  adopted  a  strategy  of  inflation  targeting 
during  the  1990s.  The  key  element  is  the  public  announcement  of  an  inflation  rate  to  be 
maintained  over  a  more  or  less  defined  time  horizon.  Pioneers  of  inflation  targeting  were 
joined  later  on  by  a  number  of  developing  countries  (for  example  Brazil,  South  Africa  and 
Thailand)  as  well  as  by  some  East  European  transitional  economies  (such  as  Poland,  the 
Czech  Republic  and  Hungary).  With  hindsight,  the  policies  pursued  within  this  framework 
have been a success, particularly in those countries which – starting from a relatively high 
inflation level – needed to bring inflation expectations back into line with the central bank’s 
objective.  But  also  other  countries  (like  Norway)  with  no  particular  difficulties  in  terms  of 
anchoring  inflation  expectations  have  moved  in  this  direction,  presumably  because  their 
central banks were convinced of the benefits per se of the strategy. At present some twenty 
central  banks  have  adopted  an  inflation  targeting  framework4,  and  some  observers  would 
add a few more to that number. 
The monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem 
The Eurosystem has not followed the same route. In October 1998, the Governing Council of 
the ECB dismissed the adoption of either inflation or monetary targeting and decided instead 
to  select  a  strategy  of  its  own,  which  aims  at  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium-
term. The idea was to develop a credible and flexible, tailor-made strategy that would allow 
for timely responses to a changing environment, while keeping in clear focus the objective of 
price  stability.  And  it  was  necessary  to  take  account  of  two  key  factors  of  that  time:  the 
regime shift implied by Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and the heightened uncertainty 
that  surrounded  the  introduction  of the  single  currency.  Whilst it  was  important  to  build  on 
                                                 
1   See Kydland F. E. and Prescott E. C. (1977), "Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal 
Plans", Journal of Political Economy, 85, 473-92 and Barro R. J. and Gordon R. (1983), "A Positive Theory of 
Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model", Journal of Political Economy, 91, 589-610. 
2   See  Rogoff  K.  (1985),  "The  Optimal  Degree  of  Commitment  to  a  Monetary  Target",  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, 100, 1169-1190. 
3   Cukierman A. (2007), “Central Bank Independence and Monetary Policymaking Institutions - Past Present and 
Future”, CEPR Discussion Paper 6441, September. 
4   See  C.  Berg  (2005):  “Experience  of  inflation-targeting  in  20  countries”.  Economic  Review,  1.  Sveriges 
Riksbank. 
2 
 BIS Review 132/2007
state-of-the-art economic research and on other central banks’ successes (including the best 
European  monetary  tradition),  it  was  also  crucial  to  recognise  that  the  available  strategies 
had been tried and tested in completely different contexts. 
The  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  consists  of  two  main  elements.  First,  the  core 
feature is a quantitative definition of its Treaty mandate of price stability, to be maintained 
over the medium term. Price stability is defined as a year-on-year increase of below 2% in 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area. In May 2003, after a 
thorough public evaluation of the strategy, the Governing Council of the ECB confirmed this 
definition and clarified that it will aim to maintain inflation rates below but close to 2% over 
the  medium  term.  The  clarification  of  May  2003  underlined  the  need  to  provide  a  safety 
margin against the risks of deflation as a result of monetary policy becoming ineffective due 
to the zero bound constraint on nominal interest rates, should the economy be hit by adverse 
shocks. 
The second element of the strategy is a comprehensive analysis of the risks to the outlook 
for price stability, according to two perspectives: economic analysis and monetary analysis. 
These two perspectives offer complementary analytical frameworks to support the Governing 
Council’s  overall  assessment  of  risks  to  price  stability.  The  economic  analysis  aims  at 
identifying those factors that have a bearing on risks at short- to medium-term horizons. It 
includes, inter alia, projections of key macroeconomic variables and an analysis of shocks 
hitting the euro area economy. In turn, the monetary analysis – which has been broadened 
and  deepened  over  time  –  draws  on  a  wide  range  of  tools,  techniques,  models  and 
frameworks,  complemented  by  the  use  of  informed  judgment,  in  order  to  identify  risks  at 
longer horizons. After the evaluation of the strategy in 2003, the Governing Council of the 
ECB explained that the monetary analysis mainly serves as a means of cross-checking the 
short to medium-term indications coming from the economic analysis.  
When  compared  to  the  strategy  of  inflation  targeting,  the  Eurosystem’s  Monetary  Policy 
Strategy  shares  the  essentials:  that  is,  the  importance  of  price  stability  and  the  need  for 
monetary  policy  to  act  pre-emptively  and  make  comprehensive  use  of  all  available 
information.  The  strong  belief 
independence  must  necessarily  be 
supplemented by high standards of accountability and transparency is also shared by both 
camps. This is reflected in the growing weight that central banks, in industrial countries and 
beyond, place on the importance of communication. Emphasis on communication has also 
been boosted by central bankers becoming increasingly aware that effective communication 
facilitates  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  decisions  to  the  economy,  thereby  making 
their jobs easier. 
Nonetheless,  the  Eurosystem’s  strategy  has  some  differences  when  compared  with  the 
inflation  targeting  strategies.  Let  me  focus  my  comments  in  this  respect  on  two  particular 
issues:  the  relevant  horizon  for  policy  and  the  role  of  macroeconomic  forecasts  in  policy-
making and in communication.  
institutional 
that 
The relevant horizon for policy 
Inflation  targeting  is  often  described  as  a  framework  where  monetary  policy  responds  to 
deviations  between  a  conditional  inflation  forecast  at  a  specific  time  horizon,  typically  of 
around two years, and the inflation objective. From a welfare perspective, however, focus on 
an  ex-ante  fixed  horizon  is  problematic  for  a  number  of  reasons.  In  particular,  economic 
theory suggests that the relevant horizon for monetary policy depends in a significant way on 
the  size  and  nature  of  shocks  affecting  the  economy,  as  well  as  on  the  prevailing 
circumstances  (i.e.  the  initial  state  of  the  economy).  Moreover,  taken  at  face  value,  this 
approach neglects the implications of policy for price stability at longer horizons.  
BIS Review 132/2007 
 3
In connection with this last point, a number of researchers (and notably research at the BIS5) 
have been arguing quite convincingly that that short-term inflation control is not enough to 
prevent  the  emergence  of  imbalances,  which  may  lead  later  on  to  costly  episodes  of 
macroeconomic instability. They point to the “Great Depression” in the 1920s and to Japan’s 
“lost decade” as cases in point. And they argue that big policy mistakes surrounding those 
episodes would have been avoided had the Federal Reserve Board and the Bank of Japan 
paid  closer  attention  at  the  time  to  credit  developments  and,  more  generally,  to  financial 
conditions. These lessons from economic history are even more relevant nowadays, when a 
range of innovations in financial markets have enhanced the possibilities for intermediaries to 
take and trade risk, thereby challenging the ability of prudential authorities to guard against 
excessive risk taking.  
In  recent  years,  the  global  economy  has  experienced  the  strongest  sustained  period  of 
growth since the early 1970s. This impressive expansion has taken place, despite significant 
commodity price increases, against the background of relatively subdued global inflation and, 
throughout  most  of  this  period,  a  benign  outlook  within  the  horizons  typically  covered  by 
forecasts.  Better  monetary  policy  has  in  turn  been  praised  for  its  contribution  to  this 
formidable setting. It has been argued that firmer anchoring of long run inflation expectations 
was  responsible  for  the  marked  decline  in  inflation  persistence  and  the  more  favourable 
short-term Philips curve trade-off. With inflation expectations well anchored, any given shock 
to inflation – coming from aggregate demand, energy prices, or the foreign exchange rate – 
would have a smaller effect on expected inflation and hence on trend inflation.  
However, this favourable set of circumstances has co-existed until recently with numerous 
signs of over-abundant monetary and market liquidity: robust money and credit growth; high 
transaction  volumes  and  small  bid-ask  spreads;  low  credit  spreads  and  term  premia;  and 
reduced  volatility  across  virtually  every  asset  class.  Those  vulnerabilities  have  not  gone 
unnoticed  by  central  banks,  as  testified  by  past  analyses  in  the  ECB  Financial  Stability 
Review publication. Although market sentiment had proved extraordinarily resilient to events 
which  in  the  past  would  have  triggered  sharp  corrections  (including  the  shift  to  less 
accommodative monetary policies in the major economies), the analyses identified the risk 
that the prolonged period of low rates might have created incentives for excessive risk taking 
and that a sudden tightening might leave, using Rajan’s words6, “a number of participants 
stranded on a limb of illiquidity”. 
In my view, all of this warns against excessive focus on a fixed, excessively short-term time 
horizon  for  inflation  targets.  The  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  abstains  from 
specifying  a  fixed  time  horizon  for  policy.  Through  its  diversified  approach,  it  also  accords 
due importance to assessing medium- to long-term risks to price stability. It is therefore well 
equipped  to  deal  with  the  perils  of  short-termism,  the  temptations  of  excessive  fine-tuning 
and  the  risks  of  asymmetric  responses  during  upswings  and  downturns.  It  also  permits 
appropriate  account  to  be  taken  of  the  endemic  pro-cyclical  characteristics  of  the  financial 
system  and  of  boom-bust  cycles  in  asset  prices,  and  to  consider  under  very  specific, 
exceptional  circumstances  a  policy  of  carefully  leaning  against  the  wind,  despite  the  well-
known intrinsic difficulties of identifying misalignments in real time.  
The role of forecasts in policy making 
Inflation  forecasts  are  at  the  centre  of  inflation  targeting  strategies.  Policy  discussion  and 
communication  are  organised  around  the  forecast  process,  and  decisions  are  often 
explained  on  the  basis  of  deviations  of  the  inflation  forecast  from  an  inflation  target  at  a 
                                                 
5   See, for instance, W.R White (2006): “Is Price Stability Enough?” BIS Working Paper, No 205. 
6   Remarks at the Conference on Central Banks in the 21st Century, Banco de España, 8-9 June 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 132/2007
specific time horizon. The numbers, including the baseline scenario and risks, are owned by 
the policy-setting committee. 
The  Eurosystem  also  produces  macroeconomic  projections.  These  are  based  on  a 
combination of models and experts’ technical judgments and are owned by staff, rather than 
by the Governing Council. Twice a year, in June and December, projections are produced by 
the staff of the Eurosystem under the responsibility of the Monetary Policy Committee, which 
is  one  of  the  Eurosystem  Committees  composed  of  senior  staff  from  the  ECB  and  the 
national central banks.  
The process leading to these broad exercises involves close interaction between staff of the 
ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  to  ensure  that  the  euro  area  projections  draw  on  all 
available expertise – both at the country and euro-area levels – and reflect the consensus 
view  of  the  staff.  There  are  three  main  steps:  First,  initial  assumptions  underlying  the 
exercise and covering interest rates, exchange rates, the international environment and fiscal 
variables  are  set,  although  they  are  reviewed  and  can  be  changed  in  the  course  of  the 
exercise; second, the projection numbers are derived and agreed upon, following a process 
of peer review of the individual country projections, consistency checks and integration within 
the  euro  area  framework;  the  third  and  final  step  is  the  preparation  of  a  report  for  the 
Governing Council. In addition to the numbers themselves, the staff also produces a number 
of  background  analyses  on  relevant  issues.  In  March  and  September,  the  projections  are 
updated by the staff of the ECB. Summary reports of both the Eurosystem’s and ECB Staff’s 
projections exercises are released on the ECB’s web-site on the same day that the detailed 
projections are presented to the Governing Council. They are also published later on in the 
ECB’s  Monthly  Bulletin.  Publication  is  intended  to  make  clear  the  information  set  which  is 
available to the Governing Council when taking its decisions, and not to explain the decisions 
themselves.  
Due  to  the  forward-looking  orientation  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy,  forecasts 
constitute  necessarily  a  very  important  input  into  the  decision-making  process.  They  are 
particularly  useful  because  they  are  able  to  summarise  a  vast  amount  of  information  and 
analyses  within  a  coherent  and  internally  consistent  accounting  and  economic  framework. 
However, unlike in the case of inflation targeting strategies, they do not constitute the main 
vehicle around which the policy process and communication are organised. The Governing 
Council of the ECB bases its policy judgment on these and many other inputs, which include 
inter  alia  competing  forecasts  from  other  private  and  public  organisations  as  well  as  other 
pieces  of  information  that,  for  a  number  of  reasons,  are  difficult  to  integrate  within  the 
framework of the projections.  
By way of example, information (i.e. data, indicators, analyses, etc.) that becomes available 
after the cut-off date for the projections cannot, by definition, be incorporated in the exercise. 
At a more fundamental level, we should acknowledge that even the state-of-the-art macro-
econometric models of the kind used nowadays by leading central banks are, as yet, unable 
to fully incorporate a richer description of the economy’s financial structure. Wealth effects, 
swings  in  asset  prices,  credit  and  liquidity  constraints  and  other  financial  frictions  are  not 
sufficiently  taken  into  account.  That  results  in  an  over-simplified  view  about  the  channels 
through which monetary policy can affect economic activity and inflation. It also affects the 
ability  of  such  models  to  identify,  and  hence  estimate  with  any  degree  of  precision,  the 
potentially significant role of financial variables and financial intermediation in the monetary 
transmission process.  
Academic  research  is  progressing  on  this  front  and,  hopefully,  at  some  point  in  time, 
workable  and  operational  models  will  be  developed  that  allow  for  more  realistic  settings 
where the complex interactions between the real and financial sectors of the economy are 
acknowledged in full and where financial variables (notably money and credit) play an active 
role  in  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  When  this  has  been  achieved,  it  will  be 
possible  to turn  the  two  pillars  of  our  analysis into  a  larger,  single  pillar  as  Vice  President 
BIS Review 132/2007 
 5
Lucas  Papademos7  has  put  it.  Or,  if  you  prefer  another  metaphor,  we  could  join  the  two 
pillars with an arch, thus forming a solid bridge to support our monetary policy decisions.  
But  policy  is  an  ongoing  activity.  Policy-makers  cannot  afford  the  luxury  of  waiting  for 
research  advances  to  happen.  Empirical  evidence  supporting  these  advances  is  itself 
frequently  uncertain  and  provisional,  open  to  revisions.  Constantly  confronted  with  the 
burdens of judgment, we are very much like sailors in Neurath’s boat. And, in this respect, I 
believe that the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy has been particularly useful in helping 
us navigate through the deep waters of pervasive uncertainty and to make decisions in real 
time.  In  my  view,  the  Eurosystem’s  concept  has  clear  strengths.  It  permits  a  diversified 
approach to the assessment of economic developments and the outlook for price stability. It 
encourages cross-checking between different forms of analysis. It is a pragmatic and robust 
approach intended to help avoid major policy errors.  
The monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem in retrospect  
The ECB Governing Council had three main objectives in mind when it decided to announce 
a new monetary policy strategy for stage three of EMU in October 1998. First, the strategy 
should  facilitate  transparency  and  accountability,  helping  the  public  to  understand  and 
assess monetary policy decisions. Second, it also should promote credibility and confidence 
among euro area citizens that the Eurosystem would keep a clear focus on its constitutional 
assignment  of  maintaining  price  stability.  And  third,  the  monetary  policy  strategy  was 
important  for  internal  decision-making.  It  should  constitute  a  conceptual  framework  for 
structuring  information  and  provide  guidance  and  consistent  decision  criteria  to  policy-
makers,  who  are  constantly  confronted  with  alternative  paradigms,  limited  information  and 
difficult views about the current state and prospects of the economy.  
Next year will be the 10th anniversary of the creation of the ECB and the announcement of 
the monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem. In retrospect, the monetary policy strategy – 
together with a strong institutional set-up- has provided the right foundations for an effective 
and  successful  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has 
demonstrated that it is well-equipped to take prompt and swift action in order to secure price 
stability over the medium-term. At the same time, it has retained the appropriate degree of 
flexibility to respond to shocks and to take into account the unique uncertainties facing the 
euro area. The average annual increase in the HICP since the launch of the euro has been 
very  close  to  2%,  despite  the  sizeable  adverse  price  shocks  during  this  period.  Moreover, 
long-term  inflation  expectations  have  been  stable  and  well  anchored  at  levels  broadly 
consistent  with  the  definition  of  price  stability,  as  shown  by  the  evidence  coming  from 
surveys or from indicators derived from index-linked bonds. The 318 million citizens of the 
euro area believe that price stability is here to stay. This is a considerable achievement that 
could not be taken for granted a few years ago. And the Governing Council of the ECB can 
claim credit for it. 
Concluding remarks 
But  monetary  policy 
is  constantly  confronted  with  new  challenges  and,  certainly, 
developments since this summer (winter in this hemisphere, of course) indicate that we are 
not currently short of such challenges. At the beginning of July, the ECB Governing Council 
pointed out the risk of a potential abrupt shift in market sentiment. This risk materialised in 
August, although through somewhat unexpected channels. Growing default rates in the US 
market for subprime mortgages resulted in a loss of confidence in the valuation of structured 
                                                 
7   Papademos, L. (2006): “The role of money in the conduct of monetary policy”. Speech at the 4th ECB Central 
Banking Conference “The role of Money: money and monetary policy in the 21st century”. 
6 
 BIS Review 132/2007
credit instruments and the disruption of the asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) market. 
As  a  consequence,  conduits  and  structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs),  which  were 
borrowing in this market to finance their holdings of asset-backed securities, started facing 
difficulties to refinance themselves. Tensions spread to the interbank markets of most OECD 
countries, as banks began hoarding liquidity to meet their liquidity support commitments with 
conduits and to put the underlying assets on their balance sheets. Moreover, banks curtailed 
interbank  lending  because  of  uncertainty  surrounding  the  potential  exposures  of  their 
counterparties.  
Since the summer, the global economy and the euro area have entered a period of increased 
financial  market  volatility,  significant  re-appraisal  of  risks  and  market  nervousness.  The 
Governing Council of the ECB is paying great attention to these market developments and, in 
particular,  has  acted  swiftly  to  provide  the  liquidity  that  was  needed  to  permit  an  orderly 
functioning  of  the  money  market,  to  reduce  the  volatility  of  very  short-term  interest  rates 
around the minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations, and to contain the risk that 
tensions in these markets would propagate through the banking system. The Eurosystem will 
continue to play its part to consolidate a smooth return to a normal functioning of markets. 
The Governing Council is also monitoring very  closely the macroeconomic effects that the 
recent episodes of financial unrest may have on the prospects for the euro area economy. 
Sound  fundamentals  and  the  expected  robust  global  growth  should  support  a  relatively 
favourable  medium-term  outlook  for  economic  activity.  However,  disruptions  in  financial 
markets  have  increased  the  uncertainty  surrounding  this  outlook,  which  poses  particular 
challenges for monetary policy. As a result, the Governing Council has indicated that it will 
need some time to fully grasp the consequences for its policy stance.  
From  today’s  perspective,  the  modal  scenario  going  forward  is  one  of  financial  conditions 
normalising over a period of time, which could be protracted, although some low-probability, 
more  challenging  scenarios  cannot  be  totally  ruled  out  at  the  moment.  Under  this  central 
scenario, the effects of financial market turbulence on borrowing costs would most likely be 
contained.  In  line  with  that,  the  consensus  view  that  seems  to  be  emerging  among 
international organisations and private analysts is that, whilst some slowdown of growth may 
be  expected,  the  overall  effects  would  most  likely  remain  moderate,  with  the  euro  area 
economy  continuing  to  expand  at  rates  close  to  potential  going  forward.  Nonetheless, 
downside risks to growth have increased. 
Other  things  being  equal,  a  less  dynamic  growth  picture  could  mitigate  the  risks  to  price 
stability. But, unfortunately, as often happens when we need other things to be equal, they 
are not. We are currently facing renewed inflation pressures, which come essentially from the 
dramatic increase of oil and food prices. The concern is that all this could lead to second-
round effects in a context in which euro area labour markets have become tighter. It is true 
that in the recent past we have experienced various episodes of substantial increases in oil 
prices  without  negative  consequences  on  underlying  inflation.  But  pure  extrapolation  from 
this recent past may not be appropriate due to the possible existence of threshold effects. 
The  persistence  of  the  current  inflation  shock  also  entails  the  serious  risk  that  inflation 
expectations could become unhinged and that, as a result, our credibility as central bankers 
could  be  significantly  damaged.  It  cannot  be  forgotten  that  there  is  a  two-way  relationship 
between  credibility  and  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  Effectiveness  depends  on  the 
credibility of central banks. But, no less importantly, the credibility of central banks depends 
critically on the effectiveness of the monetary policy that they have applied.  
The conduct of monetary policy has also been complicated over the recent period by sharp 
and abrupt moves in exchange rates, which might signal that the long-awaited correction of 
global imbalances is not proceeding in as orderly a fashion as we would have hoped. Against 
this background, the Governing Council is monitoring exchange rate markets closely. And, in 
this  respect,  the  President  of  the  ECB  has  repeatedly  indicated  that  excess  volatility  and 
disorderly movements of exchange rates are undesirable for economic growth. 
BIS Review 132/2007 
 7
In summary, monetary policy is operating in an environment of heightened uncertainty. This 
is the result of the materialisation of some risks that we have been pointing out for a long 
time. First, the potential consequences of the turmoil in financial markets, which go beyond a 
sound reappraisal of risks and a less dynamic economic outlook. Second, renewed inflation 
pressures associated with the explosion of oil and commodity prices. And third, sharp and 
abrupt changes in exchange rates of late.  
Academic economists like to put labels on economic periods. And I have referred to some of 
these labels earlier in my speech: the “Great Depression” of the 1920s, the “Great Inflation” 
era of the 1970s and early 1980s, and the “Great Moderation” we have witnessed since then. 
It  is  my  hope  that  the  increased  uncertainty  we  are  facing  is  conjunctural  and  does  not 
become structural, and that we are not entering an era which, later on, academic economists 
could label as the "Great Uncertainty”. I believe that central banks are both willing and able to 
prevent this from happening. 
Therefore, at this juncture it is particularly important that the Eurosystem remains focused on 
its fundamental mandate of maintaining price stability over the medium term. The Governing 
Council of the ECB has indicated in this respect that it is fully committed to acting in a firm 
and  timely  manner  to  ensure  that any  risks  to  price stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not 
materialise  and  that  medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  remain 
solidly anchored at levels consistent with price stability. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for 
monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting  sustained  economic 
growth,  well-functioning  markets  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area.  This  is  true  now  more 
than ever, when we are confronted with a panorama which is more uncertain than that which 
we have faced during recent years. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 132/2007
