Zhou Xiaochuan: Instability and evolution of the financial system 
Speech  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  "Global 
Management Forum" organized by Qing Hua University, Beijing, 30 October 2007.  
 Financial instability or turbulences occur every few years. As it is almost impossible to avoid 
mistakes completely, the key is to learn how to live with the instability or turbulences, and 
consequently draw lessons to improve the financial system. 
 
The  recently  concluded  17th  National  Congress  of  the  Communist  Party  of  China  (CPC) 
stressed  the  objective  of  keeping  the  momentum  of  good  and  fast  economic  growth.  That 
means,  in  the  financial  sector,  we  should  do  our  best  to  prevent  financial  instability  or 
turbulence. The recent subprime turbulence has created fairly large disruptions in financial 
markets in the U.S. and the world at large, and consequently put China on high alert. For the 
past five years, China's economy has basically maintained a steady and rapid growth without 
any real bumps. In fact, I am a bit worried that some young people may think that this kind of 
smooth, stable status is normal. In fact, the more likely norm is that a financial system faces 
instability  or  turbulences  of  varying  degree  every  few  years;  free  from  all  such  instability 
would be, in fact, abnormal. 
What's  important  to  realize  is  that  all  economic  distress  including  the  current  subprime 
turbulence,  contain  within  themselves  valuable  lessons  worthy  of  discovery  and  scrutiny. 
Indeed, these lessons can serve as an important source of insight for China as it improves 
and develops financial markets and macroeconomic policy-making. 
Financial instability or turbulences are not unusual  
The  financial  markets  in  the  U.S.,  the  most  developed  in  the  world,  have  experienced 
turbulence and distress one after another in the past decades. In the 1970s, there was a high 
inflation;  in  the  1980s,  the  S&L  crisis  occurred  and  prompted  the  authorities  to  create  a 
Resolution  Trust  Corporation  around  1990  to  deal  with  the  consequences  of  the  crisis.  In 
1987, the stock market crashed on Black Monday; in autumn 1998, as the financial crisis in 
Asia spread to Russia and Brazil, the collapse of Long Term Capital Management triggered a 
distress; in 2000, enormous amount of wealth evaporated as a result of burst bubbles in the 
NASDAQ market; after this, the Enron and WorldCom scandals shook the securities market 
in 2002; and most recently, this year has seen an ongoing subprime turbulence.  
Instability or turbulences have occurred in succession. Each is caused by as yet unidentified 
mistakes. As mistakes are unavoidable, the key is to learn how to live with the instability or 
turbulences, and consequently draw lessons to improve the financial system. As a matter of 
fact, the financial authorities have introduced significant and substantive policy or institutional 
improvements after every crisis.  
By  reviewing  the  above-mentioned  turbulences  in  the  U.S.,  we  get  a  rough  idea  of  how 
improvements have occurred. In the period of high inflation through 1970s and 80s, the role, 
independence  and  governance  of  the  central  bank  were  carefully  studied.  As  a  result, 
operations  of  the  central  bank  made  lots  of  improvements.  We  can  read  about  these 
developments  in  the  biography  of  Paul  Volker  and  the  autobiography  of  Alan  Greenspan. 
After the Black Monday in 1987, it became known to the general public how the central bank 
used liquidity management in a flexible manner in response to the crisis that might otherwise 
spread  quickly.  After  the  S&L  crisis  between  1980  and  early  1990s  was  resolved,  the 
regulators carefully examined the potential moral hazard in the deposit insurance scheme. In 
1991, the Federal Deposit Insurance Company Improvement Act was adopted to strengthen 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 1
the supervision function of the FDIC, establish an arrangement for prompt corrective actions 
and adopt differentiated premiums to mitigate adverse selection and moral hazards. After the 
Long Term Capital Management problem, the financial sector watched the leverage ratio of 
hedge  funds  more  carefully  and  urged  commercial  institutions,  commercial  banks  in 
particular, to strengthen internal control over the leverage ratio. With the burst of NASDAQ 
bubbles, people began to get a taste of bubbles and their harms. In the aftermath of Enron 
and WorldCom scandals, Sarbanes-Oxley Act was passed. Though some may view a small 
number of its codes as over reaction, the Act contains remarkable improvements in response 
to  the  problems  of  the  listed  companies.  A  lot  of  reflection  has  been  seen  in  the  recent 
turbulence  triggered  by  subprime  mortgage.  As  we  usually  say  in  China,  there  is  a  good 
chance of turning bad things into good ones.  
Parsing China's experience 
Looking back at China's economic and financial development since the period of opening up 
and  reform,  a  similar  picture  emerges  in  which  we  could  see  financial  distresses,  big  or 
small, always occurred.  
In 1985, China experienced a high inflation rate of 8.8 percent. In the anti-inflation process, 
the  decision-makers  learned  how  to  build  a  two-tier  banking  system.  The  blind  optimism 
about the balance of payments existed at that time was also corrected in this process. The 
high  inflation  rate  recorded  in  1988  was  a  result  of  several  factors,  including  a  so-called 
theory of “harmless inflation ” that had been influential in 1987-1988. After 1988, this view fell 
completely out of favor.  
The  next  round  of  inflation,  starting  in  1993,  caused  the  third  plenary  session  of  the  14th 
CPC  Central  Committee  to  lay  out  a  formal  macroeconomic  policy  framework  as  well  as 
various  guiding  perceptions  and  principles,  including  what  kind  of  macroeconomic  policy 
framework should be established? What is the role of the fiscal policy? What is the role of the 
monetary policy? What exactly is government plan attempting to coordinate? Based on these 
deliberations,  the  macroeconomic  policy-making  has  improved  significantly,  and  we  have 
also learned how to apply economic leverages appropriately and timely, and how to deal with 
the inflation. 
Through the 1990s, the Chinese banking sector faced a predicament characterized by the 
underdevelopment of a sound “credit culture.” During this period, shortcomings of the credit 
culture  were  exemplified  by  two  main  types  of  bank  lending.  The  first  was  policy  lending, 
including  those  determined  by  the  government  plan  or  under  variety  of  administrative 
interventions.  The  second  was  so-called  “relationship-based  lending”.  At  that  time,  there 
existed large deficiencies in the standards of accounting, information disclosure and financial 
statements reporting. Enterprises’ access to credit was largely based on their management’s 
personal  relationship  to  the  banks,  and  only  those  with  good  relationship  got  the  loans. 
Rectifying China’s unsound credit culture has been a long and painful process. A key step on 
this path was the nation’s first National Financial Work Conference held in November 1997, 
which set out a vertical management system for the commercial banks. Both the central and 
local governments were thus prohibited from interfering with loan decisions. This change was 
considered an important step forward in transforming the credit culture.  
At the end of 1997, the Asian financial crisis spread to its full scale. Although China averted a 
head-on  hit  by  the  crisis,  its  aftermath  had  produced  long-term  effects  on  the  Chinese 
economy, including, most obviously, the problem of non-performing loans (NPLs). According 
to accounting standards used domestically at that time, in 1998 the Chinese banking system 
had an NPL ratio of 25 percent, although international accounting standards would have put 
the rate as high as more than 40 percent – a figure underscoring a NPL crisis. Indeed, many 
banks  were  technically  insolvent.  A  banking  system  in  such  a  status  would  be  difficult  to 
support a sound economic development. Such a reality buttressed China’s resolve to carry 
out reforms. 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2007
In February 2002, at the second National Financial Work Conference, plans were made to 
strengthen financial supervision (later on in 2003 the China Banking Regulatory Commission 
(CBRC)  was  established).  It  was  also  decided  to  kick  off  a  new  round  of  reforms  on  the 
commercial  banking  sector,  clean  up  bank  balance  sheets,  and  proceed  with  financial 
restructuring  –  measures  designed  to  make  major  commercial  banks  to  be  financially 
healthy.  Over  the  next  five  years,  China  carried  out  a  series  of  reforms  on  the  financial 
institutions,  including  not  only  the  commercial  banks,  but  also  the  rural  credit  unions  and 
other financial institutions, such as security firms and insurance companies. The decision to 
carry out reforms was the result of lessons learned, and it also laid a foundation for future 
development. 
Just before the Enron and WorldCom cases were exposed in the United States, the Chinese 
media  had  unveiled  a  fund  scandal  in  its  securities  trading.  In  this  case,  some  institutions 
were found of manipulating stock prices. The year 2001 also saw the Yin Guang Xia case, 
which was similar to the Enron scandal in that the listed company disclosed false information 
and  engaged  in  unlawful  trading  in  its  stock.  In  2003,  a  larger  scandal  of  listed  company 
broke out with the collapse of the De Long Conglomerate. Following these incidents, China’s 
financial regulations and corporate governance standards were improved and toughened to 
counteract the misconducts by using complex corporate structures, which occurred in the De 
Long Case. 
China’s financial system is thus gradually improving its knowledge to deal with instability or 
turbulences of varying degrees. While it’s difficult to avoid mistakes completely, the key is to 
learn the right lessons, make improvements, and achieve substantive progress.  
A Chinese saying goes like this “if you frequently suffer minor illnesses, you may be finally 
exempted  from  a  major  disease”.  China  must  avoid  at  all  costs  the  kind  of  disease  that 
plagued Japan’s economy through the 1990s and even into the new century. 
The mirror image 
In reviewing international financial instability or turbulences since the 1970s, we may have 
two observations. 
First, while many kinds of instability or turbulences afflict financial systems, only minority is 
created by the financial system itself. The majority reflects problems in the real economy – 
the so-called “mirror image” in financial sector. The real economy and the financial system 
mirror  each  other,  such  as  NPL  problem  usually  reflects  troubles  with  firms  in  the  real 
economy. At the same time, it may also reflect problems in accounting practice, information 
disclosure, and corporate governance. One characteristic of the modern economy is that the 
financial  system  is  a  barometer  for  the  entire  economy:  troubles  in  the  real  economy  are 
often first broken out in the financial system. Problems in the financial system, however, are 
not caused by the financial system alone. 
Second,  problems  in  developed  countries,  particularly  in  those  emerged  in  mature  market 
economies,  are  often  relatively  new  as  these  economies  are  often  places  where  financial 
innovation activities are concentrated. These problems are so new that market participants 
and regulators alike have a hard time predicting their course. Naturally, it’s a big challenge to 
find  solutions.  In  comparison,  problems  faced  by  the  emerging  markets  or  developing 
countries are more often a repeat of those already experienced by the developed economies. 
Thus,  the  way  for  dealing  with  instability  often  can  more  probably  be  drawn  from  the 
international historical experience. 
Rethinking financial instability or turbulences  
First, if an economic system or policies are flawed, sooner or later they will be forced to be 
corrected;  this  is  an  objective  law  in  the  functioning  of  the  market  economy.  The  US 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 3
subprime turbulence is a clear case. Individuals without sufficient ability to repay and failing 
to meet loan standards were nonetheless given large amount of home loans. At some point, 
such  hidden  risks  would  have  to  surface.  When  an  obvious  bubble  forms  in  an  economy, 
bursting problems are bound to emerge with time. 
Second,  risks  to  the  financial  system  brought  by  indirect  financing  are  much  higher  than 
those  tied  to  direct  financing.  So  we  say  “debt  is  more  dangerous”.  Institutional  investors 
including  pension  funds,  mutual  funds,  hedge  funds,  private  equity  funds,  etc,  presumably 
know and undertake relevant risks inherent in the investment. Problems that arise are thus 
comparatively less painful to be absorbed. A recent estimate of the amount of the subprime 
mortgage  securities  is  about  US$  200  billion.  If  these  risks  are  truly  spread  among  the 
institutional investors and other direct investors, it should not be so hard for an economy as 
large as the U.S. to absorb the losses (all the more so given some of the burden will fall on 
Europe, Japan and even, to a much less extent, China). So why, against most expectations, 
did this turbulence continue spreading? An understanding lies in the fact that while some of 
the investment risk was carried by direct investors, certain risks were in fact left within the 
indirect  financing  channels.  As  we  know,  these  are  the  so-called  structured  investment 
vehicles (SIVs), which are often off-balance-sheets of banks and other financial institutions. 
Financial institutions kept a huge amount of debt exposure off their books – without being 
detected  by  the  regulatory  bodies.  Off-book  supervision  has  actually  been  rather  relaxed, 
and many people including the regulators even don’t necessarily have relevant experience in 
this field. Because these off-book investment institutions usually borrowed from the banks, in 
the end commercial banks were left holding a sizeable portion of subprime and its derivative 
products. The Basel II banking guidelines set requirements for debtors to bring certain off-
book services back on-book in a timely manner. But most banks, with the exception of those 
large  European  banks,  have  not  yet  taken  these  guidelines.  And  the  Chinese  banks  are 
currently not subject to the Basel II.  
As long as the banking system doesn’t get dragged into the mess, the subprime mortgage 
problems  would  only  have  limited  impact.  As  far  as  direct  investment  risk  is  concerned, 
investors  will  have  to  absorb  their  losses,  and  central  banks  generally  would  not  stand  to 
provide  support.  As  for  debt  risk  within  the  banks  that  bear  systemic  implications,  actions 
have to be taken to curb its spread. As illustrated in Northern Rock case when the drying up 
of market liquidity begins and threatens to spread, the bank of England must act. 
Reviewing the debt instruments, we learn that the creditor-debtor relationships imply greater 
systematic risks. Similar cases can be found by reviewing lessons from the Asian financial 
crisis  and  the  Japanese  experience.  To  reduce  risk  and  increase  financial  stability,  great 
effort should be made to develop direct financing. However, it’s vital that direct investment 
products  are  not  twisted  to  simply  shift  the  risk  back  to  the  banking  system.  In  such  a 
process, the key is to foster and develop investors, including institutional investors as well as 
individual investors, who can recognize specific risk and have the ability to undertake risks.  
Third, analyses and research should be strengthened to detect bubble risks and prepare for 
different  scenarios.  A  book  called  Extraordinary  Popular  Delusions  and  the  Madness  of 
Crowds  describes  the  bubbles  of  early  years  of  western  financial  markets.  The  title  of  the 
book is interesting because it reminds participants in the financial markets to keep rational. 
When  the  market  goes  to  overheat,  participants  often  see  their  reasoning  weakened  and 
even many of them try to explain away or defend such irrationality. During his tenure at the 
U.S.  Federal  Reserve,  Alan  Greenspan  used  the  term  “irrational  exuberance”  to  alert  the 
overheated  situation.  This,  too,  was  a  reminder  that  a  more  rational  attitude  should  be 
maintained in the process of economic and market overheating.  
Fourth, in the process of diagnosing problems and prescribing solutions, it’s important not to 
misread history. When making corrections, efforts should be exercised to avoid overshooting, 
lest  such  efforts  end  up  sowing  the  seeds  for  another  crisis.  Among  the  analyses  of  the 
current state of global excess liquidity and the US subprime turbulence, one line of thinking 
4 
 BIS Review 148/2007
draws  its  origins  from  the  Fed  loosening  monetary  policy  following  the  bursting  of  the 
NASDAQ bubble in 2000. Amid the large amount of analysis about the spillover effects of the 
subprime  turbulence  on  China,  some  have  voiced  cautions  about  the  development  of 
securitized products, and traced the origins of the subprime turbulence to the development of 
these securitized products and other derivatives. Worrying that more complex product might 
generate  greater  troubles,  these  embrace  a  vision  of  “simpler  is  better.”  But  we  need  to 
remain  sober:  the  securitization  process  should  not  be  jettisoned  quickly.  To  develop 
financial market and support economic growth, resolute efforts need to be made to develop 
direct financing and related securitization. It is almost impossible to avoid securitization in the 
contemporary  development.  Rather,  great  efforts  should  be  made  to  develop  an  array  of 
financial  products,  including  the  hybrid  products  such  as  debt-equity  mixed  and  some 
derivatives.  We  need  to  recognize  that  problems  arise  not  because  the  securitization  or 
derivatives  as  a  product  are  somehow  flawed.  Instead,  most  of  these  troubles  result  from 
problems in information disclosure or the pricing mechanisms, or because the design of the 
mechanisms implied moral hazard. 
Fifth, flexibility and adaptability must be improved. In dealing with the crisis it’s important to 
realize the fluidity of the situation and thus the need for a nimble response. The Governor of 
the  Bank  of  England  was  criticized  for  his  response  to  the  Northern  Rock  on  the  floor  of 
Parliament, where he was blamed of changing his position over a few days. In fact, financial 
markets are fast changing, and judgments must be made according to specific conditions. It’s 
normal for one’s conclusions to be updated within a few days. From the perspective of the 
adjustment  capabilities  in  dealing  with  the  crisis,  the  key  is  to  increase  microeconomic 
flexibility. In other words, the adaptability of the micro entities to changes in prices as well as 
in  market  supply-demand  should  all  be  improved,  thus  avoiding  the  introduction of  excess 
rigidity in pricing, supply, demand, and institutional design. 
Sixth,  to  guard  against  and  manage  instability,  developing  countries  must  raise  levels  of 
confidence  in  their  currencies,  markets  and  central  banks.  Key  points  here  include 
maintaining  the  stability  of  currency  value,  adopting  a  flexible  exchange  rate  policy, 
supporting confidence in currency convertibility, increasing the economy’s ability to deal with 
all  kinds  of  shocks,  and  exercising  regular  assessment  of  the  economy,  so  as  to  provide 
early warning about risks forming within the economy, and research and prepare contingency 
plans.  IMF’s  annual  surveillance  mechanism  –  including  the  “Article  IV  Consultation”  – 
functions as an effective tool for regular health check-up of the member economies.  
Seventh, it’s truly an art to find the subtle balance needed for anti-crisis policy-making. It’s 
important  to  avoid  creating  too  much  moral  hazard  by  bailing  out  institutions  whose  own 
operations lead to major mistakes. At the same time, it’s necessary to consider the impact on 
the real economy: if a crisis impact on the real economy and social confidence are severe, or 
it may result in a system-wide chain reaction, a prompt action would be required. Of course, 
the reactions will vary under different circumstances. 
As  the  subprime  mortgage  crisis  develops,  we  are  carefully  observing  two  recent  policies. 
First,  about  2  million  American  subprime  home  loan  recipients  face  their  problem  to  fully 
repay  their  mortgages.  If  foreclosure  is  enforced,  it  may  lead  to  further  declines  of  the 
housing  prices.  During  the  process,  the  government  may  wish  to  take  steps  to  help  poor 
people  through  their  difficulties.  But  the  fundamental  issue  is  that  people  who  didn’t  meet 
loan conditions probably should not have bought such large houses. Will the government’s 
provision of aid or subsidies lead to moral hazard? Should the resulted loss be borne by the 
taxpayers?  Second,  some  US  (as  well  as  a  handful  of  European)  financial  institutions 
employed  SIVs  or  other  conduits  to  take  on  additional  risk  exposure.  Should  these 
institutions  be  bailed  out?  Several  big  US  banks  have  recently  created  a  “super  conduit” 
worth US$ 75 billion, trying to help alleviate the crisis. But in so doing, how it is going to price 
the risk of related products? Will this simply create even greater moral hazard? 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 5
Above all, we need to pay close attention to and deeply think about the turbulence underway 
as  well  as  the  remedial  measures  adopted  by  the  financial  regulatory  authorities  in  the 
mature  economies  to  deal  with  it.  Such  a  reflection  bears  great  significance  for  China  to 
develop 
regulation  and 
macroeconomic policy-making. 
financial  supervision  and 
financial  market, 
improve 
its 
6 
 BIS Review 148/2007
