John Hurley: Financial Stability Report 2007 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services 
Authority  of  Ireland,  at  the  presentation  of  the  Financial  Stability  Report  2007,  Dublin, 
14 November 2007. 
 I am pleased to welcome you all to the publication of our 2007 Financial Stability Report. The 
objective of the Report is to set out our overall assessment of the stability of the domestic 
financial  system.  Just  before  I  start,  I  would  like  to  clarify  that  my  comments  today  are 
directed towards the financial stability issues regarding the Irish economy and do not relate 
to monetary policy matters.  
Summary of the Report 
The  Report  outlines  our  assessment  of  the  resilience  of  the  Irish  financial  system  to  both 
expected  and  unexpected  shocks.  A  stable  financial  system,  such  as  stable  financial 
markets, payments and settlements systems and financial institutions, is one which is able to 
absorb  shocks.  In  this  Financial  Stability  Report,  we  consider  various  risks  and  potential 
shocks that, if they were to happen, could have a relatively large impact on the stability of the 
financial system.  
Our  assessment  is  that  financial  stability  risks  have,  on  balance,  increased  since  the 
publication of our last Financial Stability Report a year ago. However, our overall conclusion 
is that the Irish financial system’s shock absorption capacity remains robust and the system 
is well placed to cope with emerging issues.  
Among the key points are: 
• 
To  date,  2007  has  provided  a  more  challenging  international  environment  for 
financial stability with considerable turbulence in international financial markets; 
On the domestic front, there has been an improvement in the main risks identified in 
last year’s Financial Stability Report, particularly in relation to house price increases, 
private sector credit growth and easing in repayment burdens; 
While recognising the risks, the Irish banking system continues to be well placed to 
withstand  adverse  economic  and  sectoral  developments  in  the  short  to  medium 
term. 
  the  current  outlook 
In this statement, I will explain the rationale behind this assessment in greater detail. I will 
begin  by  summarising 
the  associated 
macroeconomic risks. I will update you on some welcome improvements relating to the key 
vulnerabilities in the domestic financial system that were highlighted in last year’s Report. I 
will finish with comments on three issues: the current environment in international financial 
markets;  the  positive  outlook  for  the  Irish  banking  sector  in  this  changed  operating 
environment; and some issues that need to be looked at in the light of current turbulence in 
financial markets. Frank Browne, Head of Financial Stability, will make a brief presentation to 
pick up on some of these points, after which we will be happy to take questions.  
the  economy  and 
for 
The economic outlook 
Turning first to the macroeconomic situation, the strength of the Irish economy continues to 
support the stability of the financial system. The indications are that the domestic economy 
continues to perform solidly. The overall picture for economic growth is generally satisfactory 
in the current uncertain international environment and this follows a period of high growth. On 
BIS Review 132/2007 
 1
the positive side, economic fundamentals – a good budgetary position, strong employment 
growth, and an adaptable economy – continue to be sound. While the outlook is for some 
deceleration  in  2008,  growth  projections  remain  reasonably  strong  by  international 
standards. As economic growth slows somewhat, some upturn in the unemployment rate is 
likely. However, this is expected to be modest and the forecast is for the economy to remain 
at close to its full employment position.  
Macroeconomic risks to the economic outlook 
I  will  now  refer  briefly  to  the  macroeconomic  risks  that  could  pose  problems  for  economic 
growth if they were to materialise. There is the risk of slower world growth feeding through to 
the Irish economy. Forecasts from the major international economic institutions suggest that 
the downside risks are most pronounced for the US. While the resilience of the global and 
euro area economies should be helped by the fact that both were growing solidly before the 
recent outbreak of market turbulence, a marked slowdown in US growth would represent a 
drag on economic activity in the rest of the world. In particular, the trade and investment links 
between Ireland and the US leave the Irish economy vulnerable to any significant downturn 
in growth in the US.  
The  main  downside  risks  from  the  domestic  environment  are:  first,  the  moderation  in  the 
contribution  of  residential  construction-sector  activity  to  overall  growth,  and  secondly,  the 
longer-term  deterioration  in  Ireland’s  competitiveness.  The  high  share  of  the  construction 
sector  in  economic  activity  is  expected  to  decline  gradually  in  the  coming  years  with  the 
reduction  in  residential  activity  compensated  in  part  by  continued  strong  growth  in  public-
sector  and  private-non-residential  construction.  However,  a  sharper-than-expected  fall  in 
housing  output  would  have  a  negative  impact  on  both  GDP  growth  and  employment.  A 
second factor has been a longer-term deterioration in competitiveness due to a number of 
factors,  including  higher  inflation  than  our  main  trading  partners,  an  appreciation  of  the 
exchange  rate  and  lower  productivity  growth.  While  the  overall  competitive  position  of  the 
economy  does  not  appear  to  be  too  strained, a  continuation  of  these  trends  could  have  a 
more significant economic impact in the longer run.  
Issues for the domestic financial system 
Last  year’s  Financial  Stability  Report  identified  three  major  domestic  vulnerabilities:  the 
upward momentum in  house prices, strong credit growth  and rising indebtedness, and the 
adverse  impact  of  increasing  repayment  burdens  on  the  health  of  the  household  sector. 
Since then, there have been a number of welcome improvements around these issues.  
Firstly,  the  upward  momentum  in  residential  property  prices  has  eased,  reducing  the 
vulnerability posed by the previous substantial increase in house prices. While house prices 
increased nationally by almost 12 per cent on average in 2006, they slowed significantly in 
the second half of the year. The slowdown continued this year and prices are now about 3½ 
per cent lower on a year-to-date basis. These developments should be assessed against the 
gains in house prices in recent years, where prices have risen by over 50 per cent between 
2002 and 2006. House prices are now on average at mid-2006 levels. Concerns at that time 
that  house  prices  would  move  further  out  of  line  with  fundamentals,  and  that  housing 
affordability would worsen, have lessened since last year’s Report. Regarding future house 
price  developments,  factors  such  as  investors’  participation  in  the  property  market,  the 
sustainability of current rates of immigration, the cost of borrowing and the performance of 
the labour market are  all important. The underlying fundamentals of the residential market 
continue to be reasonably strong.  
Second, a welcome easing has taken place during 2007 in the rate of increase in private-
sector  borrowing,  and  the  rate  of  accumulation  of  private-sector  indebtedness  has  eased 
accordingly. Ireland’s level of private-sector indebtedness, however, continues to be high by 
international standards. Although a high level of indebtedness increases the vulnerability of 
2 
 BIS Review 132/2007
the  private  sector  to  income  and  interest-rate  developments,  there  are  also  important 
mitigating  factors  such  as  the  sector’s  high  net  worth  and  the  positive  outlook  for  the 
economy.  When assessed alongside the slowdown in borrowing, these factors reduce this 
vulnerability somewhat.  
Also, mortgage repayment burdens have generally increased in recent years – driven initially 
by  the  high  rate  of  houses  price  inflation  and,  since  late-2005,  driven  by  interest-rate 
increases. Robust income growth as well as changes introduced in the last Budget and the 
moderation in house price developments have worked to reduce repayment burdens since 
our last Report.  
As well as these developments in the vulnerabilities highlighted in last year’s Report, there 
are additional issues which merit consideration. The first relates to the commercial property 
sector,  where  price  rises  have  been  very  strong  in  recent  years  and  reflect  the  overall 
strength  of  the  economy.  The  concern  was,  however,  that  capital  values  appeared  to  be 
moving out of line with rents such that yields were close to unprecedented low levels. We 
have  analysed  these  trends  in  commercial  property  in  a  separate  article  in  this  year’s 
Financial Stability Report and this helps to identify aspects – such as low yields – which are 
part of a broad international trend. The most recent developments are welcome, whereby the 
pace  of  capital  appreciation  has  started  to  ease  while  underlying  fundamentals  such  as 
vacancy rates remain low and rental growth solid and will be outlined by Frank Browne in his 
presentation. 
An  additional  factor  is  the  possible  impact  of  the  turbulence  in  financial  markets 
internationally  on  credit  conditions  in  the  domestic  economy.  While  much  depends  on  the 
possible  evolution  and  duration  of  the  current  disruption  in  market  activity,  there  is  the 
concern that a prolonged period of market disruption could work through to economic activity 
by increasing the cost of credit to firms and individuals and reducing the volumes of credit 
which  banks  are  willing  to  extend  to  borrowers  compared  with  earlier  periods.  While  the 
potential evolution of these developments is difficult to predict, nevertheless we are alert to 
the possible risks for the domestic economy.  
International financial markets and the domestic banking system 
Overall health of the domestic banking system 
Turning  to  the  Irish  banking  system,  the  stability  and  health  of  the  banking  system  here 
remain  robust  when  assessed  by  the  usual  indicators  of  financial  health  such  as  asset 
quality,  profitability,  solvency,  liquidity  and  credit  ratings.  The  central  expectation  is  that, 
notwithstanding  the  international  financial  market  turbulence,  the  Irish  banking  system 
continues to be well placed to withstand adverse economic and sectoral developments in the 
short  to  medium  term.  This  is  based  on  our  assessment  of  the  risks  facing  both  the 
household  and  non-financial  corporate  sectors,  the  health  of  the  banking  sector  and  the 
results  of  recent  in-house  stress  testing.  We  cannot,  of  course,  preclude  the  possibility  of 
unanticipated  adverse  developments,  which  should 
they  materialise,  could  have 
consequences for banks here.  
The ongoing tensions in financial markets and the interbank market for loans 
After  several  years  during  which  financial  market  conditions  were  extremely  buoyant, 
international financial markets have experienced considerable volatility this year. This follows 
a  prolonged  period  when  some  asset  prices  were  driven  to  unsustainable  levels  and 
inadequate attention was paid to risk. The unwinding of these excesses has contributed to 
the recent increased turbulence in financial markets. The possible spillover effects from this 
volatility  are  important  for  financial  stability  because  of  the  potential  impact  on  the  real 
economy and on the banking system, both globally and in Ireland. The international banking 
BIS Review 132/2007 
 3
system has been negatively affected by these events, both directly through losses on their 
US sub prime assets, and indirectly through holding of investments exposed to US sub prime 
losses  as  well  as  credit  commitments  to  conduits  or  special  purpose  vehicles.  This  has 
affected confidence between counterparties and has caused disruption in the money market 
where  banks  have  been  reluctant  to  lend  to  each  other.  In  early  September,  a  number  of 
central  banks,  led  by  the  ECB,  reacted  promptly  to  alleviate  this  disruption  through  the 
provision of substantial liquidity injections. These actions alleviated the problems at the very 
short-end of the interbank market, although longer-term rates have not yet fully adjusted and 
spreads  between  these  rates  and  policy  rates  remain  relatively  wide.  Although  overall 
liquidity  is  adequate,  the  circulation  of  this  liquidity  has  been  disrupted.  Activity  in  the 
interbank  market  remains  well  below  normal  and  is  likely  to  revert  to  previous  levels  only 
when a greater degree of confidence returns to the markets. It may take some time before 
such confidence returns.  
The situation in Ireland 
Like their international peers, Irish banks are operating in an environment where liquidity is 
not  as  readily  available  as  heretofore.  In  addition,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  larger 
institutions have diversified their businesses outside the Irish economy, the banking sector is 
operating  in  an  economy  where  growth  will  be  slower  by  comparison  with  recent  years. 
Investor  sentiment  towards  the  banking  sector  globally  has  been  negative  in  recent  times. 
However,  the  current  situation  and  outlook  for  Irish  banks,  based  on  an  assessment  of 
developments  so  far,  is  positive.  Firstly,  the  sector’s  shock  absorption  capacity  has  been 
largely unaffected by the turbulence in international financial markets. The domestic banking 
system reports no significant direct exposures to US sub prime  mortgages and essentially 
negligible exposures through investments and through links with other financial companies or 
special purpose vehicles which themselves were negatively affected by the current market 
turmoil. The Financial Stability Report contains an article summarising the results of a survey 
conducted  with  the  banks  on  this  issue.  Secondly,  given  the  extent  of  the  disruption  to 
normal market functioning internationally in recent months, it is inevitable that Irish banks – 
like all banks – would experience some impairment in their access to liquidity in the interbank 
market.  However,  the  comprehensive  liquidity  framework  within  the  Eurosystem  and  the 
significant  volumes  of  collateral  held  means  that  Irish  banks  are  well  positioned  to  access 
Eurosystem  liquidity.  Also,  a  fuller  assessment  of  the  funding  patterns  of  Irish  banks 
indicates that there is a significant medium-term element to much of their funding, as well as 
a relatively wide range of funding options available to them. Finally, our stress-testing of the 
banking  system  and  our  extensive  financial  stability  analysis  indicate  that  Irish  banks  are 
solidly profitable and well-capitalised. In this context, it is worth noting that they have one of 
the lowest rates of non-performing loans among banks in all EU countries.  
Lessons from the current episode of financial market turbulence 
As the evolution and duration of the current episode is uncertain, it is difficult to draw firm 
conclusions at this early stage. Nevertheless, EU Finance Ministers have looked  at recent 
events and have set out a roadmap of issues to address, to help avoid a repeat of recent 
events. A number of areas would seem to require attention in the near future: 
There is a need to improve transparency about where financial risks lie. The lack of accurate 
and  timely  information  on  exposures  and  underlying  risks  has  been  an  important  factor  in 
triggering the loss of investor confidence in recent months; 
While securitisation and financial innovation have significantly enhanced credit risk transfer, 
they have had other, less benign – effects. In particular, the “originate and distribute” model 
behind securitisation has changed the incentives for lenders regarding the monitoring of risk 
and we probably need some more checks and balances here; 
4 
 BIS Review 132/2007
Clearly, rating agencies play a very important role and should continue to do so. However, 
there are some potential conflicts of interest and how these are handled needs to be thought 
through, as does the question of whether a more differentiated scale of ratings for structured 
credit products is appropriate; the issue of how to value complex products, many of which 
are not traded on markets with genuine liquidity, also needs further consideration.  
Conclusion 
The  publication  of  this  Report  is  one  way  in  which  the  Central  Bank  &  Financial  Services 
Authority  of  Ireland  fulfils  its  financial  stability  mandate.  In  addition,  we  maintain  an  active 
dialogue  with  the  domestic  credit  institutions  in  order  to  highlight  issues  for  the  financial 
system,  and  the  Central  Bank  works  in  close  co-operation  with  the  Financial  Regulator  to 
help maintain financial stability in Ireland. The Financial Regulator conducts regular on-site 
inspections  and  monitors  banks’  exposures  on  a  regular  basis.  Finally,  we  continue  to 
develop procedures to assess and deal with any concern of a financial stability nature that 
might  arise  in  the  future.  I  may  add  that,  in  the  current  environment,  we  have  had  more 
extensive dialogue with financial institutions to ensure that we and they are cognisant of the 
main risks and challenges in financial markets at this time.  
I  hope  that  the  comprehensive  analysis  in  our  Financial  Stability  Report  conveys  the 
importance of a stable financial system and that it may stimulate discussion of the current 
financial stability climate in Ireland among financial market participants and the wider public.  
To conclude, I am pleased to report that, notwithstanding some significant vulnerabilities and 
downside  risks  noted  earlier,  our  overall  conclusion  is  that  the  Irish  financial  system 
continues to be in a good state of health. 
Frank Browne will now make a short presentation on some of the most pertinent points in the 
Financial  Stability  Review.  We  will  then  be  available  to  answer  questions  and  hear  any 
comments that you may have. 
BIS Review 132/2007 
 5
