Rundheersing Bheenick: Bank of Mauritius – 40th anniversary year 
highlights and outlook 
Speech  by  Professor  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the 
dinner to mark the conclusion of the 40th Anniversary celebrations of the Bank of Mauritius, 
Port Louis, 6 December 2007. 
 “Our revels now are ended…” 
The Vice-president and our guest of honour; former Vice-presidents; Former Deputy Prime 
Ministers;  Ministers;  Former  Ministers;  Excellencies  members  of  the  Diplomatic  Corps; 
Honourable Governor of the Bank of Ghana Dr Paul Acquah, our special guest this evening; 
Members  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  Chairman  of  the  Mauritius  Bankers’ 
Association;  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Economic  Council;  Deputy  Speaker;  Honourable 
Members of Parliament; Mayors and Chairmen of District Councils, Members of the Press, 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The first necessity for good speaking is a goodly audience: and I must say we certainly have 
that tonight! I am delighted that we have with us on this occasion our special guest Dr Paul 
Acquah Governor of the Bank of Ghana. 
We  are  here  for  the  finale  of  the  celebrations  of  the  40th  anniversary  year  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius. I should add our congratulations to the Mauritius Bankers’ Association, who are 
with us in strength tonight, also in their 40th year. At our opening banquet, we dwelt on the 
milestones we have passed since those heady days of Independence and the opening of this 
Bank, as part of the process of shedding the mantle of Colonial times. 
Tonight I will focus on the fresh developments of this 40th year itself, with just a glance into 
the crystal ball of years ahead. There are quite some tasks that confront us to secure a sure 
sustainability for banking into the future. We hover still in a shadow of the looming clouds, of 
recent  months,  from  the  global  credit  crisis  unfolding  from  the  US  sub-prime  debacle.  Dr 
Reddy our good friend from the Reserve Bank of India has emphasised the uncertainties in 
the unstable state of banking. These are nothing less than a climate change for us. They are 
the inescapable shifting of the tectonic plates of global trade. We shall be seeing the west, 
and even the “green back” as a global currency, recede, and the Asian giants move in. 
For the present, let me say, 2007 has been not just a year of celebration, but a year of real 
progress and development in banking in this country. In reviewing this year of real progress, 
so far, I shall touch on: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The formal institutional developments, 
The internal light re-engineering or restructuring, 
Our new relationships with stakeholders, and 
Some of the events in our pageant of 40th anniversary year celebrations. 
Institutional developments 
Allow  me  to  list  a  few  of  the  critical  institutional  reforms  that  have  already  changed  the 
pattern  of  our  work  together.  For  the  first  time  in  our  history,  we  have  a  Monetary  Policy 
Committee,  which,  with  its  new  independence,  will  ensure  a  more  adaptive  capacity  for 
determining the best monetary interests for the country. We have had the Amendment to the 
Banking Act, which gives the MPC decisive powers. We have instituted a new departure in 
communications  policy  that  ensures  that,  you  know  as  much  as  we  do,  about  both  the 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 1
decisions and the analysis. Yesterday, in our fifth meeting, we came to an historic decision 
on interest rates, by unanimous vote: BUSINESS AS USUAL; no change! 
For those new to these matters, I must confirm that it is not a requirement that the members 
of  the  MPC  are  signed  up  adherents  to  Monetarist  theory.  We  have  a  more  liberal 
perspective here; rather taking the view that Monetarism, like Marxism, has suffered the only 
fate for a theory worse than death; it was, for a time, put into practice. History teaches us that 
men  and  nations  behave  wisely  once  they  have  exhausted  all  other  alternatives.  What 
worries me, and I guess most other bankers, is that when great men get drunk with theory, it 
is the little men who wake up with the headache. 
We  now  have  a  new  formal  accord  on  our  complementary  functions  with  the  Financial 
Services  Commission  the  FSC.  This  will  I  believe  set  a  new  tone  for  harmonious  co-
operation between the several actors in promoting safe more efficient and stable leadership 
and management in the sector. This accord is the start of a journey we are making, together. 
It is not a final destination we have already attained. 
We  are  passing  through  a  tense  period  globally  in  the  supervision  of  banking  and  credit. 
There  are  compelling  reasons  to  take  stock  now.  So  we  have  made  an  important  step  in 
establishing this new accord on our relative roles in supervision of the ownership structure, 
corporate governance and risk management. It is this latter field that has been in the sharp 
focus of worldwide concern, starting with the so-called sub-prime market in the US. This has 
not been a local storm in a tea-cup, but a tsunami rapidly engulfing not just the core activities 
of  a  few  institutions  in  one  region.  It  is  surging  across  the  oceans.  It  is  submerging  the 
interlinked archipelago of loosely affiliated entities, subject to varying degrees of regulation. 
Some of the regulatory links are so obscure and vulnerable to the sea level rise they have 
been  quickly  overwhelmed.  Central  banks,  and  even  governments,  have  had  to  mount 
rescue operations, at unusually sympathetic rates, at great financial cost and at even greater 
moral hazard. 
I trust that this new accord with the FSC will help us here to tighten our controls and limit the 
risk arising from such supervisory gaps. The accord with the FSC is based on international 
best  practice,  commended  by  international  bodies  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision.  This  joint  BOM/FSC  committee  will  ensure  continuity  of  monitoring  and 
partnership. Yet uncertainty of the underlying risks remains. However confident we are in our 
institutional strengths, we must beware of that notion of progress which mistakes comfort for 
invulnerability. We must be rethinking the instruments of monetary policy. This is essential as 
we move, slowly but surely forward, into the higher realms of financial globalisation and the 
process of regional economic, financial and monetary union. 
As we move into closer union in Africa, we shall continue to work with all our international 
partners, western and eastern. Although I suppose we have to admit the Europeans remain 
our best of friends, in terms of markets for our exports products and services. 
Now for a little light re-engineering 
Now let me pass on to our little light engineering, here at the Bank. We are not only moving 
into our new building, but at the same time undertaking some modest reform of our internal 
organisational structure and processes. 
In  the  past  in  Mauritius  we  have  come  to  rely  on  a  time  lag  of  some  years  between  the 
perception that something ought to be done, and any serious attempt to do it. We have dared 
to reduce this lag to months, even weeks in some cases. I am glad to say that all the staff 
have collaborated well. We have encountered little of the paradox of reform where the office 
becomes a hotbed of cold feet. In all this we have been greatly assisted by a fine Malaysian 
expert review team, who have brought both fresh ideas and a new stimulus to the continual 
process  of  adaptation  to  our  changing  market  in  banking  and  to  the  changing  needs  and 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2007
perspectives  of  government.  We  now  have  a  flatter  structure,  sloughing  off  some  of  that 
cellulite, producing a faster more relevant response to the needs of our times and customers. 
We  are  seeing  meetings  more  as  means  of  resolving  issues  rather  than  just  continually 
restating them. We look to very positive results from our new Communications Division, with 
a fresh vision drawn from the wider realms of the media and communications practice. Our 
mission is to transform the Bank of Mauritius into the People’s Bank. 
We have a new Corporate Services Division with a knowledge-management function as its 
core discipline. One new focus will be on applied teaching and research with the University, 
to  foster  our  sustained  adaptation  in  the  face  of  the  global  financial,  commercial  and 
economic  climate  change.  We  have  marked  this  with  a  series  of  five  open  lectures  on 
banking, applied economics and monetary policy, which should become a staple part of our 
diet in years to come. 
Our new relationships with stakeholders 
Let me now pass to our improving relationship with our stakeholders, many of whom, I am 
delighted to see here tonight. I am also pleased to say how constructive the new Banking 
Committee meeting is emerging. It is a new breeze in our more open relationship with our 
stakeholders. We have had a series of refreshing meetings. These meetings have developed 
into a series of consultations with private sector stakeholders. Through them you are airing 
your prevailing concerns and we are learning how better to gauge your perceptions on key 
issues, and the ways in which a central Bank can best respond. 
We  have  touched  on  such  trends  in  the  main  macroeconomic  indicators,  labour  market 
developments, access to finance and the nature and impact of the main constraints that you 
face  in  getting  on  with  business.  These  consultations  have  involved  the  chambers  of 
commerce,  merchants,  export  associations,  the  tourist  industry,  shop  owners,  consumers’ 
representatives, maritime agents, insurers and those in the agriculture and in the transport 
sectors amongst others. 
Issues  raised  at  these  meetings  have  ranged  widely  from  globalisation,  banking  practices, 
bank charges, security of on-line transactions, cyber-crime, varied levels of competitiveness, 
transparency  of  exchange  rates,  effectiveness  of  the  sme  partnership  fund,  widening  the 
participation in the sme’s chamber, communications and the heavy technical content of our 
traditional Bulletin and other reports, the role of the new Communications Director and how 
best to tap into the intelligence, vigour, resilience and leverage of the private sector. 
We  have  been  exploring  benchmarks  for  performance,  efficiency  and,  may  I  add, 
inefficiency, the profitability of banks at the expense of customers, variation in bank charges, 
re-investment rates in companies, development of Mauritius as a duty free island, and the 
time taken to process cheques. 
These are not meetings for taking votes. They are more important than that. For they give 
airtime to the softest voices. I have always had a sneaking feeling, you know, that in the long 
run, we discover that the minorities with the softest voices are almost always right. This open 
approach to our consultative meetings has been extended to our over-the-counter banking; 
more  open  than  ever  this  year.  This  is  a  trend  sweeping  though  the  banking  sector  in 
general. 
40th year celebrations 
Now let me briefly take you through the highlights of our anniversary year. This has served 
as a celebration of the wisdom and courage of our founders, a rite of passage into a new era 
in banking, and a preparation for the difficult journey ahead. I have been immensely grateful 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 3
to  the  staff  past  and  present  who  have  put  so  much  of  themselves  into  each  of  these 
unfolding events. 
We began with a gala dinner with the great and the good, at which we received expressions 
of  most  generous  support  from  the  Prime  Minister,  from  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and 
Minister  of  Finance,  and  from  our  colleagues  and  friends  in  the  banking  and  business 
community, many of whom are also with us tonight. I was particularly delighted that De La 
Rue’s were represented here. That is a link to this country that goes back over 150 years. 
Our new building has been formally opened and we are gradually becoming accustomed to 
its special architectural features and added security measures. 
Staff  and  their  families  greatly  appreciated  the  inter-faith  ceremony  and  blessings  for  their 
work, from the leaders of many religious communities, who graced that occasion with prayers 
and hymns of praise. 
Amongst other celebratory events this year, were: 
• 
The interclub youth athletics tournament, 
A health week, 
• 
The launching the new Rs20 coin, 
• 
• 
The issue of a Commemorative Rs 200 coin, 
The design competition for the new bank notes, 
• 
• 
The Charity night for Epilepsy and Alzheimer Associations, and 
The opening of the ecological bamboo garden. 
• 
Revisiting the future 
Finally,  as  we  close  our  anniversary  celebrations,  we  must  look  into  the  future  and  work 
towards the accomplishment of a new era for banking. Another forty years takes us beyond 
2020; into Vision 20-20 +. The prime requirements for us will be to nurture a strong adaptive 
capacity, and a healthy appetite for problem solving. 
Seven  years  ago  the  technical  version  of  the  20-20  vision  document,  Into  the  3rd 
Millennium,1 referred to the past decades, as a story of unmitigated success. Then we put in 
a note of caution: 
“But  peel  away  the  layers  of  this  remarkable  success  and  there  are 
immense challenges ahead to be overcome if growth is to be achieved and 
sustained…” 
How right we were to sound the early warning! Sustainable development is not easy; it really 
is post-graduate philosophy, politics and economics, especially for a small island developing 
state. 
I have been a lifelong socialist with a strong affinity to the Gini-coefficient. A long way back 
socialists  thought  that  making  a  profit  was  a  vice:  whereas  the  real  vice,  in  the  pursuit  of 
sustainable  development,  is  making  a  loss,  especially  a  loss  of  capital  and  of  natural 
resources. 
In 1989 The World Bank referred to Mauritius as a “miracle of development”: the worry now 
is  that  the  genie  has  retired  back  into  the  bottle,  and  in  the  meantime  we  seem  to  have 
forgotten the trick of rubbing. 
                                                 
1   Ministry of Economic Planning and Development (2000) Into the 3rd Millennium, Government of Mauritius. 
4 
 BIS Review 148/2007
I am encouraged therefore to see that youth is on our side. For I observe that the number of 
Mauritian students registered in Tertiary education has increased from the year 2005 to 2006 
by 15%. with a gross enrolment rate of nearly 20%. To keep pace with our competitors the 
target for the enrolment rate is to exceed 30%. That is the benchmark already achieved by 
our competitor countries. 
The overall increase in students in the finance sector in the year was 14%, which broadly 
matched the general increase of 15% in total tertiary students. But in banking the increase in 
registered students in the year was 32%, double the general trend. I hope they all have their 
sights on our jobs. We must ensure the banking doors are open wide to the best of them. We 
together  as  a  sector  must  eagerly  respond  to  their  commitment.  We  must  see  more  and 
more careers open to merit. High performance must bring financial rewards and accelerated 
advancement. We need to cherish the vigour and ideas of each new generation. We must no 
longer overwhelm the vitality of youth with stifling traditional procedure-based management. 
A key to our very sustained survival in the next four decades is working with the lighter feet of 
youth. Rapid response is not only relevant to survival from marine tsunamis. 
I have to say I am impressed by the changing culture of our banking world today. I sense a 
new eagerness to explore the future with new vigour, armed with fresh ideas. 
The curtain 
As we draw the curtain on our anniversary pageants, I am reminded of that Shakespearian 
scene, with Prospero, on the desert island in his exile, entertained by ethereal figures from 
legends past, Juno and the goddesses, in bright illuminated revelling. 
“Our revels now are ended,” 
he declares, 
“These our actors were all spirits… 
We are such stuff as dreams are made on and our little life 
Is ended with a sleep.” 
The Tempest past, his exile from the affairs of state is over. Now reality resumes. And so it is 
for us. But are we equipped, skilled and wise enough to grasp this opportunity and accept the 
challenge of the future? 
Together  we  must  grasp  the  realities  afresh.  This  is  the  40th  year  of  our  celebrations  in 
Banking;  next  year  it  is  the  nation  itself  that  will  be  looking  back  on  its  record  since 
Independence. With renewed vigour we must recommit ourselves to further progress in all 
sectors. 
We must value and enhance the outstanding but fragile natural beauty of this land, as our 
ultimate source of wealth. We must explore and more effectively play our role in the wider 
regions, to which we adhere, in the years to come. 
Only  then  can  we  turn  to  those,  who  have  with  so  much  courage,  laid  the  foundations  of 
banking here in the last forty years, and say to them, we have worthily followed your lead. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 148/2007 
 5
