Axel A Weber: The role of interest rates in theory and practice – how useful is 
the concept of the natural real rate of interest for monetary policy? 
Text  of  the  G.L.S.  Shackle  Biennial  Memorial  Lecture  2006,  by  Mr  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at St. Edmund’s College, Cambridge, 9 March 2006. 
The references for the lecture can be found on the Deutsche Bundesbank’s website. 
 Introduction 
1 
It  is  obvious  that  interest  rates  play  a  key  role  in  monetary  policy  today.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
instrument  of  most  central  banks  is  a  short-term  interest  rate.  On  the  other,  interest  rates  contain 
important  information  on  the  current  state  of  the  economy,  and  the  extent  to  which  past  monetary 
policy measures have already started to take effect. Put it differently, interest rates are important as 
both an input into and an output of monetary policy decisions – they are instrument variables as well 
as indicator variables. 
Of  course,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  ‘the’  interest  rate.  Rather,  there  is  a  wide  variety  of  them. 
Neglecting other relevant features, we have to distinguish interest rates at least with respect to their 
time to maturity and with respect to whether they are expressed in nominal or in real terms. Interest 
rates  that  matter  for  consumption  and  investment  decisions  are  likely  to  be  of  longer  maturity. 
Moreover, since economic agents ultimately benefit from the consumption of real goods, it will be real 
rates rather than nominal rates that they are mainly interested in. 
Monetary policy directly controls nominal and very short-term rates. However, since – according to the 
expectation  theory  of  the  term  structure  –  longer-term  rates  depend  on  expected  future  short-term 
rates, a central bank does have the ability to affect them by influencing private agents’ expectations. A 
similar argument holds for real rates. Given the level of nominal rates, real interest rates depend on 
expected  future  inflation  rates.  To  a  large  extent,  these  depend  on  the  degree  to  which  the  public 
believes  monetary  policy  will  be  able  to  ensure  price  stability.  Besides  expected  short-term  interest 
rates and expected inflation, longer-term real rates also depend on several types of risk premia, for 
example  inflation  risk.  These  constitute  an  additional  channel  through  which  monetary  policy  may 
influence long-term real rates. Thus, monetary policy exerts both a direct effect on short-term nominal 
rates and an indirect but important effect on long-term real rates.  
Understanding  how  current  economic  variables  –  such  as  economic  activity  and  policy  variables  – 
interact  with  expected  future  variables  is  a  challenge  that  has  been  featuring  prominently  in  both 
academic discussion and monetary policy practice in recent years. Accordingly, the book by Michael 
Woodford  “Interest  and  Prices”,  which  is  cited  frequently  nowadays,  characterizes  the  practice  of 
central banking mainly as the management of expectations. This is an aspect of which G.L.S. Shackle 
was already well aware, as we shall see later.  
Having said that monetary policy does have an influence on a variety of interest rates it is not clear a 
priori  whether  certain  levels  of  these  rates  are  ‘adequate’  in  the  sense  that  they  represent  prudent 
monetary policy. This brings me to my second point, the information content of interest rates. Inferring 
the  current  monetary  policy  stance  from  prevailing  interest  rates  requires  some  sort  of  benchmark. 
Ideally, this would be a reference level – depending on current economic conditions – with which some 
particular interest rate could be compared, the difference between the two then measuring how loose 
or tight monetary policy is. For such a benchmark to be useful for the monetary policy decision-making 
process, it should satisfy certain criteria, including the following three. 
•  First, that benchmark rate should be based on sound theoretical foundations. This would allow 
a meaningful interpretation of its behaviour and the driving forces behind it.  
•  Second, the difference between some particular interest rate and this benchmark rate should 
ideally be a summary variable reflecting the overall pressure on inflation. If this is not possible, 
it should, at least, contain some predictive power for future inflation.  
•  Third, the benchmark should be readily computable from observable economic data. Ideally, 
this  criterion  includes  the  requirement  that  these  data  should  be  available  with  sufficient 
precision at the time they are needed.  
BIS Review 18/2006 
 1
Actually, there is an economic variable which is often claimed to provide such a benchmark role: the 
natural real rate of interest on which I will focus in this talk. I will start with Wicksell’s notion of the 
natural rate, followed by a presentation of its definition and role in today’s monetary macroeconomics. 
After  that,  I  will  focus  on  approaches  to  measuring  the  natural  real  rate  of  interest  (NRI)  and  its 
usefulness for the practice of monetary policy. At the end of my remarks, I will try to judge whether the 
natural rate is able to satisfy all or some of the criteria I have listed. 
Wicksell’s concept of the natural rate of interest 
2  
The concept of a natural rate of interest goes back to Wicksell. He defined it as the level of the real 
interest rate at which prices have no tendency to move either upward or downward. The starting point 
of his analysis is the assumption that any movement in the price of a single good must have been 
caused by a mismatch between the demand for and the supply of this particular good. Accordingly, the 
movement  of  the  aggregate  price  level  must have  been caused by  a  mismatch  between aggregate 
demand and aggregate supply. Wicksell therefore stressed that any theory which intends to explain 
the overall rate of inflation must therefore be able to explain the underlying aggregate demand and 
supply movements.  
A second important aspect of Wicksell’s theory is related to the role of money and credit. He did not 
doubt  that  money  growth  is  a  necessary  condition  for  inflation,  but  his  approach  is  based  on  the 
endogeneity of money – in other words, money is not exogenous. Here, the banking system plays the 
crucial role: By extending credit to firms and households it determines the growth rate of money and 
thereby aggregate demand.  
Key to the understanding of this connection is Wicksell’s ’cumulative process’. Banks setting ‘too low’ 
an interest rate trigger a high credit demand from investors because, given the relatively low interest 
rate costs, they have a high expected return. Owing to the prevailing very large degree of flexibility in 
the banking sector, banks can satisfy this higher loan demand, which results in an increase in money 
growth and a higher demand for investment goods. This tends to increase the price level of investment 
goods  and  the  competitive  wages  in  the  investment  goods  sector,  causing  expenditures  and  the 
overall  price  level  to  rise.  This  is  how  Shackle  describes  the  next  steps  in  Wicksell’s  cumulative 
process: “The cost of production per physical unit of goods will be rising month by month, but the price 
of goods per unit will be rising as fast, will be keeping ahead, and the persisting gap per unit will invite 
an ever-larger output”.1 The cumulative process of strong money creation by a highly flexible banking 
system and a higher aggregate price level does not end until the banks have raised the interest rate 
sufficiently. Here, ‘sufficiently’ means that the interest rate – which is set by the banks – should be 
raised to the level at which the overall demand for goods equals their supply – that is, the interest rate 
at  which  prices  remain  constant.  Wicksell  referred  to  this  interest  rate  level  as  the  ‘natural  rate  of 
interest’. 
Shackle  was  certainly  right  when  in  the  foreword  to  the  English  translation  by  Stephen  Frowen  of 
Wicksell’s “Value, Capital and Rent” in 1953 he compared the contribution to economic theory made 
by Wicksell’s concept of a natural rate of interest to that made by the steam locomotive in the built-up 
of  modern  societies.2  But,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  we  now  know  that  Shackle  was  a  little  too 
pessimistic  when  he  predicted  that  the  natural  rate  could  become  as  obsolete  as  the  steam 
locomotive.  Modern  monetary  theory  –  as  embodied  in  the  latest  generation  of  New-Keynesian 
macroeconomic  models,  for  example  –  proves  that  the  opposite  is  true.  It  is  not  by  accident  that 
Michael Woodford’s textbook – which became sort of a standard work in modern monetary theory – 
carries the title “Interest and Prices” - the English translation of the title of Wicksell’s book ’Geldzins 
und Güterpreise’. 
The natural rate of interest in modern macroeconomic theory 
3  
In order to highlight the key role of the natural interest rate concept in modern monetary theory, it is 
useful to recapitulate briefly the core structure of New-Keynesian models which form the workhorse of 
                                                      
1   Shackle, (1972),p. 336. 
2   Shackle (1954). 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2006
today’s monetary policy analysis.3 Basically, such models add various forms of nominal rigidities to the 
features of the real-business-cycle paradigm which is based on the notion of dynamically optimising 
agents in a world characterised by stochastic shocks. One of the key elements is the assumption of 
rational expectations: Agents fully take into account the specifics of the model world they inhabit and 
the consequences of today’s actions for the future. In particular, they bear in mind how the monetary 
authority  is  likely  to  react  to  macroeconomic  developments,  and  this,  in  turn,  influences  their  own 
actions in the here and now.  
Models  in  this  micro-based  paradigm  render  it  possible  to  analyse  the  outcomes  of  policy  changes 
without running into the Lucas critique. Moreover, such models can highlight and quantify the ability of 
monetary policy to influence private sector expectations which are key to a proper understanding of 
the  effects  of  monetary  policy.  Based  on  this  view,  as  I  mentioned  before  the  practice  of  modern 
central banking has frequently been described as being, to a large extent, the management of private 
expectations. This is an aspect of monetary policy which was already stressed by Shackle in his 1949 
article on “The nature of interest rates.” Describing a situation in which the central bank tries to bring 
interest rates down he states that [p. 115] “a consensus of market opinion can be swung, by words 
and deeds of the monetary authority or its masters”.  
The  structure  of  the  basic  New-Keynesian  model  can  be  easily  represented  by  three  equations 
characterising the dynamics of the interest rate, output and inflation. The first equation can be related 
to  the  supply  side,  the  second  to  aggregate  demand,  and  the  third  specifies  monetary  policy 
behaviour. The equation representing aggregate supply captures the price-setting behaviour of firms, 
resulting from profit-maximisation under the obstacle of some sort of nominal price rigidity. Owing to 
this  rigidity,  firms  have  to  take  into  account  the  expected  development  of  prices  in  the  next  period 
when setting their prices today. In its most basic form, this equation is known as the “New-Keynesian 
Phillips curve” which expresses current inflation πt as a function of currently expected inflation for the 
next period Et(πt+1) and the current output gap xt:
 
The latter stands for the amount of slack in the goods market and is defined as the difference between 
actual output and its natural level, that is, the production level which would prevail in the hypothetical 
situation of fully flexible prices.  
The demand equation (’IS curve‘) is based on the assumption that households optimise their whole 
consumption stream over the present and the future. This leads to an expression relating the current 
output gap to the currently expected output gap of the next period Et(xt+1) and an interest rate gap:  
 
(2) 
The natural real rate of interest comes in at this stage: the interest rate gap is the difference between 
*. This variable 
the actual ex ante real interest rate it  - Et(πt+1) and the natural real rate of interest rt
turns out to be a key variable for the design of monetary policy in this class of models. Within the New-
Keynesian paradigm it is defined as the one-period equilibrium real rate of return that would prevail in 
the  hypothetical  equilibrium  with  completely  flexible  prices,  that  is,  in  the  absence  of  nominal  price 
rigidities. As is evident from the demand equation the situation where current and expected output is at 
its  flexible-price  level  is  accompanied  by  the  actual  real  interest  rate  being  equal  to  its  natural 
counterpart and thus by a closed interest rate gap.  
The natural rate of interest is influenced solely by real factors such as productivity growth, movements 
in government expenditure, the growth of the workforce, the tax structure, and the time preference of 
households. As a consequence, the natural rate is not constant over time but mirrors the dynamics of 
all  those  driving  forces.  Accordingly,  it  is  subject  to  short-  and  long-run  fluctuations.5  As  for  the 
absolute level of the natural real rate, one cannot state that a high or low level does per se represent a 
state of the economy which is desirable or not. It simply reflects its driving forces which themselves 
        xt = Et(xt+1) – σ  -1 ·(it  - Et(πt+1) – rt
πt = β·Et(πt+1) + κ· xt. 
(1) 
4  
                                                                        
3   See Clarida, Gali Gertler (1999), Gali (2003) and Woodford (2003). 
4   The  parameter  β  denotes  the  subjective  discount  rate  of  private  households,  κ  incorporates  the  degree  of  nominal  price 
rigidity and σ (in equation (2)) governs households’ intertemporal elasticity of substitution.  
5   An example of the dependency of the natural rate on structural changes has been pointed out by Charles Bean recently, 
see Bean (2004). He stresses that global demographic change would lead to a lower natural rate not only in the new steady 
state but also along the transition path. 
BIS Review 18/2006 
 3
could, in principle, be gauged as being favourable or not. For instance, an increase in the natural rate 
may be induced by a rise in productivity growth but may also be rooted in the need to finance larger 
social security deficits.6
For monetary policy purposes, the indicator quality of the natural rate for inflation is of special interest. 
To this end, what matters is the level of the actual real interest rate compared with the natural rate of 
interest. Again, this is illustrated most clearly within the baseline New-Keynesian model. An actual real 
interest rate below the natural level – that is, a negative interest rate gap – implies a positive value of 
the  output  gap  which  tends  to  increase  inflation.  If,  for  instance,  an  expected  permanent  future 
increase in productivity induces agents to expect higher income in the future, they will try to smooth 
consumption by already raising their consumption level in the present. In a flexible price equilibrium, 
the  natural  real  interest  rate  would  rise,  increasing  current  desired  savings  in  order  to  equate  the 
current consumption level and current natural output again. However, if the actual real interest rate 
does not rise sufficiently, there will be a negative interest rate gap, which increases the current output 
gap – that is, stimulates the economy too much – which in turn leads to inflationary pressure.7
Interestingly, in these models the current inflation rate can be expressed solely as a sum of current 
and  expected  future  interest  rate  gaps.  In  this  sense,  the  sequence  of  interest  gaps  is  a  sufficient 
statistic for the determinants of inflation. This is close to the story told by Wicksell. Indeed, it may be 
interpreted as a forward-looking variant of the Wicksellian analysis outlined above.8 However, at this 
point  the  New-Keynesian  paradigm  also  differs  from  Wicksell’s  theory  in  one  crucial  aspect:  while 
Wicksell viewed inflation as being a disequilibrium phenomenon, inflation in the New-Keynesian model 
is an equilibrium phenomenon. In the latter case, all markets clear each period and all variables are 
consistent with the optimality conditions of forward-looking households and firms. 
 Monetary policy and the natural rate of interest in theory 
4 
Since there is no trade-off between output and inflation stabilisation in the theoretical model presented 
so far, the prescription for stability-oriented monetary policy is straightforward: measure the currently 
prevailing natural real rate of interest, and equate the one-period interest rate – which is the monetary 
policy instrument – with that number. If an inflation rate different from zero is viewed as desirable, the 
resulting interest rate should simply be increased by that amount. For expositional clarity, I will assume 
a zero inflation objective in the following theoretical remarks.9  
The key role which the natural rate plays with regard to the inflation process in the described basic 
New-Keynesian model thus renders monetary policy a simple task: Although there are a variety of real 
shocks that influence inflation, the central bank only has to care about the movements in the natural 
rate  through  which  the  shocks  are  channelled.  However,  in  this  benchmark  New-Keynesian  model, 
too,  the  described  policy  would  have  the  problem  that  it  is  merely  consistent  with  the  equilibrium 
outcome  of  price  stability  but  does  not  necessarily  create  it.  The  problem  is  that  it  permits  the 
occurrence  of  other  less  desirable  equilibria  with  fluctuating  inflation  and  output  gaps.  This  is  why 
monetary policy must also commit to react sufficiently strongly to endogenous variables such as the 
deviations of the output gap and inflation from their target values. Thus – assuming a zero inflation 
objective  –  the  monetary  policy  reaction  function  in  this  theoretical  model  would  set  the  short-term 
interest rate as 
 
 
*
where rt
 denotes the natural real rate of interest. If the monetary policy authority credibly commits to 
follow the natural rate and to react to unfavourable situations, these situations will never occur at all. 
Thus, following the above rule not only supports the equilibrium of full stabilisation but pins it down as 
the only possible one.  
We should further note that a simple Taylor rule of the form  
*
 + g1· xt  + g2·πt, 
it = rt
(3) 
                                                               
6   See ECB (2004). 
7   See Amato92005).  
8    See Woodford (2003) p. 279. 
9   For the analysis of monetary policy in the simple model with and without cost-push shocks, see Gali (2002). 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2006
              (4) 
it = c + g1· xt  + g2 ·πt, 
     πt = β· Et(πt+1) + κ· xt + et. 
 
which  does  not  follow  the  variations  in  the  natural  rate  of  interest  would  generally  not  be  able  to 
generate  full  stabilisation.  To  illustrate  this,  assume  for  the  moment  that  monetary  policy  can 
nevertheless commit to (4) and at the same time completely stabilize output and inflation. In this case, 
the  nominal  interest  rate  and  expected  inflation  would  be  constant  over  time.  However,  since  the 
natural real rate of interest moves due to exogenous factors, the resulting interest rate gap varies. But 
according to demand equation (2) this would be incompatible with the assumed complete stabilisation 
of  the  output  gap.  This  line  of  reasoning  shows  that  the  simple  policy  rule  (4)  is  not  capable  of 
implementing complete stabilisation unless the natural rate is constant. 
Unlike in the simple model considered so far, monetary policy will in general not be able to guarantee 
full  stabilisation  at  all  times.  One  important  factor  that  generates  a  trade-off  between  output  and 
inflation stabilisation is the presence of cost-push shocks. These appear as an additional disturbance 
term in the Phillips curve,  
 
 
Thus, a cost-push shock constitutes an additional driving force to inflation beyond those effects that 
operate via the output gap. The presence of such shocks can arise from time-varying market power of 
firms, from time-varying distortionary consumption or wage taxation, or from time-varying wage-mark-
ups  in  imperfectly  competitive  labour  markets.10  In  contrast  to  the  earlier  example,  where  all 
inflationary pressures had been due to real shocks – manifested in movements of the natural rate – 
the central bank will now face a trade-off between output-gap and inflation stabilisation. If a cost push 
shock  arises,  the  monetary  authority  may  raise  the  interest  rate  to  counterbalance  the  effect  on 
inflation. This, however, now comes at the cost of generating a negative output gap. In this case, the 
weights  that  the  central  bank  attaches  to  both  targets  come  into  play.  In  theory,  this  is  typically 
represented by a loss function that increases in squared deviations of the output level and inflation 
from target.11
The  policymaker  seeks  to  minimize  this  loss  function,  taking  the  functioning  of  the  economy  as  a 
constraint. In the presence of cost-push shocks, it is immediately evident that – contrary to the model 
without  cost-push  shocks  –  a  vanished  interest  rate  gap  does  not  imply  price  stability.  What  the 
optimal  policy  looks  like  in  this  case  depends,  in  particular,  on  whether  or  not  the  policymaker  can 
credibly commit to future actions or – in the language of the “time inconsistency” literature – whether 
monetary  policy  is  conducted  under  discretion  or  commitment.  In  any  case,  given  the  existence  of 
cost-push  shocks,  a  policy  that  merely  traces  the  path  of  the  natural  rate  is  not  optimal.  Rather, 
optimal  policy  will  have  to  take  into  account  both:  movements  in  the  natural  rate  and  the  nature  of 
additional cost-push shocks which are not manifested in the natural rate.  
(1a) 
     Monetary policy and the natural rate of interest in practice 
5 
In light of the discussed theoretical considerations, the natural rate of interest could in principle play an 
important role in the conduct of monetary policy. And at least conceptually its measurement would be 
straightforward: identify its real driving forces, get to know in what way the NRI is affected by each of 
them,  and  finally  measure  their  values.  Obviously,  all  of  these  three  steps  imply  considerable 
obstacles. Step one requires an exhaustive enumeration of all those real factors that are potentially 
important.  Step  two  requires  a  precise  knowledge  of  how  these  factors  affect  the  real  rate,  thus 
requiring some sort of a very exact economic model. Finally, step three requires a measurement of 
variables  which  are  themselves  partly  unobservable,  such  as  the  time  discounting  rate  of  private 
households.  Therefore,  the  natural  rate  has  to  be  estimated  indirectly  based  on  current  and  past 
observations  of  directly  observable  economic  data,  making  use  of  a  more  or  less  detailed  model 
prescribing the interactions of the NRI with these variables.  
However,  policymakers  intending  to  make  use  of  the  natural  rate  are  in  an  even  less  comfortable 
position than econometricians conducting ex post analyses for estimating the NRI at a given point in 
                                                      
10   See Benigno and Woodford (2004), Walsh (2003) or Woodford (2003). 
11   More  elaborated  optimising  models  based  on  utility-maximising  agents  even  allow  choosing  this  loss  function  so  that  it 
represents  the  utility  stream  of  private  agents,  which  in  turn  makes  meaningful  welfare  analyses  of  different  policies 
possible. 
BIS Review 18/2006 
 5
history. Econometricians can use current, past, and future observations to make inferences about the 
NRI, while policymakers have only past and current data at their disposal. Moreover, past and current 
data may also be affected by data revisions, this so-called ‘real-time data problem’ being, in itself, a 
significant obstacle to monetary policy analysis on its own.  
Estimating the natural rate of interest 
5.1 
For  estimating  the  NRI,  a  number  of  different  methods  have  been  established  in  the  literature. 
Unfortunately,  they  lead  to  a  wide  range  of  different  results.12  Such  variability  across  estimation 
methods  poses  an  additional  problem  besides  the  one  of  uncertainty  surrounding  any  statistical 
estimate. As we shall see below, dealing with these uncertainties in an appropriate manner is a real 
challenge for monetary policy – a challenge which is both discussed in the current academic literature 
and debated in the context of policymaking in practice. The various approaches to estimating the NRI 
in the literature can be grouped into the following three categories: (1) univariate filtering approaches, 
(2) structural econometric models with the NRI as a latent variable, and (3) fully-fledged equilibrium 
models  with  microeconomic  foundations.  In  my  following  remarks,  I  will  sketch  the  nature  of  these 
methods and comment on their advantages and drawbacks. 
One approach to estimating the NRI is based on simply using realised real rates. The idea supporting 
this modus operandi, is that in the long run – that is, after all shocks have washed out – the actual real 
rate should have converged to its natural counterpart. If moving averages of actual real rates are taken 
over the typical length of a business cycle, the resulting number may be interpreted as being close to 
the  natural  rate.  Since  the  method  uses  actual  real  rates  it  already  inherits  the  arbitrariness  of 
measuring them: one has to decide between ex ante and ex post measures of inflation and on the 
type of price index used. Additionally, one has to decide the window width over which the sequence of 
means is computed. Since all these choices will have an influence on the level of the estimated natural 
real rate, different variants of this approach can result in quite different point estimates of the NRI.  
The  NRIs  resulting  from  such  moving  average  estimations  typically  constitute  a  fairly  smooth  time 
series. However, this stands in contrast to the characterising features of the ‘true’ natural rate outlined 
above, because – theoretically - it can in fact exhibit strong variations corresponding to the size and 
dynamics of the real shocks it depends on. In general, methods based on averaging will by their very 
nature  translate  a  de  facto  abrupt  persistent  upward  change  in  the  NRI  into  a  smooth  phase  of 
transition. This drawback remains even if the averaging method is refined, as is the case, for example, 
in methods that filter out low-frequent components from the real rate.13
Alternatively, the literature also employs econometric models which explicitly specify the dynamics of 
the natural rate as an exogenous stochastic process. This approach is – on the one hand – based on 
exogenous shocks and – on the other – on the assumption about certain structural relations between 
observable  variables  and  the  NRI.14  These  structural  equations  may  contain  quite  general 
formulations of inflation and output dynamics based on economic theory. Typically, they nest a variety 
of  specifications  from  both  specific  theories  and  ad  hoc  assumptions.  For  instance,  an  inflation 
equation may nest a forward-looking Phillips curve that would result from particular assumptions of a 
micro-founded equilibrium model – as mentioned above – but would also contain lagged inflation and 
real activity in order to take account of some degree of backward-lookingness that is present in the 
data. Here, the key idea is that the NRI – which, by its very nature, is unobservable – may be filtered 
out from observable data on the basis of the model’s implications for the interaction between the NRI 
and these observable variables. This filtering technique is more efficient if it is two-sided, that is, if it 
uses not just past and current data, but also future data. However, since policymakers are confined to 
one-sided filtering, this real-time problem tends to reduce the usefulness of this method. 
The aforementioned econometric approaches specify a fairly general structure of the dynamics of key 
economic  variables  that  interact  with  the  NRI.  Alternatively,  one  may  use  more  specific  general 
equilibrium models of the economy, which are usually based on explicit microeconomic foundations. 
                                                      
12   See in particular the survey in Crespo Cuaresma, Gnan and Ritzberger-Grünwald (2005). 
13  These problems are analogous to those encountered when estimating potential output. Filtering low-frequency components 
from  a  series  of  actual  output  does  not  in  general  lead  to  a  time  series  that  shares  the  characteristics  of  the  theoretical 
concept of potential output.  
14   See e.g., Laubach and Williams (2003) and Mesonnier and Renne (2004). 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2006
For the euro area, the model by Smets and Wouters (2003), for instance, has gained some popularity 
as a tool for monetary policy analysis. Such a model makes it possible to emulate the hypothetical 
flexible-price path of the economy, that is, the sequence of equilibria in which all real variables are at 
their natural levels. This counterfactual exercise allows us to derive the natural rate of interest. Usage 
of an estimated equilibrium model also makes it possible to track and interpret the very sources of its 
variation, such as shocks to technology, government spending, or a change in the tax system.15
Moreover, structural equilibrium models direct attention to the role that specific key variables may play 
in identifying the relative natural rate movements. As outlined above, inflation may be represented by 
the sum of future expected natural real interest rates. But an immediate proxy for the expected natural 
real interest rate is even less available than it is for the current natural real rate. However, exploiting 
the  logic  of  forward-looking  models,  these  important  future  developments  may  be  inferred  from 
observations available in real time. For instance, in variants of the New-Keynesian model, presented in 
Andres,  Lopez-Salido  and  Nelson  (2004),  portfolio  adjustment  costs  lead  to  a  forward-looking 
specification of money demand. This, in turn, implies that current real balances are linked not only to 
current income and interest rates but also to the sum of expected future values of the NRI and interest 
rate gaps. In other words, if their model is true, money contains valuable information on future natural 
real rates. For policymakers, this a crucial point: Given the real-time data problems with which they are 
confronted,  looking  at  monetary  developments  may  be  useful  for  learning  about  the  current  (and 
future) state of the economy even in the New-Keynesian world which, at first sight, has no such role 
for money to offer. And this point is to some extent also related to Wicksell’s theory, where an interest 
rate  gap  has  direct  implications  for  credit  and  money  growth.  I  will  come  back  later  to  the  issue  of 
monetary indicators’ usefulness.  
However, deriving the natural rate of interest from structural models is accompanied by the risk that 
the underlying narrow view of economic interactions may not be an adequate representation of reality. 
Basing  estimates  of  the  NRI  on  a  distorted  picture  of  real-world  interactions  would  then  lead  to  a 
distorted estimate of the NRI. Obviously, this shows that the use of the concept of the natural rate of 
interest for policymaking comes with the problems of model and data uncertainty.  
Monetary policy guided by estimates of the natural rate of interest 
5.2 
From the foregoing remarks it should come as no surprise that point estimates of the natural rate of 
interest  vary  immensely  across  methods.  Again,  it  is  important  to  note  that  this  variation  across 
estimation  approaches  prevails  in  addition  to  the  statistical  uncertainty  surrounding  every  point 
estimate for any given model on which it is based. For the euro area since 1999, a synopsis in a paper 
by Crespo Cuaresma, Gnan, and Ritzberger-Grünwald (2005) shows that estimated paths of the NRI 
differ considerably in terms of their levels, the range that they cover over time, and their smoothness. 
Therefore, the natural question arises as to whether the concept of the NRI can be useful to monetary 
policymakers in practice. For illustration, let us consider again the most basic New-Keynesian model 
without any output/inflation trade-offs. Here, policymakers can completely stabilise the path of inflation 
and output: they set the nominal interest rate equal to the natural real rate of interest plus their inflation 
objective. They commit to react to inflation and output gap fluctuations, but these would never occur in 
equilibrium.  However,  if  the  natural  rate  is  not  measured  precisely  and  is  simply  replaced  by  its 
estimate  in  the  above  rule,  then  “estimation  error  becomes  policy  error,  and  stabilization  policy 
becomes destabilizing”.16
One  therefore  has  to  explore  what  the  optimal  monetary  policy  looks  like  in  the  presence  of 
measurement uncertainties concerning the natural rate. This is one instance of the general question of 
how monetary policy should act in presence of uncertainty about the state of the economy and this 
issue  currently  constitutes  a  very  active  research  area.  Under  specific  assumptions  the  apparently 
comfortable principle of ‘certainty equivalence’ prevails: optimal policy should react to its best estimate 
of a state variable in exactly the same way as it should react if this variable were precisely observable. 
It is immediately clear that even in this ‘straightforward’ case, every policy that comes in the form of a 
‘simple  rule’  loses  that  property  of  simplicity:  reacting  to  the  ‘best  estimate’  of  any  state  variable 
                                                      
15   See also Neiss and Nelson (2001). In their DSGE model, it is particularly interesting to see that the response of the NRI to a 
technology shock depends crucially on the specification of capital adjustment.  
16   Jonathan A. Parker in a comment on Orphanides and Williams (2002). 
BIS Review 18/2006 
 7
usually implies conducting a one-sided filtering exercise, yielding a state estimate which is a function 
of  all  current  and  past  observables.  Moreover,  this  approach  is  conditional  on  two  crucial 
requirements: first, the central banker has to know the structure of the data-generating process for the 
NRI in order to come up with the best estimate. And second, this best estimate will typically depend on 
the degree of mismeasurement of the NRI which, in general, is not precisely known either. Thus, in 
trying to react appropriately to state uncertainty, uncertainty kicks in on another level, posing an even 
greater challenge.  
If model uncertainty or uncertainty about the degree of mismeasurement prevails, policymakers are 
well advised to go for a strategy that is robust to misconceptions of the true economic mechanism or 
the  degree  of  NRI  mismeasurement.  That  is,  a  policy  that  performs  acceptably  under  a  variety  of 
possible model structures should be preferred to one that is optimal in one specific environment but 
would  lead  to  disastrous  outcomes  if  another  setting  prevailed.  One  way  to  tackle  this  issue  is  the 
Bayesian approach, where the policymaker has to assign a subjective probability distribution over the 
class of possible models prevailing.17 Of course, doing so requires an a priori decision about the set of 
models  considered  within  the  exercise.  Note  that  this  problem  is  closely  related  to  G.L.S  Shackle’s 
work on  uncertainty:  coming  up with  a  sensible  set  of  models  –  relevant  for decisions affecting  the 
future  –  may  not  be  accomplishable:  there  are  always  „fresh  kaleidic  shift(s)  of  the  environment“18, 
thus, those models that are potentially adequate to describe the economic characteristics of the future 
may not be imaginable today.  
Model uncertainty in the sense of an unknown degree of mismeasurement of the natural rate19 is the 
subject  of  Orphanides  and  Williams  (2002):  they  show  that  the  welfare  cost  of  underestimating  the 
degree of mismeasurement of the natural rate of interest20 exceeds the cost of overestimating it. Put 
differently,  a  policy  that  is  optimal  for  the  case of  low  measurement  uncertainty  would  induce  large 
welfare losses if measurement uncertainty is, in fact, high, but would bring about only moderate losses 
in efficiency in the converse case. Accordingly, the robust policy rule puts little weight on the estimate 
of the natural rate. In the extreme, robust optimal policy would ignore it completely and go for a policy 
rule that relies on first differences of observed variables rather than the relevant gaps.21  
Summing up and looking ahead 
6 
This example illustrates that on top of all those statistical measurement problems the question of how 
to react optimally to an estimate of the natural rate may be an even more intricate problem. So at the 
end of the day, what can we make of the concept of the natural real rate of interest for the practice of 
monetary policy? 
To answer this question, let me come back to the properties for an ideal benchmark indicator of the 
monetary policy stance, which I listed at the beginning.  
First,  concerning  theoretical  foundations,  the  natural  real  rate  of  interest  –  with  an  already  long 
tradition in economic theory – plays a key role in modern rational-expectations models of monetary 
macroeconomics and stands on sound analytical ground. It is a tool for thinking about the monetary 
transmission process. This is because the determinants of the natural rate of interest – for example 
changes in preferences, advances in production technology and variations in government spending – 
all have an effect on output fluctuations and inflation. Thus, the natural rate of interest subsumes all 
these real shocks into a single number that – when compared with the actual real rate – provides an 
indicator for the stance of monetary policy.  
Second, even within the limits of the theoretical framework, the corresponding interest rate gap is not a 
sufficient summary variable reflecting the overall pressure on inflation in the sense that it captures all 
                                                      
17   See  Angeloni,  Smets  and  Weber  (1999)  and  the  references  therein  concerning  the  problem  of  monetary  policy  making 
under uncertainty with special reference to ECB policy.  
18   Shackle (1972), p. 240. 
19   Thus, compared to the latter considerations, model uncertainty in a quite narrow sense. 
20   They are concerned with both the natural rate of interest and the natural rate of unemployment.  
21   Orphanides and Williams even propose a policy rule that completely dismisses any reliance on natural rate concepts. See, 
however, the comment by J. A. Parker who claims that within non-simple rules estimates of the natural rates can be fruitfully 
exploited.  
8 
 BIS Review 18/2006
possible determinants of price changes. Rather, cost-push shocks provide a source of inflation which 
is  important  for  monetary  policymakers  to  know,  but  which  is  not  mirrored  by  the  natural  rate  of 
interest.  
Third,  the  natural rate of  interest  is  not  readily computable  from observable  economic  data.  On  the 
contrary, its measurement is affected by severe problems. In addition to the usual statistical estimation 
uncertainty,  estimated  NRIs  differ  widely  across  estimation  approaches.  The  more  simplistic  the 
approach one follows, the farther away one will move from a theoretically founded notion of the NRI. 
This problem is less severe if a detailed theoretical model is used for estimation. In this case, however, 
the problem of model uncertainty becomes pivotal. 
Thus,  I  think  one  can  safely  conclude  that  the  natural  rate  cannot  be  a  surrogate  for  a  detailed 
analysis of the real and monetary forces relevant for the identification of risks to price stability. As we 
have seen, even within the simple New-Keynesian model with cost-push shocks, the natural real rate 
of interest or the corresponding real interest rate gap alone is not a sufficient measure of the monetary 
policy stance.  
Moreover,  it  is  far  from  certain  what  role  the  natural  rate  may  play  in  models  outside  the  New-
Keynesian paradigm. This point is particularly relevant with respect to models that aim to capture the 
longer-run perspective between monetary developments and inflation. Such models could represent 
natural complements to models of short-run fluctuations – such as those of the New-Keynesian type – 
in  the  toolbox  of  policymakers.  These  are  an  essential  device  for  judging  the  medium  to  long-term 
risks to price stability. More generally, an anchoring of inflation expectations in the long run requires 
that any analysis of the real side – in which natural rate considerations take place – is complemented 
by an analysis of monetary and credit development. This is one line of reasoning that stands behind 
the  two-pillar  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem,  which  takes  account  of  short  to  medium  run  inflationary 
pressures within its economic analysis as well as of medium to long-run risks to price stability within its 
monetary analysis. 
However,  I  think  further  active  research  on  the  role  of  the  natural  rate  for  monetary  policy  and  its 
measurement  is  certainly  worthwhile.  Theoretical  considerations  along  the  lines  of  Wicksell’s 
cumulative process or of the New-Keynesian paradigm have demonstrated that the natural rate may 
be  key  to  understanding  the  factors  that  drive  inflation.  And  since  policymakers  cannot  afford  to 
discard  such  information,  they  should  certainly  keep  an  eye  on  it.  However,  one  cannot  judge  the 
usefulness of the natural rate of interest for monetary policy purposes without taking into account the 
serious problems that accompany its measurement and estimation. As has been pointed out, these 
problems are severe and comprise a considerable degree of data as well as model uncertainty. Seen 
from  this  perspective,  it  may  be  worthwhile  to  examine  in  more  detail  what  information  content  the 
real-time  estimates  of  the  natural  rate  of  interest  from  various  empirical  approaches  –  or  more 
precisely the implied real interest rate gaps – have for future inflation. This exercise would move away 
a bit from the question of what measure provides an estimate that is as close as possible to the ‘true’ 
natural rate, and would move towards the question of which is the most informative empirical measure 
based on natural rate considerations for inflation in the medium run.22 Finally, within the very active 
theoretical literature on optimal monetary policy under uncertainty, there remains the relevant question 
of what to do with the – up to now very imprecise – estimates of the natural rate of interest.  
Conclusion 
Coming back to the title of this lecture “The role of interest rates in theory and practice - How useful is 
the  concept  of  the  natural  real  rate  of  interest  for  monetary  policy?”  I  would  like  to  conclude  by 
answering  this  question.  I  think  that  the  concept  of  the  natural  rate  of  interest  is  of  importance  for 
modern monetary theory and that it is proving to be very useful in organising one’s thoughts about the 
working  of  the  economy  and  the  effects  of  monetary  policy.  Thinking  again  of  Shackle’s  likening  of 
Wicksell’s  natural  rate  of  interest  to  the  steam  locomotive  I  would  say  that  the  modern  theoretical 
version  of  this  concept  is  indeed  a  high-speed  train.  However,  the  degree  to  which  this  theoretical 
concept can be transferred to the sphere of practical monetary policy is, as yet, uncertain. 
                                                      
22   Neiss and Nelson (2001) find that a real interest rate gap based on an estimated DSGE model has explanatory power for 
future inflation in the UK.  
BIS Review 18/2006 
 9
