Amando M Tetangco, Jr: New year message 2006 with an overview of 2005 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, at the annual 
reception for the banking community, BSP Complex, Manila, 17 January 2006. 
 Introduction 
Members  of  the  banking  community,  special  guests  from  the  legislative  branch  and  the 
judiciary,  members  of  the  Cabinet,  fellow  workers  in  government,   guests  from  the  media,  friends, 
ladies and gentlemen, good evening. It t has been a tradition for the Monetary Board to host an annual 
reception for the banking community.  
As Chairman of the Monetary Board and Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I am 
only  one  of  your  seven  hosts  tonight.  Let  me  therefore  introduce  your  six  other  hosts  ---  My  fellow 
members at the Monetary Board, by order of seniority of their appointment:  
1.      Dr.  Vicente  B.  Valdepenas,  Jr….   He  is  an  economist,  educator,  former  NEDA 
Director  General  and  holds  the  distinction  of  being  a  member  of  the  Monetary  Board  for 
three terms now;  
2.     Mr.  Raul  Boncan…  A  lawyer  and   former  trade  &  industry  Undersecretary,  banker, 
professional manager, and businessman;  
3.     Mrs. Juanita Amatong…An economist,  educator,  and  former  Finance  Secretary,  the 
first woman to hold this important post;  
4.       Mrs.  Nellie  Favis-Villafuerte…A  lawyer,  prolific  writer,  and  former  Undersecretary  of 
Trade and Industry; 
5.       Budget  Secretary  Romulo  Neri…educator  and  former  Director  General  of  the 
National  Economic  and  Development  Authority  and  of  the  House  of  Representatives' 
Congressional Planning and Budget Office; and last but not the least;  
6.       Mr.  Alfredo  Antonio…a  professional  manager  and  banker,  former  CEO  of  the 
Development Bank of the Philippines and the Subic May Metropolitan Authority.   
Ladies and gentlemen, we are the members of the Monetary Board….and we welcome all of 
you to our traditional annual reception      
As you may have noticed, we also have non-banker guests  this is our way of saying thank 
you to the other sectors of our society who work with the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas in the pursuit of 
its mandate to ensure stable prices and a sound banking system .   
An Overview of 2005  
All  of  you  present  here  tonight  are  our  stakeholders   and  we  are  happy  to  report  to  you 
that…. Even in the face of a challenging year marked by record high oil prices, rising global interest 
rates, political tremors and credit rating downgrades, we ended 2005  on a clearly upbeat note  among 
others:  
•  Our economy continued to grow;   
•  We contained inflation at single-digit levels even with runaway oil prices;  
• 
the cost of doing business remained benign with a steady downtrend in interest rates, based 
on 90-day t-bill rates;  
•  The peso emerged as best performing currency in asia;  
•  Capital adequacy ratio of banks remained well above the international benchmark;  
•  The asset base of the banking sector sustained its growth;  
BIS Review 3/2006 
 1
•  Asset quality of banks continued to improve with single-digit non-performing loan ratio;  
•  Our  poverty  alleviation  program  through  microfinance  was  recognized  as  excellent  by  the 
united nations, making us one of only three asian nations given that distinction;    
•  OFW remittances hit their highest level;  
•  Foreign investment inflows continued to rise;  
•  A higher-than-expected bop surplus was registered;  
• 
•  The revised value added tax and sin taxes, accompanied by stronger tax administration efforts 
are showing positive results. If both fiscal discipline and higher revenues can be sustained, 
there is good reason to expect a balanced budget by 2008    
International reserves hit record-high levels; and  
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, we are off to a good start in 2006    
For  this,  we  must  also  acknowledge  the  significant  contributions  of  my   predecessor….  Former 
Bangko  Sentral   Governor  Rafael  Buenaventura….  As  well  as  the  other  members  of  the  Monetary 
Board during his term  friends, Governor Paeng could not be with us tonight but let us applaud  him 
and  his  MB  members  as  a  way  of  saying  thank  you  for  their  unwavering  commitment  to  initiate 
necessary reforms in our financial sector.   
What’s in store in 2006  
The  new  year  gives  us  a fresh opportunity  to  do  things  better,  not  only  for  our  respective 
institutions but also for our country    
Of course, you and I know we have a long way to go before we can truly say everything   
is… a-ok  more than anyone, you know. Our economic fundamentals: our strong points…. As well as 
other areas requiring more attention                     
In our case, it is critical for the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas to keep an eye on the risks to 
inflation  and  to  make  such  risks  clear  to  the  markets  and  the  general  public   our  main  focus  is  to 
 ensure  that  we  achieve  our  inflation  target,  keep  the  public’s  inflation  expectations  anchored  and 
manage the  growth in domestic liquidity  
The Development Budget Coordinating committee  is looking at a real GDP growth rate of 
5.7 percent for 2006, with growth driven by services, industry, and agriculture which stands to benefit 
from better weather conditions.   
The main risk we see for domestic demand is high oil prices, which have already taken some 
of  the  buoyancy  out  of  consumer  spending  last  year   rising  oil  prices  also  continue  to  be  the  key 
source of risk to inflation, although the strong peso and the easing of food prices should help balance 
inflationary risks . 
While  inflation  may  range  from  7.5  to  8.2  percent,  we  see  a  downward  trajectory  given 
expectations of an easing of oil prices from peak levels in 2005 and a short-lived impact of the revised 
vat on prices of goods and services .   
Market interest rates are also expected to benefit from ample liquidity, improving fiscal performance, 
and better prospects for our sovereign credit rating at the same time, our external position is likely to 
continue to benefit from dollar inflows from remittances and investments  with healthy inflows, the peso 
is likely to remain generally stable in the course of the year .   
Challenges and strategies  
In the months ahead, the task for economic managers will be to strengthen the economy in 
the short term….and to preserve the momentum for economic reforms that will sustain growth in the 
long  term.   At  the  BSP,  our  job will  be  to  be   more  steadfast  in fighting  inflation  and  reforming   the 
financial sector .   
In the area of banking supervision, our focus will be on reducing the stock of non-performing 
loans  with  the  help  of  congress  in  extending  the  SPV  Law;  enhancing  the  prudential  regulatory 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2006
environment  of  the  banking  system  to  align  it  with  international  standards  and  best  practices; 
strengthening  corporate  governance  standards  and  market  discipline  mechanisms;   developing  the 
domestic  capital  market  further;  enhancing  the  payments  system;  and  improving  the  BSP’s 
supervision technology and capacity .   
In the pipeline are the issuances of the guidelines on the implementation of Basel II Accord, 
and the new financial reporting package in line with the adoption of international accounting standards. 
While  there  will  be  initial  friction  costs  related  to  the  transition,  these  will  strengthen  the  banking 
system for the long haul .   
To speed up  the development and deepening of the domestic capital market, the BSP will 
continue to work with other government agencies and the private sector for the completion of critical 
market infrastructure to further enhance system integrity and overall market confidence  
And  in  response  to  the  need  to  further  enhance  financial  information  critical  to  investor 
decisions, BSP will also continue to work on the establishment of rating agencies, highlighting their 
role  particularly  in  the  conduct  of  banks’  risk  management   in  addition,  we  continue  to  work  with 
Congress on the creation of a centralized credit information bureau system to help private enterprises 
get  better  access  to  credit,  reduce  borrowing  costs,  and  minimize  the  risk  exposures  of  financial 
intermediaries.   
Similarly,  we  will  continue  to  work  with  market  players  to  widen  the  investor  base  for 
domestic financial instruments.   
All  these  reforms  require  the  support  and  cooperation  of  the  banking  sector  the  BSP 
therefore takes heart in having in the banking community a responsive partner and support force in 
shaping the future of our financial system . 
A  special  advocacy  for  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  is  our  National  Coin  Recirculation 
Program.   In  this  regard,  we  are  particularly  pleased  that  tonight,  the  entire  banking  sector   is 
expressing  its  support  for  this  crucial  advocacy  that  stands  to  benefit   consumers,  retailers,  banks, 
and  the BSP    
In particular, we are happy that the Bankers Association of the Philippines, the Chamber of 
Thrift Banks, the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines, the Bank Marketing Association of the 
Philippines,  and  the  Philippine Retailers  Association  have  declared  their  full commitment  to  support 
our Coin Recirculation Program under a Memorandum of Agreement for this purpose .   
We are also pleased that Archbishop Gaudencio Rosales of the hugely successful Pondong 
Pinoy, our inspiration for our coin program, is here with us to sign a Memorandum of Agreement for 
the servicing of its coin deposits. Under the adopt-a-parish program of the Bankers Association of the 
Philippines,  there  are  initially  three  participating  banks:  Bank  of  Philippine  Islands,  Metrobank,  and 
Equitable-PCIBank    
Ladies and gentlemen, this is definitely a fine way to start the new year: committing to work 
together for the greater good.   
Indeed,  the  translation  of the  final  outcome  of our  reform programs should be  sustainable 
growth  and  development  to  the  man  on  the  streets,  it  is  jobs  and  income  to  the  nation,  peace and 
prosperity   these  are  goals  we  should  all  work  for   the  cooperation  of  everyone  is  of  utmost 
importance.   
With your continuing support, we are confident of achieving greater gains in reforming and 
energizing the economic and financial system, as well as in keeping the transmission mechanism of 
monetary policy in high gear . 
Finally,  on  behalf  of  the  Monetary  Board  and  our  co-workers  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng 
Pilipinas, I wish all of you a fruitful, meaningful and a hugely successful new year!    
Marami pong salamat  thank you all.  
BIS Review 3/2006 
 3
