Axel A Weber: Oil price shocks and monetary policy in the euro area  
Text of the Whitaker Lecture by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, Dublin, 11 May 2006. 
References to the speech can be found on the Deutsche Bundesbank’s website. 
 Introduction 
Dear John Hurley, Dear Dr Ken Whitaker, Ladies and gentlemen,  
Thank you very much for your kind invitation to Dublin. I am very pleased to have this opportunity to 
share my views with you. And I am honoured to give this year’s Whitaker lecture. Ken Whitaker has 
been  the  intellectual  mastermind  behind  the  theoretical  and  practical  sea  change  in  Irish  economic 
policies in general. Especially with his book on economic development in 1958. And let me mention 
that his rigorous arguments against protectionism and isolation and for macroeconomic stability are 
still relevant today despite all the achievements we have made in this respect in Europe over the past 
few decades.  
Ken  Whitaker  has  not  only  made  a  crucial  contribution  to  the  intellectual  foundations  of  solid 
macroeconomic policies in Ireland, also he has not shied away from the more onerous challenge of 
implementing his views in day-to-day policy, not least during his term as Irish central bank governor 
from 1969 to 1976.  
Ken Whitaker’s tenure as central bank governor fell at the time of the first oil price shock. This is a 
subject that is once again high on the agenda of monetary policymakers all over the world and it is the 
topic I shall focus on in my following remarks.  
The world is, indeed, once again facing a substantial rise in oil prices. Prices have nearly tripled since 
mid-2003 and have now reached nominal record levels (USD70 per barrel Brent crude on a monthly 
average in April 2006). Putting it even more starkly: Taking the low-point of oil prices at the end of 
1998  (USD10  per  barrel  Brent)  and  thus  interpreting  the  developments  since  then  as  a  single 
prolonged oil price shock, the scale of the shock is greatly magnified. Moreover, the current oil price 
level  is  perceived  to  be  persistent,  as  is  reflected  by  Brent  crude  oil  futures  remaining  at  elevated 
levels.  
These  developments  are  creating  imminent  upside  risks  to  price  stability.  Consequently  oil  prices 
figure  prominently  on  the  risk  agenda  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council.  This  is  documented  by  last 
week’s assessment that inflationary risks persist  and continue to lie on the upside. Upside risks for 
future  price  stability  arise,  amongst  others,  from  additional  increases  in  administered  prices  and 
indirect  taxes,  and  from  a  situation  with  ample  liquidity.  But  in  particular  they  stem  from  possible 
further increases in oil prices, a stronger pass-through of higher oil prices into consumer prices due to 
stronger  indirect  effects  or  possible  second-round  effects.  I  will  come  back  to  these  transmission 
channels later on.  
As  I  have  said  before,  the  concern  about  oil  prices  will  be  familiar  to  Dr  Whitaker.  In  his  time  as 
Governor of  the  Central  Bank of  Ireland,  he  had  to manage  the  first  oil  price crisis of  1973-74,  the 
textbook  example  of  a  supply  shock.  It  caused  a  serious  stagflation  (in  other  words,  a  period 
characterised by both rising inflation and recession) in the oil-importing economies.  
In my subsequent remarks, I should like to concentrate on the following three issues. How does the 
current oil price shock compare to previous ones? Why do supply shocks pose a challenge for the 
monetary policymaker? What are the implications of the current high oil prices for the Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy stance?  
Comparison of current and previous oil price shocks 
Taking the developments since mid-2003 as a single energy price shock, the current oil price hike is 
roughly  comparable  to  its  predecessors  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  From  December  1973  to  January 
1974, the dollar price of oil increased by over 250%. Taking the average oil price over the years 1974 
and 1975, the price hike amounted to over 160%. Again, from November 1978 to June 1979, the price 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 1
increase was nearly 160%. Taking the oil price high in November 1979, the price jumped by roughly 
180% within one year. And it also is comparable to the oil price increase in 1990 following the invasion 
of Kuwait (from June 1990 to October 1990: 140% in nominal US dollar terms). From the end of 1998 
to the end of 2000, the oil price went up by more than 200%, stabilising thereafter for some years only 
to start rising again to unprecedented nominal levels since mid-2003.  
The scale of current oil price developments is also comparable to its predecessors in real terms and 
after taking into account exchange rates -with the possible exception of the period from 1998 to 2000, 
when the depreciation of the euro amplified the dollar increase in energy prices. Here, however, due 
account should also be taken of the extremely low level of oil prices in 1998 at the onset of the price 
increases (under USD10 per barrel Brent).  
In marked contrast to its predecessors in the 1970s and 1980s and in 1990, however, the impact of 
the latest oil price shocks on real GDP growth have been benign. Whereas the oil price shocks of the 
1970s, 1980s and the shock in 1990 were accompanied by a severe slowdown in global growth and 
outright recessions in many oil-importing countries, the current oil price increases are coinciding with 
the  most  favourable  scenario  for  the  global  economy  in  the  past  35  years.  Global  GDP  growth  is 
estimated by the IMF at 4.8% in 2005, compared with 5.3% in 2004 (historical average: 3½%). And 
real growth in advanced economies in 2004/05 was above the long-term average and, according to 
the latest IMF outlook, is projected to stay at around 3% this year and next year. Although the euro 
area is lagging behind, there are clear signs of a more sustained recovery in the quarters ahead.  
This  marked  difference  is  also  supported  by  simple  correlation  analysis:  The  contemporaneous 
correlation  between  the  level  of  annual  oil  prices  and  annual  global  growth  was  -0.6  for  the  period 
1970-1991.  For  the  period  1992  -2005,  however,  the  correlation  coefficient  has  changed  radically 
(+0.6).  This  admittedly  crude  line  of  reasoning  is  supported  by  more  formal  country-specific 
econometric analysis.1
Equally  remarkable  is  the  behaviour  of  consumer  price  inflation  in  the  current  energy-price-driven 
economic  environment.  Whereas  the  oil  price  shocks  of  the  1970s  and  1980s  went  hand  in  hand 
globally with more or less a doubling of inflation rates, the latest oil price increases to date have not 
led to an escalation of consumer prices. On the contrary: The present global inflation rates are the 
lowest for 35 years. In the euro area, inflation rates in the aftermath of the oil price shocks edged up 
markedly in the 1970s and 1980s and went into double-digit figures. Euro area inflation rates since 
1999 have been much more contained.  
In light of such evidence: Is the expression ‘oil price shock’ old hat? Or, as David Walton of the Bank 
of England put it some weeks ago: “Has oil lost its capacity to shock?”2
There are several plausible explanations for the muted impact of oil price increases in recent times. To 
start with, the difference in today’s economic performance and that of earlier periods might, in part, be 
related to the different size and nature of the shock.  
The more than doubling in oil prices – though comparable in scale to earlier oil price shocks – has 
taken more than two years to unfold, much longer than on previous occasions.  
Moreover, unlike its predecessors, the present price hike is explained by substantially different factors. 
Shocks  in  the  1970s  were  caused  mainly  by  sizeable  disruptions  to  the  oil  supply,  which  seriously 
dampened the confidence of companies and households. Now, there is a variety of factors. As they 
are partly structural in nature, however, it is all the more likely that the present shock will prove to be 
permanent.  
To a large extent, the current oil price shock has been driven by unexpectedly buoyant demand for oil, 
particularly in the US, and by rapidly growing emerging market countries – especially China. China’s 
share in global oil demand has more than doubled in the past 15 years (3.5% in 1990, estimated 8.2% 
in  2006).  Despite  higher  oil  prices,  the  demand  from  China  is  expected  to  persist,  because  its 
underlying growth development is still ongoing.  
                                                      
1   For example, Jimenez-Rodriguez and Sanchez (2004) for the main OECD members; Schmidt and Zimmermann (2005) or 
the German Council of Economic Experts (2004) for an analysis of oil price effects on the German economy. The declining 
economic impact of oil price increases over time has led some researchers to study these issues in a non-linear framework. 
2   Walton (2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2006
The latest price hike, however, is being put down mainly to supply-side factors, namely, to heightened 
geopolitical concerns over the security of future supplies, especially in Iran, Iraq and Nigeria – or the 
recent events in Bolivia.  
Both  factors are  aggravated  by  yet  another supply-side  argument:  Spare  capacities  in  both  refining 
and production are limited, as the investments of oil producing countries have been responding too 
slowly to the unexpected pace of demand growth. Now, it is taking time to open up the bottlenecks. 
This view has been recently accentuated at the G7-meeting in Washington where, amongst others, a 
strengthening  of  the  dialogue  between  oil  producers  and  consumers  and  further  investment  in 
exploration, production, energy infrastructure, and refinery capacity has been demanded.  
The  fact  that  the  bulk  of  the  current  oil  price  shock –  unlike  its  predecessors –  has  been  demand-
driven  is  often  said  to  alleviate  its  impact  on  economic  growth.  Oil  price  shocks  lead  to  a  negative 
domestic demand effect in oil-importing countries resulting from a loss in terms of trade. A demand-
driven  shock  offsets  this  impact  somewhat  as  foreign  oil  producers  recycle  part  of  their  income  by 
importing capital goods.3 It should be noted, however, that this additional demand – owing to the oil-
exporting countries’ specific needs – might lead to sectoral shifts in the production pattern of the euro 
area economy.  
Obviously, with oil prices being increasingly driven not only by demand-side concerns, the nature of 
the current shock might eventually become closer to that of its predecessors.  
Apart from the size and nature of the shock, the resilience of advanced economies like the euro area 
stems from a structural change in their dependence on oil. Owing to the growing importance of the 
services sector, which now accounts for roughly 70% of GDP in the euro area, the relative weight of 
the  energy-intensive  industrial  sector  has  declined  since  the  1970s.  Accordingly  (and  also  due  to  a 
growing ecological awareness), the oil intensity of industrial countries, defined as the total amount of 
oil consumed to produce one unit of GDP, has been halved during the past 30 years.  
Finally, the reaction of economic agents, namely trade unions, has contributed to the muted economic 
impact  of  the  current  oil  price  shock.  Strong  global  competitive  pressures,  particularly  in  the 
manufacturing  sector,  as  well  as  relatively  high  unemployment  rates  significantly  weaken  the 
bargaining power of today’s trade unions. Inflationary pressures resulting from potential second-round 
effects and wage-price spirals have so far been much more contained than in the 1970s.  
The credibility of low-inflation regimes has now been well established. Therefore, inflation expectations 
have so far remained well anchored at low levels. This has allowed central banks to maintain a more 
accommodative monetary policy stance, thereby providing ongoing support to overall demand.4
It should be clear by now that, for all these reasons, the oil price shocks of the 1970s differ strongly 
from  those  of  today.  The  recently  changing  nature  of  the  current  oil  shock  with  supply-side  factors 
gaining more importance implies a certain risk, however, that this benign scenario may not extend into 
the  future.  Central  banks  therefore  have  to  closely  monitor  ongoing  developments  and  act 
appropriately if needed. But what is an appropriate response?  
The trade-off faced by monetary policy 
Does the current benign environment mean that oil price shocks have lost their potentially damaging 
effects and are no longer a challenge for monetary policy? In my view, this is not the case. A stability-
oriented monetary policy cannot afford to treat oil price shocks with benign neglect.  
A  natural  starting  point  to  discuss  this  topic  is  provided  by  current  macroeconomic  thinking  on  the 
determinants of inflation – which may be summarised under the heading of the New Keynesian Phillips 
Curve (NKPC). According to this – now mainstream – building block of modern macro models, current 
                                                      
3   The fact that the recycling of oil revenues plays a more supportive role for oil-importing countries today than during past oil 
price shocks has been confirmed for Germany by research undertaken at the Bundesbank (Bundesbank, 2005). Another 
channel of recycling oil revenues is provided by financial investment opportunities in the capital markets of oil importers. The 
latter effect is estimated to have contributed to the decline in the order of approximately 1/3 percentage point in long-term 
government yields in the US in 2005 (IMF, 2006). 
4   This point is especially important in light of the fact that some research has explained the dampening economic impact of 
earlier oil price shocks by the endogenous reaction of monetary policy (Bernanke, Gertler and Watson, 1997; Barsky and 
Kilian, 2004). 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 3
inflation  is  driven  by  expectations  about  future  inflation,  current  and  expected  future  demand  and 
supply factors (both translated into the summary statistic of the output gap) and cost-push shocks.  
Unlike demand shocks, which affect inflation and economic growth alike – that is, either both positively 
or both negatively – cost-push shocks are more of a challenge. A surge in oil prices will raise inflation 
(at  least  in  the  short  term)  while  dampening  economic  growth,  thereby  constituting  a  trade-off  if 
monetary policy tries to achieve price stability without compromising real economic developments in 
general. The trade-off between inflation and output stabilisation in the face of macroeconomic shocks 
is also influenced by real rigidities. Real wage rigidities, especially, are important in this context.5
From  the  aforementioned,  it  is  clear  that  the  possible  trade-off  for  monetary  policy  is  influenced  by 
various transmission channels over and above the cost-push element alone.  
Firstly, the better inflation expectations are anchored, the less a cost-push shock leads to higher future 
inflation.  
Secondly, an oil price shock influences not only output but also potential output. The concrete relative 
factors are difficult to gauge for policy makers in real time. Notwithstanding this identification issue, it is 
clear that the popular notion of equating the observable dampening effect of higher oil prices on GDP 
with a corresponding decline in the output gap may be seriously misleading.  
The  problems  are  compounded  by  the  fact  that  there  is  not  the  one  all-encompassing  concept  to 
calculate potential output. In applied work potential is often modelled as a de-trended measure of real 
GDP  or  calculated  within  a  production  function  approach.  Taking  the  first  concept,  the  dampening 
effects of oil price shocks on real GDP will translate into potential output depending on the concrete 
statistical filtering method being used. Using a production function approach, a persistent increase of 
oil prices can influence potential output directly via reduced energy inputs and indirectly via its effects 
on the capital stock: a higher equilibrium price of energy inputs slows down capital accumulation and 
scraps some part of the existing capital stock.  
Last  but  not  least,  in  the  New-Keynesian  framework,  potential  output  is  an  even  more  complex 
concept and very different from the de-trended measures popular in current empirical work. Potential 
output here refers to the output level that would prevail when all distortions – be they static or dynamic 
– were absent.6 Not going into the details it is clear that potential output is then influenced by a host of 
shocks hitting the economy. It is thus much less smooth over time than a figure calculated by applying 
a statistical filtering method.7
All in all, it should be clear that oil price shocks have also adverse effects on potential output, albeit 
difficult to quantify with any precision.  
Finally, a sluggish adjustment of real wages adds a further complication to the policy trade-off in the 
face of an oil price shock: a higher price of oil increases real marginal costs and thus inflation as long 
as the necessary decline in real wages is not brought about. With flexible real wages this poses no 
problem, with only gradually adjusting real wages the time profile of inflation and output also depends 
on the way monetary policy reacts. A non-accommodating monetary policy can achieve the necessary 
decline in real marginal costs in the face of sluggish real wages by further reducing output through a 
tighter response. An accommodating monetary policy temporarily allows for some increases in inflation 
and thus real marginal costs thereby stretching the effects over time. Which policy is optimal can not 
be  decided  without  a  deeper  analysis  of  the  causes  of  wage  rigidities  and  the  possible  strategic 
interactions between monetary policy and wage setting parties.  
                                                      
5   See for example Blanchard and Gali (2005) or Krause and Lemke (2005). Real wage rigidities have the potential to create 
inertia in inflation rates. Inflation then is not only determined by future macroeconomic conditions but also influenced by past 
developments. Moreover, real wage rigidities have the consequence that for a wide variety of shocks – not only cost-push 
shocks –policymakers are confronted with a trade-off between inflation and output stabilisation. The reason for this is that 
real wage rigidities introduce another dynamic distortion in addition to nominal rigidities. The latter can be corrected by a 
monetary  policy  directed  towards  price  stability.  Such  a  policy,  however,  would  not  eliminate  the  distorting  effects  of  the 
former, that is sluggish real wage adjustments, and therefore be sub-optimal from a welfare point of view. 
In  the  base-line  NK-model  without  real  rigidities  the  statistic  distortion  is  given  by  monopolistic  competition  on  goods 
markets, the dynamic distortion by nominal rigidities in the price-setting process. 
6  
7   Cost-push  shocks  and  real  wage  rigidities  introduce  another  complexity  in  the  NK-framework  as  they  create  a  wedge 
between the output level that would stabilise inflation and the output level that would be optimal to stabilise from a welfare 
maximising perspective. With other words, the inflation stabilising output gap is different than the welfare relevant output 
gap. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2006
In  general:  The  more  flexibly  the  real  wage  reacts  to  an  oil  price  shock,  the  sooner  the  necessary 
decline in real marginal costs can be achieved and the faster the output gap will be closed. A more 
flexible  labour  market  is  therefore  conducive  to  alleviating  the  conflict  between  price  stability  and 
output stabilisation.  
Admittedly,  these  more  theoretical  considerations  do  not  provide  us  with  a  mechanical  formula  for 
responding to oil price shocks. But they make clear that the appropriate monetary policy response in 
the  face  of  a  persistent  increase  in  the  level  of  oil  prices  is  more  complex  than  the  often  popular 
“transitory blip theory” assumes. And they highlight several important insights which are also relevant 
in the present context.  
Firstly, the New-Keynesian framework strongly emphasises the advantages of price stability. Monetary 
policy in keeping inflation low corrects for the distorting effects of nominal price rigidities.  
Secondly, in the light of the above mentioned policy trade-offs monetary policy should not strike the 
balance  by  responding  in  a  discretionary  fashion  to  shocks.  Rather,  it  should  adopt  a  systematic 
framework for decision-making and explicitly apply it to the prevailing conditions.  
By committing itself to a systematic monetary policy approach, the central bank is best able to anchor 
inflation  expectations  at  a  low  level.  This  should  ultimately  lead  to  a  containment  of  inflation  at  the 
lowest possible cost.8 And, as a by-product it will also lead to a better track record in stabilising real 
output close to potential.  
Moreover, in that respect a credible and systematic monetary policy may lead wage setting parties to a 
swifter acceptance of necessary real wage adjustments.  
The  presence  of  labour  market  rigidities  significantly  complicates  the  task  of  a  stability-oriented 
monetary  policy.  It  is  therefore  in  the  natural  own  interests  of  a  central  bank  to  insist  on  making 
excessively  rigid  labour  market  structures  more  flexible  and  not  an  overstretching  of  central  bank 
competences, as it is sometimes portrayed in the public debate.  
Summing  up:  Monetary  policy  is  well-advised  to  follow  these  guiding  principles  even  in  the  more 
complex  oil  price  shock  environment.  Focusing  on  price  stability  to  anchor  inflation  expectations, 
acting  in  a  systematic  strategy  compatible  fashion,  and  not  trying  to  fine-tune  the  policy  trade-off 
discretionary is the best way to confront the limitations of monetary policy in real-time and to limit the 
danger of becoming overburdened with tasks it can not fulfil.  
The Eurosystem’s economic and monetary analysis 
In  order  to  maintain  price  stability  for  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term,  the  Eurosystem  has 
provided itself with such a systematic framework: its monetary policy strategy. Two key elements are a 
quantitative definition of price stability by the Governing Council (a year-on-year increase in the HICP 
for the euro area of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term) and an analytical framework for the 
assessment  of  all  relevant  information  and  analysis  based  on  two  pillars:  economic  and  monetary 
analysis.  
The economic analysis assesses the short to medium-term determinants of price developments with a 
focus on real activity and financial conditions. The monetary analysis concentrates on a longer-term 
horizon.  It  exploits  the  long-run  link  between  money  and  prices  and  serves  as  a  means  of  cross-
checking, from a medium to long-term perspective, the short to medium-term indications for monetary 
policy resulting from the economic analysis.  
How does the Eurosystem’s strategy translate into day-to-day decision-making? Given the vigour and 
perseverance of the current oil price shock, its impact on the euro area economy has to be analysed 
carefully. The transmission of oil prices can analytically be separated into direct, indirect and second-
round effects. Direct effects focus on the increase of energy components in consumer and producer 
prices in the short-term. Indirect effects refer to medium-term transmission to non-energy components. 
Finally,  second  round  effects  describe  the  inflation  impulses  due  to  endogenous  reactions  to  direct 
                                                      
8   This point plays a prominent role in the current New Keynesian framework. There, discretionary monetary policy, even in a 
completely forward-looking environment, is inferior to a systematic response pattern under a timeless perspective from a 
welfare point of view (Woodford, 2003). And it is precisely the better anchoring of inflation expectations that is responsible 
for these results. 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 5
and indirect price effects by wage-setting parties. They create the danger of a wage-price spiral with 
subsequently accelerating inflation.  
So far, only the direct effects of higher oil prices have been noticeable, although they have been less 
inflationary than in the 1970s. Headline inflation is still being driven mainly by energy prices. With core 
inflation remaining subdued, indirect effects of the oil price shock have remained contained.  
The pick-up of the euro area economy is, however, expected to cause a gradual acceleration of core 
inflation.  This  view  is  supported  by  the  March  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections.  And  it 
demonstrates that blindly relying on core inflation as the major benchmark for monetary policy would 
be too short-sighted at the current juncture.  
At  the  same  time,  second-round  effects  have  not  yet  materialised  on  a  noticeable  scale.  Wage 
dynamics in the euro area have remained moderate in the recent past, though the risks to this benign 
scenario have clearly risen over the past couple of weeks with oil prices accelerating once again. To 
prevent second-round effects from materializing it is crucial that the social partners continue to meet 
their responsibilities in this regard, also in the context of a more favourable economic environment.  
Turning  to  monetary  analysis,  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  long  term  are 
evidenced by strong monetary trend growth in an environment of already ample liquidity in the euro 
area. The growth in monetary aggregates is mirrored by dynamic developments in credit to the private 
sector,  especially  in  the  real  estate  sector.  These  monetary  developments  constitute  strong  upside 
risks to future price stability and they are stimulated by the low level of interest rates. They warrant 
particular vigilance and close monitoring.  
Summing up: Whilst headline inflation clearly exceeds our definition of price stability and has recently 
edged up to 2,4 % under the impact of renewed oil price increases, underlying inflationary pressures 
have, to date, remained more contained. In the medium term, however, these pressures might gain in 
strength, as an improvement in the euro area economy is assumed for the quarters ahead, and oil 
prices may be passed-through faster in an economic upturn, raising the risk of indirect and second-
round effects. Indirect effects are in the pipe-line and will most likely materialize. Additional increases 
in administered prices and indirect taxes will also contribute to inflationary pressures. In particular, the 
expected VAT increase in Germany (+3 pp) next year is expected to keep euro area headline inflation 
at a higher level (+0.3 pp in 2007). Finally, monetary and credit aggregates are growing at rates much 
higher than is compatible with non-inflationary real growth.  
So, oil price developments are just one, albeit important factor contributing to inflationary risks in the 
current environment.  
The materialisation of these risks to price stability would be most undesirable as the HICP inflation rate 
has  already  been  exceeding  the  level  that  is  consistent  with  the  Eurosystem’s  definition  of  price 
stability for a considerable time now and is projected to do so on average this year and next year.  
In  the  current  environment,  perhaps  the  single  most  important  transmission  channel  of  oil-price-
induced  risks  into  higher  future  inflation  consists  in  longer-term  inflation  expectations  becoming 
unanchored. And while it is true that current long-term inflation expectations are compatible with the 
Eurosystem’s definition of price stability this argument cannot be used to justify a monetary policy of 
“wait and see”. As inflation expectations incorporate the expected future path of monetary policy, and 
markets have priced in increasing short-term rates in the quarters ahead, the “wait and see” argument 
would run into inconsistencies.  
The current low level of inflation expectations is predominantly the successful outcome of the stability-
oriented monetary policy framework itself. This has been inherited partly from past achievements, but 
these achievements have to be secured by our current and future decisions. These considerations are 
highly relevant in the current situation, too.  
Concluding remarks 
In  general:  An  important  way  an  oil  price  shock  can  lead  to  permanently  higher  inflation  rates  is 
through  monetary  policy  accommodation.  The  most  important  explanation  for  fact  that  the  current 
economic impact of the oil price increase has been so benign lies in the achievements of monetary 
policy having become transparent, systematic and well aware of the problem of time inconsistency. It 
would  be  an  irony  of  history  if  we  were  to  sacrifice  the  credibility  we  have  earned  by  gambling  on 
possible short-term gains in neglecting current risks to price stability. How easily such a gamble can 
6 
 BIS Review 38/2006
end in prolonged economic problems is demonstrated by the aftermath of the earlier oil price shocks – 
a period that became popular as “the great inflation”.  
BIS Review 38/2006 
 7
