Axel A Weber: Challenges to the financial system - ageing and low growth 
Opening  address  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Third 
Conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation on “Challenges to the financial system - ageing and 
low growth”, Frankfurt am Main, 6 July 2006. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen! 
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  third  conference  of  the  Monetary  Stability  Foundation  here  in 
Frankfurt. 
As in previous conferences, I am again very delighted that so many distinguished speakers will share 
their thoughts with us during the forthcoming panels. 
This year’s conference is entitled “Challenges to the financial system – ageing and low growth”. One 
might ask: Why is this topic of interest to the Monetary Stability Foundation, whose aim is to maintain 
and promote public awareness of the importance of stable money? 
The reason is that maintaining the intrinsic value of money requires that we look not just at short-term 
developments that have a direct impact on inflation dynamics; in fact, we also need to closely monitor 
long-term developments that might ultimately affect  
- 
- 
- 
Low growth and the ageing phenomenon are examples of such long-term developments and therefore 
quite suitable topics for this year’s conference. 
During my opening address, I would like to outline the general topic of the conference and its likely 
implications.  In  doing  so,  I  hope  to  pave  the  way  for  the  forthcoming  panels  that  will  elaborate  on 
several aspects in more detail. 
inflation 
the transmission process of monetary policy 
or financial market developments in general. 
Ageing and low growth – interrelated phenomena and real economy implications 
2. 
If one were asked to rank the two phenomena of ageing and low growth in order of public awareness 
in Europe, low growth would most likely come out ahead of ageing. 
The picture is quite clear: While the world economy continues to see strong growth, the euro area’s 
economic upswing remains by comparison rather sluggish. A special matter of concern is the fact that 
not only euro area’s actual growth, but also its potential growth has visibly declined over the past few 
years.1
In  parenthesis:  This  development  stands  in  stark  contrast  to  the  objectives  of  the  Lisbon  Strategy, 
which was especially developed to tackle low productivity and low economic growth in the euro area!  
Whereas the challenge of low growth is widely discussed, the phenomenon of ageing generally does 
not receive as much public attention. Evidently, it is very difficult to convince people and policy makers 
of the importance of a phenomenon that is emerging very slowly and is thus not so obvious. 
Nevertheless,  the  economic  repercussions  of  a  steadily  ageing  population  are  among  the  key 
economic and social policy challenges facing modern industrial societies. 
There 
the  demographic 
developments  over  the  next  50  years.  Developments  over  the  next  20  to  30  years,  though,  are 
is  undoubtedly  considerable  uncertainty  about  estimates  regarding 
                                                      
1   Average of the European Commission’s, IMF’s and OECD’s estimates for potential output growth in the euro area over the 
years 1990-94: 2.4%. For 2005-06: 1.9% 
BIS Review 62/2006 
 1
comparatively  easy  to  forecast.  Therefore  it  would  be  highly  remiss  of  us  not  to  take  the  core 
implications of the currently available forecasts seriously. 
From  an  economic  viewpoint,  the  longer-term  demographic  problem  is  mostly  attributable  to  the 
permanent  shift  in  the  age  structure  of  the  population  and  the  relative  contraction  of  the  potential 
labour force. The shift in the age structure of the population has been evident for a long time and is 
virtually  irreversible.  Even  major  adjustments  in  the  birth  rate  or  in  migration  movements  would  not 
suffice to halt the ageing process in the next two to three decades.  
This shift will negatively impact on social security systems as well as potential economic growth. Thus, 
the ageing of society and low growth are not separate, but interrelated phenomena. 
Recent estimates expect ageing-induced expenditures to rise significantly in the euro area by the year 
2050.2 This will pose a dramatic threat to the sustainability of the (already stretched) public finances of 
most EMU member states. In addition, average potential growth is expected to decline sharply, from 
around 2% at present to slightly above 1% (between 2031 and 2050). 
Both  developments  urgently  call  for  adequate  policy  reactions.  The  challenge  is  to  find  timely  and 
appropriate  economic  and  social  policy  answers  to  the  economic  risks  and  burdens  resulting  from 
demographic change. In doing so, a key aim should be to strengthen the foundations for economic 
growth so that the “demographic burdens” can be absorbed as much as possible. Therefore, policy 
measures should aim at raising not only labour productivity but also total factor productivity in general.  
The ongoing demographic change is not only impacting directly on the real economy. It is also putting 
social  security  systems  under  massive  pressure.  Especially  PAYGO  pension  systems  are  being 
affected  very  adversely.  A  transition  to  fully-funded  pension  systems  is  an  obvious  necessity  in  the 
medium to long term. 
Additionally, the demographic change is very likely to affect the financial system as well, namely: 
- 
- 
- 
economic and financial relationships 
the financial structure and 
the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
3. 
Impact of demographic changes on the financial system  
Ageing and financial returns 
3.1 
Let me start with the impact of ageing on financial returns – or, to be more precise, with its impact on 
real  interest  rates.  Real  interest  rates  are  one  of  the  most  prominent  indicators  used  by  central 
bankers, as they reflect investors’ expectations about economic activity. 
All other things equal, theoretical and empirical studies alike suggest a decrease in real interest rates 
due to a higher capital-labour ratio. This effect would be amplified by a shift from pay-as-you-go to 
funded pension systems – which would be equivalent to an increase in private savings – and also by 
an allocation of funds to bonds. To what extent the real interest rate is likely to decline is, however, the 
subject of heated debated. 
In  my  view,  only  a  slight  decrease  is  to  be  expected.  First  of  all,  integrated  financial  markets  and 
internationally mobile capital should open up new ways of capital utilisation. Secondly, the worst-case 
scenario of an asset meltdown (ie the assumption that the retiring baby-boomer generation will start 
dissaving,  thus  putting  immense  downward  pressure  on  asset  prices)  is  unlikely  to  occur:  Not  only 
                                                      
2   Economic Policy Committee and European Commission, The impact of ageing on public expenditure, European Economy 
Special Report 1/2006. If projections for education expenditures and unemployment benefits are excluded, the increase in 
ageing-induced  spending  amounts  to  4.6%  of  euro-area  GDP,  ranging  from  0.4%  to  over  10%  of  GDP  for  individual 
countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2006
does a longer life expectancy imply higher individual saving rates of workers, but retirees are also not 
expected to dissave – as would be assumed by the underlying life-cycle model.3  
3.2  Ageing and financial structure 
Apart from financial returns, ageing also impacts on financial systems. The large capital inflows into 
pension funds and other institutionalised forms of saving since the 1990s have been the driving factor 
behind this development.4 They reflect the noticeable increase in saving for retirement by the baby-
boomer generation as well as the partial transition from pay-as-you-go to funded pension schemes. In 
sum, these large capital inflows should accelerate the shift in EU financial systems from a bank basis 
to a capital-market basis.  
In  general,  the  transition  to  a  more  capital-market  based  financial  system  is  expected  to  enhance 
financial  stability.  One  prominent  reason  for  this  effect  is  that  the  efficiency,  depth  and  liquidity  of 
markets can be assumed to improve with their growth. In addition, the diversity in types and sizes of 
institutional  investors  should  increase.  Finally,  it  is  likely  that  institutional  investors  will  process 
information available to the general public more efficiently than private investors.  
At  this  point,  however,  let  me  utter  two  words  of  warning.  They  are  necessary  as  the  growing 
importance of institutionalised forms of saving does not necessarily lead to increased stability.  
Firstly, the rising number of institutional investors could potentially be accompanied by a greater risk of 
herding behaviour which, in turn, might increase volatility in financial markets. This is just one example 
why financial stability issues are at the top of central banks’ agendas. 
The second word of warning also applies to financial stability issues. The transition from pay-as-you-
go schemes to funded pension schemes certainly supports fiscal sustainability – but introduces a new 
reason for concern: a decline in the financial strength of suppliers. This risk became apparent in 2000-
02  when  –  due  to  falling  equity  prices  –  pension  funds  and  also  some  life  insurance  companies 
became significantly underfunded.  
The  episode  prompted  policy  changes  in  areas  such  as  asset  liability  management  and  financial 
accounting. However, the resultant need to match long-term liabilities with suitable assets might now 
trigger shifts in the asset allocation of pension funds and life insurers. Two questions evolve out of 
that: 
1 
 
Will there be a shift from equity to bond markets? 
Indeed, such a shift – or other investors’ (eg hedge funds) anticipation of it – is commonly 
cited as a “special factor” explaining what appear to be excessively low levels of global long-
term interest rates. But even if such a shift is plausible in countries where equity allocation in 
the investment portfolios predominates (for example, in the US, the UK or Canada) empirical 
evidence of such a closing of the duration gap is neither clear nor uniform across countries.5
Is  there  a  scarcity  of  financial  instruments  that  enable  pension  funds  and  life  insurers  to 
manage duration, inflation and longevity risks? 
This is the reasoning underlying the occasional call for the government to act as a catalyst 
for private issuance of inflation and longevity hedges. I do not object to authorities issuing 
ultra-long fixed and inflation-indexed bonds at market prices. But governments should refrain 
from issuing longevity bonds. Not only do governments lack a suitable hedge for longevity 
risks, but – due to national pay-as-you-go schemes – they already face a huge demographic 
burden which should not be exacerbated needlessly. 
2 
                                                       
3   For Germany, Axel Börsch-Supan states that, in the later stages of life, the saving ratio stabilises at about 3% to 5% – a fact 
which  might  be  explained  by  lifetime  uncertainty  and  provision  for  old  age  (see  A  Börsch-Supan  (2005),  Risiken  im 
Lebenszyklus – Theorie und Evidenz, Working Paper of the mea – Mannheimer Forschungsinstituts, No 069-05). 
4   Even in Germany, where pay-as-you-go schemes and a bank-based financial system still prevail, the share of households’ 
financial assets invested in mutual fund shares (accumulated with insurers and pension funds) has risen from 4% (1/5) in 
1991  to  12%  (1/4)  in  2005.  At  the  same  time,  overall  financial  assets  increased  from  €34,000  per  household  in  1991  to 
€69,000 in 2005. 
5  See  OECD  (2006),  Pension  fund  demand  for  high-quality  long-term  bonds:  Quantifying  potential  scarcity  of  suitable 
instruments, in: Financial Market Trends, April 2006. 
BIS Review 62/2006 
 3
Ageing and monetary policy 
3.3 
The final question, ie the impact of ageing on monetary policy, is a research issue still in its infancy. 
The generally assumed impact of a demographically-induced overall increase in savings is three-fold: 
Central banks will have to take into account the gradual decline in real interest rates (though 
- 
its extent is hard to quantify). 
The relative strength of the transmission channels is likely to shift: wealth effects are likely to 
become more important as the sensitivity of consumption and investment to asset prices is 
expected to increase. 
The pressure on central banks to keep inflation low and asset prices stable is expected to 
rise. 
  Although the pace of demographic change is expected to be glacial – as already noted by Charles 
Bean, the chief economist of the Bank of England6 – it might be possible that its effects are slightly 
accelerated  through  a  more  rapid  shift  from  pay-as-you-go  to  funded  pensions  systems.  Indeed, 
research  has  shown  that  such  a  development  supports  the  shift  to  a  more  capital  market-based 
financial system, thereby enhancing households’ saving propensity and risk aversion.7
In the same vein, we might ask ourselves how the interrelationship between increased private savings 
and  the  role  of  banks  is  going  to  develop.  As  this  interrelationship  is  crucial  to  the  transmission  of 
monetary impulses, the following questions are worth answering. Will the importance of bank deposits 
shrink, and what would be the implications? To what extent will bank and bond market financing be 
substitutes? And how readily will banks be able to adapt to their ever-changing environment? I hope 
that these issues might capture researchers’ curiosity. They are of particular interest in the euro area, 
where bank-dominated financial systems still prevail. 
To sum it up, the Eurosystem will increasingly need to monitor demographically-induced changes in 
the financial system. Based on these insights, the Eurosystem will provide a stable, non-inflationary 
macroeconomic  environment  –  which  is  the  best  contribution  to  economic  growth  it  can  and  does 
make. 
Concluding remarks 
4. 
To stimulate our panel discussions, I have highlighted some examples of how ageing, low growth and 
financial systems interrelate. To be sure, there are still more questions than answers. However, that 
should be the ideal starting point for such a conference. Moreover, conferences like this will sharpen 
political awareness of the demographic burden. In this respect, I wish you a lively discussion and a 
productive conference. Thank you for your attention. 
                                                      
6   See C Bean (2004), Global demographic change: some implications for central banks, Overview Panel, FRB Kansas City 
Annual Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
7   See D Miles and A Černý (2006), Risk, return and portfolio allocation under alternative pension systems with incomplete and 
imperfect financial markets, in: The Economic Journal, April 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2006
