Jean-Claude  Trichet:  Joint  interview  with  Corriere  della  Sera,  Helsingin 
Sanomat, De Volkskrant, Diário de Notícias 
A joint interview of Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted on 
19 June 2006  by  Ms  Marika de Feo, Corriere  della Sera,  Mr Juhana Rossi,  Helsingin  Sanomat,  Mr 
Olav Velthuis, De Volkskrant, Mr Sergio Anibal, Diário de Notícias, published on 27 June 2006. 
 1) Mr Prodi, Mrs Merkel and Mr Chirac think that an alliance between Euronext and Deutsche 
Boerse,  instead  of  a  merger  with  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  is  necessary  in  order  to 
strengthen financial markets in Europe. Do you agree?  
Answer:  As  you  know  we  have  no  say  and  we  do  not  participate  in  the  decision,  which  has  to  be 
prepared by the appropriate boards of directors and shareholders.  
2) Why do you prefer the European solution?  
Answer: All things being equal, a personal preference coming from me for a European solution would 
appear natural, wouldn’t it? That being said, we are not protectionist, the European economy is and 
must be an open economy.  
3)  There  seems  to  be  no  evidence  now  of  a  stronger  synchronisation  of  the  12  euro  area 
economies when it comes to growth.  
Answer: As far as the business cycle is concerned, the level of synchronisation has improved over the 
last 20 years, and recent analysis suggests that this level has never been that high for the euro area 
economies. Furthermore, dispersion of growth in the euro area is not different from the magnitude of 
equivalent dispersion between growth in the various States in the United States. So it seems to be 
characteristic  of  very  large  economies.  But  we  have  persistent  differences  in  the  long-term  trend 
growth and in the growth potential of the various euro area economies, which can be explained by 
factors such as the level of structural reforms and demographic developments. It is this persistence of 
trend growth differences which seems to be the characteristic of Europe.  
Let me also stress that price stability is not only our primary goal but also a mean to attain sustainable 
growth and job creation.  
4) Is this also true also as far as inflation is concerned?  
Answer: We also have a level of dispersion of inflation from country to country which is similar to that 
seen in the United States. But again it is the persistence of these differences which is the European 
characteristic. That is the reason why when we observe a) that unit labour costs – which is the major 
cost parameter for inflation – are augmenting in a country, year after year, and that they are above the 
average of the euro area, and b) that the level of cost competitiveness of the economy concerned is 
starting  to  create  difficulties,  for  instance  that  the  external  account  is  deteriorating  vis-à-vis  the 
average of the euro area, then it is time, in our opinion, to take appropriate measures to bring the unit 
labour costs below the average and catch up on the lost competitiveness. 
5) At Governing Council meetings, have you discussed the situation in countries like Portugal 
and Italy – with high levels of debt and very low growth – or the Netherlands and Finland – with 
low inflation?  
Answer: Just like the Federal Reserve, we have to look at the average of our vast continent. And we 
are responsible for price stability in the euro area in terms of the average inflation for our 313 million 
fellow  citizens  of  the  euro  area.  But  the  countries  concerned  are  responsible  for  the  differential 
between  their  country’s  inflation  and  the  average.  And  we  examine  as  carefully  as  possible  the 
evolutions and relationships inside the euro area. 
6) Which measures would improve competitiveness in the euro area, and specifically in Italy 
and Portugal? Maybe, for instance, cuts in labour and/or administrative costs?  
Answer: It is important, not only for Italy and Portugal, but for all economies of the euro area, to have a 
good  understanding  and  a  very  attentive  examination  of  the  evolution  of  their  own  cost 
competitiveness, of their labour costs including their labour productivity progress, in order to be able to 
take  if  and  where  necessary  the  appropriate  measures  to  regain  lost  competitiveness  if  there  is  a 
documented loss of it. Structural reforms are equally of the essence to foster competitiveness. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 1
7) How do you permit unit labour costs to move at a speed which will make it possible to catch 
up on lost competitiveness?  
Answer: Labour productivity is certainly decisive. In this domain structural reforms make it possible to 
extract  improvements  from  new  technologies  and  processes.  It  is  equally  important  to  improve  unit 
labour costs through moderation in nominal wages. 
8)  The  German  Chancellor  Angela  Merkel  has  dealt  with  the  budget  deficit  through  tax 
increases. Should other countries follow suit?  
Answer: What counts is the final goal, which is the rigorous implementation of the Stability and Growth 
Pact. If and when it is necessary to redress the situation, it is pure arithmetic that you have first to 
reduce spending and, if a gap remains, increase tax receipts. We would certainly recommend cutting 
the level of public spending in economies that have a high level of public spending in proportion to 
GDP. But we can not rule out the possibility of increasing taxes. 
9) Even if it happens at the expense of growth?  
Answer: In the opinion of the Governing Council, which includes also Mario Draghi (Banca d’Italia), 
Nout  Wellink  (De  Nederlandsche  Bank),  Vitor  Constancio  (Banco  de  Portugal)  and  Erkki  Liikanen 
(Suomen  Pankki),  sound  fiscal  policies  are  not  hampering  growth  but  fostering  growth.  We  believe 
that, if the Stability and Growth Pact is not respected, what we would lose in terms of the confidence of 
households, entrepreneurs and the economy in general would decrease growth more than the illusory 
expansive impact of a fiscal deficit.  
10) And would you agree with a country, for instance Italy, raising taxes but putting off cutting 
labour costs?  
Answer: We have two different questions there. One is if an economy has lost a certain degree of cost 
competitiveness and has to regain it. And to regain it at the level of enterprises and of the productive 
sector, it is decisive to rely upon unit labour costs that would augment less than the average of the 
euro area in order to regain cost competitiveness. That is the first remark, which is always true in any 
circumstances. Regardless of whether you have budget problems or not, you have to be sure that you 
are progressively regaining an appropriate level of cost competitiveness.  
11) What about the second question?  
Answer:  Then  you  have  the  second  question  associated  with  the  budget  situation:  the  goal  is  very 
clearly the rigorous implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact. And the way you do it logically is 
by reducing public spending as a priority and then by increasing taxes if and when needed.  
12)  Are  you  concerned  that  Italy  and  other  countries with  difficult  deficit  and  debt  positions 
may put the euro at risk?  
Answer:  No.  The  euro  is  a  very  solid  currency  of  which  we  are  ourselves  the  guardians.  But  good 
policies at national levels would augment growth, prosperity and job creation.  
13)  Are  you  concerned  that,  now  that  growth  is  picking  up,  some  countries  have  budget 
deficits exceeding the 3% limit?  
Answer:  We  should  not  repeat  the  mistakes  of  the  past,  when,  even  in  good  periods,  insufficient 
attention was paid to budgetary soundness, and thus a very high price was paid when we were back 
in  a  more  difficult  period  in  the  business  cycle.  That  is  the  reason  why  we  call  for  a  rigorous 
implementation of the Pact and encourage the European Commission in its efforts. 
14) In the past, you have been quite critical about a lack of compliance with the Stability and 
Growth Pact. Do you think that these fears still arise?  
Answer: We have said very clearly in the past that we would not recommend changing the corrective 
arm of the Pact. After the unanimous decision of the executive branches to agree on a new wording of 
the Pact, we said that “we call on the Commission and the governments to implement it rigorously. 
15)  Recently  equity  markets  in  many  euro  area  countries  have  seen  their  value  diminish  by 
around 10%. How is this phenomenon related to the interest rate hikes? And do you expect this 
to have an impact on consumer demand?  
Answer: I will not comment on the daily ups and downs of the stock markets. That is like looking at the 
sea and commenting on the waves and the tide. If you consider the picture in the context of a longer 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2006
period,  then  the  situation  is  very  different.  What  we  do  in  the  Governing  Council  is  to  ensure  price 
stability in the medium and long term, which is also a prerequisite for financial stability. 
16) So the influence of future rate hikes might have on equity markets is not a concern at all 
when you make a decision?  
Answer: Price stability is our primary goal as you know and also fosters financial stability. 
17) In the last stability report the ECB wrote that hedge funds increasingly present a risk to the 
stability of the economy. Can you elaborate on that?  
Answer: Hedge funds have expanded considerably rapidly in the most recent period of time. When we 
look at them from the financial stability standpoint, we think it is important to have a full understanding 
of the main reasons behind this extraordinarily rapid expansion, and to handle appropriately the risks 
involved with hedge funds. This handling is operated through the counterparties of the hedge funds, 
namely banks, which are themselves under the surveillance of the banking authorities. It is through 
this  cautious  monitoring  by  the  banks  of  their  risks  with  hedge  funds  that  we  expect  them  to  be 
disciplined. We have to check permanently whether this channel of introducing discipline in the hedge 
funds is functioning correctly or not. In this respect, we still have a lot of work to do within the ECB and 
the Eurosystem, and certainly at the global level. As you know, it is also one of the major issues which 
is examined by the Financial Stability Forum at a global level.  
18) To what extent does this risk influence your rate decisions?  
Answer: Again, our responsibility is price stability which is itself a precondition for financial stability.  
19) Do you expect further regulation of hedge funds to be necessary?  
Answer:  I  think  that  more  work  has  to  be  done, but  what we do  need, directly  or  indirectly  is  more 
transparency. But any decision in this domain has to be made at global level.  
20) The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) published its annual report yesterday. In its 
conclusion, the report says that “it could be that monetary policy should have been tightened 
more, and earlier”. So basically the BIS is saying that the ECB, together with the other central 
banks, started its tightening cycle too late and has been too modest with its interest rate hikes. 
How would you assess this implied criticism of being too accommodative in monetary policy?  
Answer: To say that the ECB has been too complacent would be very paradoxical! We resisted a lot of 
advices, which we were given both by academics and executive branches. In 2004 I had calls during 
the same week from the heads of three important countries, economically speaking, in Europe, calling 
for rate decreases. As you know, we did not act on that. We maintained our rates at 2% because we 
concluded that it was necessary to ensure price stability and be faithful to our mandate.  
21) So you are saying that the ECB did not start too late and has not been too modest in its 
current tightening cycle?  
Answer: We certainly resisted a lot of pressures in 2004 and, when we decided to increase rates, we 
did that very much against a number of advices we were receiving from various circles, as well as from 
a  number  of international  institutions,  such  as  the  OECD and  the  IMF.  We  raised  rates at the  right 
moment and we took the right decisions without complacency against a lot of advice to the contrary. 
22) Moving on to the second part of the analysis by the BIS. The report says that now that the 
central banks have been too slow to act, continued tightening of monetary policy could harm 
the economy and could, to quote, “have negative effects on global growth and employment”. 
Will  the  ECB  do  as  the  BIS  suggests  and  give,  to  quote,  “a  more  measured  monetary 
response”?  
Answer: The BIS is merely reflecting the debate, particularly the academic debate. Ex ante you are 
called on not to increase rates. Ex post you are reproached for not having done that earlier. So, again, 
we will continue to do what is necessary. Our responsibility is very clear: to ensure price stability and 
be credible in ensuring price stability. It is what the Treaty itself and I would add that it is what our 313 
million  fellow  citizens  as  well  as  investors  and  savers  in  Europe  and  in  the  rest  of  the  world  are 
expecting from us. 
23) So you are continuously as vigilant as a hawk seeking its prey?  
Answer:  I  leave  the  responsibility  for  this  metaphor  to  you.  I  would  say  the  Governing  Council  is 
permanently  alert.  We  have  to  be.  In  several  speeches  I  have  mentioned  the  concept  of  “credible 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 3
alertness”. It is the mark of our institution to be constantly alert. We, as you might have noted, never 
pre-commit  ourselves  unconditionally  to  any  particular  course  of  action,  whatever  happens.  We  do 
what is necessary when it is necessary. 
24) Does the unwinding of the global imbalances such as the deficit on the US current account 
argue for a more measured monetary response?  
Answer: The possible disorderly unwinding of global imbalances is calling for all partners concerned to 
do  their  homework.  And  that  homework  has  been  very  well  documented,  particularly  at  the  global 
level, at G7 meetings. 
25) What can Europe and the United States do?  
Answer: Europe should implement structural reforms to elevate the level of its growth potential. The 
continent has a lot to gain in doing that, growth, more prosperity and more job creation. The United 
States has to address its fiscal imbalances and deal with the issue of the low level of savings in the 
overall US economy, which is a major issue. And it is also true for Japan and the rest of the world: we 
all have homework to do in order for the global imbalances to unwind in an orderly way. I think we 
have done a very good job in the past, and we will continue to do so. 
26) Has the risk of a disorderly global unwinding increased or decreased?  
Answer: There has been and there is an important risk for a number of years. That is absolutely clear. 
Our working assumption is that there will be an orderly unwinding, because we trust that homework 
which has to be done will be done. And we call on all partners to be responsible and consistent.  
27) One specific imbalance is the housing market bubble. Do you think that the situation has 
improved or worsened in the last few months?  
Answer: It is clear that this is a domain in which there is undoubtedly a lot of diversity in the euro area, 
as is also the case in the United States. For example, you might have real estate dynamism in Florida, 
whereas  in  Massachusetts  things  are  not  going  that  fast.  We  have  to  accept  that  a  very  vast 
continental economy might have different features. That being said, at the aggregated level of the euro 
area it is clear that we have dynamism in outstanding credit for housing, and dynamic price increases 
in  various  available  real  estate  figures,  which  are  a  cause  of  tension  and  that  we  are  monitoring 
carefully.  
28) How is this influencing your monetary policy decisions?  
Answer: I have mentioned several times that, in the Governing Council’s decision-making, we have 
paid particular attention to real estate developments and we were impressed by the dynamism of the 
counterpart of the monetary aggregates which is the financing of housing. This was one among many 
other elements that we took into consideration when we increased rates. 
29) You mentioned the advices that you got from executive branches and the IMF. To follow-up 
on that, two months ago you were sent a letter by Mr Juncker asking for more contact with the 
ECB.  You  have  already  said  in  the  press  conference  that  there  is  enough  contact.  The 
executive  branches  kept  asking  for  rate  decreases  and  now  they  are  asking  you  to  pay 
attention  to  the  euro  exchange  rate?  Do  you  think  that  the  executive  branches  pay  enough 
attention and respect to the central bank’s independence?  
Answer:  First,  let  me  tell  you  that  I  have  great  esteem  for  Jean-Claude  Juncker,  who  has  a  very 
important responsibility in chairing the Eurogroup. Second, central bank independence is guaranteed 
by the Treaty. In that respect, independence is guaranteed more nowadays than it was before under 
national legislation. I do not see any dispute on that. I trust that because the entire world, Europe and 
European households know and see that we are independent. We have a very high level of credibility. 
That, I have to say, explains to a large extent why we are anchoring solidly inflation expectations. I 
would say the sequence is: independence, which is crystal clear and undisputed, triggers credibility, 
which in turn triggers the solid anchoring of inflationary expectations and permits us to deliver price 
stability. That is why we are so profoundly attached to independence. 
30)  Mr  Juncker  rebuffed  you  very  strongly  last  week  when  he  said  “I  am  Mr  Euro  for  my 
competencies”, leaving you saying you are Mr Euro for your competencies. Do we have two Mr 
Euros in Europe?  
Answer: You are not at all quoting him exactly and I do not share your appreciation of what he said. 
The euro is a currency which is issued by central banks. The Eurogroup is the college of Ministers of 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2006
Finance. Presiding over all Ministers of Finance of the euro area is a considerable responsibility. As far 
as I am concerned, on behalf of the Governing Council, I sign the euro banknotes.  
31) But he said that he had responsibility as far as the competence of the finance ministers 
goes.  
Answer: Of course and it is an extremely important responsibility. 
32) So we have two Mr Euros?  
Answer: No. I have already responded to that question at the last press conference. 
33) Is the fact that stock markets heavily adjusted downwards recently a signal that economic 
growth is not doing well?  
Answer:  I  would  say  that,  on  growth,  as  you  know,  we  in  the  Governing  Council  extract  from  all 
information and signals that we are receiving what we would call the trend growth as we see it. That 
trend growth that we are extracting from those signals indicates that we are around potential in the 
euro area. This analysis was made at the end of 2005. We increased our rates in December 2005 on 
the basis of our economic and monetary analyses. In the economic analysis, it was clear for us that 
growth  was  reaccelerating  and  going  progressively  around  potential.  We  maintained  this  analysis 
when  we  had  somewhat  disappointing  information  on  growth  in  the  last  quarter  of  2005,  which  we 
attributed to short-term volatility on a quarter-on-quarter basis.  
34)  Did  you  maintain  this  sentiment  also  at  the  most  recent  Governing  Council  meeting  in 
Madrid?  
Answer: We maintained this sentiment in Madrid. We consider, again, that all the information we have 
from both surveys and from all other figures have to be replaced in a medium-term context and that 
they confirmed that we were around trend potential.  
35)  Now  that  Jürgen  Stark  has  taken  over  from  Otmar  Issing,  the  fears  of  smaller  Member 
States that the larger ones would claim their own seats in the ECB’s Executive Board seem to 
be confirmed. Do you think this fear is justified?  
Answer: This is the responsibility of the executive branches. I will ship that back to the Council. What 
we call for ourselves is full and appropriate implementation of the Treaty, which calls for persons of 
exceptional quality in the field of monetary and financial matters. And I have to say that my colleagues 
in  the  Executive  Board  are  all  of  exceptional  quality  as  it  has  been  recognised  by  the  European 
Parliament. 
36) In your prepared statement after the last monetary policy decision, you dropped the word 
“vigilance” in characterising inflation risks. The markets have interpreted this as a signal that 
interest rates will not be raised in July, but maybe at the beginning or end of August.  
Answer: I will stick to what I said on behalf of the Governing Council in the last press conference in 
Madrid as well as in my hearing at the European Parliament last Wednesday. 
37)  The  Finnish  banker  Bjorn  Wahlroos  suggested  in  an  opinion  article  published  in  the 
Financial Times on 6 June that Turkey and other EU candidate countries be allowed to join the 
single currency. Can you comment on the specific arguments expressed in this article? And in 
more general terms, has the euro become strong enough to unilaterally replace the national 
currencies of weak economies, in the same way that the US dollar has replaced the national 
currency in some poor countries?  
Answer: If a particular country wants to unilaterally adopt the euro, it is up to that particular country. It 
would be the same with the US dollar or any other currency. But the Governing Council of the ECB is 
not committed; we do not do anything ex ante to facilitate this decision. It is really the responsibility 
and  risk  of  that  particular  country.  And  this  country  has  to  realise  that  this  would  not  be  a  way  to 
bypass  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  If  a  country  is  a  Member  State  of  the  European  Union  and  wants  to 
enter in the euro area then this country has to prove the stability of its national currency through the 
participation in the Exchange Rate Mechanism II.  
38) Could you tell us the individual salaries of the Executive Board members of the ECB?  
Answer: The total amount for the Executive Board was EUR 2.1 million in 2005. There are six of us on 
the Executive Board. 
39) Why only the aggregate figure? Why not the individual figures?  
BIS Review 64/2006 
 5
Answer:  Because  a  decision  has  been  taken  on  this  by  the  Executive  Board  and  the  Governing 
Council, and we are sticking to that. 
40) Do you think you will at some point publish the minutes of the Council meetings, maybe 
without the names of the governors?  
Answer: It was our decision – and we are very proud of that – to introduce for the first time in the world 
the display of the “Introductory Statement”, which is an overall diagnosis of the situation as viewed by 
the Governing Council. It is presented immediately after the monetary policy decision. This was a first. 
No other central bank had done that before. We also have a press conference, which is proof of our 
full transparency, which remains exceptional among the major central banks of the world. We consider 
that  what  we  are  producing  in  the  Introductory  Statement  and  in  the  questions  and  answers  in  the 
press conference delivers immediate transparency. Until now, the Governing Council has not wanted 
to publish the individual votes of its various members. We consider that we are responsible for the 
single currency in 12 – and in the immediate future 13 – sovereign states. That leads us to think that 
what  we  have  to  display  is  the  unity  of  the  collège,  the  unity  of  the  Governing  Council,  which  is 
characterised by a very strong sense of team spirit. As you know, we all stick to the position which is 
taken by the Governing Council. We are very committed to the decision taken. I have explained that to 
the  European  Parliament  and,  through  you,  to  the  people.  I  think  this  is  becoming  more  and  more 
understood. 
41) Would you consider in the future publishing the minutes even without the names?  
Answer: The publication of the Introductory Statement immediately after the Governing Council gives 
the information that you are looking for. This is the reason why a priori we don’t envisage publishing 
the minutes. 
6 
 BIS Review 64/2006
