Bandid Nijathaworn: East Asian financial markets – some thoughts on the way 
forward 
Speech by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at a high level panel on 
“East Asian financial markets: the next frontier” seminar organised by the World Bank and Hong Kong 
Monetary Authority, Hong Kong, 22 June 2006. 
 Thank you Mr. Chairman, 
First,  let  me  thank  the  World  Bank  and  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  for  the  invitation.  It  is 
always a pleasure to be here in Hong Kong, and I should also congratulate the organizer for putting up 
what looks like another important and useful seminar. 
My  task  today  is  to  speak  on  East  Asian  financial  markets.  In  the  recent  years,  I  think  there  is  no 
disagreement  that  the  economies  and  the  financial  markets  in  East  Asia  have  gone  through  an 
important phase of transformation and growth. So, it is ideal that we do take stock and think ahead on 
how things should best evolve going forward, so that the region’s economic potentials would be best 
leveraged, and to see what role can the region’s financial markets play. 
Given the limitations of time, I want to use this opportunity to make just two points. The first is the 
issues  that  are  currently  being  discussed  in  the  region  on  the  areas  that  we  need  to  do  more  in 
developing financial markets in East Asia. And the second is my view on the role that policy can play 
in supporting future developments. 
But to set the context on what I am going to say, given that financial markets cannot be discussed 
separately from the real economies, I want to begin with a few observations on the current macro and 
finance trends in the region. 
In the context of key macro and finance trends in the region, I think at least four developments stand 
out as the current defining themes. 
First is the region’s much improved economic resilience and fundamentals. These qualities now offer 
the  region  a  prospect  of  continued  strong  long-term  growth  and  potentials.  At  the  same  time,  the 
region’s  financial  prowess  –  in  terms  of  high  saving  rates,  current  account  surpluses,  and  strong 
international  reserves  –  has  continued  to  improve,  and  thereby  enhances  the  region’s  financial 
influence in the global economy. 
Next  is  the  increased  interdependency.  With  the  growth  in  economic  activities,  we  are  also  seeing 
more economic interdependency within the region, especially in trade, and especially in trade between 
China and the rest of the region. Intra-regional trade is now the largest component of total trade for 
most East Asian economies. And its momentum has been an important driver of the region’s trade and 
economic growth.  
And third is the growth of finance, flows, and market transactions, propelled by the increase in trade 
and investment between the region and the rest of the world and also by trade within the region. This 
growth, in my view, is underpinned by a much improved and more diversified financial sector, as well 
as by a strong presence of international financial firms competing to provide services in the region. 
And the fourth is the deepening process of regional financial integration, defined as cross-border trade 
and investment flows within the region. But, many have noted that the progress, while well and good, 
seems to lag behind that of trade integration. 
On account of these developments and achievements, two questions are often raised. 
The first is how the development of the region’s financial markets should move forward so that it can 
best leverage on the region’s economic interest and potentials, as well as to ensure that the region will 
benefit fully from its own financial strength and resources. 
And the second is that, as the region becomes more integrated financially with the rest of the world, in 
what way can we ensure that the risk that comes with increased integration is adequately managed, 
and that the region’s financial interest is well protected. 
These  two  questions,  in  my  view,  are  the  central  themes  or  the  points  of  focus  around  which  the 
issues of financial markets and development in East Asia are now being discussed in all circles. And 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 1
from these discussions, a number of important observations have been made that point the ways to 
the next possible areas of focus in our efforts to further develop the markets. 
Let me share with you some of these observations. 
The  first  is  that,  while  it  is  agreed  that  more  needs  to  be  done  to  achieve  a  robust  and  diversified 
financial  system,  the  key  focus  of  financial  sector  reform  in  the  region  should  remain  to  be  the 
serviceability  or  access  to  finance  for  the  majority  of  the  region’s population.  This  is  to say  that  for 
financial sector development to really matter, the people of East Asia across all income groups must 
be able to enjoy the access to and the benefits of a modern financial sector.  
The second is the observation that the region’s financial sector continues to be less integrated within 
the region than with the rest of world. And it follows that, with weak regional integration, the region will 
lose the opportunity to leverage on its own high levels of savings to support investment. The financing 
cost for corporates and SMEs will also be higher because of the round-tripping of funds. This, I think is 
a fair and important point, because greater reliance on the region’s own savings will help reduce the 
volatilities associated with capital reversals that we have seen in the recent months. 
The  third  is  the  concern  that,  despite  rapid  growth,  the  role  of  Asian  financial  institutions  remains 
small. Their participation in the region’s finance, especially cross-border finance, is not at par with the 
flows  of  savings  that  need  to  be  intermediated.  The  challenge  here  is  to  promote  greater  roles  of 
Asia’s  own  financial  institutions  without  compromising  the  open,  competitive,  and  level  playing  field 
that has been the hallmark of the region’s financial markets. 
The  fourth  observation  is  the  concern  about  the  attendant  risk  associated  with  increased  financial 
flows and integration. With increased flows, the region’s financial markets are susceptible to greater 
risks and spillovers from the international financial markets. The issue then is whether a better system 
is needed to help mitigate and manage these risks. 
And  the  fifth  is  the  concern  about  the  region-wide  benefits  of  the  efforts  we  are  doing  on  financial 
market  development  and  integration,  given  the  vast  diversity  of  the  economies  and  markets  in  the 
region. Ideally, regional financial development should be a win-win situation. Nonetheless, the uneven 
pace of development and unbalanced focus could risk hallowing out the region’s financial system. And 
if this happens, it could sow a seed for future instabilities. 
I  think  these  observations  and  concerns  are  important,  and  in  a  way  they  point  to  the  issues  that 
should be addressed in our next step of financial reform. And it is in this context that I see the World 
Bank Flagship study on East Asian financial markets to be timely. And from what I heard this morning, 
significant benefits and insights can probably be gained from this study, and be useful to our future 
works in the region. 
I also have a number of specific remarks and views to make on the aspects of East Asian financial 
markets to be discussed in the next sessions. But for the benefit of time, I think I should leave them for 
later opportunity. For now, let me close by saying a little bit about the role of policy. 
Government policies, in my view, have played an important role in the current development of East 
Asian  financial  markets.  The  key  policy,  of  course,  has  been  the  implementation  of  financial  sector 
reform which has resulted in a much improved financial system, especially the banking sector. Policies 
have been directed at developing the region’s capital markets too, especially the bond market. Policy 
coordination has also been strengthened to increase regional financial integration and to develop a 
policy coordination framework that can help the region deal better with the likelihood of a crisis. I am 
referring here to the CMI or the Chiang Mai Initiative and its surveillance process. 
But while policies have been important, the process of financial market development in East Asia has 
essentially been left to the market, in the sense that the process is basically a market-driven one. But 
on account of what is perceived to be a slow progress, question arises whether policy should do more.  
My view is that the process should continue to be market-driven and not policy-driven. But there are 
areas that government policies can do more, especially on issues that involve efforts on a region-wide 
basis.  In  this  context,  future  efforts  at  policy  coordination  should  start  by  setting  out  a  clear  and 
concrete medium-term goal, then followed by a few but concrete and specific issues to be addressed 
or  projects  to  be  executed.  A  case  in  point  is  the  development  of  a  shared  regional  financial 
infrastructure such as linking the clearing and payment systems, harmonizing minimum regulations on 
cross-border investment flows, and developing a shared facility to promote greater flows of investment 
information.  This  type  of  specific  efforts  and  projects  would  be  easier  to  win  region-wide  political 
commitment and support. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2006
Another suggestion is that, for the market-based approach to work efficiently, we may need to engage 
more formally the cooperation of the private sector. On this, I think East Asia can learn a lot from the 
experience  of  the  EU  in  engaging  the  private  sector  in  planning  and  reviewing  major  financial 
initiatives. Specifically here, I am thinking of the Giovannini Group of private experts, established in 
1996, which has done at least four useful reports for the EU Commission. Their inputs have helped the 
EU in introducing the necessary directives. 
My last point is on the role of IFI’s such as the World Bank. In recent years, in a good way, we have 
seen active involvement of all major IFI’s in the region’s financial market development. They contribute 
to  research,  ideas,  technical  assistance,  policy  advice,  and  funding.  Some  are  even  involved  as 
market participants. I am thinking here of the World Bank, the ADB, and the IMF. But while their efforts 
are good, well-intended, and should definitely continue, their contributions should aim to cover or be 
useful to all markets in all countries in the region. This is because of the diversity in terms of stages of 
market development in the region. And for the IFI’s themselves, it can be useful that their resources 
are not wasted in overlapping projects. 
On  this  point,  I  see  considerable  value  if  each  IFI  can  establish  its  own  areas  of  expertise  and 
specialization,  so  that  the  value  added  they  are  contributing  collectively  to  the  region  are  further 
enhanced. 
I  think  I  have  take  up  enough  time  already  and  should  stop.  So,  let  me  stop  here  and  I  hope  my 
contributions have been useful. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
BIS Review 66/2006 
 3
