Philipp Hildebrand: Reflections on the gold market 
Speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
LBMA Conference, Montreux, 26 June 2006. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you this morning. The last time a member of the 
Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank (SNB) had the opportunity to address this audience was 
in June 1999, when our present Governor Jean-Pierre Roth had the difficult task to explain why the 
SNB intended to sell 1300 tonnes of its gold reserves. Back then, the gold market environment was 
quite  different:  the  price  of  gold  had  steadily  declined  to  USD  250/oz  and  there  were  widespread 
concerns in the market place that central banks were intending to liquidate a substantial part of their 
gold reserves. 
In seven years, the market has, in many ways, come full circle: the price of gold climbed to above USD 
700/oz before receding below USD 600/oz, levels that were last seen in 1981. Central bank activity in 
the gold market is not considered as a threat anymore. The agreements of 1999 and 2004 between 15 
European  central  banks  -  the  so-called  Washington  agreements  -  have  removed  much  of  the 
uncertainty regarding central bank sales. Indeed, market rumours today are arguably more concerned 
about central banks buying gold than they are about central banks selling gold.  
As many of you know, the SNB completed its gold sales program fifteen months ago1. In total, 1300 
tons were sold. The decision to reduce our gold holdings by half was taken for two reasons that were 
highlighted  by  experts  as  early  as  1997:  First  the  SNB  arguably  had  more  gold  than  it  needed. 
Switzerland's  official  gold  holdings  per  capita  were  five  times  higher  than  those  of  the  next  G10 
country.  Second,  the  SNB  had  -  on  a  mark-to-market  basis  -  excess  capital  reserves  that  were  no 
longer required for monetary purposes. As a result, the decision was taken to sell 1300 tons of gold. In 
May 2000, as soon as the legal framework had been amended to allow market sales, the SNB started 
it gold sales operations. We adopted a very transparent strategy and tried, within the constraints of the 
Washington  Agreement,  to  maximize  the  proceeds  of  the  gold  sales  in  Swiss  francs.  The  average 
selling price of USD 350/oz was 17 dollars higher than the average London fixing of the selling period. 
Of course, with today's prices around 600 USD/oz, you might think that we revisit our sales program 
with  mixed  feelings.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  price  forecasts,  which  are  inevitably  subject  to  great 
uncertainty, did not feature prominently in the SNB’s decision to sell gold. The timing of the gold sales 
was largely influenced by factors that the SNB did not fully control. Once we were allowed to sell, we 
started  our  program  within  the  window  of  opportunity  that  had  been  negotiated  with  other  central 
banks under the first Washington agreement.  
Today, the SNB is no longer in the spotlight with regard to its gold policy. This makes my task today 
easier  than President Roth's seven  years  ago.  I  have  no  newsworthy  information  to  present  to  you 
regarding  our  gold  policy.  Instead,  I  will  briefly  reflect  on  six  commonly  held  arguments  related  to 
commodities and, more specifically, to gold. The point of considering these arguments is not to either 
reject or confirm them definitely but rather to illustrate the likely speculative nature of long-term gold 
price  forecasts.  Since  it  was  freed  from  central  bank  intervention,  the  gold  market  has  been  quite 
volatile. Historical evidence as well as analytical considerations suggest that price volatility will likely 
remain an important feature of the gold market. 
First argument: gold is a commodity like any other  
Since  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  System,  gold  has  lost  its  role  as  an  anchor  for  the 
international monetary system. Does that mean that it has become a commodity like any other? Before 
trying to analyse fundamental differences or similarities between gold and other commodities, lets look 
at  what  prices  tell  us:  At  first  sight,  gold  and  other  commodity  price  cycles  indeed  look  similar:  the 
                                                      
1  For  a  detailed  overview  of  SNB's  sales  program,  see  Hildebrand  (2005),  SNB  Gold  Sales  -  Lessons  and  Experiences, 
Institute for International Economics, Washington. 
BIS Review 61/2006 
 1
boom in the gold market since 1999 clearly has parallels in other commodities as well. Oil prices have 
increased sevenfold since 1999; industrial metals have increased threefold since 2001. Similarly, the 
extraordinary  gold  bull  market  at  the  end  of  the  seventies  occurred  in  the  context  of  rising  oil  and 
commodity prices. This parallelism, however, is not perfect. The average correlation between weekly 
price changes of gold and oil throughout the last 20 years is a mere 0.1. For metals, the correlation 
with  gold  is  slightly  higher  but  remains  below  0.2.  Both  correlations  have  varied  heavily  within  the 
period; currently, they are clearly on the high side (Graph 1).  
Graph 1: Correlation between gold, metals and oil prices 
Gold - Metals (GSCI)
Gold - Oil (Brent)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
01.01.1983
01.01.1988
01.01.1993
01.01.1998
01.01.2003
Correlation of weekly price changes over a 1-year period
 Despite similarities in price movements, the gold market has a number of distinct features relative to 
other commodity markets. Arguably, the most important distinction is the fact that the ratio of available 
supply  to  annual  production  is  much  higher  for  gold  than  for  other  commodities.  A  significant 
proportion  of  the  estimated  160,000  tonnes  of  all  gold  worldwide  available  in  the  form  of  jewellery, 
bars, coins, etc. (sixty times the annual mine production) could be brought to market at relatively low 
cost. Thus, in contrast to other commodities, gold prices are not only dependent on the current mine 
production  and  processing  demand  but  are  also  influenced  to  a  great  extent  by  the  supply  and 
demand behaviour of existing and potential owners of gold. In other words, the investment motive is a 
much more important driver in the gold market than in the market for other commodities. Of course, 
mining and processing demand have an important role in the long term, but the medium term price 
equilibrium  depends  heavily  on  the  investment  or  disinvestment  decisions  of  the  private  and  public 
sectors.  
Second argument: commodity supply cannot catch up with demand  
A common argument in commodity markets relies on a kind of Malthusian logic: due to limited supply, 
prices must rise in the long run in order to match increasing demand. This argument has been invoked 
for  centuries.  However,  secular  trends  show  the  contrary:  in  almost  all  commodity  markets,  prices 
have decreased relative to other goods and services. This secular relative price decline does in no 
way imply that bottlenecks in production or increased demand cannot trigger a commodity price cycle. 
These  cycles  are  often  caused  by  the  delayed  reaction  of  supply  to  an  increase  in  demand,  which 
tends  to  push  up  prices  temporarily.  But  in  due  time,  higher  prices  tend  to  trigger  new  mining 
investments and foster technological progress.  
This raises the question of whether we are currently witnessing a commoditity cycle like any other or 
whether  things  might  be  different  this  time?  On  the  demand  side,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the 
increased demand caused by the integration of China and India in the world economy is a once in a 
century  historical  event.  On  the  supply  side,  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  exploration 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2006
investment since 2002.2 It remains to be seen whether the increased supply will be sufficient to bring 
prices down significantly. The depletion of easy-to-mine resources has contributed to a significant rise 
in extraction costs. Other factors might also push in the same direction: for instance, it is possible that 
the  internalisation  of  external  mining  costs,  previously  born  by  society  as  a  whole  (i.e.  through  the 
degradation of the natural environment), might contribute to commodity prices remaining at elevated 
levels.  
With regard to gold, on the other hand, I am doubtful that the main source of uncertainty is related to 
surprises  in  future  mining  supply  or  fabrication  demand.  As  I  mentioned  before,  absent  new  vast 
discoveries, investment demand will arguably continue to dominate future gold prices.  
Third argument: today's commodity investment boom is structural and will be long-lasting 
Let's turn our focus to investment demand. In recent years, institutional and private investors appear to 
have rediscovered commodities as an asset class. According to some market estimates, investment in 
commodities has surged tenfold since 2003 and amounted to USD 120bn in May 2006. Many market 
analysts see this increase as the beginning of a new trend: their argument goes roughly as follows: if 
all pension funds had only 3% of their assets invested in commodities, this would represent a total 
investment of more than USD 500bn.3  
The  gold  market  has  also  benefited  from  a  surge  in  investment  demand.  According  to  market 
specialists,  net  investment  exceeded  700  tonnes  in  2005.  Exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  have 
become  particularly  popular  because  they  give  investors  the  opportunity  to  make  flexible and  liquid 
investments in gold, even for small volumes. At the end of 2003, gold ETF investments accounted for 
less than 20 tonnes. Today, they likely exceed 500 tonnes.  
Does the risk/return payoff of commodities justify this new interest? Empirical studies have shown that 
the  inclusion  of  commodities  as  an  asset  class  improves  the  efficient  frontier  of  a  portfolio. 
Nonetheless, we all know that returns and correlations can change. With respect to correlations, there 
is arguably no compelling reason why low correlations between commodities and bonds or equities 
should  change  significantly  going  forward.  The  case  for  diversification  with  regard  to  investing  in 
commodities may therefore well remain intact. With regard to returns, however, things appear more 
complicated,  particularly  if  we  base  our  analysis  on  the  return  of  commodity  futures  indices.  In  the 
past, most commodity markets have been in backwardation: futures prices were lower than the spot 
price. This was beneficial to investors buying commodity futures, because they could profit from a so-
called  roll-yield.  This  yield  can  be  interpreted  as  a  risk  premium  priced  into  the  futures  contract  to 
compensate the holder for bearing the commodity price risk. However, if the number of investors ready 
to bear this risk increases significantly, the risk premium could disappear or even turn negative. In fact, 
for some time now, the near-term structure of many commodity prices has experienced a change from 
backwardation to contango. It seems to me, there may well be a connection between this change from 
backwardation to contango and the growing trend to invest in commodity futures.  
Contrary to other commodities, gold has typically been in contango. The reason is that there is plenty 
of  gold  around  and  plenty  of  market  participant  -  including  central  banks  -  willing  to  lend  it.  As  a 
consequence,  gold  lease  rates  are  usually  lower  than  USD  interest  rates  and  gold  futures  prices 
higher than spot prices. The roll yield is thus negative, which is one of the reasons why investment in 
gold  futures  did  not  generate  the  same  returns  as  investments  in  broad  commodity  future  price 
indices. So what return should we expect from investing in gold? History shows that gold has been 
able  to  keep  its  value  in  real  terms,  but  compared  to  bonds  or  equities,  no  real  return  has  been 
realized (Graph 2). 
                                                      
2   For  instance,  Metals  Economics  Group  (2005)  estimates  that  expenditures  for  commercial  nonferrous  metals  exploration 
increased from a 12-year low of USD 1.9bn in 2002 to USD 5.1bn in 2005, a level just slightly lower than in 1997, when 
expenditures were at their highest level. 
3   Source: Watson Wyatt in GFMS Gold Survey (2006). 
BIS Review 61/2006 
 3
Graph 2: Cumulative returns on gold, bonds and equities in USD since 1871 
US equities: 7.1% p.a.
US T-bonds: 4.6% p.a.
Gold: 2.5% p.a.
US CPI: 2.4% p.a.
100000
10000
1000
100
10
1
0
1871 1881 1891 1901 1911 1921 1931 1941 1951 1961 1971 1981 1991 2001
 Fourth argument: gold mine hedging is "passé" 
As you know, in the second half of the 1990s, gold mines increasingly sold their future production on a 
forward basis. In doing so, they pushed up gold supplies by more than 10% per year, thus reinforcing 
the already negative price trend. As from 2001, mining companies increasingly abandoned this type of 
price hedging, which amounted to a de facto reduction in the supply of gold and thus contributed to 
rising prices.  
This raises the question of what constitutes an optimal hedging policy to maximize shareholder value? 
One  of  the  reasons  gold  mine  companies  typically  give  for  reducing  their  hedge  book  is  that 
shareholders want to incur a gold price risk when investing in mines. While there is arguably some 
logic to this argument, investors clearly have other alternatives if they seek exposure to the price of 
gold. There is no doubt that no hedging at all would have been better from a shareholder’s perspective 
than  the  kind  of  pro-cyclical  policy  that  was  followed  in  the  past.  Nonetheless,  it  seems  to  me,  we 
cannot rule out that the gold mining industry will start increasing its hedging activities again at some 
point in the future.  
Fifth argument: central banks will adopt a homogenous attitude towards gold. 
At  the  end  of  2005,  central  banks  had  officially  declared  reserves  of  around  USD  3,500bn.  Of  this 
amount, around 15% was invested in gold (Graph 3). The proportion of gold varies considerably from 
one country to another. For instance, it amounted to more than 70% for the United States, 50% for the 
Eurozone, 40% for Switzerland, 4% for India, 2% for Japan but less than one percent for Brazil, China, 
Hong Kong, Korea or Malaysia. These variations have always been a source of market rumours. At 
the end of the nineties, the prevailing question was: what if European central banks would reduce their 
gold  holdings  to  10%  of  their  reserves?  Now,  the  question  is:  what  if  Asian  central  banks  would 
increase their holdings to 10% of their reserves? I doubt that in the foreseeable future, these national 
discrepancies related to gold reserves will diminish significantly, let alone disappear. Countries have 
different  geopolitical  situations,  different  historical  backgrounds,  different  levels  of  development  and 
different  functions  for  their  official  reserves.  These  differences  give  rise  to  different  priorities  with 
regard to the role of gold reserves.  
4 
 BIS Review 61/2006
Graph 3: Evolution of World Official Reserves 
Gold Reserves Currency Reserves
 
n
o
i
l
l
i
b
D 
S
U
 
n
i
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Jan 95
Jan 96
Jan 97
Jan 98
Jan 99
Jan 00
Jan 01
Jan 02
Jan 03
Jan 04
Jan 05
 Sixth argument: increasing living standards will boost private gold demand in emerging Asia  
My comments on this last argument will be brief. As often when looking at economic issues, there are 
substitution and income effects at work. On the one hand, prosperous Asian workers will be able to 
save and consume more, which should be reflected by an increased demand for gold. On the other 
hand, as financial markets and banking systems become more developed and more secure in today’s 
emerging economies, the palette of alternative saving vehicles will increase and we should expect the 
relative proportion of wealth invested in gold to decrease. In other words, we might expect the income 
effect to be strong at the beginning before receding and giving way to the substitution effect.  
Conclusions  
Despite  the  demonetisation  of  gold,  the  yellow  metal  continues  to  have  a  special  significance  for 
central  banks.  Unlike  currencies,  the  value  of  gold  does  not  depend  on  a  national  sovereign. 
Moreover,  payment  transactions  with  gold  are  fully  under  a  central  bank's  control.  These  are  two 
important reasons why gold, more than any other type of investment, serves to ensure the capacity to 
act in extreme crisis situations. From an investment viewpoint, the price of gold often moves in the 
opposite direction to other financial assets, in particular to the US dollar. The price for this 'insurance 
function' is reflected in the fact that gold is less profitable in the long term than other financial assets.  
It is not surprising that Switzerland, a small open developed country with a highly integrated financial 
sector and an ageing but relatively wealthy population, continues to invest a significant proportion of 
its reserves in gold. At present, the SNB holds 1,290 tonnes of gold or roughly 30% of its assets. Price 
fluctuations in both directions are to be expected and may be strong and sustained. As was the case 
in the past, such price fluctuations will modify the proportion of gold on our balance sheet from year to 
year. These short-term fluctuations should not give rise to great concern. Experience has shown that 
extreme movements in markets tend to level out in the long run.  
BIS Review 61/2006 
 5
