Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine economy - the continuing challenge 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, during the 
57th Inaugural Meeting of the Management Association of the Philippines, Manila, 24 January 2006. 
 Introduction  
During the BSP’s annual reception for the banking and business community last Tuesday, I had one 
principal appeal to our friends.  To make the best of our circumstances, achieve progress in our own 
spheres, so that in the end, the whole nation will be better off.  
Distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  Management  Association  of  the Philippines  led  by  2005 
President  Mon  Paterno  and  2006  President  Evelyn  Singson,  colleagues  from  the  BSP  and  the 
government, distinguished guests, friends, ladies and gentlemen, good evening.  
MAP’s  theme  for  this  year,  “Call  to  action:  Country  above  self”,  happens  to  be  in  accord  with  my 
Tuesday’s appeal. We are all convinced that the must-do list for the Philippines is long, some of the 
items are structural while some would require streamlining of policies. Any and all efforts to address 
this must-do list are therefore quite crucial. The next best thing to do is precisely this – take action in 
your respective spheres of influence. As captains of industries – described by media as movers and 
shakers of our economy – you can truly generate tremendous benefits for our country and our people. 
Ladies and gentlemen, what you have selected as guiding theme for this year is exactly the mindset 
we want Filipinos to have: Country above self. If you can widen the reach of this message to cover as 
many Filipinos as possible, then you would be a part of a chain that seeks to improve the nation.  
Now, let me share with you some positive news on the economic front which give us reason to be 
more confident about our future.  
2005 a most challenging year  
By most accounts, 2005 was a very challenging year for the Philippines. We had to contend with high 
oil prices, rising global interest rates, lower farm output, and non-economic tremors. Yet our economy, 
as  measured  by  GDP,  continued  to  expand.   Sure,  it  wasn’t  at  the  pace  we  aimed  for,  but  our 
economy proved its resilience once again.  
The expansion in economic activity was achieved amid an easing inflation environment. Inflation has 
continued to ease since the second half of 2005, supported mainly by the softening prices of food and 
oil, and to some extent the stronger peso. Headline inflation has fallen to 7.0 percent in the second 
half of 2005. The average inflation rate for last year was 7.6 percent. More importantly, core inflation, 
which  takes  out  the  impact  of  volatile  food  and  energy  prices  on  the  CPI,  has  steadily  trended 
downwards. The decline in core inflation suggests that the inflationary pressures of the past year were 
not  of  a  permanent,  demand-driven  nature.  This  fact  supports  the  limited  and  selectively  tightening 
bias of monetary policy.  
Another source of optimism is the improving fiscal performance. Coming from a very difficult period of 
large and persistent fiscal overhang, the government embarked on and succeeded in its initial efforts 
towards fiscal consolidation, by way of intensified tax administration and vital new tax measures as 
well as expenditure control. The National Government budget deficit stood at P146.5 billion for 2005, 
well below the target for the period. This figure also represents the lowest budget shortfall since 2001. 
As  revenue  gains  continue  with  the  VAT  implementation,  we  stand  a  good  chance  of  seeing  a 
balanced budget by 2008.  
The positive investor sentiment over the progress made on the fiscal front as well as healthy inflows 
from remittances have also strengthened the external position. Latest estimates show that the overall 
balance of payments (BOP) position for 2005 stood at a surplus of US$2.4 billion, which is a welcome 
turnaround from the previous year’s shortfall.  
The peso likewise ended stronger against the US dollar on the back of the positive market sentiment 
and strong inflows. The peso ended 2005 as the top performing currency in the Asian region.  
BIS Review 5/2006 
 1
This surge in dollar inflows also allowed the BSP to build up its dollar reserves. At US$18.5 billion as 
at end-December 2005, the country’s gross international reserves (GIR) is significantly higher than the 
US$17 billion target for the year and is sufficient to cover about 4 months’ worth of imports of goods 
and services.  
Meanwhile, the country’s external debt also narrowed to US$55.5 billion by end-September 2005. This 
amount continued to be made up mostly of medium- and long-term liabilities, which ensures that our 
debt payments remain manageable and sustainable.  
At  the  same  time,  the  Philippine  banking  system  continued  to  show  improving  soundness.  As  of 
November 2005, commercial banks’ non-performing loans as a percentage to total loans registered a 
single digit level of 8.7 percent. Growth in bank lending, however, continues to be modest (2.1 percent 
Nov.),  but  we  expect  it  to  rebound  this  year  given  the  substantial  progress  achieved  so  far  with 
sustained asset clean up.  
Having said this, I have to admit, the Philippines is not yet totally out of the woods. There are risks that 
we  have  to  face  and  manage  in  the  years  ahead.  We  are  sure,  however,  to  move  forward  if  we 
persevere.  For  us  at  the  bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  we  are  aware  of  the  risks  attendant  to  our 
primary responsibility of keeping prices stable.  
The Monetary Board had to respond promptly and carefully to these inflationary risks to the inflation 
target.  In  the  course  of  2005,  we  raised  our  policy  interest  rates  by  a  total  of  75  basis  points  and 
increased  reserve  requirements  by  200  basis  points.  These  were  modest  responses  compared  to 
other jurisdictions where their capacity is nearing to the brim and the labor market is stretched to the 
limit. Yet they were decisive, considering the demand pressures were limited and the second round 
impact was yet to emerge. By the second half of 2005, inflation had started to ease.  
Improving fundamentals, optimism and 2006  
What then do we see in 2006.  
We continue to face uncertainties, but I believe the country’s improving economic fundamentals should 
give us a reasonable degree of optimism about 2006.  
Economic  activity,  for  one  thing,  is  likely  to  continue  at  a  reasonable  pace,  driven  mainly  by  the 
services and industry sectors. Nonetheless, the rise in oil prices over the past year is likely to take its 
toll  on  domestic  demand,  particularly  on  consumption  spending.   For  this  reason,  the  development 
budget coordinating committee is looking at real GDP growth in 2006 that is likely to be closer to the 
lower end of its target at 5.7 percent.  
As  for  inflation,  it  is expected  to  be  higher  in  2006, given  the  continued  upside  risks. Oil  prices,  for 
example, are expected to remain high relative to their historical trend and the RVAT is likely to exert, 
at least a short-term, upward pressure on consumer prices. Taking into account the recent easing of 
oil prices, as well as the strengthening of the peso, inflation is expected to hover between 7.5 and 8.1 
percent in 2006. Let me point out though that we do expect an easing of inflation in the second half of 
the year, as the impact of the RVAT diminishes.  
Meanwhile, improvements in fiscal performance, ample liquidity in the financial system, and moderate 
credit growth are expected to mitigate the impact of inflationary pressures on market interest rates.  
There is also good reason to expect a strong external position this year. Dollar inflows, primarily from 
OFW  remittances  and  investments,  are  expected  to  continue  to  come  in.  With  healthy  inflows,  the 
exchange rate is poised to remain broadly stable in the course of the year.   
The continuing challenges to monetary and banking policies  
While economic performance appears to be on track, we remain watchful of the potential risks and 
challenges to the economic outlook. These risks include the following: (1) volatility in world oil prices; 
(2) a build-up of excess liquidity in the financial system; (3) possible exchange rate volatility due to 
excess liquidity; and (4) adverse shifts in the public’s inflation expectations.  
In the face of these challenges, the public can count on the BSP to make sure that these risks do not 
endanger our path to economic progress. The BSP will stay committed to its mandate of promoting 
low and stable inflation.  
2 
 BIS Review 5/2006
The BSP is also committed to strengthening the financial sector through continued structural reforms. 
Foremost of these measures is the clean-up of banks’ balance sheets of non-performing assets. The 
clean-up will help spur credit and investment activity and create the basis for more sustainable growth 
in the medium term.  
Other key financial reforms will be focused on: (1) improving the BSP’s supervision technology and 
capacity; (2) aligning prudential regulation of the banking system with international standards and best 
practices; (3) strengthening corporate governance standards and market discipline mechanisms; (4) 
further developing the domestic capital market; and (5) enhancing the payments system.  
Efforts  are  also  underway  for  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  accord  and  adoption  of  international 
accounting standards by local banks. These initiatives are designed to bring local banking practices in 
line with internationally accepted standards.  
In  the  area  of  capital  market  development,  the  BSP  will  continue  its  active  collaboration  with  other 
government agencies and the private sector for the completion of much-needed market infrastructure 
to enhance system integrity and overall market confidence.  
We will likewise pursue further enhancements in financial information to guide investor decisions. A 
key effort in this area is the establishment of credit rating agencies. We are also working closely with 
congress on the establishment of a centralized credit information system to help private enterprises 
secure  better  access  to  credit,  reduce  borrowing  costs,  as  well  as  minimize  the  risk  exposures  of 
financial intermediaries.  
The  BSP  also  actively  seeks  to  widen  the  investor  base  of  the  local  financial  markets  through  a 
number  of  new  investment  products  which  would  better  reflect  market  prices. These  will  help 
encourage more institutional investors such as insurance companies, mutual funds and pension funds 
to participate in the capital market. Future reform measures will eventually lead to the introduction of 
exchange-based products that can further stimulate market activity and deepen liquidity.  
The continuing challenge  
Let  me  sum  up  by  saying  that  the  near-term  economic  outlook  suggests  more  vibrant  economic 
activity, but there are potential obstacles on the way to sustainable growth. The critical task ahead is 
for us to focus, not just on macroeconomic stabilization in the short-term, but also on preserving the 
momentum  for  economic reforms  to  ensure sustained  growth  in the  years  to  come. Consistent  with 
map’s marching order, we need to act outside of ourselves.  
Most  of  the  items  on  the  must-do  list  will  take  time  before  these  come  into  fruition.  Reforming  an 
economy  is  an  enormous  task,  one  that  the  government,  even  in  theory,  cannot  do  by  itself. 
Governments govern, or better still, guide. But it is the economic and business community that creates 
commodities and services, builds the economy and competes in the global market.  
I take heart in the fact that our business leaders in MAP remain a stalwart partner of the government in 
making  economic  progress  possible. Personally, 
that  our  hard  work  and 
resourcefulness will allow us to overcome our remaining economic problems. As a people, they say 
Filipinos have a knack for turning adversity into opportunity. My caution is that we should not always 
welcome adversity to be able to turn it into opportunity. I believe that by responding to the challenges 
with a deeper sense of purpose, by adhering to “country above self” as a guiding principle, we can 
reach our  full  potential. By  all  means, we  have  what  it  takes  to succeed.  The  outgoing  officers and 
board members of the MAP, congratulations on a job well done, and to the new officers, I wish you all 
the best! 
Thank you very much. Mabuhay tayong lahat.  
I  am  optimistic 
BIS Review 5/2006 
 3
