Lars Nyberg: The framework of modern central banking 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Conference  on 
Reforming the State Bank of Vietnam, Hanoi, 21 March 2006.  
 Thank you for inviting me to this conference on reforming the State Bank of Vietnam. I imagine that 
one reason why I have been invited here is that the central bank I represent, Sveriges Riksbank in 
Sweden,  just  over  a  decade  ago  was  in  a  situation  which  resembles  the  one  the  State  Bank  of 
Vietnam  is  experiencing  now.  At  that  time  we  had  reached  a  situation  where  there  were  strong 
reasons – if not imperative ones – for reconsidering the way in which we used to think about monetary 
policy.  It  became  clear  that  a  reform  of  monetary  policy  and  its  framework  was  both  desirable  and 
necessary. 
Of  course,  Sweden  is  by  no  means  the  only  country  where  monetary  policy  has  undergone  major 
changes in recent times. The view of how best to conduct monetary policy has changed fairly radically 
over the past twenty years and this has been reflected in a more or less worldwide reform process.  
What I hope to be able to contribute here today – as an introduction to the discussions – is to provide 
an overall picture of the ideas that formed the basis for this process and to describe what are today 
considered to be the guiding principles for a modern central bank, according to established research 
and practical experiences. 
What objectives should a central bank have? 
The  most  fundamental  question  to  ask  when  one  is  on  the  point  of  reforming  the  monetary  policy 
framework is, of course, what the objective of monetary policy should be. On a very general level the 
objective  of  monetary  policy  can  be  said  to  be  to  create  an  environment  where  the  economy  can 
develop in the best possible manner. However, this definition is too general to be of any great practical 
use, although it excludes some tasks that are sometimes imposed on central banks. 
To obtain a more operational definition, it is necessary to take the discussion one step further and ask 
the  question  of  how  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  favourable  economic  development.  On  a 
fundamental  plane,  one  could  say  that  the  central  bank’s  main  task  should  be  to  ensure  that  the 
payment system in the economy functions efficiently. This means in simple terms that payments and 
financial  transactions  can  be  made  easily  and  smoothly  and  entail  as  little  risk  as  possible.  Many 
scholars also regard this as the main reason why central banks were originally founded1.  
An economy’s payment system can be regarded as a sort of infrastructure in roughly the same way as 
the  country’s  communications  network  or  energy  supply  system.  It  also  essentially  fulfils  the  same 
purpose,  i.e.  to  ensure  that  the  flows  essential  to  the  economy  –  in  this  case  the  flow  of  money  – 
functions properly. 
However, ensuring that the payment system functions efficiently is also a fairly general definition that 
requires further precision. To become more specific, it is necessary to define what characterises an 
efficient payment system. I intend to discuss two characteristics here that I perceive to be the most 
central – price stability and financial stability. 
Price stability 
An important component of an efficient payment system is that economic agents have confidence that 
the value of the means of payment will remain stable over time, that is in practice that inflation will be 
low and stable. One usually expresses this as there being a nominal anchor that prevents inflation and 
inflation  expectations  from  drifting  off.  If  households  and  companies  are  confident  that  the  general 
price level will not change very much, they are better able to plan for the future and need not put effort 
                                                      
1   See, for instance, Santomero, A.M., S. Viotti and A. Vredin, (2001), "Challenges for Central Banking: An Introduction”, in 
Santomero, A.M., S. Viotti and A. Vredin (ed.), Challenges for Central Banking, Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 1
into  finding  ways  of  protecting  themselves  against  inflation,  but  can  focus  on  more  productive 
activities. 
Another  argument  for  keeping  inflation  low  focuses  on  the  role  of  price  formation  as  a  signalling 
system.  When  inflation  is  low  and  stable  it  is  easier  for  economic  agents  to  distinguish  changes  in 
relative  prices  and  to  adjust  their  decisions  regarding  consumption,  saving,  work  and  investment 
accordingly.  High  and  fluctuating  inflation,  on  the  other  hand,  disrupts  the  signalling  function  of  the 
pricing  system  and  can  more  easily  lead  to  bad  economic  decisions.  In  an  environment  with  low 
inflation, the price system can do a better job in allocating resources to uses where they will do most 
good. In a broader sense, one could see an efficient pricing system as part of an efficient payment 
system – it ensures that the transactions made are based on the best information possible. 
Price  stability  can  also  be  justified  for  reasons  not immediately connected  with  the efficiency  of  the 
payment system, such as the fact that high and fluctuating inflation tends to give rise to undesirable 
distribution effects. For instance, inflation appears to hit poor people hardest as the rich usually have 
better opportunities to protect themselves, or even to benefit, from the effects of inflation2. This could 
be because, for instance, poor people often have no other opportunity than to retain a large part of 
their  limited  assets  in  the  form  of  money  or  because  they  are  to  a  greater  extent  than  the  rich 
dependent on public subsidies that are not fully indexed. 
Keeping inflation low and stable is currently the most obvious – and definitely the most noticed – task 
for  modern  central  banks.  The  reason  for  the  focus  on  price  stability  is  of  course  the  negative 
experiences of the high and fluctuating inflation many countries experienced in the 1970s and 1980s. 
During this period one could say that the central banks’ original task of guaranteeing the value of the 
means  of  payment  was  neglected  as other  tasks, primarily  affecting  demand  in  the  economy,  were 
perceived as more important and more interesting for monetary policy. The consequence was that the 
nominal anchor was relinquished and to establish it again proved to require considerable effort. 
Let  me  before  I  discuss  the  other  important  component  of  an  efficient  payment  system  –  financial 
stability – say something about the most common approaches to attaining price stability. There are 
currently two predominant means of trying to ensure that inflation remains at a low and stable level. 
One is to tie one’s own currency to the currency of a country with a long tradition of low and stable 
inflation. The fixed exchange rate thus becomes an intermediate target through which one hopes to 
attain the ultimate target – price stability. The other means is to allow the exchange rate to float and to 
give the central bank the task of acting more directly to attain low, stable inflation – what is known as 
inflation targeting. 
The changeover in monetary policy made by Sweden at the beginning of the 1990s meant that we 
switched from the first method, fixing the exchange rate, to the second, targeting inflation. The reason 
was  quite  simply  that  the  fixed  exchange  rate  had  not  functioned  very  well  as  a  means  of  keeping 
down inflation and establishing a nominal anchor in the economy. For a couple of decades we had 
failed to keep price and wage increases in check. However, a fixed exchange rate relationship is not, 
of course, compatible with an inflation rate that systematically exceeds that in the country to which the 
exchange  rate  is  tied  –  sooner  or  later  the  exchange  rate  relationship  must  collapse.  The  rapid 
increases in wages and prices also repeatedly came into collision with the fixed exchange rate and the 
result  was  that  the  Swedish  currency  was  devaluated  on  several  occasions  from  the  mid-1970s 
onwards.  The  economy  was  thus  characterised  by  "boom-bust-cycles”  with  alternate  strong 
acceleration and sudden braking.  
However, the fact that the fixed exchange rate did not work as a nominal anchor in Sweden does not 
mean that it could not function well in other countries; it has unquestionably done so in many cases. 
So let me therefore move on and mention some general advantages and disadvantages of the two 
methods3. 
                                                      
2   See Easterly, W. and S. Fischer, (2001), “Inflation and the Poor”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 33, 2 (part 1), 160-
178. For a more detailed account of the advantages of low, stable inflation, see for instance King, M., (2002), ”The Inflation 
Target Ten Years On”, Speech at the London School of Economics, November 19. 
3   A more detailed discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of these and other monetary policy regimes can be found 
in,  for  instance,  Mishkin,  F.S.,  (1999),  ”International  Experiences  with  Different  Monetary  Policy  Regimes”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics 43, 579-605. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2006
Perhaps  the  foremost  advantage  of  having  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  as  a  means  of  keeping 
inflation under control is that it makes the task of monetary policy simple and straightforward: it shall 
set the key rate in a way that enables the exchange rate relationship to be maintained. This task is 
also easy for the general public to understand. 
At the same time, it may be a disadvantage that monetary policy is tied to this single task. It cannot 
then  be  used  to  subdue  domestic  disruptions  that  have  no  equivalent  in  the  country  to  which  the 
currency  is  tied  –  the  anchor  country.  At  the  same  time,  disruptions  in  the  anchor  country  will 
immediately affect the targeting country as interest rate adjustments in the anchor country will lead to 
corresponding interest rate adjustments in the targeting country. If, for instance, the interest rate in the 
anchor country is raised because demand in that country is increasing, the interest rate in the targeting 
country must also be increased in order to maintain the exchange rate relationship, even if the country 
is  in  a  recession.  A  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  thus  means  that  it  is  not  possible  to  conduct  an 
independent monetary policy. The task of keeping the economy in balance and of steering inflation 
more directly cannot thus rest with the central bank. A fixed exchange rate relationship can also be 
exposed to speculative attacks if it is not entirely credible. This was the case with the Swedish krona 
and several other European currencies at the beginning of the 1990s. 
With  regard  to  inflation  targeting,  I  am  of  course  somewhat  biased  and  for  obvious  reasons  find  it 
easier  to  point  to  advantages  than  disadvantages.  One  advantage  is  that  a  central  bank  which 
conducts inflation targeting is not tied to maintaining a particular exchange rate relationship, but can 
be more directly aimed at focussing on what is happening in the domestic economy. Another, partly 
related  advantage  –  which  I  believe  has  been  very  important  in  Sweden’s  case  –  is  that  inflation 
targeting means that one specific authority is given a clear responsibility for maintaining price stability. 
During the 1970s and 1980s it was not entirely clear where the responsibility for this lay in Sweden. 
One could say that the responsibility in practice had been delegated to the social partners, but that the 
total  economic  policy  tended  at  the  same  time  to  be  so  expansionary  that  it  became  difficult  to 
maintain wage and price increases at reasonable levels. A further advantage of inflation targeting is 
that the task of monetary policy, in the same way as with a fixed exchange rate regime, is easy for the 
general public to understand. 
If I am to try to find a disadvantage with inflation targeting, it could be that it is more difficult from a 
purely operational point of view for a central bank to steer inflation towards a particular level than to 
maintain a particular exchange rate relationship. Inflation targeting is thus much more demanding than 
a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  with  regard  to  the  central  bank’s  analytical  work  and  its  ability  to 
communicate its policy. Whether this is something that should be regarded as a disadvantage or not is 
of course a question of judgement. For the Riksbank, the transition to inflation targeting heralded the 
start of a fairly comprehensive increase in competence in the field of economics. The number of PhD 
economists  at  the  Riksbank  has  risen  sharply  in  recent  years  and  our  research  in  areas  related  to 
monetary policy has expanded considerably.  
Financial stability 
Let me now move on to the other central component of an efficient payment system. This concerns the 
stability in the financial system; particularly in the financial institutions that supply payment services, 
i.e. primarily the banks. Financial stability is currently regarded, parallel to the price stability target, as 
the main task of a modern central bank. 
The financial system has essentially three main tasks: converting savings into financing, managing risk 
and providing efficient channels of payment. Let me give a basic example. A bank receives savings 
from households which it then lends to other households or to companies that need to invest. Banks 
are specialists at valuing, monitoring and managing credit risks in the households and companies to 
which  they  lend.  The  bank  therefore  contributes  to  ensuring  that  the  mediation  of  capital  in  the 
economy  functions  efficiently;  it  is  sufficient  that  borrowers  can  convince  the  bank  of  their 
creditworthiness, they do not need to convince each individual saver. Similarly, savers do not have to 
assess the creditworthiness of every borrower; it is enough to be satisfied of the bank's solvency. The 
banks can also supply payment services for households and companies by using the existing financial 
infrastructure,  such  as  accounts  and  various  routines  for  transferring  funds  between  financial 
institutions. 
As these functions are central to an efficient economy, it is evident that major problems can arise if 
financial stability is upset. This is aptly illustrated by, for instance, the crises in South East Asia at the 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 3
end of the 1990s and by the bank crisis that Sweden and other countries suffered at the beginning of 
that same decade. 
While the target of maintaining price stability is relatively straightforward and intuitive, it is more difficult 
to  specify  the  task  of  promoting  financial  stability.  This  task  has  also  been  formulated  in  slightly 
different ways in different central banks’ regulations. For instance, the Bank of England’s charter says 
that  it  is  ”responsible  for  the  overall  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole”,  while  the 
corresponding task in the regulations for Sweden’s Riksbank has been expressed in a more indirect 
manner: ”to promote the efficiency and safety of the payment system”4. 
One strategy for maintaining financial stability can briefly be described as consisting of three different 
parts: a clear regulatory framework, an efficient day-to-day prudential supervision and oversight and a 
preparedness to act strongly and quickly in a crisis. Exactly what role is played by the central bank in 
this strategy is also something that varies from country to country. 
Many central banks contribute in different ways to the formulation of the regulatory framework for the 
financial  system,  for  instance,  by  giving  their  views  on  proposed  bills  and  by  participating  in 
committees where domestic and international legislation is formulated. With regard to the day-to-day 
prudential supervision and oversight, one solution that is applied in Sweden and other countries is that 
the supervision of the financial sector is delegated to a special, independent authority with the power 
to apply sanctions. In other countries the supervision work is done by the central bank itself. In the 
cases  where  supervision  is  delegated  to  an  independent  authority,  the  central  bank  usually  has  an 
oversight role that entails regularly monitoring and analysing developments in the financial sector and 
presenting its views of the risks in the financial system. Ever since the bank crisis at the beginning of 
the 1990s, this has been perceived as a very important task in Sweden; in fact, it could be argued that 
the  bank crisis  was allowed  to  arise  partly  because  no  authority  previously  had  the specific  task  of 
monitoring the overall financial stability. The Riksbank now publishes a twice-yearly report analysing 
the  stability  of  the  Swedish  financial  system.  In  a  crisis  situation,  the  central  bank  plays  a  very 
important role. It may then need to go in and act as lender of last resort, that is, to grant emergency 
liquidity assistance (ELA) to banks and financial companies if this is considered necessary to prevent 
the financial system from collapsing. 
The two objectives of price stability and financial stability are related to each other in different ways, in 
addition  to  both  being  important  components  of  an  efficient  payment  system.  The  stability  of  the 
financial system is of course a necessary condition for a policy aimed at price stability, as the latter is 
fairly meaningless if the country is threatened with economic collapse. The financial stability objective 
can therefore in one sense be said to be superior to the objective of price stability.  
At the same time, it is very probable that price stability in the long run promotes financial stability, for 
instance, by making the price system function better and thereby reducing the risk of bad investments. 
However,  price  stability  is  no  guarantee  of  stability  in  the  financial  system,  which  is  illustrated,  for 
instance,  by  the  problems  in  the  Japanese  banks  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  There  is  thus  no 
reason  for  central  banks  to  focus  solely  on  the  price  stability  objective  and  thereby  assume  that 
financial stability will follow automatically – both objectives are important.  
Other objectives than price stability and financial stability? 
Are  there  any  other  objectives  than  price  stability  and  financial  stability  that  may  be  suitable  for  a 
modern central bank? 
Many countries also have objectives for developments in the real economy written into the regulatory 
framework governing the central bank’s activities. For instance, in the US legislation it says that the 
Federal  Reserve  shall  promote  “maximum  employment”,  while  the  British  legislation  says  that  the 
Bank  of  England  shall  support  “the  economic  policy  of  Her  Majesty’s  Government,  including  its 
objectives  for  growth  and  employment”.  In  Sweden  there  is  no  specific  objective  for  real  economic 
developments  written  into  the  law,  but  it  is  nevertheless  considered  to  be  understood  that  the 
                                                      
4   See,  for  instance,  Oosterloo,  S.  and  J.  de  Haan,  (2003),  ”A  Survey  of  Institutional  Frameworks  for  Financial  Stability”, 
Occasional Studies Vol.I/No. 4, De Nederlandsche Bank, for an overview of how the task of promoting financial stability is 
dealt with in different central banks’ regulations and in practice. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2006
Riksbank – as an authority under the Riksdag, the Swedish parliament – shall support the objectives 
of economic policy with the aim of attaining sustainable growth and a high level of employment. 
Exactly how the objectives are worded thus varies considerably between countries, often depending 
on the fact that changes and modifications have gradually been made to regulations originally written 
much earlier. I dare to claim nevertheless that the essence of modern central banks’ wording of their 
objectives is the same. It is a question of monetary policy, as I said earlier, being first and foremost 
aimed at ensuring there is a credible nominal anchor in the economy. As long as this nominal anchor 
does  not  risk  coming  loose,  monetary  policy  can  be  aimed  at  stabilising  the  real  economy.  I  shall 
return  to  this  shortly  and  for  now  merely  emphasise  that  the  key  word  here  is  stabilise  the  real 
economy and nothing else. 
It may be interesting to note in this context that the experiences from the period of low, stable inflation 
have meant that price stability is now increasingly perceived as both an objective in itself and as a 
means of achieving other macroeconomic objectives5. 
There are many indications that price stability has beneficial effects on efficiency and growth in the 
economy. The reasons can be those I just mentioned, i.e. that the price system functions better as a 
signalling mechanism in a low inflation environment and that households and companies can spend 
more time on productive activities instead of trying to protect themselves against inflation. Essentially it 
is a question of price stability being a necessary condition for an efficient payment system, as I said 
earlier. 
In addition, the period of low and stable inflation has also been characterised in many countries by 
less  fluctuations  in  growth  in  the  real  economy  than  was  previously  the  case.  The  differences 
compared  with  developments  during  the  inflationist  and  unstable  1970s,  often  entitled  “The  Great 
Inflation”,  have  been  so  notable  that  this  development  has  been  awarded  its  own  title  in  academic 
research – “The Great Moderation”6. Although the reasons for the greater real economic stability are 
not  entirely  clear;  there  are  hypotheses  that  economies  have  undergone  various  types  of  structural 
changes  which  have  subdued  the  fluctuations  –  such  as  improved  stock  management  among 
companies and financial innovations – or that the shocks to the economies have quite simply been 
smaller  than  during  the  1970s.  However,  it  is  most  likely  that  a  better  monetary  policy  has  played 
some role in the increased real economic stability.  
We have thus established what a central bank’s primary tasks should be: to maintain price stability, to 
promote  stability  in  the  financial  system  and  –  as  long  as  the  nominal  anchor  formed  by  the  price 
stability  target  is  not  threatened  –  to  try  to  stabilise  the  real  economy.  There  may  nevertheless  be 
reason to provide an example of what is not an appropriate objective for a central bank.  
As I have tried to emphasise, the real economic objectives that central banks have entail stabilising 
real quantities such as production and employment. By stabilising I mean that one tries to reduce the 
fluctuations  around  the  long-term  trend.  However,  it  is  important  to  realise  that  this  long-term  trend 
development is not something that monetary policy can directly influence. For example, a country’s 
long-term  growth  is  determined  by  developments  in  the  quantity  of  labour  and  real  capital  and 
technological  progress.  The  best  that  monetary  policy  can  do  is,  as  I  have  already  observed,  to 
indirectly contribute to favourable economic developments by ensuring that inflation is kept low and 
stable and that financial stability is good. 
Although  it  might  be  tempting,  it  is  therefore  meaningless  –  and  often  counter-productive  or  even 
damaging – to give the central bank the task of "creating" growth or employment. If one tries to affect 
growth  and  employment  by  systematically  keeping  interest  rates  low  and  increasing  liquidity  in  the 
economy, or by allowing public sector projects to be financed directly by the central bank, the profits 
will be only short term. Inflation will rise in a way that will sooner or later become difficult to control – 
the nominal anchor will loosen – while developments in the real economy risk being poorer than they 
would  have been otherwise.  I  believe that  it  is  correct  to  claim  that  a  lack of  insight  and excessive 
                                                      
5   See,  for  instance,  Bernanke,  B.S.,  (2006),  ”The  Benefits  of  Price  Stability”,  Remarks  at  The  Center  for  Economic  Policy 
Studies  and  on  the  occasion  of  the  75th  Anniversary  of  the  Woodrow  Wilson  School  of  Public  and  International  Affairs, 
Princeton University, February 24. 
6   See,  for  instance,  Bernanke,  B.S.,  (2004),  “The  Great  Moderation”,  Remarks  at  the  Meetings  of  the  Eastern  Economic 
Association, Washington, DC, February 20. 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 5
optimism  regarding  the  role  monetary  policy  can  play  in  long-term  real  economic  growth  was  one 
important reason why inflation was so high during the 1970s. 
The value of independence 
How can one then construct a framework for monetary policy that provides the central bank with the 
best possible conditions to carry out its tasks? Here I intend to be fairly brief as this is something that 
will be discussed in more detail in the next contribution to this conference. Let me just note that there 
is  currently  general  agreement  that  the  central  bank  should  be  given  the  opportunity  to  work 
independent  of  the  political  system  in  order  to  attain  the  objective  of  price  stability.  It  has  been 
observed  that  if  monetary  policy  is  conducted  at  arm’s  length  from  party  politics,  there  is  greater 
confidence  in  the  price  stability  objective.  This  is  linked  to  the  fact  that  there  has  often  been  a 
tendency  for  politicians  to  use  monetary  policy  for  more  short-term  purposes  which  have  conflicted 
with the long-term price stability objective and which have often entailed loosening the nominal anchor. 
Making the central bank independent is probably the element of the past decades’ monetary reform 
process that has triggered the most debate and has been perceived as the most controversial. It is 
probably natural for politicians to feel uncomfortable giving the central bank increased independence 
as it unavoidably means that they give up some of their decision-making powers, and moreover in a 
field perceived to be central. I assume that this is one explanation why, for instance, it took Sweden 
until  1999  before  there  was  sufficient  political  support  to  grant  the  Riksbank  increased  formal 
independence and to confirm by law the price stability objective, despite the fact that these reforms 
had been proposed when the inflation target was introduced in 1993. 
However, the concern among politicians over making central banks independent is quite unwarranted. 
The independence does not, of course, mean that the central bank is free to conduct any monetary 
policy  they  wish;  it  only  means  that  it  should  be  able  to  use  the  means  at  its  disposal  to  meet  the 
objectives  set  by  the  political  system  without  outside  intervention.  This  is  usually  expressed  as  the 
central bank being instrument independent but not goal independent. The delegation of powers should 
be regarded as a means for politicians to ensure that the long-term aim of the monetary policy that 
they endeavour to achieve – but have difficulty guaranteeing – can become a reality. Furthermore, a 
natural consequence of the independence is that the central bank shall be accountable for its actions 
and that monetary policy shall be conducted in a transparent manner7.  
It is interesting to note that, despite fairly substantial initial doubts, people have afterwards been very 
satisfied  with  the  reforms  implemented.  Monetary  policy  therefore  appears  to  have  essentially 
delivered what was hoped for and I am not aware of any country where making the central bank more 
independent has been regretted.  
Conclusion 
Let me round off. I began by saying that the State Bank of Vietnam is currently in a situation similar to 
that of the Swedish Riksbank just over a decade ago. However, it is also the case that the conditions 
are  different  in  certain  respects.  One  difference  is  that  the  Swedish  credit  and  money  markets  had 
been  deregulated  completely  during  the  1980s  and  early  1990s.  This  meant,  for  instance,  that  the 
central government issued bonds, through public auctions and at predetermined times, and actively 
attempted  to  promote  the  development  of  a  secondary  market.  Thus,  there  was  already  a  clear 
channel  through  which  monetary  policy  could  have  an  effect.  Another  difference  was  that  we  in 
Sweden had the support of a long tradition of comprehensive production of public statistics that made 
our work easier. These are factors that, as I understand it, do not apply to the same extent here in 
Vietnam, at least not yet. 
Vietnam  has  thus  –  like  all  countries  –  its  own  special  conditions  that  may  need  to  be  taken  into 
account and may make it difficult to formulate monetary policy as an exact blueprint of the system in 
                                                      
7   For a detailed discussion of “central bank transparency”, see, for instance, Chapter 1 of Blinder, A.S., (2004), The Quiet 
Revolution – Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2006
another country8. However, I would like to say nevertheless that the principles which guide monetary 
policy in modern central banks, and which I have described here, are so general that they should be 
able to act as guiding stars for monetary policy reform work anywhere in the world.  
Essentially it is a question of giving the central bank carefully specified – and realistic – objectives, 
granting it independence in its endeavours to meet the objectives and ensuring that it carries out its 
work in a transparent manner and is accountable for its actions.  
It is my conviction that reforms based on these principles will be beneficial to Vietnam, too. 
Thank you. 
                                                      
8  
It can be noted, for instance, that Camen, U. and H. Genberg, (2005), ”An Inflation Targeting Regime for Vietnam”, paper 
prepared for the VERCON First Annual Conference, Hanoi, May 24, draw the conclusion that the conditions for introducing 
”full fledged inflation targeting” have not yet been fulfilled in Vietnam. 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 7
