Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Bahrain’s experience as single regulator 
Presentation  by  His  Excellency  Rasheed  Mohammed  Al  Maraj,  Governor  of  the  Bahrain  Monetary 
Agency, at the Arab Central Bank Governors' Meeting “Bahrain's Experience as a Single Regulator”, 
Algiers, 4 September 2006. 
 Fellow Governors, Excellencies: 
My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  Bahrain’s  experience  with  the  single  regulator  model.  I  will  briefly 
outline the main arguments supporting the single regulator model, as well as some of the arguments 
made against it. I will then describe Bahrain’s own experience in creating a single regulator, and draw 
some conclusions from this. 
First,  what  are  some  of  the  arguments  typically  encountered  in  the  debate  on  financial  regulatory 
structures, when considering the single regulator model? 
In  principle,  regulatory  structures can  be  categorized  according  to  two  basic  types  –  those  that  are 
essentially focused on a class of financial institution or sector - such as insurance brokers or banks - 
and  those  that  are  based  around  specific  regulatory  functions  or  objectives  –  such  as  investor 
protection or the prudential soundness of financial sector firms. 
Historically,  many  jurisdictions  have  operated  multiple  regulators,  reflecting  the  way  financial  sector 
regulation  has  evolved  in  the  industrialized  world.  This  evolution  typically  saw  banking  supervision 
become  the  first  to  develop  in  a  formal  manner,  usually  as  an  extension  of  the  mandate  of  central 
banks  (because  a  stable  banking  system  is  important  to  running  effective  payment  systems  and 
monetary policy). 
Insurance and securities supervision typically developed separately, usually at a later stage. Securities 
regulators,  furthermore,  have  tended  to  focus  more  on  investor  protection  than  on  wider  issues  of 
systemic stability: many could be categorized as functional rather than sectoral regulators, as in many 
cases their responsibilities have cut across different classes of institutions.  
From  the  late  1980s  onwards,  however,  various  jurisdictions  started  implementing  new  regulatory 
structures  by  merging  their  regulators,  often  into  a  single  body.  North  European  countries  such  as 
Norway (1986), Denmark (1988) and Sweden (1991) led the way. But it was moves in the UK and 
Japan (both in 1998) that gave a major impetus to this trend. Since then, there has been a steady 
stream of countries changing to a single regulator model. 
Three main arguments are usually advanced to support the creation of integrated regulators. The first 
is that sector-based regulators no longer reflect the reality of evolving financial markets and players, 
which  has  blurred  the  boundaries  between  financial  sectors  and  seen  the  growth  in  ‘cross-sectoral’ 
groups, or conglomerates. 
As groups develop across different sectors or product types, they face the problem of having to deal 
with a growing number of regulators, ostensibly focusing on different aspects of their operations, but 
raising  the  risks  of  duplication  or  regulatory  underlap.  Even  where  the  activities  of  an  institution  or 
group  remain  limited  to  a  single  sector,  they  may  potentially  face  multiple  functional  regulators.  In 
short,  traditional  regulatory  structures  are  viewed  as  increasingly  ill-adapted  to  a  rapidly  evolving 
financial services industry, increasing both regulatory costs for the industry and heightening the risk of 
supervisory failures. 
The second argument is that integrated regulators can operate more efficiently as a single body – in 
other words, that they can achieve economies of scale. Thus, a single regulator can reduce its own 
costs  by  moving  to  a single  set  of support  services, a  unified management structure,  and  a  unified 
approach to rule making and supervision. 
Third, it is argued that single regulators can achieve economies of scope. In other words, they can 
address  cross-sector  issues  more  effectively  as  a  single  body,  rather  than  as  multiple  regulators  – 
whether  this  be  in  terms  of  developing  rules  of  cross-sector  applicability  (such  as  on  corporate 
governance  or  anti-money  laundering),  or  in  addressing  supervisory  concerns  (e.g.  the  impact  of 
falling  asset  prices  on  financial  sector  firms).  A  single  regulator  should  be  better  at  reaching  a 
BIS Review 81/2006 
 1
comprehensive view of risks facing a financial sector, and responding accordingly – for instance, by 
moving staff to supervise sectors where risks are increasing. 
What are some of the arguments against the single regulator model? Some people have argued that 
there  are  fundamental  differences  between  prudential  supervision  –  i.e.  ensuring  that  an  institution 
does not fail – and conduct of business regulation – i.e. ensuring that an institution treats its customers 
fairly and in accordance with good market practice or applicable regulations. 
The  former  has  tended  to  be  less  rules-based  and  less  confrontational  –  indeed,  prudential 
supervisors often don’t want to publicize their actions, for fear of further undermining confidence in an 
institution.  The  latter  has  tended  to  be  more  legalistic  in  approach,  focused  simply  on  whether 
compliance with the rules has been achieved, and ensuring compliance through tough enforcement 
and publicity – fines, ‘naming and shaming’, and so on. – Combining these functions in a single entity 
is thus problematic, or so the argument goes. 
In my view, these differences can be over-emphasised; in many jurisdictions, furthermore, there has in 
recent years been an evolution in supervisory approaches, which has further reduced the differences 
between  these  different  types  of  regulation.  To  the  extent  that  differences  remain,  it  can  also  be 
argued that it is better to internalize these and resolve them within a single institution. 
Other arguments against the single regulator model tend to focus more on institutional factors, many 
specific to particular jurisdictions. It has been said that single regulators are too powerful – although 
the  answer  here  is  better  accountability  mechanisms.  In  some  countries,  creating  single  national 
regulators is difficult, either because of institutional rivalries, with existing bodies able to resist a loss of 
responsibility, or because of regional issues. (Each of the USA’s 52 states, for instance, retains their 
own  insurance  regulator.)  Though  powerful  obstacles,  these  arguments  don’t  so  much  call  into 
question the rationale for a single regulator; rather, they highlight that specific political or institutional 
obstacles may make such a move difficult, within a particular jurisdiction.  
Until a few years ago, regulatory structures in the Gulf were essentially sectoral in nature, and Bahrain 
was no exception. Banks tended to dominate the financial sector, and the primary focus of regulation 
was  therefore  on  the  banking  sector.  In  all  cases,  responsibility  for  regulating  and  supervising  the 
banking sector rested with central banks. 
The regulatory mandates of central banks in the region also extended beyond banks, in most cases, to 
cover  certain  types  of  non-bank  institutions  (such  as  money  changers  and  sometimes  investment 
firms);  but  insurance  supervision  was  separately  regulated  by  Commerce  Ministries,  and  the  stock 
market (and its broking members) were run as self-regulatory organizations. 
In May 2002, the Government of Bahrain announced the transfer of regulatory responsibility for the 
insurance sector and capital markets from, respectively, the Ministry of Commerce and the Bahrain 
Stock Exchange, to the BMA. This was a far-reaching reform, creating the first integrated regulator in 
the region, and bringing together under one roof both prudential and conduct of business regulation for 
the  whole  financial  sector.  In  addition,  the  BMA  retained  its  responsibilities  as  a  central  bank  for 
systemic stability (including oversight of the payments system and monetary policy), as well as other 
central bank functions such as currency issue, reserves management and provider of banking services 
to government departments. In short, the scope of the BMA’s responsibilities is similar to those of the 
Monetary Authority of Singapore, but is otherwise unique for a single institution in the Gulf region. 
What were the reasons for the above reforms? The key advantages for Bahrain in moving to a single 
regulator lie mainly in the economies of scale and scope that could be achieved. For a relatively small 
country such as ours, the impact of these economies is significant.  
Not only have we been able to save on some of our own costs, but we have also reduced costs to the 
industry by creating a simple and easily understood regulatory framework, which minimizes the risk of 
regulatory duplication. We have been able to utilize scarce specialist resources, previously available 
only  in  one  regulator,  across  the  difference  sectors;  and  we  have  been  able  to  apply  the  more 
extensive supervisory experience available in the banking regulator across the other sectors as well. 
The net result of the move has been to upgrade the quality of regulation and supervision applied to 
non-banking sectors, at a time when insurance and capital markets activities are fast developing. 
Achieving this, however, takes time. Combining different regulatory organizations, each with their own 
corporate  cultures  and  way  of  doing  things,  means  that  much  management  attention  is  required  to 
create a new organization. Staff need to be motivated and retained, to counter the unsettling nature of 
change. New systems and processes need to be put in place. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2006
Also, as with most other jurisdictions that have undertaken such reforms, new laws need to be put in 
place. In Bahrain’s case, pending the passage of a single financial services law, we were able to make 
progress  by  the  simple  expedient  of  initially  issuing  short  amendments  to  the  existing  sector  laws, 
such as our 1987 Insurance Act – the only change being to transfer regulatory responsibility to the 
BMA. 
This  allowed  us  to  make  a  start  on  integrating  the  different  regulatory  organizations  early  on,  even 
though we continue to operate under different laws for banking, insurance and capital markets. The 
process  of  drafting  a  new,  integrated  financial  services  law,  and  securing  its  passage  through 
parliament  was  only  recently  completed,  so  without  such  an  approach,  implementation  of  a  single 
regulator would have been delayed several years. 
Let me finish by drawing together some conclusions from Bahrain’s experience. First, there is no doubt 
in my mind that the single regulator model is the right approach for a country like Bahrain. I believe it 
has allowed us to build a more effective and efficient regulatory system; and has allowed us to spread 
regulatory best practice across the whole financial sector. Separate regulators would simply be sub-
optimal in size, in our case. 
That  is  not  to  say  that  the  single  regulator  is  the  right  model  for  all  countries.  Industry  specific, 
institutional  or  other  factors  may  mean  that  different  approaches  would  work  better  in  other 
jurisdictions. 
Second, I would caution against expecting instant results. It takes time to put in place new laws, and to 
create a truly integrated organization, with a common understanding as to regulatory approaches and 
processes. Four years on, we have made significant progress in this direction, but I would be the first 
to admit that we are still working on these issues. 
Finally, I would underline the management challenges involved in creating a new regulator. On-going 
supervisory  work  of  course  remains,  whilst  the  additional  work  of  building  a  new  regulator  is 
undertaken – maintaining a ‘business as usual’ approach requires significant commitment from staff. 
These brief remarks only touch on the surface of the issues surrounding the single regulator debate. 
Nonetheless, I hope that they provide some helpful pointers for discussion, and perhaps encourage 
some  of  you  to  consider  whether  your  own  jurisdictions  might  also  benefit  from  moving  to  such  a 
model. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 81/2006 
 3
