Leonard Wilson Kamit: Sustaining macroeconomic stability  
Presentation by Mr Leonard Wilson Kamit, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, to the Rural 
Industries Council, Port Moresby, 22 February 2006.  
 Introduction  
Thank you Chairman Mr Brown Bai for the invitation to this meeting of the Rural Industries Council 
(RIC). I want to share my thoughts on financial sector reforms, which commenced in 2000, and how 
this  development  changed  economic  management  of  the  country.  I  am  convinced  that  sustained 
macroeconomic  stability  will  lay  the  necessary  foundation  for  growth  in  the  medium  to  long  run.  I 
present a snap shot of necessary institutional reforms that create an enabling environment to promote 
sustained macroeconomic stability and growth.  
Financial Sector Reforms  
I am of the view that most significant reform process in Papua New Guinea was the financial sector in 
2000. It involved the Government introducing the new Central Banking Act (CBA) 2000, the Banks and 
Financial Institutions Act (BFIA) 2000, and the Superannuation and Life Insurance Acts.  
Under the Central Banking Act 2000, the Central Bank has three important objectives and functions, 
which  are  the  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  formulation  and  implementation,  financial  system 
supervision  and  oversight  of  the  payments  system.  The  Act  also  made  significant  changes  to  the 
relationship  between  the  Central  Bank  and  Government,  eliminating  political  influence,  introducing 
price stability as the objective of monetary policy, and provided greater independence to the Central 
Bank in the management and conduct of it’s affairs.  
The  Central  Banking  Act  2000  made  price  stability  as  the  main  objective  of  monetary  policy. 
Consistent with the Act, the Monetary Policy Statement (MPS) is released semi-annually in January 
and July. In order to respond quickly to monetary shocks, the Kina Facility Rate (KFR) is announced 
on  the  first  Monday  of  each  month,  which  provides  a  clear  direction  or  signal  to  the  market  on  the 
Bank’s monetary policy stance. The announcement is strengthened through operational instruments, 
which  are  market  orientated  and  used  commonly  by  many  central  banks  around  the  world.  These 
instruments include Treasury bills, short term Inscribed stocks, Repurchase Agreements, and Central 
Bank Bills.  
A  sound  and  healthy  financial  and  efficient  payments  system  is  a  necessary  conduit  for  monetary 
policy  implementation  for  facilitating  business  activity.  The  Bank  has  also  introduced  stringent 
supervision  of  banks,  finance  companies  and  other  financial  institutions  such  as  savings  and  loan 
societies, superannuation funds and life insurance companies. This is to ensure prudent management 
of depositor’s funds, members’ contributions, and premiums on life insurance policies held with these 
financial  institutions.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  employs  best  international  practices  on  prudential 
supervision methods to ensure financial system stability. A greater part of the standards introduced 
was focused on good governance practices and the assessment of Fit & Proper persons for Directors 
and Management of these financial institutions.  
To date, the reforms have vastly improved the conditions and outlook of the financial sector landscape 
of  the  country.  In  the  banking  sector,  there  is  marked  improvements  in  asset  quality  with  non-
performining loans as a percent of total assets declining from 2.3 percent in 2000 to 1.4 percent in 
September 2005. Return on assets of the banking system, which was negative 1.1 percent reversed 
sharply to over 6.0 percent at the end of September 2005. In addition, the banking system remains 
liquid at 15.5 percent of total deposits, compared to 4.0 percent in 2002. These indicators reflect that 
the  banking  system 
for  sustained 
macroeconomic conditions.  
In  the  Superannuation  industry,  the  positive  results  over  the  last  few  years  speak  for  themselves 
compared to the bad experiences some 6-7 years ago where contributors lost a lot of their savings. 
The tale is different today. Prudent and good management are enabling contributors to benefit from 
their  funds.  The  declaration  of  huge  profits  by  POSF  and  Nasfund  are  clear  testimony  of  these 
reforms. Similarly, improvements are continuing to be instilled in the Life Insurance industry.  
financially  sound  and  provides  a  strong 
foundation 
is 
BIS Review 12/2006 
 1
The Bank recognizes the importance of the Savings and Loans movements in ensuring the economic 
and social well being of the members who participate in it. This can only be realized in a sustainable 
way  if  the  operators  of  the  societies  continue  to  ensure  that  these  institutions  are  managed  in  a 
prudent  manner  and  supported  by  strong  governance.  Improved  management  of  the  societies 
combined with stringent level of supervision by the Bank of PNG has enabled the industry to record 
improvement  in  its  overall  performance.  Between  June  2004  and  September  2005  total  assets 
increased by over 50 percent to K312 million.  
The rugged geographical terrain of the country makes access to financial service difficult for the semi-
formal,  informal  and  the  rural  population.  Financial  institutions  themselves  face  these  difficulties  in 
reaching  out.  In  our  endeavours  to  bring  out  financial  services  to  these  sectors  the  Bank  of  Papua 
New Guinea in collaboration with the Asian Development Bank, the National Government and AusAid 
established the “Wau Microbank” under the micro finance project. The pilot project is slowly growing 
into a viable complementary player in the development of the financial system. In addition, the PNG 
Sustainable  Development  Program  Company  obtained  a  banking  licence  from  the  Central  Bank  to 
operate the PNG Micro Finance Limited in 2004, and has operations in NCD and Western Province. 
The  micro-finance  industry  development  is  a  meaningful  way  of  mobilizing  savings  and  servicing  a 
large  section  of  the  community  that  do  not  enjoy  financial  facilities.  The  Government  has  also 
introduced  the  District  Treasury  Roll-out  Program,  which  will  further  complement  the  provision  of 
financial services in the rural parts of PNG. This entails the provision of treasury, banking and post 
office services from one outlet mainly at local and district levels.  
I am still very concerned about fast money scams. Hard working Papua New Guineans have lost funds 
to con-artists who operate these scams. The Bank of PNG continues to warn the public about these 
scams and individuals must avoid risking their savings. I also call on your rural industries members to 
support the Bank in warning people about these illegal scams.  
The Bank of PNG is also supportive of the Government’s initiatives to promote export driven economic 
growth  strategy  through  removal  of  impediments  to  trade  and  investment.  In  recognition  of  this 
initiative, the Bank liberalized the foreign exchange control regime by freeing up controls in all but (4) 
areas which are:-  
•  Opening of foreign currency or kina accounts offshore by residents;  
•  Approval for capital transaction contracts;  
•  Gold export licenses; and  
•  Approval for dealing in foreign exchange.  
To  date,  consistent  with  the  Banks  expectation,  the  liberalization  has  had  limited  impact  on  the 
balance of payment position of the country. This is the result of an close and on-going dialogue and 
communication between the stakeholders and the Bank of Papua New Guinea.  
Macroeconomic Review  
What  has been  the  end  result  of  this massive  financial sector reform? The end  result  is that  it  has 
helped  to  achieve  macroeconomic  stability  that  is  necessary  for  inducing  sustainable  economic 
growth. The stability in macroeconomic environment is reflected by the following: 
•  Decline  in  inflation  from  double  digit  levels  to  an  annual  headline  inflation  of  4.6  percent  in 
December 2005;  
•  Stable exchange rate;  
•  Historically  high  levels  of  international  reserves  of  over  US$760  million  that  is  sufficient  for 
around 8 months of non mineral and 6 months of total import cover;  
•  Sound fiscal management by the Government was fully supported by high mineral tax receipts 
and saving from the reduction in interest expenditure. This led to a fiscal surplus of 0.3 percent 
of GDP in 2005;  
•  Efficiency gains from Financial Sector Reforms leading to high profitability and improved asset 
quality of the financial institutions; and  
•  Confidence in the Government’s management of the economy by the public.  
2 
 BIS Review 12/2006
Consistent with the macroeconomic stability, the Bank of PNG progressively eased monetary policy, 
reducing the Kina Facility Rate (KFR) from around 16.0 percent in 2002 to 6.0 percent in February 
2006. As a result of the lower interest rate environment private sector credit grew significant in 2005 by 
over 20 percent. Unlike in the past, where private sector borrowing stagnated because of continued 
increased  funding  of  the  fiscal  deficit  of  the  National  Government,  the  increase  in  private  sector 
borrowing  is  also  the  result  of  improved  fiscal  management  and  new  loan  products  offered  by  the 
commercial banks.  
I released the Semi-Annual Monetary Policy Statement (MPS) on 31 January 2006. The MPS sets the 
broad parameters for monetary policy for the six months of 2006 and the medium term. The monetary 
policy  for  2006  and  the  medium  term  were  framed  against  a  background  of  sound  macroeconomic 
fundamentals, which we expect will be sustained into the medium term.  
Going Forward  
Going  forward,  much  still  needs  to  be  done.  The  financial  sector  reforms  have  not  only  led  to  the 
development  of  a  sound  and  healthy  financial  system  but  also  created  a  stable  macroeconomic 
environment.  However,  Papua  New  Guinea  should  not  be  complacent  with  these  outcomes  but 
continue 
that 
accommodates  domestic and  global  challenges.  The  reforms  of the  financial sector  is  still on-going 
and the following reforms are currently being undertaken by the Bank:  
towards  building  a  more  efficient  and  competitive 
financial  system 
to  work 
•  A  Taskforce  has  reviewed  the  Superannuation  and  Life  Insurance  industries  to  determine 
areas where parts of these new legislations could be more stakeholder/member friendly. The 
Report has been finalized and is waiting to be formally presented to the Treasurer and myself;  
•  Undertaking a review on the legal framework for Micro-Finance Institutions and a review to the 
Savings  &  Loan  Societies  Act  1995  with  the  view  of  separating  registry  functions  from 
prudential supervision.  
In  June  2006  the  Bank  will  undertake  a  review  of  the  liberalization  with  the  aim  of  fully 
liberalizing the remaining exchange controls. I intend to immediately allow holders of onshore 
foreign  currency  accounts  to  settle  obligations  in  foreign  currency.  This  arrangement  is 
intended to minimize foreign exchange transaction costs.  
 •  The  Bank  decided  to  licence  financial  institutions  as  authorised  foreign  exchange  dealers 
under the Banks and Financial Institutions Act to promote competition.  
•  The  Bank  has  commenced  a  major  review  of  the  payments  system  in  Papua  New  Guinea. 
Review of the payments system is necessary for a sound and efficient system that will reduce 
costs to businesses and improve monetary policy transmission. The review will cover different 
forms  of  payments,  clearing-house,  and  currency  banknotes  and  coin  distribution  and 
withdrawal methods. Papua New Guinea is a predominantly cash economy and I want to see 
our people use clean banknotes and bright coins. I want to devise more efficient methods of 
withdrawing dirty and torn banknotes.  
In  conclusion,  these  reforms  are  intended  to  sustain  macroeconomic  and  price  stability  over  the 
medium to longer term. With the stable macroeconomic environment, the private sector and members 
of the Rural Industries Council should use this opportunity to enhance their activities and contribute 
towards generating economic growth.  
Thank you for listening.  
BIS Review 12/2006 
 3
