J D Rogers: Debt reporting in Sierra Leone 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  J  D  Rogers,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone,  at  the  opening 
ceremony  of  the  WAIFEM  Regional  Course  on  Debt  Reporting  and  the  IMF/World  Bank  Debt 
Compilers Guide, at the Bank of Sierra Leone recreational complex, Kingtom, 7 August 2006. 
 Director General, West African Institute for Financial and Economic Management (WAIFEM),  
Officials of the Commonwealth Secretariat &  
The International Monetary Fund (IMF),  
Distinguished Guests,  
Course Participants,  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
Introduction  
1.0 
On behalf of the President, His Excellency, Alhaji Dr. Ahmad Tejan Kabba, the Government and 
people of the Republic of Sierra Leone, I am pleased to bid you all a warm welcome to Freetown. 
Let me start by expressing our sincere thanks and appreciation to the West African Institute for 
Financial  and  Economic  Management  (WAIFEM),  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat  (COMSEC) 
and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  for  choosing  Sierra  Leone  as  the  venue  for  this 
Regional Course on Debt Reporting and the IMF/World Bank Debt Compilers Guide. The theme 
of the course is relevant and timely. Let me thank the organizers of the course for this initiative 
which would go a long way to strengthening overall debt management capacity in the sub-region.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Principles for compilation of gross external debt position 
2.0  
The  need  for  comprehensive,  comparable,  and  reliable  data  on  external  debt  for  informed 
decisions  by  policymakers,  financial  markets  and  other  users  of  economic  statistics  cannot  be 
over stressed. In other words, quality data are invaluable for sound policy decisions. For example, 
to enhance comparability across time and across countries, debt compilers must be guided by 
certain principles. I will proceed to highlight a few of them, mindful of the fact that the expert team 
of resource persons will provide deeper insights into these and other issues during the course. 
The  major  principles  include  residence  criterion,  ownership  (i.e.  time  of  recording),  accrued 
interest liability, treatment of arrears and valuation.  
Residence  
Debt liabilities of residents must be owed to non-residents for such liabilities to be classified and 
included  in  an  economy’s  gross  external  debt  position.  Debt  liabilities  of  residents  owed  to 
residents are excluded. Hence the definition of residence is central to the definition of external 
debt.  A  resident  of  an  economy  is  an  entity  such  as  a  household,  corporation,  government 
agency, etc that is capable, in its own right, of owning assets, incurring liabilities, and engaging in 
economic  activities  and  in  transactions  with  other  entities.  Residence  is  defined  as  a  country’s 
“economic territory” which consists of a geographical territory administered by a government and 
includes, for maritime countries, any islands subject to the same fiscal and monetary authorities 
as the mainland. However, international (multilateral) organizations are not considered residents 
of  any  national  economy  in  which  the  organizations  are  located,  although  employees  of  those 
bodies  are  residents  of  the  national  economy.  In  the  same  vein,  the  residence  of  offshore 
enterprises is attributed to the economies in which they are located. 
Principle of ownership (Time of recording)  
The principle of ownership stipulates that the creditor owns a claim on the debtor, and the debtor 
has  an  obligation  to  the  creditor.  Transactions  are  recorded  when  economic  value  is  created, 
BIS Review 79/2006 
 1
transformed, exchanged, transferred, or extinguished. For example, loan drawings are entered in 
the accounts when actual disbursements are made, and financial claims are established, and not 
necessarily when an agreement is signed.  
Accrued interest liability  
In order to maintain inter-temporal and inter-country comparability of external debt statistics, and 
to identify the variation introduced by the timing of recording of interest costs that have accrued 
and are not yet payable, such accrued costs must be included in the gross external debt position. 
With respect to bonds, the difference between the issue price and face value or redemption value 
is treated as accrued interest over the life of the bond.  
Arrears  
When  principal  or  interest  payments  are  not  made  when  due,  arrears  are  created,  but  are 
recorded under other debt liabilities. But the debt statistics compiler should ensure that the debt 
is not counted twice by understanding and applying the principle of recording arrears. Otherwise 
the magnitude of the debt burden would be over stated. 
Valuation  
The principle of valuation states that the nominal value of a debt instrument reflects the value of 
the  debt  at  creation;  any  subsequent  economic  flows,  such  as  transactions  (e.g.  repayment  of 
principal);  valuation  changes  including  exchange  rate  and  other  valuation  changes  other  than 
market  price  changes.  Nonetheless,  the  compiler  must  be  cognizant  of  the  fact  that,  among 
others, the nominal value of a debt instrument could be less than originally advanced (face value) 
if  there  have  been  repayments  of  principal,  debt  forgiveness,  other  economic  flows,  such  as 
indexation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  nominal  value  of  a  debt  instrument  could  be  more  than 
originally advanced because, for example, of the accrual of interest costs. Appropriate valuation 
of  debt  instruments  such  as  loans  would  minimize  incidence  of  disagreements  between  the 
debtor country and the international community over the magnitude of the country’s external debt 
exposure.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Benefits of quality debt data  
Good  quality  and  comparable  external  debt  data  would  flow  from  rigorous  application  of  the 
principles of debt data compilation. To compromise them risks potential economic costs in terms 
of  vulnerability  of  the  country  to  solvency  and  liquidity  risks  associated  with  meeting  the  “true” 
current and future payments obligations. For instance, the quantum and composition of external 
debt  needs  to  be  measured,  valued  and  monitored  in  line  with  best  practices.  This  fosters 
portfolio optimization and scenario analysis but also identifies potential variability in debt service 
costs and such other indicators of external vulnerability, notably changes in external prices and 
terms of trade. Also, good quality data fed into a recording system such as the CS-DRMS would 
maximize the gains from the use of such a system for improved debt management.  
At this juncture, let me take the liberty to highlight the institutional arrangements for sound debt 
management in Sierra Leone.  
Institutional arrangement for debt management in Sierra Leone 
3.0 
Public debt management in Sierra Leone is governed mainly by the 1991 Constitution and the 
Loan Amendments Act of 1992 which vest the responsibility for contracting loans in the Ministry 
of Finance (MoF). However, the Ministry and Bank of Sierra Leone (BoSL) work closely in the 
execution  of 
loan  negotiations,  renegotiations, 
disbursement,  amortizations  and  recording.  While  the  MoF  undertakes  the  policy  function  in 
terms  of  formulation  of  debt  policies,  strategies  and  implementation  consistent  with  the 
macroeconomic and fiscal framework of the country, the BoSL maintains the database, prepares 
the  debt  management 
function,  namely, 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2006
the  foreign  exchange cash  flow  budget,  including debt  service obligations.  This  framework  has 
contributed significantly to improving debt management in the country. We will strive to improve 
on  it.  Indeed,  the  framework  enhances  coordination  of  the  debt  management  function  by  the 
appropriate authorities. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Like most developing countries, Sierra Leone has been facing a number of problems, particularly 
those  relating  to  maintenance  of  quality  debt  data.  These  include  inadequate  resourcing  of 
statistics  generating  units;  low  priority  attached  to  data  collection;  and  inefficient  institutional 
arrangements  for  data  collection,  processing  and  dissemination.  Others  include  gaps  in  data 
recording; and gaps in debt recording systems.  
I am glad to inform you that the present administration has moved consistently and decisively to 
up-scale general economic and financial data quality by strengthening data information flows both 
in BoSL and MoF and at the Central Office of Statistics. These efforts have also included working 
closely with WAIFEM  and  its  technical  partners  to streamlining  the  back  office  functions  of  the 
MoF; and enhancing institutional capacity building efforts. Government will continue to keep these 
measures under constant review, because the process of achieving effective debt management is 
not like a sprint race, but rather, could be likened to a marathon involving medium to long-term 
policy thrusts and interventions.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Over the past couple of minutes, I have attempted to sensitize you on some of the issues that 
would be dealt with in detail during this course. Even so, I make no pretensions to any exhaustive 
analysis. I am aware that the expert faculty assembled by the organizers will do just that. All that 
is left for me to do is to invite you to take maximum advantage of the opportunity presented by 
this course to strengthen your competencies in debt data compilation in line with best practices.  
Conclusion 
4.0 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I would be remiss in my duty if I ended this address without expressing the profound appreciation 
of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  WAIFEM  to  COMSEC,  IMF,  and  World  Bank  for  their  support  to 
WAIFEM in strengthening capacity of countries of its member central banks in the area of debt 
management capacity building. Before I take leave of you to commence the technical sessions, 
let  me  enjoin  you  to  take  some  time  off  your  crowded  schedule  to  visit  some  of  the  tourist 
attractions  in  Freetown,  and  its  environs.  The  Governors  look  forward  toward  greater 
collaboration between WAIFEM and these institutions in the years ahead.  
On this note I have the honour to declare the course open.  
I thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 79/2006 
 3
