Timothy F Geithner: Risk management challenges in a changing financial 
environment 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  New  York  Bankers  Association  Financial  Services  Forum  Chairman's 
Reception, New York City, 5 April 2006. 
 You are meeting at a time of greater confidence about the near-term world economic outlook and the 
stability of the financial system. 
The  expansion  in  global  economic  activity  has  become  more  broad-based.  In  the  United  States, 
underlying productivity growth remains strong and some of the structural changes underway in other 
mature, large economies offer the prospect of greater productivity growth in those countries, as well. 
The gains of the past two decades in reducing inflation and stabilizing inflation expectations have been 
preserved in the face of a sustained and substantial rise in energy and commodity prices. 
In many emerging markets, a combination of stronger external balance sheets, more flexible exchange 
rate regimes and better monetary and fiscal policies have produced stronger growth and an apparent 
reduction in vulnerability to financial crisis. 
The world economy also faces some considerable longer-term challenges. These stem from a myriad 
of  factors—the  impact  of  demographic  changes  on  fiscal  sustainability,  the  evolution  of  the  current 
pattern of external imbalances in the world economy, the political pressures induced by greater global 
economic integration, potential threats to energy supplies and many others. 
These challenges are familiar, but they have produced few indications of unease in financial markets. 
This  seems  due,  in  part,  to  important  fundamental  improvements  in  policy  credibility  and  economic 
performance. It may also reflect confidence that governments will ultimately act effectively to deal with 
these challenges. And it may reflect the inherent difficulty of assessing the risk in what may seem like 
low probability but very adverse outcomes. 
A number of fundamental changes in the U.S. financial system over the past 25 years appear to have 
rendered it able to withstand the stress of a broader array of shocks than was the case in the past. 
The core institutions hold more capital against risk. 
Risk  management  systems  are  more  sophisticated  and  the  internal  control  regimes  around  those 
systems  are  more  robust.  The  earnings  of  many  financial  institutions  are  stronger  and  more 
diversified. Payments systems are stronger. Innovation continues at a remarkable pace, providing new 
ways to allocate and manage risk. 
Confidence in the overall resilience of the financial system needs to be tempered by the realization 
that there is much we still do not know about the likely sources and consequences of future stress to 
the system. Uncertainty is inherent in any process of change, but uncertainty is greater because much 
of  the  recent  innovation  has  occurred  against  the  backdrop  of  general  economic  stability  and  a 
sustained  period  of  low  credit  losses,  low  risk  premia  and  low  implied  volatility  across  many  asset 
classes. 
This means that some aspects of the financial system today have not yet been subjected to the more 
exacting tests of macroeconomic or financial stress. This makes it harder for the conventional array of 
risk management tools to capture the actual risk faced by financial institutions today. 
The challenge we face is not simply in determining whether we are better off today than we were at 
past periods of considerable stress in the financial system, but also in assessing how well positioned 
the current system is to deal with prospective sources of stress. That assessment is harder to make 
today because of the changes now underway in the nature of financial intermediation and the overall 
conditions in which these changes have occurred. 
Several examples of these changes are worth noting: 
The  more  critical  role  played  by  hedge  funds  and  other  nonbank  financial  institutions  in  credit  and 
other  markets  has  the  potential  to  magnify  the  impact  of  distress  in  those  institutions  on  market 
dynamics and liquidity if counterparty risks are not managed appropriately. 
BIS Review 28/2006 
 1
The proliferation of new forms of derivatives and structured financial products has changed the nature 
of  leverage  in  the  financial  system.  The  addition  of  leverage  imbedded  in  financial  instruments  to 
balance  sheet  leverage  has  made  this  source  of  potential  risk  harder  to  assess.  New  players,  new 
products and more dynamic ways of intermediating and managing credit may increase the sensitivity 
of balance sheets and income-to-market volatility and potentially amplify the impact of a sharp change 
in perceptions about macroeconomic risk or credit on asset prices and liquidity. 
The increased international integration of both capital and goods markets has brought a huge increase 
in  the  scale  of  cross-border  financial  activity.  The  largest  global  financial  institutions  now  play 
significant roles in a large number of financial systems outside of their home market. These changes 
are likely to affect the manner in which financial shocks in one region are propagated to other regions. 
Finally,  we  have  witnessed  an  increase  in  the  degree  of  concentration  in  some  markets,  a 
development  that  has  the  potential  to  make  the  system  more  vulnerable  to  the  deterioration  in 
conditions at one of the major bank or nonbank financial intermediaries. 
The  degree  of  systemic  risk  presented  by  these  changes  depends  importantly  on  two  things.  It 
depends on the robustness of the infrastructure that supports these markets. And it depends on the 
level of reserves, capital, margin and collateral that the major financial institutions hold against risk, 
which is in part a function of the strength of risk management systems. 
In  both  of  these  areas,  market  practice  has  made  significant  progress  over  the  past  decade,  and 
further improvements are underway. A few quick points about two areas in which we believe further 
progress offers the highest possible return in terms of improving the overall resilience of the financial 
system. 
In the broad area of market infrastructure, we think the greatest near-term imperative is to strengthen 
the  post-trade  processing  systems  that  underpin  the  rapidly  growing  over-the-counter  derivatives 
market. The major dealers and the buy-side investors are making substantial investments in improving 
the process around the credit derivatives market. 
The overall strategy outlined in the public letter signed by the 14 major market participants on March 
10,  2006,  offers  the  prospect  of  a  more  automated  confirmation  and  settlement  process,  with 
significantly  less  operational  risk  than  has  existed  in  these  markets  since  their  inception.  Looking 
beyond  the  specific  objectives  for  reducing  confirmation  times  and  backlogs,  we  hope  to  see 
agreement over the next several months on a new ISDA® protocol for net physical settlement in the 
event of default and progress toward adoption of emerging utilities for centralizing certain processing 
and information functions that can facilitate netting and matching of payments and collateral. 
Alongside these improvements in what we call infrastructure, this is a moment where it is important to 
see more care and attention and greater conservatism applied to the discipline of risk management. 
This is most critical in the areas that are hardest to do well. The challenges seem most exacting in the 
firms’ abilities to capture the exposure of the institution to stress scenarios that lie outside the range of 
recent experience, and to set exposure limits and calibrate margin and credit terms accordingly. 
The challenges here are magnified by the changes I described earlier, including the rapid growth in 
complex structure products with imbedded leverage, uncertainty about liquidity in many instruments in 
less-benign financial conditions and other features of the present environment. 
A credible stress-testing process has to try to account for not just the effects of a discrete change to 
some dimension of market risk or some constellation of asset prices, but the effects of those changes 
on,  for  example,  the  behavior  of  financial  market  participants  and  on  the  broader  macroeconomic 
conditions that might affect credit. It is also critical that firms assess their concentrations not only under 
current  conditions,  but  also  determine  how  firmwide  credit  concentrations  to  names,  sectors  or 
counterparties could build up under more stressful economic and financial market conditions. 
Of course, what is important here is not just that firms do a better job of capturing and valuing potential 
exposures, but that this information is translated into appropriately conservative judgments about limits 
and  terms.  Where  uncertainty  and  complexity  is  higher,  we  should  see  this  translate  into  higher 
cushions  against  potential  loss.  And  senior  management  needs  to  be  willing  to  lean  against  the 
erosion in credit terms and margin practice typically induced by competitive pressure during periods of 
low credit losses and implied volatility. 
Overall capital is, of course, an important part of what makes financial systems stable. But the size of 
the  margin  above  the  regulatory  minimum  or  the  thresholds  that  might  affect  a  financial  rating  is 
critical, as is the extent to which the initial margin is set at levels that are likely to be sustainable over 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2006
the cycle. The closer these cushions are to levels that reflect potential future exposure across a more 
adverse set of market conditions, the more resilient markets and institutions will be under conditions of 
stress, and the less likely the prospect that the behavior by institutions will amplify financial shocks. 
Stress testing and scenario analysis is an important part of the process of calibrating this relationship 
between risk and capital and margin. The test of a sufficiently strong process is not simply the realism 
of the process used to measure potential losses, but the impact that it has on the decisions made by 
the institution on the size and type of exposures relative to earnings, capital and collateral or margin 
and the terms on which it extends credit. 
Let  me  conclude  by  noting  again  that  we  are  in a  period  of  perceived  strength  in  economic 
fundamentals in the United States and many countries around the world. This strength has helped to 
induce significant reductions in a range of market-based perceptions of risk. Much of this confidence 
may prove warranted and durable, but the extent to which it endures will depend in part on the degree 
to  which  those  running  the  major  financial  institutions  in  the  United  States  use  the  opportunity 
presented by this period of relatively high profitability to strengthen their capacity to withstand a less 
favorable overall macroeconomic and financial environment. 
The  balance  between  innovation  and  resilience  that  has  characterized  the  U.S.  financial  system  in 
recent years has played an important role in the improved performance of the U.S. economy. We all 
have a strong interest in preserving this balance. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 28/2006 
 3
