Timothy F Geithner: Hedge funds and derivatives and their implications for the 
financial system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Distinguished  Lecture  2006,  sponsored  by  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority and Hong Kong Association of Banks, Hong Kong, 14 September 2006. 
 I want to thank Joseph Yam for inviting me to Hong Kong for this occasion.  
We  are  approaching  the  10-year  anniversary  of  the  financial  crises  of  1997-99.  Those  crises  were 
remarkable both in the scope of countries and markets they affected, and for their speed and severity. 
The circumstances leading up to the crises varied across countries and regions, as did the magnitude 
of the resulting damage to the real economy. But each of these events had one dynamic in common - 
the confluence of a sharp increase in risk perception, and the subsequent actions taken by financial 
institutions and investors to limit their exposure to future losses. As asset prices declined and volatility 
increased in response to increased concern about risk, firms moved to call margin, to reduce positions 
and  to  hedge  against  further  losses.  These  individual  actions  had  the  aggregate  effect  of  inducing 
even  larger  price  declines  and  further  heightening  perceptions  of  risk,  ultimately  propagating  and 
amplifying the effects of the initial shock.  
The dynamic I just described was not unique to the crises of the late 1990s, nor was the damage to 
overall economic activity they left in their wakes. Systemic financial events with spillovers to the real 
economy  have  been  a  persistent  feature  of  the  economic  environment,  and  both  financial  market 
participants and policymakers have grappled with the challenge of how to reduce their incidence and 
to minimize their severity, longevity and impact on the broader economy.  
There is a lot we do not understand about these challenges, but we know more today than we once 
did. In the case of the crises of the late 1990s, despite the broad-based nature of the financial market 
turmoil, in countries where capital cushions in the financial sector were strong relative to risk, where 
there was a greater diversity of institutions in the financial system to absorb the losses, and where 
monetary  authorities  were  in  a  position  to  provide  liquidity  to  restore  confidence,  the  financial  and 
macroeconomic impact of the crises was relatively modest. Where those conditions did not exist, the 
damage was acute. 
The  U.S.  economy  appears  to  have  become  more  resilient  to  financial  shocks.  Over  the  past  two 
decades, the U.S. economy has experienced several  episodes of significant financial market strain. 
These episodes were associated with spikes in risk perception and significant market volatility within 
financial  markets,  but  none  proved  exceptionally  damaging  in  terms  of  the  overall  macroeconomic 
impact. The mild impact of these episodes on the real economy contrasts with financial events such as 
the  “credit  crunch”  that  exacerbated  the  1990-91  recession.  That  episode  was  characterized  by  a 
widespread reduction in the provision of credit by banks in response to loan losses and the need to 
raise capital.  
The  resiliency  we  have  observed  over  the  past  decade  or  so  is  not  just  good  luck.  It  is  the 
consequence of efforts by regulatory, supervisory and private financial institutions to address previous 
sources of systemic instability. Risk management has improved significantly, and the major firms have 
made  substantial  progress  toward  more  sophisticated  measurement  and  control  of  concentration  to 
specific risk factors. What seems to have been most critical in preventing financial market turmoil from 
translating into a significant reduction in credit provision by banks and other financial institutions were 
the steps taken by regulatory authorities and financial institutions alike to strengthen capital in the core 
of the financial system, and to measure and manage risk.  
These efforts have most notably manifested themselves in increased levels of risk-adjusted capital in 
the core of the system relative to what prevailed in the early 1990s. In the United States, for example, 
tier-one  risk-based  capital  ratios  have  stabilized  near  8.5  percent,  considerably  higher  than  the 
estimated levels around 6.5 percent for the early 1990s. This is based on a relatively crude measure of 
risk, but the direction of the improvement is right and the magnitude of the change is significant.  
Relative to the conditions that prevailed in the early 1990s, the higher levels of capital in the core now 
provide  a  larger  buffer  against  shocks  and  enhance  the  ability  of  the  banking  industry  to  act  as  a 
critical stabilizer in times of stress by providing liquidity to the corporate sector. When financial markets 
BIS Review 85/2006 
 1
dry  up,  firms  turn  to  banks  and  their  unused  loan  commitments  and  lines  of  credit.  Banks  are  in  a 
position to fund this liquidity because transaction deposits tend to flow into the banking sector. In times 
of crisis, it appears that U.S. investors now run to banks, not away from them. 
In view of the critical role that efficient credit provision plays in economic growth and development, the 
benefits to the global economy of getting the underpinnings of a stable, efficient financial system in 
place are substantial. At the same time, we also know that these important markets are susceptible to 
certain  “market  failures,”  such  as  information  asymmetries,  incentive  conflicts,  moral  hazard  and 
agency  problems.  By  at  times  distorting  incentives  to  manage  risk,  these  market  imperfections  can 
alter  credit  decisions  and  lead  to  a  higher  overall  level  of  risk-taking  than  may  be  optimal  for  the 
economy as a whole. This provides the classic rationale for supervision and regulation. Supervision 
and regulation have the potential to help mitigate these sources of market failure. The recognition of a 
market failure does not mean, of course, that policymakers have the capacity to design solutions that 
can effectively mitigate those failures without raising others problems. 
The  fundamental  challenge  for  policy  is  how  to  achieve  the  appropriate balance  between efficiency 
and  financial  resilience.  With  too  much  government  intervention,  innovation  is  constrained  and  the 
system  is  stifled.  With  too  little,  the  probability  of  systemic  crisis  may  rise  to  levels  that  are 
unacceptably high. We judge the appropriate balance not against the standard of whether it reduces to 
zero the probability of a major financial crisis, the failure of a large individual financial institution or a 
major reduction in asset prices. That is not an appropriate objective of policy. Some vulnerability to 
crisis is a necessary and unavoidable feature of a dynamic and efficient financial system where asset 
prices need to be able to adjust to changes in fundamentals. The consequences of trying to induce 
regulated financial institutions to self-insure against all conceivable potential risks would do substantial 
damage to the level and efficiency of economic activity and cause the same risks to migrate to other 
institutions.  
This leaves policymakers with a set of normative questions, the answers to which must be based on 
knowledge about how markets work, as well as a substantial degree of judgment about what policy 
actions are likely to be both appropriate and effective. What level of exposure to very low probability, 
extreme adverse events should we be comfortable living with? What fraction of that residual exposure 
to the potential range of adverse events can and should the official sector try to protect the system 
against?  
The apparent success that market participants and supervisors have had so far in confronting these 
issues does not imply that the potential for systemic risk in financial markets no longer deserves the 
attention  of  central  banks  and  supervisors.  Although  improvements  in  capital  adequacy  and  risk-
management  tools  seem  to  have  been  a  key  part  of  the  increased  resiliency  we’ve  seen  in  recent 
years, we can’t assume that the standards and risk-management practices consistent with stability in 
the recent past are the ones that will perform well in the future. This is partly because it is impossible 
to  know  for  sure  how  the  favorable  macroeconomic  conditions  and  the  financial  sector  stability 
interacted  and  reinforced each  other. That  is,  would  financial  sector  outcomes  be as  favorable  in a 
weaker macro environment?  
But  probably  more  important  is  the  fact  that  even  as  we  have  pushed  forward  on  regulatory, 
supervisory  and  risk-management  efforts,  financial  markets,  instruments  and  institutions  have 
continued to evolve as well. Among the most notable of these changes has been the rapid growth and 
innovation in derivatives and the greater relative importance of private leveraged financial institutions, 
such as hedge funds.  
The changes in credit markets that have accompanied the latest wave of innovation in derivatives and 
the large role played by leveraged financial institutions in those markets may exacerbate some of the 
traditional  sources  of  challenges  in  financial  markets.  And  they  present  new  challenges  for  the 
framework of incentives and constraints that central banks and supervisors set for financial institutions. 
On balance, we believe these changes in the financial environment are likely to come with substantial 
benefits  in  terms  of  overall  market  efficiency.  In  the  remainder  of  my  remarks  today,  I  will  highlight 
some of these benefits, but will also consider some of the challenges they present for central banks 
and  governments  in  determining  where  on  the  spectrum  of  efficiency  and  vulnerability  to  crisis  the 
financial system should operate, and in crafting the policies consistent with achieving that objective.  
2 
 BIS Review 85/2006
Changes in financial markets since the late 1990s 
In the United States and the other major markets, the policies designed to mitigate the risk of financial 
crises  rely  primarily  on  a  capital-based  system  of  supervision  of  the  major  financial  institutions, 
reinforced by measures to improve market discipline. These policies have evolved to reflect both the 
fundamentally  important  role  credit  markets  play  in  the  economy,  as  well  as  the  reality  that  these 
complex markets are susceptible to a range of potential market failures.  
In thinking about the potential supervisory and regulatory challenges presented by the broad evolution 
of  the  financial  system  over  the  past  decade,  it  makes  sense  to  first  consider  how  some  of  these 
changes may have enhanced market functioning by mitigating at least some of the imperfections that 
characterize these markets. My remarks here are a mix of what we see happening in practice and how 
we might expect things to work in principle.  
To  begin  with,  financial  institutions  within  the  regulated  core  of  the  financial  sector  have  become 
larger, and the industry considerably more concentrated. The 10 largest bank holding companies now 
hold  roughly  half  of  banking  assets,  compared  to  less  than  a  third  in  1990.  These  institutions  now 
operate  with  greater  geographic  scope  and  offer  a  broader  range  of  financial  products,  but  overall 
volatility of earnings has not changed much relative to capital.  
Hedge funds, private equity funds and other leveraged financial institutions control increasingly large 
shares of aggregate financial capital and play very active roles in many asset markets and in credit 
markets. Although assets under management in hedge funds still represent a relatively small share of 
total  financial  assets,  their  relative  share  has  increased  significantly  and  their  ability  to  take  on 
substantial  leverage  magnifies  their  potential  impact  on  financial  market  conditions.  These  private 
leveraged  funds  have  become  an  important  source  of  protection  to  regulated  institutions  by  being 
large sellers of credit insurance in the rapidly growing market for credit default swaps. 
In terms of enhancing overall market efficiency, the growth of these private leveraged institutions can 
be expected to provide benefits in terms of improved liquidity, price discovery via arbitrage, diversity of 
opinion and diversification opportunities for investors. The increase in the share of assets managed by 
private pools of capital devoted to arbitrage activity should improve the overall functioning of markets. 
In most circumstances, increased trading and participation contributes to market liquidity and makes 
markets less volatile. The ultimate benefit should be lower risks for all market participants. This in turn 
should reduce the risk premia associated with holding financial assets, and ultimately reduce the cost 
of capital. 
The  rapid  growth  in  the  relative  importance  of  these  leveraged  financial  institutions  has  been 
accompanied  by  a  number  of  structural  changes  as  well.  The  total  number  of  funds  has  grown 
dramatically.  There  are  more  very 
firms.  Greater 
institutionalization, and the maturity of risk management and operational infrastructure in the largest of 
these private funds, has likely reduced operational risk. To the extent these changes have increased 
the diversity of firms and strategies in this part of the financial system, and this is hard to measure with 
any  confidence,  this  heterogeneity  should  provide  diversification  opportunities,  foster  more  efficient 
price discovery and could help improve stability.  
These  changes  in  market  participants  have  occurred  in  conjunction  with  a  dramatic  acceleration  in 
number and type of derivative instruments. These developments have likely had the important impact 
of allowing for a more efficient distribution and more effective management of risk.  
All  of  these  changes  should  move  the  market  in  the  direction  of  fostering  the  efficient  allocation  of 
credit and capital formation, and thus enhancing the economy’s real growth potential.  
The  available  evidence  is  consistent  with  the  view  that  the  changes  in  the  core  of  supervised 
institutions,  growth  of  the  leveraged  sector  and  rapid  financial  innovation  have  strengthened  the 
efficiency and resiliency of the overall financial system. As I mentioned at the start, a broad range of 
recent financial shocks do not seem to have adversely impacted the real economy. The international 
financial crisis that began in 1997 did not spillover to the nonfinancial sector in the United States. The 
equity price collapse and deterioration in credit in 2000 did not cause significant damage to the core 
institutions in the U.S. market. The relatively limited damage caused by operations failures of the 9/11 
attacks  reflected  the  strength  of  the  capital  position  of  major  intermediaries,  as  well  as  the  policy 
actions by the Federal Reserve to provide liquidity to the markets.  
More recently, the series of smaller financial shocks experienced since 2001, including the corporate 
bond defaults after 2001, the corporate accounting scandals in 2002, credit downgrades in the U.S. 
funds  and  private  equity 
large  hedge 
BIS Review 85/2006 
 3
automobile industry in 2005, the failure of Refco, the sharp declines in mid-2006 in equity, commodity 
and  emerging  markets  debt  prices  caused  little  contagion  to  other  markets  and  limited  strain  on 
financial institutions. 
Challenges 
The  favorable  balance  between  efficiency  and  resilience  in  the  financial  system  we  have  observed 
recently  does  not  of  course  guarantee  we  will  achieve  as  favorable  a  balance  in  the  future.  The 
prospects for future stability will depend in part on how effective supervisors are in adapting policies in 
response to the ongoing evolution in markets.  
Financial institutions face strong incentives to monitor and limit their risk profile and the risk-taking of 
their leveraged counterparties to some efficient level where benefits balance costs at the margin. This 
is good for the firm and also good from society’s perspective. 
Private pools of capital have the capacity to use extensive leverage to amplify returns. This leverage 
can  be  acquired  in  a  variety  of  ways:  through  repurchase  agreements  and  reverse  repos,  through 
secured financing and securities lending and through derivatives and structured financial products.  
The ability of funds to take on risk and leverage is constrained by two external sources of discipline - 
the returns required by their investors, and the terms on which their dealers/financers are willing to 
extend credit. In other words, the fund is constrained by the willingness of outsiders, collectively, to 
take  exposure  to  the  fund.  The  willingness  of  banks  and  investment  banks  to  take  on  exposure  to 
hedge  funds  is  in  turn  influenced  by  the  capital  and  supervisory  framework  that  applies  to  those 
institutions and the discipline imposed on them by the market. 
The  effectiveness  of  market  discipline  in  constraining  the  risk-taking  behavior  of  financial  firms, 
however, may be compromised by the presence of market failures of the type mentioned above. While 
this issue is at the heart of risk management challenges for the provision of credit more broadly, the 
rise  in  the  relative  size  of  the  private  leveraged  fund  sector  and  the  rise  in  the  importance  of  new 
derivative financial instruments may complicate the design of policies and risk-management practices 
to counteract these traditional frictions. 
Virtually all types of credit markets suffer from informational problems - consider the challenge faced 
by  a  bank  in  assessing  the  risk  associated  with  lending  to  a  small  unrated  company.  But  the 
complexity of new financial products, the rapidity with which positions can change, and the lack of a 
long  time  series  of  historical  relationships  seems  likely  to  enhance  these  problems  for  leveraged 
institutions operating in new markets such as credit derivatives.  
Funds typically deal with several different banks and investments banks. The desire to maintain the 
confidentiality of their trading strategies has traditionally led firms to be quite opaque to outsiders and 
reluctant to give their banks sufficiently detailed information on a real time basis about the risk profile 
of the overall fund. Without that information, individual dealers or banks have a difficult time evaluating 
the probability of default of a leveraged counterparty and the potential covariance with other positions 
of the firm.  
Individual firms may also see only a piece of the hedge fund’s positions, and if their direct exposure to 
the individual fund is small, may perceive less need to worry about the overall risk profile of the fund. 
Public  disclosure  requirements  designed  to  compensate  for  this  information  problem  do  not  exist. 
Even if information on the overall size of the fund’s positions were available periodically, it would be 
difficult to accurately ascertain its risk profile. This gives individual firms an incentive to free-ride on the 
due diligence or monitoring by others, which may render resultant collective discipline inadequate. 
The foundations of modern risk measurement rest on a framework that uses past returns to measure 
or estimate the distribution of future returns. The stability of the recent past, even if much of it proves 
durable,  probably  understates  potential  risk.  The  parameters  used  to  estimate  value  at  risk  can 
produce very large differences in predicted exposure, especially at extreme confidence intervals. 
Estimating  the  potential  interactions  among  these  exposures  in  conditions  of  stress  is  even  harder, 
due to the uncertainty about the behavior of investors and other market participants and because of 
the potential effects of financial distress on overall economic activity.  
The relatively short history of returns for new products, the complexity of measuring exposure in many 
new  instruments  and  limitations  on  transparency  also  create  the  potential  for  classic  “agency” 
problems - internal conflicts of interest that can lead to problematic outcomes. In exposures where the 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2006
measurement of potential loss is more uncertain, more subjective, and less amenable to independent 
evaluation, for example, reasonable people can come to very different judgments about the potential 
risk in a particular position. Normal competitive pressures can push valuation methods away from the 
conservative  extreme  and  generate  larger  exposures  to  risk.  As  a  result,  individual  firms  and  the 
overall market are more exposed to risk in a stress scenario than would be desirable. 
Another set of challenges comes with the broader damage to markets that can accompany the failure 
of  a  major  financial  institution.  Firms  have  strong  incentives  to  avoid  large  financial  losses  and  to 
reduce  the  risk  of  failure,  of  course,  but  they  do  not  have  the  incentive  to  internalize  the  potential 
external  consequences  of  their  distress  on  the  financial  system,  and  it  is  unrealistic  for  market 
participants  to  incorporate  these  risks  into  market  prices.  This  “public  good”  dimension  of  financial 
stability  means  that  while  the  whole  economy  benefits  from  a  more  stable  financial  system,  each 
individual institution would prefer that others incur the costs associated with its provision. As a result, 
firms may collectively underinsure against the risk of failure and underinvest in the infrastructure and 
policies that promote financial stability.  
And  finally,  policies  designed  to  reduce  the  risk  of  failure  in  financial  markets  create  moral  hazard, 
dulling the incentive individual firms face to self-insure against potential loss. We apply a set of capital 
requirements and supervisory constraints to offset the distortion created by the safety net, but these 
may not fully compensate for the impact on behavior of the broader range of financial intermediaries of 
the perception that the authorities will act to protect the financial system from systemic risk.  
While these constraints and challenges may weaken the effectiveness of counterparty discipline, they 
are not fatal constraints. If individual dealers to a very large hedge fund each operate with adequate 
knowledge  of  the  risk  profile  of  the  fund,  if  they  each  make  conservative  judgments  about  their 
potential direct exposure to the fund in a stress scenario, if they limit the overall exposure of the firm 
as a whole to the broader market distress that might accompany that failure of a major hedge fund, if 
they compensate for the uncertainty in making these judgments by charging appropriate risk premia or 
building  in  a  greater  cushion  against  adversity,  and  if  the  supervisory  constraints  on  the  core 
institutions  adequately  offset  the  moral  hazard  that  comes  with  that  relationship,  then  the  financial 
system as a whole will be less vulnerable to distress in the hedge fund sector. These are exacting 
conditions, but they are not unachievable. And we all have an interest in encouraging progress toward 
that objective.  
Implications for policy and risk management 
What are the implications of these challenges for central banks and supervisors? The changes in the 
financial system we’ve seen over the past decade don’t change the principal objectives of policy - to 
ensure that the core financial institutions maintain an adequate cushion of capital in relation to risk, 
and to build greater resilience into the infrastructure that supports the financial markets. We have very 
limited ability to predict the sources of stress to the financial system, but if the cushions at the core of 
the  system  are  robust,  the  risk  of  a  systemic  crisis  will  be  diminished,  and  central  banks  will  have 
greater ability to mitigate the risk of broader damage to the economy. 
The  pace  and  extent  of  the  changes  in  financial  markets  requires  supervisors  to  work  harder  to 
understand  the  consequences  of  changing  market  practice  for  the  incentives  and  constraints  we 
impose on financial institutions. Let me give two examples of evolving market practices that may help 
alleviate one concern only to exacerbate another. 
Collateral plays an increasingly important role in counterparty credit risk management, particularly for 
highly leveraged counterparties. The increased importance of variation margining plays a critical role 
in counterparty credit risk management. These changes help limit the exposure of the core financial 
institution  to  losses  among  their  leveraged  counterparties,  but  they  also  act  to  exacerbate volatility, 
with asset price declines forcing further margin calls, adding for further market declines. Where initial 
margin  is  thin  in  relation  to  potential  exposure,  counterparties  are  more  exposed  to  adverse 
movements in asset prices, and in a situation of stress the actions they take to reduce their exposure 
to further losses are likely to have a greater negative impact on market dynamics.  
In  market  conditions  where  initial  margin  may  be  low  relative  to  potential  future  exposure,  the  self-
preserving  behavior  of  leveraged  funds  and  their  counterparties  may  be  more  likely  to  exacerbate 
rather than mitigate an unexpected deterioration in asset prices and market liquidity. As financial firms 
demand more collateral, funds are forced to liquidate positions, adding to volatility and pushing down 
asset prices, leading to more margin calls and efforts by the major firms to reduce their exposure to 
BIS Review 85/2006 
 5
future losses. In the context of the previous discussion of externalities, firms’ incentives to minimize 
their own exposure can amplify the initial shock and impose on others the negative externality of a 
broader disruption to market liquidity. 
The fact that this potential adverse dynamic exists does not mean it will occur. The deviation of prices 
from their fundamental values in times of stress is likely to create incentives for firms and investors 
with resources to step in and provide liquidity. In other words, the market may itself have the capacity 
to self-correct and prevent a disruptive loss of liquidity.  
A  second  example  is  the  recent  trend  to  lengthen  lock-ups,  implement  redemption  gates  that  limit 
withdrawals,  and  create  special  side-pocket  accounts  for  particularly  illiquid  investments  by  hedge 
funds.  Each  of  these  changes  may  serve  to  reduce  the  liquidity  risk  of  the  fund,  which  should  be 
beneficial and potentially reduce the disruption from the forced liquidation of positions. They may also, 
however, reduce market discipline and increase the overall scale of leverage assumed by those funds. 
We don’t have the capacity to assess with confidence the balance of these effects on the probability of 
crisis and the severity of market dynamics in conditions of stress.  
What should be the focus of supervisory efforts in this new context? Clearly, capital supervision and 
market  discipline  remain  the  key  tools  for  limiting  systemic  risk.  The  emergence  of  new  market 
participants such as leverage institutions does not change that. I am going focus on three broad policy 
priorities - risk management, capital and margining practices, and the financial infrastructure.  
Risk management 
We  should  focus  more  attention  on  parts  of  the  risk-management  process  where  uncertainty  is 
greatest and materiality of the risks that we can’t readily quantify is highest. This means more attention 
on the risk factors where the measurement challenges are most complex. It means more attention on 
assessing potential exposure in extreme events that lie outside past experience, not just those outside 
of the recent past.  
These challenges require using a mix of different analytical tools to help illustrate the range of possible 
outcomes and the dimensions of uncertainty that apply to the measurement of exposure. The focus 
should be not on the specific estimates produced for various types of asset price movements or stress 
events,  but  the  uncertainty  that  surrounds  those  estimates  and  the  magnitude  of  the  potential 
underestimation of losses. Another way to say this is that we probably need to spend as much time 
discussing  the  limits  of  the  quantitative  outputs  of  the  risk-management  process  as  we  do  on  the 
estimates produced by the models.  
Understanding  and  evaluating  “tail  events”  -  low  probability,  high  severity  instances  of  stress  -  is  a 
principal,  and  extraordinarily  difficult,  aspect  of  risk  management.  These  challenges  have  likely 
increased with the complexity of financial instruments, the opacity of some counterparties, the rapidity 
with which large positions can change, and the potential feedback effects associated with leveraged 
positions.  
Stress testing and scenario analysis have become central to the process of risk management, and we 
have seen substantial progress since 1998. The efficacy of these tools should be judged in part by the 
extent to which they capture, on a high frequency basis, the full exposure of the firm to a sufficiently 
broad range of adverse conditions, the aggregate exposure to specific types of different risk factors 
and types of counterparties, the potential interactions among those factors, the effects of a general 
loss of liquidity and confidence in markets, and the constraints on the ability of the firm to move to 
reduce its exposure to further losses. 
And, of course, the credibility of the risk-management process should be judged not just by the quality 
of attempts to estimate stress exposure, but also by the impact of these results on the decisions about 
how much exposure the firm actually takes. In other words, effective stress testing must be viewed not 
only  as  a  tool  for  monitoring  the  risks  a  firm  has  taken,  but  for  actually  influencing  and  changing 
behavior. 
Supervisors should focus on concentrations of exposure to a range of different risk factors, not just on 
the concern of the particular moment or the most recent sources of shocks. Just as generals are often 
accused  of  preparing  to  fight  the  last  war,  practice  tends  to  chase  measures  of  direct  exposure 
implicated in past crises, or what seem like the plausible candidates for future crises, whether to real 
estate, to hedge funds, to structured financial products, to emerging markets or to a particular industry. 
6 
 BIS Review 85/2006
This may be necessary and desirable, but it is not the most challenging task in risk management, and 
we generally don’t put ourselves in the position of trying to substitute our judgment for the markets on 
what level of direct exposure to a particular company or industry is prudent relative to capital. 
The better approach is to look at what might happen to the firm’s losses in various alternative, more 
adverse states of the world, and then assess the direct and indirect effects of distress in different parts 
of the portfolio and the interactions among them. The major financial institutions, for example, typically 
take on very little direct current exposure to hedge funds as group. But, as you might expect, the scale 
of potential future exposure is more substantial. An even greater challenge is measuring the exposure 
of the firm not simply to the direct effects of the failure of a particular hedge fund counterparty, but to 
the  broader  distress  that  it  might  cause  to  other  market  participants  or  its  impact  on  the  other 
exposures  of  the  firm.  The  management  of  these  direct  and  indirect  exposures  needs  to  be  an 
important focus of attention.  
Capital and margin 
Supervisors have put a considerable amount of effort over the past decade into designing a successor 
to the Basel capital accord. The present regime does not do a good enough job of capturing the risks 
a  major  institution  typically  assumes  today.  Because  it  understates  the  amount  of  capital  required 
against  some  risks,  overstates  others,  and  ignores  still  others,  we  should  work  to  put  in  place  a 
replacement  regime  as  quickly  as  we  can  be  confident  we  have  a  viable  alternative.  The  prudent, 
conservative  approach  should  be  to  move  forward  to  a  more  risk  sensitive  framework  that  creates 
better incentives for prudent risk management, not to try to extend the life of the present accord. 
It  is  critical  that  these  broader  efforts  to  fix  the  capital  regime  be  reinforced  with  more  attention  by 
supervisors to margin practice and limits around the counterparty risk-management process within the 
major financial institutions. The regulatory capital regime is designed to offset the effects on individual 
firms  of  lower  margin.  Where  margin  levels  are  low  relative  to  potential  exposure,  the  capital 
requirement is higher. Where margin is higher, the capital charge is lower. Both capital and margins 
have costs, and firms seek to limit these costs and choose their preferred combination. 
The question for policymakers is whether the mix of capital and margins produced by the market is 
appropriate from the perspective of the financial system as a whole. As forms of financing that enable 
leverage and as leveraged funds grow in importance, the overall level of margin held against positions 
can provide an important cushion against the type of adverse market dynamics and general run on 
liquidity we saw in 1998. For these reasons, in the 2005 report of the Counterparty Risk Management 
Policy  Group,  chaired  by  Gerry  Corrigan,  a  diverse  mix  of  major  market  participants  recommended 
that margin levels be set at a threshold that is “sustainable over the cycle.” This reflects a view that, in 
general,  the  initial  margin  required  of  unregulated  leverage  counterparties  should  be  set  to  provide 
some cushion against potential exposure.  
Financial infrastructure 
Supervisors should continue to encourage improvements in the infrastructure that supports financial 
markets.  When  we  think  about  infrastructure  in  today’s  market,  it’s  not  enough  to  look  just  at  the 
technology and risk-management systems that support the major exchanges and the payments and 
settlement systems operated by central banks and private utilities. This view is reflected in the amount 
of  recent  supervisory  attention  that  has  been  focused  on  the  systems  within  and  among  private 
institutions that support the bilateral over-the-counter derivatives markets. Last September, 14 major 
financial institutions and their principal supervisors met at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to 
undertake  a  concerted  program  of  improvements  to  the  infrastructure  that  supports  the  OTC  credit 
derivatives market. When that group reconvenes next week, we will review the extent of progress in 
reducing  the backlog  on  unconfirmed  trades  and  increasing  the  number  of  trade  confirmed  through 
automatic systems. We will also assess the progress toward agreement on a protocol for settlement 
events. And we will review new commitments to expand this effort to other OTC derivatives, including 
equity derivatives.  
These priorities for policy and supervision have the potential to strengthen our financial system and 
make it more robust to real systemic events. To be effective, however, we must continue to explore 
ways  for  supervisors  and  regulators  to  cooperate  more  closely  together.  The  changes  in  market 
structure and financial innovation during the past decade, along with the increased global integration 
of capital markets, have increased opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. Policy initiatives that focus 
BIS Review 85/2006 
 7
only on the U.S. market or on a specific class of institutions will push the activity to other markets or 
other  institutions,  raising  costs  on  the  regulated  intermediaries  without  reducing  overall  risk  in  the 
system. Balancing the imperative of a cooperative approach across markets and institutions with the 
need  for  a  more  agile  response  to  the  rapid  pace  of  evolution  in  markets  will  be  a  continuing 
challenge. 
Conclusion 
The changes in the financial system since 1998 confront us with a mix of benefits and challenges. The 
larger size and scope of the core institutions, the greater opportunities for risk transfer and hedging 
provided by innovation in derivatives, the improvements in risk management, the larger role played by 
a  much  expanded  number  and  more  diverse  mix  of  private  fund  managers  seem  likely  to  have 
improved the stability and resilience of the financial system across a broader range of circumstances. 
The  same  factors  that  may  have  reduced  the  probability  of  future  systemic  events,  however,  may 
amplify the damage caused by and complicate the management of very severe financial shocks. The 
changes that have reduced the vulnerability of the system to smaller shocks may have increased the 
severity of the large ones. 
Supervisors need to continue to focus attention on reducing the vulnerability of the market to these low 
probability, but extreme events, while preserving the benefits that have come with these changes in 
financial  markets.  The  limitations  of  the  conventional  risk-management  tools  in  assessing  potential 
losses  in  the  adverse  tail  of  possible  outcomes  in  today’s  financial  system  magnify  the  risk  that 
individual institutions will operate with less of a cushion than might be desirable for the market as a 
whole.  
As the structure of markets change, we need to continue to review whether the overall framework of 
supervision  over  the  core  banks  and  investment  banks  provides  the  right  balance  of  efficiency  and 
resilience for the system as a whole. The capital requirements and other constraints we place on the 
regulated institutions have played an important role in encouraging the transfer of risk to a broader 
range  of  institutions,  including  the  leveraged  private  pools  of  capital.  As  the  aggregate  size  and 
importance  of  those  funds  increases,  distress  among  those  institutions  can  have  greater  effects  on 
overall market dynamics, potentially increasing risks to the regulated core. Over time, this will force us 
to consider how to adapt the design and scope of the supervisory framework to achieve the protection 
against systemic risk that is so important to economic growth and stability.  
For the present, however, our hierarchy of priorities should focus on improving supervisory incentives 
to make counterparty discipline more effective and to strengthen the resilience of the core institutions 
to more adverse economic and financial conditions.  
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 85/2006
