Jean-Claude Trichet: The process of European financial integration 
Text of the 24th Mais Lecture by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at 
Cass Business School, London, 11 May 2006. 
 Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
First of all, let me thank very warmly the Cass Business School for inviting me to give this year’s Mais 
Lecture. Held in honour of Lord Mais, it is the 24th lecture of its kind, which is in itself an impressive 
achievement.  Keeping  with  the  School’s  practice  of  exploring  major  economic  policy  issues,  I  have 
decided for today’s Mais Lecture to address “The process of European financial integration”.  
It  is  certainly  a  topic  that  is  of  interest  to  many:  market  participants,  policy-makers  and  academics 
alike. In this respect, it is my hope that this lecture will attract attention of the audience under these 
multiple angles of vision.  
Let me stress from the very beginning that the ECB has the utmost interest in furthering European 
financial  integration.  In  this  respect,  I  should  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  May  edition  of  our 
Monthly  Bulletin,  which  was  published  this  morning,  and  which  contains  an  article  on  European 
financial integration and the ECB’s role in fostering this process.1
I will structure my remarks as follows, covering three main parts. 
First, I will give an overview of the ECB’s basic conceptual framework that underlies our work on this 
matter. Second, I will explain why we are very deeply interested in making progress with European 
financial integration. And third, I will elaborate on the current state of financial integration in the euro 
area, based on the measurement via quantitative indicators that the ECB published for the first time 
last  year.  I  will  also  mention  specific  ECB  and  Eurosystem  activities  that  aim  to  foster  financial 
integration.  
Conceptual elements of the ECB’s monitoring framework for financial integration 
To start with, let me explain how the ECB defines the concept of European financial integration. An 
obvious measure of financial integration is to check the validity of the law of one price within the euro 
area. The law of one price states that assets with identical risks and returns characteristics should be 
priced identically regardless of where in the euro area they are transacted. If all agents face the same 
rules, have equal access and are treated equally, any price difference between two identical assets 
will be immediately arbitraged away.  
This brings me to the definition of financial integration that the ECB has adopted: the ECB considers a 
market  for  a  given  set  of  financial  instruments  or  services  to  be  fully  integrated  when  all  potential 
market participants in that market (i) are subject to a single set of rules when they decide to deal with 
those financial instruments or services, (ii) have equal access to this set of financial instruments or 
services, and (iii) are treated equally when they operate in the market.  
Let me now explain our definition of financial integration in more detail. 
One  can  say  that  a  financial  system  consists  of  three  principal  components,  namely  the  financial 
markets, the related financial infrastructure and the financial institutions.  
The  ECB’s  definition  of  financial  integration  uses  the  term  “market”  in  a  broad  sense,  covering  all 
possible exchanges of financial instruments or services, be it on an organised market, such as a stock 
exchange,  or  an  over-the-counter  market  created  by  a  financial  institution’s  supply  of  a  financial 
instrument  or  service.  Furthermore,  a  financial  market  can  never  be  fully  integrated  without  the 
integration of the related market infrastructure, in particular the payment and securities clearing and 
                                                      
1   See the article entitled “The contribution of the ECB and the Eurosystem to European financial integration” in the May 2006 
issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 1
settlement systems. In this sense, you should also note that the term “rules” as contained in the ECB’s 
definition is used in a broad sense, and includes features such as laws and regulations, supervisory 
arrangements,  market  conventions  and  self-regulation,  and  standards  and  practices  related  to 
financial  infrastructures.  Finally,  financial  integration  can  also  be  fostered  by  financial  institutions 
establishing  branches  and  subsidiaries  in  other  euro  area  countries  or  by  two  institutions  merging 
across borders.  
The wide coverage of the ECB’s definition of financial integration is attributable to the fact that if only 
the  first  condition  is  fulfilled,  i.e.  the  existence  of  a  single  set  of  rules  for  a  given  market,  potential 
participants might still be discriminated against in terms of access to the market. Consequently, the 
ECB’s definition includes a second condition whereby participants should not be discriminated against 
in  their  access  to  a  market.  The  third condition  for  full  financial  integration  is that  once all potential 
market participants have accessed the market, they should be treated equally in their operations within 
that market. 
These latter two conditions in particular should also be seen within the general Treaty provision that 
the  Eurosystem  acts  “in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  an  open  market  economy  with  free 
competition, favouring an efficient allocation of resources”.2 This general provision was also one of the 
guiding principles applied when we established our definition.  
To conclude these conceptual remarks, I would like to point out that we are facing a complex process 
of progressive financial integration whilst the ECB’s definition describes a final state of full, or perfect, 
integration. By providing a benchmark against which we can assess the state of financial integration, 
this definition underpins our analytical, empirical and policy analysis. Let me now explain the various 
reasons  that  motivate  our  interest  in  making  progress  with  European  financial  integration  and 
consequently also our analytical and empirical work on this matter.  
The reasons for the ECB’s interest in progress towards financial integration in Europe 
The ECB’s interest arises from four main reasons:  
First,  the  integration  of  the  financial  system  plays  an  important  role  in  the  transmission  and 
implementation of the single monetary policy for the euro area. 
Second,  in  more  general  terms,  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  requires  us  to 
support the general economic policies in the European Community, among which European financial 
integration is a priority policy objective. 
Third,  financial  integration  is  important  for  the  Eurosystem’s  task  under  the  Treaty  to  monitor  and 
safeguard financial stability. 
Fourth,  finally  financial  integration  is  important  for our  tasks  in  the  area  of  payments  and  securities 
settlement infrastructures. 
Accordingly, the ECB’s Governing Council included the promotion of European financial integration as 
one aim in the Eurosystem’s mission statement, which reads: “[…] We in the Eurosystem have as our 
primary  objective  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  for  the  common  good.  Acting  also  as  a  leading 
financial  authority,  we  aim  to  safeguard  financial  stability  and  promote  European  financial 
integration.”3  
Let me elaborate in more detail on two of the reasons just mentioned, namely the general implications 
of financial integration to increase the potential for stronger non-inflationary economic growth and the 
implications  of  financial  integration  for  the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area, 
which is of utmost interest to the ECB.  
Financial  integration  is  a  key  factor  in  the  development  and  modernisation  of  the  financial  system, 
which,  in  turn,  increases  the  potential  for  greater  and  more  sustainable  non-inflationary  economic 
growth. By making markets deeper and more liquid, financial integration creates economies of scale 
and  increases  the  supply  of  funds  for  investment  opportunities.  The  integration  process  fosters 
                                                      
2   See Article 105(1) of the Treaty establishing the European Community. 
3   See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/ecb/orga/escb/html/mission_eurosys.en.html. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2006
competition,  the  expansion  of  markets  and  intermediation,  thereby  leading  to  further  financial 
development. Financial development, in turn, leads to lower intermediation costs and a more efficient 
allocation  of  capital.  Allocating  resources  to  the  most  productive  investment  opportunities  will 
ultimately increase the potential economic growth. 
Let me mention in this respect a research study by London Economics that estimates the benefits of 
the integration of European bonds and equity markets to be around 1% of GDP growth over a ten-year 
period, or approximately €100 billion.4  
While such figures can always be subject to estimation error, economic reasoning suggests that the 
overall benefits of financial integration will remain significant. 
So, to sum up: a financial system that is not yet fully integrated in all of its components implies a cost 
in terms of foregone economic growth. As we are well aware, Europe urgently needs to strengthen 
growth and increase employment, which are the two main goals of the renewed Lisbon programme. In 
this  respect  the  full  completion  of  the  single  market  of  financial  services  is  a  key  element  in  the 
achievement of the single market in the service sector which is absolutely of the essence: it is in this 
domain that we are very significantly lagging behind the US. 
This leads me to the second reason for the ECB’s interest in financial integration that I would like to 
explain  in  more  detail.  Monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  has  proved  very  successful  in  maintaining 
price  stability  and  building  economic  agents  and  market  participants’  confidence  in  its  ability  to 
continue  to  do  so.  As  a  consequence,  the  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  has  been  remarkably 
solid. Interest rates are still at very low levels in both nominal and real terms: short-term real interest 
rates remain close to the lowest levels we have seen in decades. And medium and long term rates are 
incorporating a low level of inflation expectations. Through this last achievement in particular the single 
monetary policy makes the best possible contribution to pave the conditions for sustainable growth in 
economic activity and job creation. 
In  this  respect,  one  could  also  illustrate  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  financial 
integration with the help of the Tinbergen rule, which states that there should be at least the same 
number  of  instruments  as  there  are  targets.  Since  the  ECB’s  single  monetary  policy’s  aim  is  to 
maintain  price  stability  –  for  which  we  have,  via  the  steering  of  short-term  interest  rates,  only  one 
instrument at hand – it follows that financial integration, which itself increases the potential for higher 
economic  growth,  thereby  also  facilitates  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  as,  all  other  things  being 
equal,  price  stability  will  be  ensured  through  appropriate  monetary  policy  at  a  higher  level  of 
sustainable growth. 
There is a second major reason why financial integration is beneficial to the single monetary policy in 
the  euro  area.  A  well-integrated  financial  system  is  essential  for  the  implementation  of  the  single 
monetary policy, as it enhances the smooth and effective transmission of monetary policy impulses 
throughout the euro area. 
While the single monetary policy is capable of ensuring price stability – and, as I mentioned, has done 
so very successfully over the past seven years – even if financial integration is less than complete in 
certain  areas,  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  could  be  even  more  homogeneous  with  perfect 
financial  integration.  The  degree  of  financial  integration  is  therefore  important  in  determining  the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy transmission throughout the euro area: the higher the degree of 
financial integration, the more effectively the transmission will work in practice. 
This leads me to give you my assessment of the current state of financial integration in the euro area. 
In  doing  so,  I  will  also  mention  specific  ECB  and  Eurosystem  activities  that  aim  to  foster  financial 
integration. Although financial integration is first and foremost a market-driven process, the ECB and 
the Eurosystem have certainly a part to play. At the same time, I will also highlight some important 
areas where financial integration is still lagging behind and where more action from market participants 
is required.  
                                                      
4   London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macroeconomic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to 
the European Commission. 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 3
The state of financial integration in the euro area, ECB and Eurosystem activities to foster the 
process, and future challenges  
I would now like to illustrate some results provided by the monitoring framework that we have built up 
for assessing the process of financial integration in the euro area.  
Our monitoring framework draws on quantitative indicators of financial integration that the ECB has 
developed. You will remember my earlier reference to the ECB’s definition of financial integration that 
an obvious measure of financial integration is to check the validity of the law of one price within the 
euro area. In particular, our price-based indicators that measure discrepancies in asset prices based 
on their geographic origin are directly relevant in  this respect. Such quantitative measures offer the 
advantage of being able to assess both the current level of financial integration and its evolution over 
time, i.e. whether integration is progressing, stable, or even regressing in respective parts. 
The first set of indicators, covering the state of integration of euro area financial and banking markets, 
was  published  last  year,  along  with  an  explanatory  report.5  This  first  publication  covers  the  money 
market, the government and corporate bond market, the equity market and the banking markets. In the 
next publication, due in September, we will expand the set of indicators by adding indicators related to 
the  integration  of  financial  institutions  and  financial  infrastructures.  In  the  following,  I will  also  touch 
upon such possible new indicators that we are at present compiling. 
To start with, let me give you my assessment of the integration of the euro area financial and banking 
markets. While the euro generally acted as a major catalyst for the integration of all these markets, the 
degree of integration differs between market segments, with integration being more advanced in those 
market segments that are closer to the single monetary policy, above all the money market. I would 
summarise the situation as follows: in general, financial integration is very strong in the money market; 
it has progressed significantly in government bond markets; it has improved for the corporate bond 
market;  it  is  slow  but  progressing  in  the  case  of  the  equity  market;  and  financial  integration  is 
unfortunately much less advanced in a range of banking market segments. 
I would now like to give the results of some selected indicators, whereby I will restrict myself to the two 
“extremes”:  the  satisfactory  level  of  integration  is  represented  by  the  money  market  and  the 
government bond market; and an unsatisfactory level of integration prevails in retail banking markets. I 
will also look at the degree of integration of financial infrastructures and financial institutions. 
Let  me  start  with  the  money  market.  The  unsecured  interbank  deposit  market  was  almost  perfectly 
integrated right at the start of Monetary Union. Our indicator, the cross-country standard deviation of 
the average overnight lending rates among euro area countries, was as low as three basis points in 
early 1999 and has since decreased to just one basis point. By way of comparison, in January 1998, 
i.e. one year before the start of Monetary Union, the cross-country standard deviation was higher than 
130  basis  points.  Our  indicators  for  one-month  and  12-month  maturities  also  consistently  show  a 
highly  integrated  unsecured  money  market,  with  the  respective  cross-country  standard  deviation  of 
EURIBOR lending rates among euro area countries standing, since early 1999, at values not higher 
than,  and  normally  below,  one  basis  point.  Finally,  a  similar  picture  of  a  relatively  high  degree  of 
integration prevails for the repo market, where we measure the degree of integration since the launch 
of  the  EUREPO  index  in  March  2002  on  the  basis  of  EUREPO  rates:  the  euro  area  cross-country 
standard deviation of the one-month EUREPO rates has normally been below one basis point, and the 
one for the 12-month maturity normally below two basis points. 
The  decisive  role  of  the  euro  in  enhancing  financial  market  integration  is  furthermore  visible  in  the 
interest  rate  derivatives  markets.  For  example,  the  euro  interest  rate  swap  market  has  become  the 
largest interest rate swap market in the world, the euro segment’s daily turnover of €250 billion being 
about one and a half times larger than the equivalent US dollar segment figure of €160 billion.6 An 
important  segment  of  the  euro  interest  rate  swap  market  is  the  euro  overnight  index  swap  market, 
where the launch of the EONIA Swap Index in June 2005 is evidence of both its importance and its 
further  potential.  Indeed,  this  market  segment  is  almost  perfectly  integrated,  with  a  cross-country 
standard deviation for EONIA Swap Index quotations of 0.1-0.2 basis point. 
                                                      
5   The ECB report is available at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/indicatorsfinancialintegration200509en.pdf. It is updated on 
indicators  can  be  accessed  at 
an  annual  basis.  The  statistics  underlying 
http://www.ecb.int/stats/finint/html/index.en.html. The indicators are updated semi-annually (last update: April). 
integration 
financial 
the 
6   See BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey – Foreign exchange and derivatives market activity in 2004 (March 2005). 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2006
The integration of the money market is of course a prerequisite for monetary policy implementation, 
since only an integrated interbank market can ensure an even distribution of central bank liquidity and 
a  homogeneous  level  of  short-term  interest  rates  across  the  euro  area.  This  has  been  mostly 
supported by the establishment of the related large-value payment system infrastructure, our TARGET 
system.  This  is  an  obvious  example  where  the  Eurosystem  contributes  to  fostering  financial 
integration.  The  launch  of  the  single  shared  platform,  TARGET2,  planned  for  November  2007,  will 
enhance financial integration even further, as it will provide a harmonised level of service and a single 
price structure. 
I should also like to mention that the short-term securities market is the least integrated segment of the 
money market. The European commercial paper and certificates of deposit markets are segmented in 
several  market  places.  But  I  expect  that  the  market-led  Short-Term  European  Paper  initiative,  the 
STEP  initiative,  will  advance  integration.  This  initiative  aims  at  the  convergence  of  standards  and 
practices through market participants’ compliance with the STEP Market Convention. In the coming 
days, Euribor ACI and Euribor FBE will formally adopt the STEP Market Convention. Issuers will then 
be able to apply for the STEP label. The Eurosystem has supported this private-sector initiative since 
its inception by acting as a catalyst. It provides technical support for the labelling process for the first 
two years, and the ECB produces statistics on yields and volumes for this market. 
Let me now turn to the euro government bond market, which is another market that has achieved a 
very  high  degree  of  integration,  as  revealed  by  the  ECB’s  published  indicators.  In  the  run-up  to 
Monetary Union, euro area government bond yield spreads converged, and since then, government 
bond yields in different euro area countries have been driven mainly by euro area-wide factors and 
news. But let me take the opportunity here to explain the relationship between financial integration and 
market discipline, given that this has at times given rise to misunderstandings. 
It is sometimes argued that the convergence in euro area government bond spreads which was seen 
in  the  run-up  to  Monetary  Union  is  evidence  that  the  process  of  financial  integration  may  be 
detrimental to the functioning of market discipline, the latter being the influence exerted by markets on 
governments by pricing different risks of default.  
This reasoning, however, neglects the fact that the observed convergence in government bond yield 
spreads mainly reflected the closer coordination of monetary policies across euro area countries – an 
overall compression of risk premia also observable in other markets and outside the euro area – and 
the  ensuing  convergence  of  inflation  expectations  across  countries,  as  well  as  the  progressive 
elimination of uncertainty regarding exchange rate movements and, finally, the disappearance of intra-
euro area exchange rate risk by the time the euro was introduced. Since 1999, government bond yield 
spreads have mainly reflected differences in liquidity and in perceived credit risks, which in turn reflect 
the sustainability of the countries’ fiscal positions. I will highlight two implications. 
First, such “local factors” continue to have an impact on bond yields in various euro area countries. 
Yest, pricing differences related to credit risk perceptions do not signal a lack of integration. I refer to 
my earlier discussion of the conceptual elements of our framework for assessing financial integration, 
where  I  stated  that  the  law  of  one  price  –  one  obvious  measure  of  financial  integration  –  holds  for 
assets with identical risks and returns characteristics to be priced identically regardless of where they 
are transacted. The integration of euro area government bond markets means that yields converge 
across countries to the extent that the  underlying bonds have identical risk-return characteristics. A 
government bond of a country with a very poor fiscal policy is riskier than a government bond of a 
country with a sound fiscal position. Consequently, the market will demand higher yields in the first 
case, even with perfect integration of government bond markets.  
Second, the ongoing process of integration of the euro area government bond market may in principle 
reinforce  the  market-driven  disciplinary  effects.  Market  discipline  is  most  effective  in  efficient, 
competitive and well-functioning markets. A necessary condition for financial markets to correctly price 
sovereign bonds is that governments have access to the capital markets on the same terms as other 
borrowers, and in particular that each country will ultimately bear the full costs of the credit risk implied 
in its government debt.7 If these conditions are satisfied (and there are no market failures), perfectly 
competitive markets will provide an accurate assessment of the risk/return profile of each bond. Under 
                                                      
7   Any direct or indirect pressure to favour government debt securities, or a perception in the market that a government with an 
unsustainable debt position would be bailed out, would inevitably introduce pricing distortions, thus impairing the role of the 
markets as a disciplinary device. The Treaty explicitly recognises the importance of these issues in Articles 101-103. 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 5
these  circumstances,  market  forces  ultimately  lead  to  funds  being  allocated  efficiently  in  the  most 
productive manner, with proper account being taken of risk. 
There is little doubt that the progress in financial integration witnessed in euro area government bond 
markets over the last few years has helped to improve the efficiency of financial markets in general 
and of government bond markets in particular. By eliminating barriers to trade and creating a truly level 
playing  field,  financial  integration  increases  the  level  of  competition  in  the  financial  markets,  thus 
enhancing their capacity to accurately price assets. Financial integration therefore may foster market 
discipline.  Available  evidence  indeed  suggests  that  market  discipline  is  at  work  in  the  euro  area 
government bond market. For example, credit default swaps data indicate that countries with poorer 
fiscal  positions  pay  a  higher  premium  and  that  markets  therefore  exert  disciplinary  pressure  on 
governments.  
Having dealt with the government bond market, let me now briefly discuss the state of integration of 
the financial infrastructure related to securities markets in general, namely the securities clearing and 
settlement  systems.  Only  if  financial  infrastructures  are  adequately  integrated  can  the  financial 
markets,  like  bond  and  equity  markets,  function  smoothly.  And  this  is  one  area  where  financial 
integration is still lagging behind and where action from market participants is required. 
Let  me  first  give  some  figures  for  the  present  situation.  Just  by  looking  at  the  development  of  the 
number  of  systems  in  the  euro  area  over  time,  we  note  that  the  number  of  central  securities 
depositories  declined  from  22  in  1998  to  19  in  2005,  and  the  number  of  securities  central  clearing 
counterparties declined from 14 to 7. This leads us to conclude that the number of securities clearing 
and  settlement  systems  that  are  often  not  efficiently  connected  to  each  other  is  still  rather  high,  in 
particular if we compare it to the significant progress that has been made in the integration of large-
value payment systems, with the overall number standing at 4, down from the 23 that existed before 
the introduction of the euro and the TARGET system.  
The  Eurosystem  strongly  supports  further  integration  in  the  securities  clearing  and  settlement 
infrastructure. To this end, it also acts as a catalyst for private-sector activities and holds meetings with 
the banking and securities settlement industry of the euro area to discuss the further integration of the 
euro  securities  settlement  infrastructures.  I  would  also  like  to  highlight  the  work  that  the  European 
Commission is investigating whether to propose a framework directive on clearing and settlement. I 
can tell you, the ECB would indeed welcome a legislative initiative in this field. 
Having  mentioned  securities  clearing  and  settlement  as  one  major  area  where  further  progress  in 
integration is required, I will now turn to the banking markets where, as I stated earlier, the degree of 
integration in the retail segment can be deemed to be unsatisfactory.  
Let me first briefly present some facts concerning banking consolidation. The decrease in the number 
of institutions has been a common trend in EU Member States’ banking sectors. The number of credit 
institutions in the euro area declined from around 12,000 in 1985 to 6,400 in 2004. Consolidation has 
been  attributed  mainly  to  mergers  and  acquisitions  (M&As)  between  institutions,  and  much  less  to 
failures or  voluntary  liquidations. The  data  also show  that  consolidation has so  far  been a  primarily 
domestic development. Between 1985 and 2005, cross-border mergers accounted for only about 20% 
of  the  number  and  value  of  all  M&A  deals  in  the  euro  area  and  the  EU.  Cross-border  banking 
consolidation  is  quite  limited  not  only  when  compared  to  domestic  consolidation,  but  also  in 
comparison to other financial sectors in the EU (on average 45% of total transactions). 
Nevertheless,  a  relative  increase  of  cross-border  M&A  transactions  has  been  observed  in  the  last 
years,  as  the  number  and  value  of  cross-border  M&As  increased  to  around  30%  of  total  M&A 
transactions in the EU banking sector. Moreover, I expect that a number of EU initiatives that have 
been  already  adopted  or  are  underway  should  significantly  reduce  the  policy-related  obstacles  to 
cross-border  banking  consolidation:  I  would  just  mention  the  European  Commission’s  review  of  the 
regulatory provisions8 underpinning the supervisory approval process for qualifying shareholdings, the 
ongoing  work  by  the  level  3  Lamfalussy  committees  to  enhance  supervisory  convergence  and 
cooperation, and the recent adoption of the cross-border mergers directive.  
Cross-border  consolidation  of  banks  is  one  way  of  looking  at  the  integration  of  euro  area  banking 
markets, i.e. one looks at the financial institutions themselves. Another way is to look at the price for 
                                                      
8   For the banking sector, Article 16 of the Codified Banking Directive (2000/12/EC) is currently under review. 
6 
 BIS Review 41/2006
financial products. Our published price-based indicators relate to the euro area cross-country standard 
deviation of interest rates for different financial products. For example, it is revealed that the cross-
country standard deviation of interest rates on consumer credit has been rather high and constant, on 
average  0.9%  over  the past  three  years.  Similarly,  the  cross-country  dispersion  of  interest rates  on 
lending  for house  purchase  amounts  to,  on  average, 0.5%  over  the  past  three  years,  with no  clear 
declining trend visible as yet. The indicators therefore support the conclusion that the integration of 
retail banking markets is lagging behind. 
I have earlier mentioned the implication of financial integration for the monetary policy transmission 
mechanism, which is the pass-through from changes in official monetary policy rates over market rate 
changes to bank interest rates. So, whilst the euro area money market is highly integrated, permitting 
the  first  part  of  the  pass-through  chain  to  function  in  an  homogeneous  way,  in  contrast  the  link 
between market rates and banks’ retail interest rates, i.e. the second part of the pass-through chain 
continues to show a significant degree of heterogeneity within the euro area. 
The integration of retail banking markets is therefore a further challenge that has to be addressed. In 
this respect, I recall the European Commission’s White Paper on Financial Services Policy 2005-2010, 
which targets, among other things, the further integration of retail markets in Europe. The Eurosystem, 
in its role of providing advice on the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial system, also 
made its contribution to the European Commission’s consultation, expressing its support for the key 
policy orientations of the financial services policy over the next few years.9  
As regards mortgage markets, I would like to highlight the European Commission’s launch of a broad 
discussion about the possible benefits and ways of further integrating European mortgage markets. 
The Eurosystem also made its contribution to the respective Green Paper.10  
Let  me  now,  after  having  discussed  financial  markets,  banking  markets,  financial  institutions  and 
wholesale financial infrastructure, address the issue of the retail payment system infrastructure.  
By  contrast  with  the  developments  in  large-scale  payment  systems,  the  situation  for  retail  payment 
services today is nearly unchanged as compared with that prevailing before Monetary Union: in 2005 
there were still 15 different retail payment systems within the euro area, compared with 20 in 1998. 
This  fragmentation  of  retail  payment  services  implies  sizeable  costs  in  terms  of  foregone  financial 
benefits that could result from the integration of retail payments, as a result of standardisation and the 
opening-up  of  payment  services  markets  to  more  competition.  The  European banking  industry  has, 
however, launched an initiative to create a Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). 
SEPA  can  be  described  as  an  integrated  market  for  payment  services  which  is  subject  to  effective 
competition and where there is no distinction between cross-border and national payments within the 
euro area. The introduction of the euro as the single currency of the euro area will only be completed 
with  the  SEPA,  i.e.  when  consumers,  businesses  and  governments  are  able  to  make  cashless 
payments throughout the euro area from a single payment account anywhere in the euro area using a 
single set of payment instruments as easily, efficiently and safely as they can make payments today in 
the  domestic  context.  Improved  payment  service  levels  will  benefit  the  end-users  with  transparent 
prices  and  cost-efficient  services.  SEPA  will  allow  the  payments  industry  to  become  more  efficient, 
thereby providing significant savings and benefits to the wider European economy. 
Acting  as  a  catalyst  for  private-sector  activities  fostering  financial  integration,  the  ECB  actively 
supports the SEPA project and offers coordination with the banking industry and end-users. I would 
also like to draw your attention to the joint statement from the European Commission and the ECB on 
SEPA that was issued just last week, on 4 May. In this statement, we outlined our common vision for 
the SEPA and the process leading to its realisation, encouraging the European banking industry and 
the other relevant stakeholders to create the necessary technical conditions. The realisation of SEPA 
calls  for  the  removal  of  all  technical,  legal  and  commercial  barriers  between  the  current  national 
payment markets. To achieve this, two milestones have been set.  
First, the European Payments Council has set objectives for January 2008, namely that is should be 
possible by that date to use the SEPA credit transfer and direct debit payment instruments; that the 
technical barriers be removed and the provisions and standards to ensure interoperability be defined; 
                                                      
9   See http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/ecgreenpaperfinancialservicespolicy2005en.pdf. 
10   See http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/eumortgagecreditconsultationen.pdf. 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 7
and  that  the  necessary  conditions  for  infrastructures  to  become  SEPA-scheme  compliant  be 
established. 
Second,  a  critical  mass  of  national  credit  transfers,  direct  debits  and  card  payments  should  have 
migrated to SEPA payment instruments by the end of 2010. Further steps will be necessary to ensure 
the widespread adoption of new and efficient SEPA instruments. The Commission and the ECB also 
stress  that  it  is  important  that  all  relevant  stakeholders,  in  particular  the  public  sector,  contribute  to 
achieving SEPA. By showing political support and by becoming early adopters of the SEPA products, 
the public sector can effectively contribute to the SEPA’s success. 
With  respect  to  the  integration  of  payment  services  markets,  I  also  would  like  to  recall  that  the 
Eurosystem is working together with the European Commission on the development of a new legal 
framework for payment services in the internal market. Currently, there is a wide variety of national 
legislation  related  to  payments,  which  makes  the  implementation  of  the  SEPA  problematic. 
Harmonisation  of  legal  requirements  for  payments  is  therefore  of  vital  importance  that  will  help  the 
banking  industry  in  its  efforts  to  establish  the  SEPA.  In  this  respect  we  have  published  the  ECB’s 
Opinion on the proposed directive on payment services in the internal market on 28 April 2006.  
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The  completion  of  the  single  market  in  the  domain  of  financial  services  is  absolutely  crucial  as  an 
integral and highly significant part of the achievement of the single market in the sector of services in 
general. We know now that the gap between the yearly productivity progress of Europe and the US 
and therefore the growth potential on both sides of the Atlantic is mainly due to the service sector. 
What is true for the European Union as a whole is particularly true for the euro area where the single 
currency both facilitates and calls for a complete financial integration.  
In the euro area in particular, significant progress has been made over the past few years, fostered by 
the introduction of the euro. However, European financial integration is still lagging behind particularly 
in the areas of retail banking activities and financial infrastructure services. 
In my view financial integration is, first and foremost, a market-driven process. I recognise promising 
initiatives in this respect, examples of which are the market-led STEP and SEPA initiatives. Making 
progress  in  financial  integration  also  requires  an  effective  interplay  between  market  forces  and  the 
actions  of  the  relevant  public  authorities.  The  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  will  continue  to  actively 
support  such  market  activities  by  acting  as  a  catalyst.  Other  public  actors,  such  as  the  European 
Commission, are also heavily involved in this process. I would also mention in this respect the critical 
importance of the implementation of the Commission’s White Paper on the financial services policy 
strategy,  which  sets  out  the  main  policy  priorities  up  to  2010  in  the  pursuit  of  furthering  European 
financial  integration.  If  public  authorities  create  a  framework  that  is  conducive  to  fostering  financial 
integration,  and  if  the  opportunities  thus  created  are  exploited  by  market  forces,  true  financial 
integration  will  be  speeded  up.  I  call  for  all  parties  concerned,  private  and  public,  to  very  actively 
pursue this goal.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 41/2006
