Eva Srejber: Should monetary policy subdue inflated high debts and asset 
prices in an inflation-targeting regime? 
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Adam  Smith 
Seminar, Thun, Switzerland, 28 June 2006. 
References for the speech can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank’s website. 
 Introduction 
Today I intend to discuss how central banks should react to debts and asset prices that increase at a 
rate which is not sustainable in the long term. When the Riksbank decided at the beginning of the year 
to  raise  its  policy  rate,  saying  that  one  of  the  reasons  was  the  rapid  rate  of  increase  in  household 
borrowing and house prices, this was perceived by some people as meaning that we had introduced a 
new  objective  for  monetary  policy.  However,  this  is  not  the  case.  Our  focus  then  –  as  on  other 
occasions – was on inflation developments. Another factor was that we also wanted to avoid further 
pressure on the rate of increase in house prices and debts and thereby reduce the risk of a large fall in 
demand and a low inflation rate in the future.  
How  should  central  banks  behave  in  a  situation  like  this,  when  models  and  forecasts  indicate  an 
inflation rate that is on target, while there is some risk that sharply rising house prices and debts will 
jeopardise the target later on? There is no common view on this issue among either central banks or 
academics. Today I intend to give my views on these issues. I shall concentrate on the role played by 
elevated  asset  prices  and  indebtedness  with  regard  to  developments  in  demand  and  thereby  price 
stability.  
Let me begin with a brief summary of my speech: 
• 
Many  central  banks  are  worried  by  rapidly  growing  house  prices  and  lending  over  long 
periods of time. The historically very low interest rate levels could create unrealistically low 
expectations of interest rates in the future. However, it is difficult to determine whether this 
development actually increases the risks to demand and inflation and whether – and how – 
monetary policy can in this case take these factors into account.  
These risks cannot be captured by the traditional models and forecasting methods normally 
used by central banks, which means that opinions differ as to how the central banks should 
act. Should we react in advance to subdue possible negative effects, or should we wait until 
a possible correction takes place?  
My opinion is that we must make the best possible assessments and act in advance to try to 
prevent  the  risk  of  large  corrections  leading  to  significant  falls  in  demand  and  to  lower 
inflation further ahead.  
There are both cyclical and structural factors which could motivate high growth figures for 
loans and house prices in Sweden over a period of time. However, when the rate of increase 
remains at a high level, my concern increases that imbalances are being built up, which may 
later on check demand and inflation. This risk has been taken into account in the monetary 
policy decisions in recent years. The costs of increasing interest rates at a slightly faster rate 
than  is  motivated  by  the  inflation  forecasts  made  by  traditional  means  must  also  be 
considered. My opinion is that when GDP growth has been strong, the risks in the housing 
and  credit  markets  have  carried  greater  weight  in  the  decisions,  and  vice  versa  when  the 
economy has been weaker. 
   Inflation is low and stable… 
Let me begin by reminding you of why we have our current framework. The attempts during the 1970s 
and 1980s to keep employment up by means of a very active stabilisation policy led to sharply rising 
central government debts and high inflation. This laid the foundation for the current broad agreement 
that economic policy should not attempt to fine tune demand in the economy and that price stability 
should be the long-term objective of monetary policy. Price stability creates favourable conditions for 
BIS Review 62/2006 
 1
households’ and companies’ decisions. It contributes to channelling savings to economically profitable 
investments, which benefits growth in the long term. 
In Sweden, as in the rest of the world, the rate of increase in consumer prices has been low for the 
past ten years, and inflation expectations have stabilised around 2 per cent in many countries.  Thus, 
the  price  stability  policy  has  in  general  been  successful.  In  many  countries  this  is  due  not  only  to 
monetary policy, but also to fiscal policy. A common fiscal framework within the EU, and in Sweden’s 
case  supplemented  by  a  clearer  national  fiscal  framework,  have  contributed  to  more  orderly  public 
finances. In Sweden this has led to a gradual decline in the central government debt as a percentage 
of GDP. We can look back on a decade of GDP growth where the annual average has been a half a 
percentage point higher than during the 1970s and 1980s. Inflation has been close to target, which 
can be compared with an average annual inflation rate of around 8 per cent during the two decades 
1975-1995. 
…but asset prices are fluctuating considerably 
However, at the same time as inflation has been low and stable around the world since the mid-1990s, 
there have been substantial fluctuations in asset prices. The fact that debts and asset prices appear to 
vary more now than they did 10-15 years ago should, at least in part, be due to the deregulation and 
evolution of the financial markets. In efficient markets, it is the price system that provides guidance to 
ensure that resources are steered to where they will provide the greatest benefit. For instance, equity 
prices in industries with considerable growth potential should rise as a result of profits being expected 
to  increase  there.  Savings  capital  is  attracted  to  this  and  these  industries  can  thereby  grow  and 
provide  jobs  to  replace  those  lost  in  industries  that  are  declining.  This  means  that  equity  prices  on 
average and across a business cycle should increase at the same rate as potential GDP-growth plus 
the risk premium required by investors. 
However,  we  know  from  experience  that  periods  when  households  and  companies  have  increased 
their borrowing at a rapid rate and asset prices have risen substantially have often preceded large falls 
in  growth  and  capacity  utilisation  in  the  economy  and  even  led  to  financial  crises.  It  is  only  with 
hindsight that we have been able to note that imbalances had built up. Regulation, fixed exchange rate 
policy,  insufficient  supervision  and  deficiencies  in  accounting  systems  have  often  contributed 
substantially to imbalances being able to accumulate over a long period of time. However, asset price 
and credit cycles also appear in many cases to have been exacerbated by exaggerated optimism and 
speculation, what is known as bubbles. This over-optimism often begins because equity prices in a 
sector,  perhaps  as  a  result  of  a  technological  advantage,  have  risen  over  a  period  of  time  and  the 
optimism then spreads.  
The problem for those of us responsible for monetary policy is that inflation – measured as consumer 
prices  –  has  often  remained  relatively  unaffected  during  these  periods.  It  is  difficult  to  distinguish 
bubbles  from  economically-motivated  fluctuations  in  advance,  which  partly  is  because  we  have 
insufficient experience of credit and asset price cycles in deregulated financial markets. Many of the 
countries that were hit by depression and banking crises during the 1930s had beforehand witnessed 
steep rises in asset prices and a sharp credit expansion without any appreciable increase in inflation. 
We  have  seen  a  similar  development  in  Japan  in  the  late  1980’s.  Also  during  the  latter  part  of  the 
1990s we have seen examples of crises with a similar course of events, for example in Thailand and 
other parts of Asia. 
Countries can suffer considerably from adjustments made in asset prices and debts - even if they do 
not suffer a crisis in the entire banking system. This is shown by what happened in the United States, 
Spain and England at the beginning of the 1990s. Corrections after long periods of credit booms and 
increases in asset prices there led to private savings rising substantially, investment declining and it 
took a long time for demand to recover. A tighter monetary policy than was motivated by the inflation 
rate  or  by  the  exchange  rate  when  this  was  the  guiding  factor  could  perhaps  have  reduced  the 
fluctuations in the real economy. 
Structural reforms reduce the risks but provide no guarantee against financial imbalances. 
Several of the measures taken in recent decades have probably reduced the risks of seeing a similar 
development recur: 
• 
The aim of the policy towards price stability, stable public finances and deregulated markets  
2 
 BIS Review 62/2006
 Extensive international efforts to develop standards and regulations regarding supervision, 
accounting and auditing. 
So  far,  so  good.  However,  at  the  same  time,  transition  countries  and  previously  strictly-regulated 
countries  inspired  by  planned  economies  such  as  China  and  India  are  playing  an  increasingly 
important role in the world economy. While the adjustment towards market conforming economies is 
moving at a rapid pace, there is still a long way to go until conditions in the domestic markets are the 
same as those in the old industrial nations. Fixed exchange rates, undeveloped credit markets and a 
high level of domestic saving in emerging economies can, for instance, delay price adjustments and 
thereby push down both short-term and long-term interest rates in the international capital markets. 
Increased competition from low-price imports coupled with low import prices for clothes, for instance, 
have already kept inflation down for several years in many parts of the world and contributed to the 
interest rates determined by monetary policy being very low. There is thus some risk that demand for 
credit and asset prices in many countries have been pushed up by expectations of lower interest rates 
in the future than is sustainable in the long term. 
We  thus  find  ourselves  in  a  situation  where  the  inflation  rate  has  been  pushed  down  by  increased 
competition  from  low-inflation  economies  at  the  same  time  as  asset  prices  and  indebtedness  have 
increased rapidly. A dilemma ensues here. Is it worth accepting slightly weaker demand and thereby 
inflation over the coming years if the economy develops as we have assumed in our forecasts in order 
to perhaps reduce the effects of possible corrections following inflated asset prices and loan stocks? 
Before I get into a discussion of this dilemma, I would like to give a brief reminder of how central banks 
with price stability as their objective take into account developments in the real economy. 
Flexible inflation-targeting policy requires openness and clarity 
In the short term, monetary policy can affect demand in the economy. Most countries with an inflation-
targeting  policy  use  this  possibility  and  conduct  what  is  known  as  flexible  inflation-targeting  policy, 
which  means  that  some  consideration  is  given  to  short-term  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy. 
However,  in  the  long  term  growth  is  essentially  determined  by  factors  outside  of  the  control  of 
monetary policy, such as technology and population growth.  As I mentioned earlier, monetary policy’s 
best contribution is to ensure that inflation is low and stable, which requires confidence in the target.  
This  sets  limits  as  to  how  much  consideration  can  be  given  to  short-term  fluctuations  in  the  real 
economy, but also limits the uncertain negative effects on inflation and the real economy that in some 
cases risk arising from a strong growth in asset prices and loans. 
To be able to maintain confidence, it is necessary that the inflation target has strong support from the 
general  public,  the  politicians  and  the  financial  markets.   This  requires  that  the  central  bank  is 
independent  and  has  clarity  and  openness  with  regard  to  the  conditions  on  which  interest  rate 
decisions are based.  
Can we judge when asset prices and debts are exaggerated? 
In order to be clear and open, it is important that there is an overall framework for how monetary policy 
shall  be  conducted,  based  on  accepted  economic  theories.  Central  banks  have  long  used  models 
based on empirical estimates to make forecasts of economic development. More powerful computers 
and more developed econometric methods have made it easier to use models in the regular work. In 
general,  the  use  of  models  contributes  to  consistency  in  the  assessments  over  time.  This  should 
create  good  conditions  for  clarity  in  communication  with  financial  agents  and  the  general  public. 
Forecasts and simulations based on models also provide a common point of departure for discussions 
between central banks and academics and make it easier for us to benefit from previous experiences.  
Many  central  banks,  including  the  Riksbank,  are  now  developing  dynamic,  stochastic,  general 
equilibrium models, DSGEs, as an aid for monetary policy. The Riksbank normally aims to attain the 
inflation target within two years, as monetary policy’s impact has a time lag. The two-year time horizon 
provides some scope for taking fluctuations in the real economy into consideration. However, under 
certain circumstances, deviations from the inflation target can be so large that it is reasonable to allow 
inflation  to  return  to  target  beyond  the  normal  two-year  horizon.  The  Riksbank  makes  forecasts  of 
GDP  and  inflation  three  years  ahead.  For  some  time  now,  the  forecasts  have  been  based  on  the 
assumption that the repo rate will develop according to market expectations as expressed in implied 
forward rates. The forecast results from the DSGE model comprise a central element, but are modified 
BIS Review 62/2006 
 3
by  assessments  from  sector  experts,  who  in  turn  make  use  of  partial  models  and  various  types  of 
economic indicators.  
It is important to base forecasts on theories from modern economics with regard to how companies' 
and  households'  behaviour  creates  equilibrium  in  different  markets.  The  DSGE  models  used  are 
based on utility- and profit maximising households and companies basing forward looking decisions on 
rational  expectations.  This  means  that  the  model  assumes  that  the  economy  is  always  at/or 
approaching  equilibrium.  Nominal  rigidities  mean  that  monetary  policy  has  an  effect  on  the  real 
economy during a particular time. One important implication of the assumptions made is that financial 
imbalances  caused  by  households  or  companies  making  decisions  based  on  non-rational 
expectations  which  must  sooner  or  later  be  corrected  are  not  built  up  in  the  model.  Examples  of 
irrationality are if households believe that interest rates will remain at the low level they have held in 
recent years and if they then borrow more money than they would have otherwise done if they had 
more realistic expectations of interest rate developments.  
Models  are  thus  unable  to  capture  everything  that  happens  in  reality  and  it  is  also  necessary  for 
practical  and  pedagogical  reasons  to  make  simplifications.  To  evaluate  forecasts  it  is  necessary  to 
understand what these forecasts are based on. Solely model-based forecasts mean, for instance, that 
there is only one interest rate, linear relationships, that the household sector is represented by one 
household and that imperfections in the financial markets are not picked up. The fact that there is only 
one interest rate means, for instance, that the effects of unusually low long-term real interest rates are 
not included. The fact that the relationships are linear means, for instance, that the model will never be 
able to forecast abrupt falls in demand following a shock.  
So  how  should  a  central  bank  judge  whether  there  is  a  risk  that  lending  and  asset  prices  are 
increasing too quickly if the inflation forecasts provide no signals of this? What one wishes to avoid are 
abrupt  corrections  in  asset  prices  leading  to  a  large  fall  in  demand  and  low  inflation  in  the  future. 
Although it is possible to extend the forecast horizon, as the DSGE models are based on rationality, 
they provide no opportunity to quantify such a risk scenario or to answer the question of whether an 
interest rate increase now would be able to reduce imbalances. The central bank must nevertheless 
make decisions  and  in  some  way  take  into  account  the  risks  it envisages.  In  the  description  of  the 
framework for the Riksbank’s monetary policy, which we published recently it says:  
 “The Riksbank routinely takes into consideration changes in asset prices and other financial variables 
(exchange rates, house prices, share prices, household and corporate indebtedness, etc.) in monetary 
policy decisions. This should not be interpreted as introducing targets for different asset prices or other 
financial quantities. However, situations may arise where the consequences for the real economy and 
inflation of the development of different financial variables threaten to become very unfavourable and 
serious without it being possible for that reason to quantify or capture this type of risk in the normal 
analytical  and  forecasting  work.  This  means  that  there  are  risks  of  sharp  corrections  in  the  future 
which  in  turn  affect  the  real  economy  and  inflation.  It  may  be  necessary  to  take  these  risks  into 
account  in  monetary  policy  decisions  in  a  different  way  than  in  the  normal  approach,  where  the 
forecasts for inflation and the real economy for the next two years serve as the foundation.” 
Although it is difficult to quantify the risks related to strong and long-term growth in asset prices and 
debts  using  normal  methods,  there  is  a  fairly  large  flora  of  research  into  how  different  types  of 
imperfections can cause and reinforce the types of imbalances I have discussed. One research area, 
for  instance,  is  based  on  psychological  factors  being  able  to  lead  to  expectations  becoming  an 
independent driving force behind fluctuations in the real economy. If, for instance, the real return on a 
financial asset has been high over a long period of time, this may, according to some research results, 
affect  expectations  so  that  many  believe  that  the  return  will  be  as  high  in  the  future,  despite 
fundamental factors indicating a lower return. In efficient financial markets, the agents with forward-
looking  rational  expectations  should  be  able  to  earn  money  by  taking  offsetting  positions,  but  an 
unwillingness  to  take  risks,  difficulties  in  finding  financing  or  regulations  can  mean  that  this  is  not 
possible to a sufficient extent. 
There are for example empirical studies indicating that investors appear to disregard the fact that an 
economic upswing is usually followed by a downswing and vice versa, which leads to them tending to 
take greater risks than they should in an upswing and vice versa in a downswing. Another research 
area concerns imperfections in the credit markets, which lead to the current income and balance sheet 
having significance for consumption and investment, as lenders and borrowers have different amounts 
of  information  regarding  the  borrowers’  future  ability  to  pay.  Borrowers  with  wealth  can  thus  gain 
access to more and cheaper loans than others. If asset prices increase, this leads to an increase in 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2006
their opportunities to borrow, which can further push up asset prices. If asset prices rise because of 
over-optimism  that  these  developments  will  continue,  the  accelerator  effect  may  contribute  to  large 
imbalances being built up before a correction occurs.  
One can express this as, if many imperfections impact at the same time, it could lead to substantial 
financial  imbalances.  Empirical  research  confirms  that  asset  prices  and  loans  can  increase 
substantially over a long period of time and my impression is that the mechanisms I have indicated 
have contributed to this. While debt and asset price levels have built up slowly over a number of years, 
price  corrections  have  occurred  quickly.  The  entire  cycle  from  start  to  finish,  from  asset  price  and 
credit expansion until the repercussions of price falls and debt reductions have waned can take up to a 
decade.  The  IMF,  for  instance,  reports  in  a  study  that  the  repercussions  alone  from  a  share  price 
crash take on average two years to wane, while it takes approximately four years for the effects of a 
house price crash to fade.  
Can and should monetary policy subdue the growth of bubbles?  
Even if we as monetary policy decision-makers assess that there is reason to feel concern that debts 
and asset prices have been pushed up by over-optimistic households and companies, it is not self-
evident whether and how this will affect the decisions. There is always some uncertainty as to whether 
it really is a question of an imbalance.  And, as I have said, it is not easy to quantify a risk scenario, 
both with regard to the probability that it will occur and the effects it can have for inflation and demand. 
It is thus uncertain how the total effect will be if one tries to reduce the growth of the imbalances via 
monetary  policy.  A  higher  interest  rate  than  would  be  motivated  if  the  risk  of  imbalances  were  not 
weighed in, dampens not only credit expansion and asset prices but also real demand and inflation in 
the short term. It is necessary to find a balance between these, even if it is based on an uncertain 
foundation.    
With regard to reducing growth in a bubble on the stock market, it may not be possible for an individual 
central bank in a small country to do very much, as the stock market is so internationalised. However, 
higher  interest  rates  nevertheless  lead  to  less  inflated  balance  sheets  when  loans  become  more 
expensive. This may alleviate the real effects of the corrections following from a stock market bubble. 
With regard to subduing exaggerated price increases in the housing market, monetary policy should 
have  a  greater  impact  as the  housing market  is  more  local  and as  loans  play  such  a  major  role  in 
house price developments.  
History shows that mistakes have been made when one has disregarded the information provided by 
growth in credit and the money supply. This applied, for instance, during the depression in the United 
States in the 1930s, when the large credit crunch was not sufficiently taken into account in monetary 
policy, and to the period prior to the high peacetime inflation rate during the 1970s and 1980s, when 
the money supply expansion was not taken into account. If we judge that developments might lead to 
substantial disturbances, the choice lies between attempting in time to avoid the accumulation of large 
imbalances and waiting until the situation turns and then counteracting the fall in demand. 
Many in the central bank world consider that interest rate policy should not react to asset prices and 
credit expansion in an upswing phase, over and above their estimated consequences for inflation and 
real stability in the short term. The arguments they bring out are that it is difficult to make an accurate 
evaluation and that it is uncertain what effect an interest rate increase will have. Other objections are 
that it may be difficult to be clear with regard to what has affected the interest rate decision and that 
confidence  in  the  price  stability  target  may  therefore  be  undermined.  Those  who  advocate  a  more 
preventive strategy meet this criticism by saying that there are nevertheless theories regarding asset 
price and credit cycles and some methods for calculating when large deviations from equilibrium levels 
are building up. According to these advocates, it should not be more difficult to use existing knowledge 
to assess when a financial imbalance is being built up than it is, for example, to calculate the output 
gap. And many central banks today calculate the output gap to make assessments of inflation. 
The argument that it is difficult to determine how large interest rate changes are necessary is usually 
met by saying that a higher interest rate in any case subdues credit growth and thereby also indirectly 
asset prices. By conducting tighter monetary policy than is required to keep inflation on target in the 
short  term  when  asset  prices  and  debts  begin  to  accelerate,  we  can  certainly  have  slightly  lower 
inflation and weaker demand than is desirable, but one also reduces the risk of negative effects on 
production and inflation from a collapse in asset prices later on. For example, the Bank of Japan has 
BIS Review 62/2006 
 5
been criticised in recent years for not having conducted a sufficiently tight monetary policy 15-20 years 
ago when the bubbles in Japan were building up. 
Those  who  maintain  that  there  is  too  much  uncertainty  to  dampen  a  price  rise  via  interest  rate 
adjustments are thus of the opinion that it is better to wait until a correction of abnormally high asset 
prices is a fact and take action then.  Many believe that it is important in such a case to act forcefully 
so  as  to  prevent  a  deep  recession.  However,  in  my  opinion  and  that  of  others,  the  risk  of  such  an 
approach is in overdoing it and thereby delaying a necessary adjustment of balance sheets and debt 
levels. New imbalances in other markets could then arise and the process will begin again. When the 
situation turns next time in other asset markets, there is a greater risk of reaching the zero-interest rate 
level. Many central banks have acted in this way, which may be the reason why a house price bubble 
has been created some time after a share price bubble. 
In my opinion, the economic costs in the shape of sharp fluctuations in demand are likely on average 
to be higher if the central bank does not take account of the effects on growth and inflation of inflated 
asset prices and credit expansion in its decisions. One reason for this is the high costs connected with 
the risk of achieving the zero-interest rate level if one waits until asset prices and indebtedness are 
corrected and demand is severely subdued before taking interest rate measures. 
Monetary policy after the stock market bubble 
The share price bubble at the end of the 1990s is an example of a financial imbalance that was built 
up  despite  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  stock  market  upturn  was  probably  pushed  up  initially  by 
fundamentally  motivated  expectations of  future  profits  and  growth  in  the  IT  and  telecom sector, but 
also by the fact that technology was generally considered to create the conditions for higher growth 
over  a  long  period  of  time.  However,  there  soon  appears  to  have  arisen  a  general  over-optimism 
regarding the durability and strength of the expected future increases in income. Low interest rates as 
a result of low inflationary pressures contributed at the same time to an increase in companies’ and 
households’ indebtedness in many countries. Investment growth was high in many sectors. When the 
share bubble burst, it was followed by an economic downswing, where high indebtedness created a 
requirement for consolidation in the corporate sector. This led to demand for goods and services being 
subdued, together with an increase in precautionary saving in many households.  
To avoid a deep economic recession and a further decline in inflation, the central banks cut their policy 
rates from the already low levels. However, growth in investment and employment was a long time 
coming, as instead of new recruitment and expansion, companies chose to rationalise their production 
and  achieve  scope  to  reduce  their  debt  ratios  through  lower  costs  and  to  meet  the  increased 
competition from low-cost countries.  The low interest rates thus did not seem to have any immediate 
effect on consumption and investment, but gave further stimulation to household sector demand for 
housing and loans in many countries. The unusually low long-term interest rates, combined with low 
interest rate differentials towards government bonds with a high rating provided further stimulation.  
Developments in the housing market have thus brought to the fore the debate on what role household 
indebtedness and house prices should have in monetary policy. At the end of the 1990s there was a 
similar discussion – but then it mainly concerned companies’ balance sheets and inflated share prices. 
Then as now it was a question of whether and in what way monetary policy should weigh together the 
requirements made by the inflation-targeting policy if the economy functions as normal, with the risks 
of a severe dampening of inflation and demand that could result from a correction of the imbalances in 
the financial markets. In practice this concerns evaluating whether it is worth accepting slightly weaker 
demand  over  the  coming  years  in  order  to  alleviate the  effects  of  an  uncertain  but  severe  effect  of 
corrections in financial imbalances at some point in the future. 
The current situation in Sweden 
Before I go on to speak in more detail of how I see the risks of Swedish households’ debts and high 
house prices today, I would like to say a few words about the Riksbank’s other task. This means that 
we  also  act  to  promote  stability  in  the  financial  system.  When  household  indebtedness  and  house 
prices  are  discussed  in  this  context,  the  focus  is  on  the  risk  of  a  crisis  in  the  banking  system.  It  is 
important for the Riksbank’s financial stability task to assess households’ ability to pay and whether 
the  collateral  taken  by  banks  and  mortgage  institutions  in  the  form  of  houses  and  apartments  risks 
6 
 BIS Review 62/2006
declining  in  value.  In  my  speech  today,  however,  I  am  concentrating  on  the  role  played  by  inflated 
asset prices and indebtedness with regard to developments in demand and thereby price stability.  
In the period between 1995, when the upturn began, and up to today, Swedish households’ debts and 
house  prices  have  increased  by  almost  three  times  as  much  as  household  incomes.  The  rates  of 
increase  have  not  yet  been  subdued  and  this  year  both  house  prices  and  household  debt  have 
increased by 13 per cent on an annual rate. On average, household debts now amount to 130 per 
cent of disposable incomes, which is as high as prior to the property crisis in 1992. In the long term, it 
is reasonable to assume that house prices will not increase at a more rapid rate than incomes. Studies 
show  that  if  house  prices  increases  deviate  from  income  growth,  the  discrepancy  tends  to  be 
corrected.  
When we assess the rate of increase in Sweden over the past 10 years, however, we must bear in 
mind that the upturn began in the mid-1990s, from a very low level following the crisis years at the 
beginning  of  the  1990s.  Much  of  the  upturn  can  be  explained  by  the  interest  rate  decline  that  has 
taken place since the mid-1990s at the same time as confidence in the inflation-targeting policy has 
become  established.  Stable  inflation  expectations  have  probably  led  to  households  feeling  less 
uncertain about future interest rate developments. Lower nominal interest rates coupled with the fact 
that the banks now appear to accept loans payable in full at maturity have further reduced the debt 
service ratio and probably increased demand for loans. Despite the fact that the debt/equity ratio is as 
high as in 1992, interest rate expenditure after tax corresponds to just under 4 per cent of household 
income1, which should be compared with 11 per cent when the situation was at its worst in the early 
1990s.  In  addition,  many  loans  are  now  repayable  in  full  on  maturity.  Increased  competition  in  the 
banking  sector,  coupled  with  more  efficient  credit  risk  management  can  also  have  increased  the 
supply of loans as well as making them cheaper.  
There  are  thus  many  factors  that  may  motivate  households’  indebtedness  being  higher  than  it  has 
been historically. However, the more time that passes without growth rates in house prices and debts 
slowing down, the greater the concern that households are borrowing more than is sustainable in the 
long term. Corrections in inflated house prices and debts may thus subdue demand and inflation in the 
long  term.  The  historically  very  low  interest  rates  could  create  expectations  of  unrealistically  low 
interest rates in future too and lead to households taking excessively large loans. Low inflation and 
amortisation-free  loans  will  also  lead  to  households  being  indebted  for  a  long  period  of  time. 
Households  that  have  financed  an  expensive  home  through  loans  may  therefore  become  very 
sensitive to corrections in house prices for a long period to come.  
How have we taken these risks into account so far? It may be useful to compare our decision in June 
2005 with our decision at the beginning of 2006.  In June 2005 we had been concerned for a long time 
over the future effects of increases in house prices and debts in Sweden, but when we saw that the 
national accounts data showed that growth in demand was not as broad and strong as we believed, 
consideration to growth and inflation 1-2 years ahead outweighed this and we cut the repo rate. At the 
beginning of 2006, however, it was clear that growth was broader and stronger than we had earlier 
believed  and  that  inflation  would  thereby  gradually  rise  towards the  target.  Concern  over  the  future 
effects  of  exaggerated  increases  in  house  prices  and  debts  then  contributed  to  the  arguments  in 
favour of an interest rate increase outweighing those against and we raised the repo rate. The strong 
growth  in  the  housing  and  credit  markets  was  also  taken  into  consideration  in  the  most  recent 
monetary policy decision, which can be seen in press release 2006-06-20. 
Conclusion 
As  I  observed  to  begin  with,  the  claims  that  the  Riksbank  has  introduced  new  parallel  targets  in 
addition to the inflation target are wrong. The fact is that the Riksbank conducts a flexible inflation-
targeting policy and within the framework for this we take into account risks of large fluctuations in the 
real economy and inflation over a long period of time. Historically, low interest rates over a long period 
of time risk leading to households borrowing too much, which pushes up house prices. Abrupt price 
corrections  later  on  may  subdue  real  demand  and  inflation.  To  reduce  the  risk  of  such  imbalances 
building up,  we  can  choose  to  raise  the  interest  rate  slightly  more  quickly  than  is  warranted  by  the 
inflation forecasts. The positive effects in the form of a lower risk of future abrupt corrections must be 
                                                      
1   The interest rate burden for indebted households was just over 5 % in 2004. 
BIS Review 62/2006 
 7
balanced against the losses in the form of lower demand and inflation that will arise in the short term. 
However, one problem is that such risks cannot be quantified. This increases the difficulty for a central 
bank  to  be  open  and  clear  regarding  the  bases  for  its  monetary  policy  decisions.  Maintaining 
confidence in the inflation-targeting policy is a central bank’s most important task and it sets limits as 
to how many considerations monetary policy can take. 
8 
 BIS Review 62/2006
