Svante Öberg: The Swedish economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Svante Öberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Öhman Fondkommission, 
Stockholm, 30 May 2006. 
 “On 27 April, I and my colleagues on the Executive Board of the Riksbank decided to hold the policy 
rate  unchanged  at  2  per  cent,  on  11  May  the  minutes  of  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy 
meeting were published and on 19 May we published a description of the monetary policy framework. 
These events provide the basis for the speech I will give today," began Mr Öberg. 
“At the meeting on 27 April we agreed to hold the policy rate unchanged. This decision was based on 
the  inflation  assessments  presented  in  the  Riksbank’s  Inflation  Report  in  February  and  the  new 
information  on  economic  developments  received  since  then.  Underlying  inflation  was  expected  to 
approach 2 per cent, but to be below this figure during the forecast period. The forecast is based on 
the assumption of gradual increases in the policy rate,” said Mr Öberg. 
“However,  the  decision  to  hold  the  interest  rate  unchanged  was  not  self-evident.  Some  of  us 
expressed the opinion at the meeting that there was reason to consider an increase as early as April. I 
was one. I would like to take this opportunity to elaborate on my reasoning. This is in the light of the 
document we published on 19 May regarding the monetary policy framework,” continued Mr Öberg. 
“The Riksbank conducts what is known as flexible inflation targeting. I shall here take up three aspects 
of flexible inflation targeting: measures of inflation, taking consideration of developments in the real 
economy and taking into account financial developments,” said Mr Öberg. 
“Monetary policy is guided by various measures of underlying inflation. There is no single measure of 
inflation that at each point in time indicates the proper stance of monetary policy. The Riksbank can 
choose  to  disregard  effects  that  contribute  to  inflation  deviating  temporarily  from  the  target.  This 
occurs on a regular basis with regard to, for instance, indirect taxes and household mortgage interest 
expenditure, as well as supply shocks that are assessed as temporary. In practice, monetary policy 
today is mainly based on one measure of underlying inflation, UND1X,” observed Mr Öberg.   
“The  Riksbank  also  takes  into  account  developments  in  the  real  economy  when  making  monetary 
policy  decisions.  In  the  preparatory  works  for  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act,  it  was  stated  that  the 
Riksbank, without prejudice to the price stability target, should support the goals of general economic 
policy  with  a  view  to  maintaining  a  sustainable  level  of  growth  and  high  rate  of  employment.  If  a 
disruption  were  to  contribute  to  inflation  deviating  substantially  from  target,  it  is  a  question  of 
judgement as to how quickly it should be returned to 2 per cent. Normally, monetary policy aims to 
attain the inflation target within two years. However, in some situations it may be necessary to allow a 
little longer time than two years for inflation to return to target, in order to avoid causing unnecessary 
fluctuations in the real economy,” continued Mr Öberg. 
“My experiences of forecasting work are that there is considerable uncertainty linked to longer-term 
forecasts. This makes it important to take into account different types of risk when making monetary 
policy  decisions.  One  risk  that  I  envisage  is  connected  with  the  strong  developments  in  the  real 
economy – the strong growth and rapid increase in employment. We will probably attain a fairly normal 
capacity  utilisation  level  in  the  labour  market  in  the  not  too  distant  future,  while  the  central  wage 
agreements for the greater part of the labour market will be renegotiated next year. In the February 
Inflation  Report,  underlying  domestic  inflation  was  calculated  at  up  to  3  per  cent  at  the  end  of  the 
forecast  period,  which  reflects  an  expectation  of  relatively  high  domestic  cost  pressures,”  said  Mr 
Öberg. 
“In my opinion, there can be some risk that the expansionary monetary policy will overly reinforce the 
economic  upswing  and  allow  domestic  prices  and  costs  to  rise.  It  could  have  more  long-term 
consequences  for  price-setting  and  wage  formation.  The  policy  rate  is  still  below  what  can  be 
regarded as an average figure over a long period of time. The question is at what pace it should be 
raised to a more normal level. This will in turn depend on how the economy develops,” considered Mr 
Öberg. 
“Our  monetary  policy  decisions  also  take  into  account  changes  in  asset  prices  and  other  financial 
variables. At present, there is reason to give particular consideration to the credit expansion and to 
   1/2 
house price developments. This is primarily a question of avoiding severe fluctuations further ahead. 
When economic activity eventually begins a downswing, this could result in an abrupt adjustment with 
falling  house  prices  and  weak  growth  in  demand.  The  risk  of  this  type  of  development  increases  if 
monetary policy is excessively expansionary for too long,” continued Mr Öberg. 
“There has recently been unease on the stock markets. However, it is too early to draw any more far-
reaching conclusions from recent events. As usual, the Riksbank will monitor developments and how 
these may affect inflation and other macroeconomic developments,” concluded Mr Öberg.  
 
   2/2 
