Jean-Claude Trichet:The process of European financial integration: where do 
we stand? 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Campus  for 
Finance 2006, WHU Otto Beisheim School of Management, Vallendar, 13 January 2006. 
 Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen, dear students, 
I would like to start by thanking the organisers of Campus for Finance 2006 for inviting me to speak 
here today.  
The turn of the year is always a good opportunity to assess the past and glance at the future. Today, 
barely two weeks into the New Year, I will do precisely this with a topic that is of interest to market 
participants, policy-makers and academics alike. And it is a topic that is also of the utmost interest to 
the  ECB:  namely,  the  process  of  European  financial  integration.  I  would  like  to  give  you  my 
assessment of where we stand at present, and also highlight those aspects where financial integration 
could be enhanced further.  
I will structure my remarks as follows. First, I would like to explain why financial integration is important 
for the welfare of European citizens. I will then briefly explain the conceptual background underlying 
our  assessment  of  the  state  of  financial  integration.  Finally,  I  will  elaborate  on  the  current  state  of 
financial  integration  in  the  euro  area,  based  on  the  indicators  recently  published  by  the  ECB.  I  will 
organise my assessment according to the different segments of the financial markets. In doing so, I 
will also mention some specific Eurosystem activities that aim to foster financial integration, and I will 
touch upon some of the EU policy issues in this field.  
Why is European financial integration important? 
In 2006 Campus for Finance is focusing on the topic of “Fixed income – lending, borrowing, and taking 
risk”. Financial systems in general serve not only to channel funds from those who have a surplus to 
those who have a shortage of savings, but they also serve to trade, hedge, diversify and pool risk.  
These  functions  help  us  to  understand  the  economic  benefits  that  can  be  derived  from  financial 
integration. There are two widely accepted economic benefits of financial integration: first, the better 
sharing  and  diversification  of  risk;  and  second,  the  increase  of  the  potential  for  higher  economic 
growth. Let me explain this in more detail.  
First, the better diversification and sharing of risk brought about by financial integration helps to fulfil 
the conditions for the optimality of a currency area. In recent years, an interesting development in the 
theory  of  optimal  currency  areas  has  been  the  idea  that  the  optimality  of  a  currency  area  is  not 
necessarily something that needs to be achieved fully before monetary union; but something that may 
also be the result of monetary union. The introduction of the euro clearly fostered financial integration. 
With the euro, economic agents from a given region can, by being able to invest more easily in other 
regions  of  the  euro  area,  diversify  the  risk  of  potential  shocks.  Steps  towards  increased  financial 
integration reduce the risk of local factors impacting on the income and consumption of a given region 
within the area, thereby helping to fulfil the conditions for an optimal currency area.  
Second, financial integration is a key factor in the development of the financial system, which, in turn, 
increases the potential for greater and more sustainable non-inflationary economic growth. By making 
markets deeper and more liquid, financial integration creates economies of scale and increases the 
supply  of  funds  for  investment  opportunities.  The  integration  process  fosters  competition  and  the 
expansion of markets and intermediation, thereby leading to further financial development. Financial 
development,  in  turn,  leads  to  lower  intermediation  costs  and  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital. 
Allocating  resources  to  the  most  productive  investment  opportunities  will  ultimately  increase  the 
potential economic growth. For example, a research study estimates the benefits from the integration 
of European bonds and equity markets to be around 1% of GDP growth over a ten-year period, or 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 1
approximately  €100  billion.1  While  these  figures  can  be  subject  to  estimation  error,  economic 
reasoning suggests that the overall benefits of financial integration will remain significant. 
As you know, Europe urgently needs to strengthen growth and increase employment, which are the 
two  main  goals  of  the  recently  renewed  Lisbon  programme.  The  need  to  proceed  with  structural 
reforms  in  Europe  is  not  confined  to  the  “real”  side  of  the  economy,  like  the  necessity  to  enhance 
flexibility in the European labour markets, but applies also to financial integration. Financial markets 
that are not yet fully integrated imply a cost in terms of foregone economic growth.  
Furthermore,  as  a  central  banker,  I  am  very  conscious  of  the  fact  that  a  well-integrated  financial 
system  is  essential  for  the  implementation  of  our  monetary  policy,  as  it  enhances  the  smooth  and 
effective transmission of monetary policy impulses throughout the euro area. Indeed, if the financial 
system were not fully integrated, the single monetary policy decisions may have an asymmetric impact 
on the different regions of the euro area. The degree of financial integration is therefore important in 
determining the effectiveness of this transmission: the higher the degree of financial integration, the 
more effectively this transmission will work in practice. 
Finally, I would also like to mention that financial integration is relevant for our task – as provided for 
by  the  Treaty  –  of  contributing  to  the  safeguarding  of  financial  stability.2  Financial  system  stability 
requires  the  financial  system’s  principal  components  to  be  jointly  capable  of  absorbing  adverse 
disturbances. It also requires that the financial system is facilitating a smooth and efficient reallocation 
of  financial  resources  from  savers  to  investors,  that  financial  risk  is  being  assessed  and  priced 
accurately and that risks are being efficiently managed. Inefficiencies in the reallocation of capital or 
shortcomings in the pricing of risk can compromise future financial system stability. A lack of financial 
stability can therefore be related directly to inefficiencies that may arise from a non-integrated financial 
system.  
Being  aware  of  the  links  between  financial  integration  and  financial  stability  is  therefore  essential. 
These links are twofold. On the one hand, integrated financial markets offer better opportunities for 
financing  and  risk  diversification.  As  the  pool  of  available  assets  for  investment  is  broadened, 
potentially enhancing the heterogeneity of financial institutions’ portfolios, the ensuing wider spread of 
portfolio-related  risks  should  reinforce  the  resilience  and  shock-absorption  capacity  of  financial 
intermediaries,  thus  improving  the  soundness  and  robustness  of  the  financial  system.  On  the  other 
hand,  financial  integration  implies  a  structural  transformation  of  the  financial  system,  including  the 
creation of intensified cross-border financial links and therefore calls for new appropriate measures to 
ensure financial stability in a renewed integrated financial system context. 
To  summarise,  the  effects  of  financial  integration  on  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  can  be 
expected to be positive in the long run. The structural transformation of the financial system through 
enhanced financial integration requires that we closely monitor the financial integration process. 
The conceptual background for the ECB’s assessment of the state of European financial 
integration 
I would now like to discuss the conceptual background for our understanding and assessment of the 
process of European financial integration.  
Under the Treaty, the Eurosystem acts “in accordance with the principle of an open market economy 
with  free  competition,  favouring  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources”.3  This  general  principle  also 
determines  the  Eurosystem’s  view  that  financial  integration  is  first  and  foremost  a  market-driven 
process.  
In addition to this, the Eurosystem sees it as a basic task of public authorities to create a framework 
that  is  conducive  to  fostering  financial  integration.  If  the  opportunities  thus  created  have  been 
                                                      
1   London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macro-economic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to 
the European Commission. 
2   The ECB publishes the outcome of its monitoring of euro area-wide financial stability in its Financial Stability Review. See 
the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview200512en.pdf for the December 2005 Financial 
Stability Review. 
3   See Article 105(1) of the Treaty establishing the European Community. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2006
exploited  by  market  forces,  true  financial  integration  will  have  been  achieved  and  its  benefits  been 
reaped fully. 
To  make  these  concepts  operational,  the  ECB  has  adopted  the  following  definition  of  financial 
integration:  we  consider  the  market  for  a  given  set  of  financial  instruments  or  services  to  be  fully 
integrated when all potential market participants in such market (i) are subject to a single set of rules 
when they decide to deal with those financial instruments or services, (ii) have equal access to this set 
of financial instruments or services, and (iii) are treated equally when they operate in the market. 
While, in practice, we are facing a process of financial integration, this definition describes a state of 
full,  or  perfect,  integration.  By  providing  a  benchmark  against  which  we  can  assess  the  state  of 
financial integration, this definition underpins our analytical and empirical analysis.  
A natural basis for the development of quantitative measures of financial integration is to check the 
validity of the law of one price. The law of one price states that assets with identical risks and returns 
characteristics should be priced identically regardless of where they are transacted. The law of one 
price is in fact an implication of our definition of financial integration: if all agents face the same rules, 
have equal access and are treated equally, any price difference between two identical assets will be 
immediately arbitraged away. 
Still, there are cases where the law of one price is not directly applicable. For instance, an asset may 
not be allowed to be listed on another region’s exchange. While the law of one price has little to say 
about this case, we would consider this to be an obstacle to financial integration. Our wider definition 
of financial integration in fact also encompasses such obstacles to financial integration. 
The current state of European financial integration, including some selected Eurosystem 
activities and EU policy issues 
This  background  information  leads  me  now  to  the  main  part  of  my  speech,  namely  to  illustrate  the 
current state and the evolution of financial integration in the euro area.  
Last  September,  the  ECB  published,  for  the  first  time,  a  set  of  indicators  regarding  the  state  of 
integration  of  euro  area  financial  and  banking  markets,  along  with  an  explanatory  report.  With  this 
publication, the ECB aims to regularly measure and monitor financial integration in the euro area.4  
We  consider  two  broad  categories  of  indicators.  Price-based  indicators  measure  discrepancies  in 
asset prices based on their geographic origin. Quantity-based indicators are used to investigate the 
extent  to  which  investors engage  in  cross-border  asset  portfolios.  Such  quantitative  measures  offer 
the advantage of being able to assess both the current level of financial integration and its evolution 
over time, i.e. whether integration is progressing, stable, or even regressing.  
A  number  of  previous  speakers  at  the  Campus  for  Finance  2006  have  looked  at  specific  financial 
market  segments,  inter  alia  the  government  bond  market,  corporate  bond  markets,  equity  markets, 
securitisation markets and debt markets. I will now cover all these major market segments from the 
point of view of the state of their integration. I will also touch upon selected Eurosystem activities that 
aim to foster financial integration, and highlight some of the EU policy issues in this field. 
Our first publication covers the money market, the government and corporate bond market, the equity 
market and the banking markets. While the euro generally acted as a major catalyst for the integration 
of all these markets, the degree of integration differs between market segments, with integration being 
more advanced in those market segments that are closer to the single monetary policy, above all the 
money market. So let me start with the money market.  
Our indicators for the euro money market measure integration on the basis of the dispersion of lending 
rates for actual transactions or rates offered by EONIA, EURIBOR and EUREPO panel banks.5
The unsecured interbank deposit market was almost perfectly integrated right at the start of Monetary 
Union. The cross-country standard deviation of the average overnight lending rates among euro area 
                                                      
4   The  ECB  report  is  available  at  http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/indicatorsfinancialintegration200509en.pdf  on  the  ECB’s 
website. Updates will be published annually. 
5   Data  referring  to  the  time  before  the  introduction  of  EONIA  and  EURIBOR  are  average  overnight,  one-month,  12-month 
rates, respectively, of euro area countries. 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 3
countries was as low as three basis points in early 1999 and has since then decreased to just one 
basis point. Just to give for comparison a figure from the time before Monetary Union, let me mention 
that  in  January  1998,  i.e.  one  year  before  the  start  of  Monetary  Union,  the  cross-country  standard 
deviation was still higher than 130 basis points.  
In fact, such integration is a sine qua non for monetary policy implementation, since only an integrated 
interbank market ensures an even distribution of central bank liquidity and a homogeneous level of 
short-term interest rates across the euro area. And this rapid integration has been mostly supported by 
the establishment of the related payment system infrastructure, i.e. our TARGET system, which has 
been  operational  since  the  first  day  of  Monetary  Union.  The  launch  of  the  single  shared  platform, 
TARGET2,  planned  for  November  2007,  will  enhance  financial  integration  even  further,  as  it  will 
provide  a  harmonised  level  of  service  and  a  single  price  structure  for  domestic  and  cross-border 
payments.  The  running  of  this  large-value  payment  system  is  a  very  concrete  example  of  how  we 
provide central banking services that are conducive to fostering financial integration. 
Our  indicators  for  one-month  and  12-month  maturities  also  consistently  show  a  highly  integrated 
unsecured money market, with the respective cross-country standard deviation of EURIBOR lending 
rates among euro area countries standing, since early 1999, at values not higher than, and normally 
below, one basis point.  
Finally,  our  indicators  also  confirm  a  relatively  high  degree  of  integration  for  the  repo  market.  The 
EUREPO index was launched in March 2002, and since then, the euro area cross-country standard 
deviation  of  the  one-month  EUREPO  rates  has  been  around,  and  normally  below,  one  basis  point. 
The indicator for the 12-month maturity shows a standard deviation of around, and normally below, 
two basis points.  
The decisive role of the euro in enhancing financial market integration is also visible in the interest rate 
derivatives markets. A particularly important segment is the euro interest rate swap market (including, 
for example, the euro overnight index swap market). This has, in fact, become the largest interest rate 
swap market in the world![6
The  least  integrated  money  market  segment  is  the  short-term  securities  market.  The  European 
commercial paper and certificates of deposit markets are segmented in several market places. But I 
expect  that  the  current  fragmentation  will  be  reduced  in  the  future  as  a  result  of  the  Short-Term 
European Paper (STEP) initiative, led by ACI – The Financial Markets Association. The purpose of 
this  initiative  is  to  promote  the  convergence  of  standards  and  practices  prevailing  in  the  European 
short-term securities  markets,  which  is expected  to provide  an  impulse  towards  integration,  thereby 
increasing  the  market’s  depth  and  liquidity.  The  promoters  of  this  initiative  expect  the  first  STEP-
labelled programme to be issued early this year. The Eurosystem acts as a catalyst and supports this 
market-led initiative. In particular, it will provide technical support for the labelling process for some 
time and will produce and publish STEP statistics on yields and volumes.  
I will now move on to the government bond market. Government bond markets have achieved a very 
high degree of integration, mainly due to the disappearance of intra-euro area exchange rate risk and 
the convergence of inflation expectations across countries by the time the euro was introduced. Since 
then, government bond yields in different euro area countries have been driven mainly by euro area-
wide factors and news. 
A simple way to quantify the degree of integration in this market segment is to look at developments in 
the standard deviation of yield spreads over time: the lower the dispersion, the higher the degree of 
integration.  Our  respective  indicator  shows  a  significant  drop  in  the  run-up  to  the  start  of  Monetary 
Union and, since then, the standard deviation has remained close to zero.  
Another  indicator  is  the  “beta-convergence”,  that  is  based  on  the  economic  intuition  that  the  more 
integrated the market is, the more bond yields should react to common factors instead of local factors. 
The  “betas”  represent  the  estimated  correlation  of  changes  in  a  government  bond  yield  of  a  given 
country with changes in a respective benchmark bond. It results that the betas varied substantially up 
to 1998 and converged afterwards towards the integration level.  
                                                      
6   With a daily turnover of around €250 billion, the euro interest rate swap market is about one third larger than the equivalent 
US dollar segment (around €160 billion). The total of euro interest rate OTC derivatives contracts reaches a daily turnover of 
around €380 billion, and is thereby larger than the US dollar  segment (a daily turnover of around  €290 billion). See BIS 
Triennial Central Bank Survey – Foreign exchange and derivatives market activity in 2004 (March 2005). 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2006
Let  me  stress  here  an  important  point.  In  assessing  the  indicators  of  the  financial  integration  of 
European government bond markets, it of course has to be borne in mind that movements related to 
changes  in  the  credit  risk  perceptions  by  the  market  do  not  signal  a  variation  in  the  degree  of 
integration.  Such “local  news”  will continue  to  have an  impact  on  bond  yields in  different countries. 
Integration of European government bond markets means that yields converge across countries to the 
extent  that  the  underlying  bonds  have  identical  risk-return  characteristics.  A  government  bond  of  a 
country with a higher fiscal deficit is riskier than a government bond of a country with a lower deficit. 
Consequently, it is to be expected that yields in the first case are higher than government bond yields 
of the country with the lower deficit, even with perfect integration of government bond markets. There 
is, therefore, no contradiction between European financial integration, as promoted by our published 
indicators, and the ECB’s view that markets should accurately price different budgetary policies into 
bond  yields. And,  let  me mention  this by  way  of  digression,  as a  result  of  the  still  existing  different 
fiscal  positions  of  Member  States,  we  continue  to  observe  the  market  participants’  perception  of 
differences  in  credit  risk.  Let  me  mention  finally  that  ensuring  the  proper  functioning  of  the  overall 
fiscal  framework  would  be  an  effective  way  of  contributing  to  enhance  the  growth  prospects  of  the 
euro area.  
I will now turn to the euro corporate bond market, which has grown considerably since 1999. While 
this  market  had  been  predominantly  open  to  the  highest  quality  credits,  it  has  since  broadened  to 
facilitate  the  funding  needs  of  riskier  issuers.  The  degree  of  integration  of  the  euro  corporate  bond 
market is reasonably high. Typically, the yield on a corporate bond depends on a number of factors, 
such as the credit rating, time-to-maturity, liquidity and cash flow structure. Our indicators for the state 
of  integration  of  the  euro  corporate  bond  market  are  based  on  (econometric)  models,  investigating 
whether or not risk-adjusted yield spreads have a systematic country component. Our studies suggest 
that  this  market  segment  is  fairly  integrated  in  the  sense  that  the  country  of  issuance  is  only  of 
marginal importance in explaining yield differentials.  
Other market segments have even more potential for greater integration. In fact, the euro area equity 
markets  are  still  quite  fragmented,  but  a  gradual  integration  process  is  ongoing.  For  example,  our 
indicators show that stock prices across the euro area increasingly react to euro area-wide factors and 
news.  Another  indicator  to  measure  the  degree  of  integration  in  euro  area  equity  markets  is  the 
relative importance of sector versus country-based investment strategies. The indicator is derived by 
calculating  and  comparing  the  cross-sector  dispersion  with  the  cross-country  dispersion  of  equity 
returns.  The  more  integrated  the  euro  area  equity  market,  the  greater  the  benefits  of  spreading 
investments across sectors as opposed to country-based equity investment strategies. Our statistics 
show that the elimination of intra-euro area currency risk has encouraged integration in the sense that 
the “home bias” in the equity holdings of institutional investors has been significantly reduced. Yet, the 
country  effect  is  still  too  important  for  it  to  be  concluded  that  the  euro  area  equity  market  is  fully 
satisfactorily integrated.  
As regards the further integration of securities (i.e. bonds and equity) markets, a prominent role should 
be attached to the securities clearing and settlement infrastructure. The Eurosystem strongly supports 
further integration in the securities infrastructure, the lack of which has also been identified by the so-
called Giovannini Group as a barrier to integration that should be removed. To this end, the ECB takes 
part in the work of respective expert groups set up by the European Commission. Furthermore, in the 
central  bank’s  role  as  a  catalyst  for  collective  private-sector  activities,  meetings  are  held  with 
representatives  from  the banking  and securities  settlement  industry  of  the  euro  area  to  discuss  the 
further integration of the euro securities settlement industry. I would also like to highlight the work that 
we  have  been  carrying  out  in  cooperation  with  the  Committee  of  European  Securities  Regulators 
(CESR): last October we published standards for securities clearing and settlement systems in the EU 
that  aim  to  adapt  international  recommendations  to  the  European  context.7  These  ESCB-CESR 
standards  are  conducive  to  the  integration  of  EU  capital  markets,  placing  emphasis  on  common 
solutions and interoperability between systems. 
Finally, I will move on to the banking markets. Here, the degree of integration differs for the various 
types of banking activities, i.e. capital market-related activities, interbank (or wholesale) activities, and 
retail banking.  
                                                      
7   See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/escb-cesr-standardssecurities2004en.pdf. 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 5
Cross-border  interbank  loans  and  holdings  of  securities  have,  in  relative  terms,  experienced 
substantial growth. While securities issued by non-monetary financial institutions of another euro area 
country  accounted  for  only  16%  of  the  securities  held  by  euro  area  monetary  financial  institutions 
(MFIs) at the end of 1997, this share has now reached almost 40%, pointing to a higher degree of 
capital market integration in the euro area. In addition, although loans granted between domestic MFIs 
still  account  for  more  than  50%  of  the  total  EU  MFI  loans,  the  respective  euro  area  cross-border 
activity has increased from just 15% at the end of 1997 to around 23% at present (the remaining ones 
consist of cross border loans to non-euro area EU countries).  
And last but not least, integration in retail banking has, by contrast, not progressed to any great extent, 
as  shown  by  both  price  and  quantity-based  indicators.  For  example,  while  the  share  of  euro  area 
cross-border MFI loans granted to non-MFIs stood at 2% at the end of 1997, this figure has risen to no 
more than 3.5% today. Moreover, as a price-based indicator, the cross-country standard deviation of 
interest rates on consumer credit has been rather high and constant, on average 0.9% over the past 
three  years.  To  give  a  final  indicator  for  the  level  of  retail  banking  integration,  the  cross-country 
dispersion of interest rates on lending for house purchase amounts to, on average, 0.5% over the past 
three  years,  with  no  clear  declining  trend  visible  as  yet,  thus  confirming  the  picture  of  the  not  very 
benign integration of the euro area credit market.  
Following up on this final indicator regarding the cross-country dispersion of interest rates on lending 
for  house  purchase,  let  me  also  refer  to  a  few  initiatives  regarding  the  further  integration  of  the 
European mortgage market, which is important with an outstanding volume of more than €4 trillion in 
residential mortgage debt that corresponds to around 40% of EU GDP. As the European Commission 
announced in its recent White Paper on Financial Services Policy 2005-20108 where, among others, 
the further integration of retail markets in Europe has been targeted, it will release a White Paper this 
year on mortgage credit in the EU. With its earlier public consultation on this matter, the European 
Commission  has  launched  a  broad  discussion  about  the  possible  benefits  and  ways  of  further 
integrating European mortgage markets. 
The Eurosystem believes that this kind of investigation into the possible benefits of and obstacles to 
the further integration of European mortgage markets is warranted, and the Eurosystem published its 
observations  in  a  recent  contribution.9  More  generally,  this  contribution  can  also  be  seen  as  an 
example  of  the  Eurosystem’s  role  in  providing  advice  on  shaping  the  legislative  and  regulatory 
framework for the financial system to be conducive to financial integration. 
And as with securities markets, retail markets also need an integrated infrastructure in order to reap 
the  full  benefits  of  financial  integration.  European  citizens’  cross-border  banking  activities,  such  as 
mortgage credit, also depend on the further developments in and costs of cross-border payments. In 
this respect, let me mention, as a final example of our contribution to fostering financial integration, the 
Eurosystem’s support, together with the European Commission, for the banking industry’s initiative to 
create a Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA), with which European citizens should be able to make 
payments throughout the euro area from a single bank account, and using a single set of payment 
instruments,  as  easily  and  safely  as  in  the  national  context  today.  Acting  as  a  catalyst  for  private-
sector  activities,  the  ECB  actively  supports  this  initiative  by  the  European  Payments  Council.  High-
level coordination takes place between the Eurosystem and the banking industry, and the ECB has 
arranged a number of meetings involving SEPA end-users. A large amount of work still lies ahead, for 
which we count on the industry’s commitment to deliver the results of the SEPA project as foreseen. In 
this respect, I recall that the first SEPA milestone is that, by 2008, in parallel to national instruments, 
banks should provide to customers also SEPA instruments. A second milestone involves that national 
infrastructures  migrate  to  a  pan-European  payments  infrastructure,  via  complete  interoperability 
between  SEPA  compliant  infrastructures,  by  the  end  of  2010,  so  that  full  competition  applies  to  all 
euro area infrastructures. 
* * *  
Ladies and gentlemen, dear students, 
                                                      
8   See the European Commission’s website at http://europa.eu.int/comm/internal_market/finances/policy/index_en.htm, dated 
5 December 2005. 
9   See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/eumortgagecreditconsultationen.pdf, dated 1 December 2005. 
6 
 BIS Review 2/2006
An analysis of the state of European financial integration and the monitoring of its progress over time 
are  prerequisites  for  possible  action  in  those  fields  where  the  analysis  has  identified  gaps  and 
shortcomings, in order to reap the full economic benefits from financial integration.  
Given today’s event and the number of students I see in the audience, let me also mention that the 
“raw”  data  and  time  series  underlying  our  indicators  are  published  on  the  ECB’s  website  and  can 
therefore  be  accessed  and  used  by  all  interested  parties  who  would  like  to  work  in  this  fascinating 
area.10 I strongly encourage you to take advantage of this opportunity and to make your contribution to 
our understanding in this important area of research. Events such as the Campus for Finance are very 
important  to  enhance  the  dialogue  between  academics  and  practitioners.  European  financial 
integration, in which the ECB has such a strong interest, is indeed one area where academics and 
practitioners could usefully benefit from closer cooperation.  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                      
10  The  statistics  underlying 
the 
the  ECB’s  website  at 
http://www.ecb.int/stats/finint/html/index.en.html. The indicators will be updated semi-annually. The set of indicators will also 
be further expanded in 2006, in particular by adding indicators related to market infrastructures and financial institutions. 
indicators  can  be  accessed  on 
integration 
financial 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 7
