Shamshad Akhtar: Financial sector of Pakistan – the roadmap 
Inaugural address by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Dawn Asia 
Finance Conference - Asian Banking: A Paradigm Shift, Karachi, 13 May 2006. 
 The  financial  system  in  Pakistan  has  grown  substantially,  benefiting  from  multi-pronged  financial 
reforms. These reforms have been pursued persistently and vigorously over a decade or so and have 
supported  economic  growth.  The  inefficiencies  and  weaknesses,  which  were  typical  of  banks’ 
operations in the pre-reforms era, have been reduced radically. We have now started to realize the 
dividends of reforms in the form of a healthier, sounder and stronger banking system. Liberalization 
and deregulation, core pillars of the reform measures, have served to enhance the size of the banking 
system  both  in  terms  of  the  number  of  banks  and  growth  in  credit,  besides  instilling  a  degree  of 
competition in the banking industry.  
However, the task of financial sector reforms is far from accomplished. Given the changing dynamics 
of the economy and its growing complexities and accompanying associated risks, the financial industry 
has to remain responsive and supportive of the broader economic ambitions and agenda. The country 
can  neither  afford  slippages  nor  can  we  visualize  the  future  dispensation  of  the  banking  system  of 
Pakistan.  All  the  major  players  and  stakeholders  in  the  banking  system  will  have  to  strive  for 
continuity, broadening and deepening of reforms, build and sustain the already implemented reforms 
and  fill  the  remaining  fissures. The growing competition  along with  increasingly  diversified services, 
both  across  the  regions  and  sectors,  and  improved  access  to  customer-base  on  the  back  of 
progressive  reliance  on  technology,  are  the  harbingers  of  the  changing  and  efficient  intermediation 
role of banks in the days ahead.  
In order to develop the future outlook, I will now examine both the emerging domestic and external 
trends, which potentially impact the future financial sector architecture: its structure, texture and the 
operations of financial institutions. In this respect, eight factors are generally believed to have been the 
major drivers of change in the financial industry the world over. They include: 
1)  Macroeconomic performance and priorities 
2)  Deregulation and market forces 
3)  Product innovation 
4)  Globalization 
5)  Technological advancements 
6)  Universal banking 
7)  Risk Management and Mitigation 
8)  Changing Role of and demands on the Regulator 
These forces, to a varying degree, will play a more dominant role in shaping the future complexion of 
the  financial  sector  and  its  institutions  and  entail  far  reaching  implications  in  terms  of  stimulating 
increased competition, greater consolidation, increased diversification and enhanced dynamism in the 
financial players and markets. The central bank, along with major players in the market, will continue 
to develop and refine the mutual vision and plan for the financial system of Pakistan. All key players 
will  have  to  correspondingly  position  themselves,  change  their  attitudes,  and  be  responsive  to 
collectively  transform  the  financial  system  of  Pakistan  into  a  dynamic  and  efficient  arm  of  the 
economy. This can be attained if the financial system meets the divergent needs of all segments of the 
economy  by  providing  a  wide  array  of  financial  services  based  on  the  use  of  globally  competitive 
technology, highly skilled human resources and harnessing global best practices. Equally critical for 
regulators, are the aspects of the stability and robustness of the financial system and as such there 
will  have  to be  further  refinements  in  the  domestic  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  to  align  it 
more closely with international standards, while taking due notice of the attendant and emerging global 
and domestic challenge and risks. 
I will now elaborate on the forces and factors which might be directly or indirectly related to the future 
performance and standing of the financial system of Pakistan. 
BIS Review 42/2006 
 1
Macroeconomic performance and priorities 
Financial system of any country has an intrinsic relationship and needs to be shaped in accordance 
with  the  broader  economic  needs,  structure  and  policies.  Considering  this    interdependence,  it  is 
imperative to assess the behavior and trends of the key macroeconomic indicators while drawing the 
emerging contours of the financial system. In this respect, the major indicators of the economy during 
the last few years have shown robust performance. GDP growth shot up to over 8 percent in FY05 and 
the  current  year  also  promises  higher  than  6  percent  growth.  Undoubtedly,  consistent  and  stable 
economic policies provided the businesses with confidence. However, easy availability of funds on the 
back of historically low level of interest rates proved to be the real catalyst for the subsequent sharp 
growth in credit to the manufacturing sector and eventually proved to be the real determinant of high 
GDP growth. Strong credit demand of the manufacturing sector translated into a sharp increase in the 
interest  income  of  the  banking  system,  giving  rise  to  unprecedented  profits  and  healthier  balance 
sheets during the last two years. Redeployment of these profits to augment financial services will help 
meet the growing economic requirements. 
The near term economic prospects are promising. The continued strong pace of economic activities, 
and plans to launch widespread infrastructure reforms offer strong business prospects for the financial 
sector. Real interest rates remain at tolerable limits. Notwithstanding, there will be demand pressures 
in particular if the trade deficit grows out of proportion and inflationary tendencies continue to persist. A 
consequent  fall  in  demand  for  credit  or  a  possible  impairment  of  the  debt  repayment  capacity  of 
borrowers does carry the risk of reversing the current gains enjoyed by the banking system. But these 
risks are being well managed and if the economy continues the growth momentum for the next decade 
or so, the financial system of Pakistan is expected to reap benefits out of rising incomes, consumption 
and emerging investment demands. 
Traditionally,  infrastructure  projects  fell  in  the  public  sector’s  domain  of  activities.  However,  recent 
years  have  seen  a  paradigm  shift  in  this  area,  with  the  growing  interest  of  the  private  sector  to 
undertake such projects. There exists immense potential for the financial institutions to finance such 
infrastructure projects built on public-private partnerships or even exclusively in the private sector. This 
will help diversify their activities as well as enhance their earnings. Similarly, financial institutions can 
take  advantage  of  the  changing  demographic  patterns,  rising  incomes  and  enhancement  of  policy 
priorities for various sectors. These trends are already visible as reflected by the increasing proportion 
of  urban  population,  rising  literacy  rates,  and  the  increasing  share  of  the  industrial  and  services 
sectors in GDP.  
The  financing  to  SME,  Agriculture,  and  Micro  finance  segments  of  the  economy  carries  special 
importance with respect to future economic growth and diversification of banks’ loan portfolios. The 
State Bank will accord further priority to improving access of development finance to these segments 
and  will  work  with  the  provincial  and  local  governments  to  facilitate  a  conducive  environment,  and 
supportive  financial  and  legal  infrastructure  to  give  impetus  to  economic  growth  and  poverty 
alleviation. The banks will have to strengthen their systems to meet the challenges and opportunities 
arising out of their venture into these segments.  
Deregulation, market forces and consolidation 
The spate of liberalization and deregulation measures in recent years has unleashed strong forces of 
competition. These are fast defining the future course of Pakistan’s financial sector. Emerging role of 
the private sector has displaced the public sector from its dominant position, giving rise to aggressive 
competition across the market operators, and the market pressure by the stakeholders to perform is 
going  to  result  in  fiercer  competition.  This  is  expected  to  change  the  business  landscape  and 
chemistry of the competition as market players will have to use fresh thinking on financial products and 
the structure of the market, and focus on value creation to survive. 
The  stiffening  licensing  policy  and  regulatory  capital  requirements  are  already  posing  a  great 
challenge to the small banks, and with gradual enhancement of the minimum capital requirements in 
the coming years, they will have to either inject more capital to become compliant or amalgamate with 
other  financial  institutions,  or  as  a  last  option,  exit  the  market.  The  current  trend  depicts  that  new 
entrants, only allowed by way of strategic partnership in existing banks and/or new Islamic banks, are 
coming in with higher capital. More so, consolidation of financial institutions is well underway and is 
likely  to  lead  to  the  emergence  of  fewer  but  stronger  institutions  to  meet  the  challenges  of  the 
increasingly complicated financial environment of the future. The competitive environment might also 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2006
force financial institutions to specialize in offering certain types of services based on their respective 
expertise and market niches.  
Product innovation 
In  a  sharp  contrast  to  international  trends,  the  financial  system  of  Pakistan  has  been  lacking  in 
developing  innovative  products  to  meet  the  diversified  needs  of  different  customers.  However,  the 
emerging financial scenario characterized by intense competition leaves little room for complacency in 
developing new and attractive products on both the asset and liability sides. Product innovation and 
developing  brand  loyalty  by  creating  specialized  products  will  decide  the  volumes  of  business  and 
market  shares  in  the  future.  Presently,  the  absence  of  specialized  liability  products  is  most 
conspicuous.  The  growing  awareness  among  investors  and  the  expected  development  of  other 
avenues  of  funds’  deployment  e.g.  the  long  term  fixed  income  and  mutual  funds  market  provide 
attractive alternatives. Thus the financial institutions which take initiative of these kinds are likely to 
grab greater market share of funds in the future. 
Ideally,  greater  liberalization  with  ensuing  competition  should  have  led  to  a  narrowing  down  of 
spreads.  However,  in  case  of  Pakistan,  there  appears  to  exist  a  somewhat  paradoxical  situation, 
where  banks  are  able  to  widen  their  spreads  mainly  because  they  enjoy  comparative  advantage  in 
offering unique banking services, primarily because of the almost non-existent competition from non-
bank finance companies and a dormant institutional finance industry as pension and insurance sector 
reforms  have  yet  to  catch  up  with  other  financial  sector  reforms.  However,  the  future  promises 
emergence  of  competitive  non-bank companies which  offer alternative  sources  of  investments.  And 
banks will need to generate fee-based income to fill the gap created by declining interest incomes. 
Pakistan’s market has a huge room for the development of derivatives and synthetic products. The 
growing  financial  engineering  of  services  and  products  requires  greater  attention  to  the  hedging  of 
risks. Financial institutions need to increase their role as risk managers to corporate and other entities 
by offering a variety of derivative products.  
Financial institutions are also expected to employ processes and practices, which could help them to 
become more cost effective and efficient. Certain traditional services might also be outsourced to gain 
efficiency and focus on core areas as competition might not be the only rule of the game. The financial 
institutions might also cooperate in offering certain types of services. Presently, this is reflected in the 
networking of ATMs. This co-optation is expected to become the order of the day as banks seek to 
enlarge their customer base and at the same time realize cost reduction and greater efficiency. 
Globalization 
With the falling barriers to capital mobility and opening up of financial services in the wake of WTO, 
globalization of financial services is expected to accelerate in coming days. As the financial institutions 
gains size, competitive edge and develop their systems at par with the global practices, it would be 
profitable  to  seek  greater  opportunities  offered  by  the  large  financial  markets  around  the  globe. 
Particularly, opportunities in emerging and regional future economic power hubs are bright. Moreover, 
higher trade activities are also likely to give boost to banks’ role in forex business and their support to 
corporate customers to expand their business across the borders. 
So far, Pakistani banks have performed fairly well against the foreign banks operating in the country. 
Lately, under the intense competition put up by the local banks due to significant improvement in their 
processes, foreign banks have been on the retreat even in the areas where they used to enjoy virtual 
monopoly.  However,  with  the  increasing  trade  volumes  in  relation  to  GDP  and  growing  overseas 
business opportunities for Pakistani corporates, as well as increasing capital flows, the large foreign 
banks  would find  considerable  scope  to  capitalize  on  their  expertise  due  to  their  established  global 
position and awareness of different markets around the world. 
Technology 
Technology  helps  to  catalyze  efficiency  in  the  provision  of  financial  services  and  ultimately  in 
determining  the  winners  in  the  intensely  competitive  financial  markets  of  the  future.  Technological 
breakthroughs  have  forced  fundamental  changes  in  the  financial  industry:  strategic  business  plans 
BIS Review 42/2006 
 3
have taken into account new ways of doing businesses, launching e-banking, and using information 
and technology for developing better internal controls, more sophisticated risk management systems 
and  better  and  convenient  customer  services.  Hence  it  is  critical  that  Pakistan’s  financial  industry 
adopts  an  appropriate  organizational  model  that  supports  a  customer-centric  approach  and 
reengineers business processes to exploit technology to derive economies of scale and create cost 
efficiencies.  
The use of ATMs and e-banking products is gaining currency and almost all banks have established 
networking of their ATMs with the interconnectivity of switches. Better outreach offered by ATMs will 
enhance  the  customer  base  and  offer  more  alternatives  and  choices  to  customers.  Further 
development  on  e-banking  and  internet  banking  will  open  up  new  avenues  like  on-line  banking. 
Among others, the relatively smaller size banks will be able to compete with the large banks and retain 
their market presence by using technology more effectively.  
Technology tends to have a high degree of obsolescence. Thus, the financial institutions will have to 
invest heavily in the development of their IT systems, which might initially burden their resources. For 
this purpose, the financial industry will have to optimize its resources for technology applications. The 
immediate  solution  might  lie  in  sharing  of  facilities.  Banks  in  Pakistan  are  already  cooperating 
extensively  in  using  ATMs  services.  The  future  areas  of  cooperation  might  involve  payment  and 
settlement, back-office processing, data warehousing etc. At the same time, financial institutions will 
also have to raise adequate safeguards to deal with the associated operational risks. This would invite 
special focus of their management in the future.  
Universal banking 
Universal banking has gained sharp acceptance as traditional boundaries of financial service provision 
have  become  blurred.  In  addition  to  their  conventional  commercial  banking  services,  banks  have 
withdrawn  from  specialization  to  offering  a  broad  menu  of  services.  This  presents  the  banks  with 
opportunities as well as challenges and requires constant development of their expertise in the new 
areas of their operations.  
The idea of universal banking, which is still evolving in Pakistan, is likely to galvanize the non-banking 
financial sector in developing competitive products and use modern technology to secure themselves 
against  banks  making  inroads  into  their  traditional  areas  of  operations.  This  is  likely  to  give  further 
impetus to competition in the financial sector for the provision of quality financial services. 
At the same time this might catalyze mergers among banks and non-bank financial institutions for their 
mutual  survival.  This  trend  may  lead  logically  to  promoting  the  concept  of  a  financial  super  market 
chain,  making  available  all  types  of  credit  and  non-fund  facilities  under  one  roof  or  in  terms  of 
specialized  subsidiaries  under  one  over-arching  organization.  Consolidated  accounting  and 
supervisory  techniques  would  have  to  evolve  and  appropriate  firewalls  built  to  address  the  risks 
underlying such large organizations and banking conglomerates. 
Risk management 
The above-mentioned forces of change have significantly increased the importance of strengthening 
the risk-management practices of the financial system. With the proliferation of new techniques and 
financial institutions venturing into new areas, a whole range of market related risks have surfaced. 
This will render the traditional risk-management techniques obsolete as new derivative products and 
off-balance sheet operations become more common. The hitherto neglected area of operational risk 
management has also come to assume greater importance and the pervasive use of technology has 
multiplied the importance of managing this risk in tomorrow’s more volatile banking environment. The 
financial  institutions  now  have  to  have  enough  paraphernalia  to  tackle  these  risks  in  line  with  the 
international  best  practices.  In  this  respect,  risk-management  tools  built  upon  the  latest  technology 
would provide the financial institutions to manage the host of new risks in a more efficient manner. 
This will enable them to deploy resources more effectively. 
The  importance  of  sophisticated risk-management  practices will  become  even more pronounced  as 
the  banks  strive  to  implement  the  Basel  II  accord.  The  smooth  switch  over  to  Basel  II  will  be  a 
challenging task before the banks, and this has far-reaching implications for the future structure of the 
banking  system.  Basel  II  would  require  a  heavy  investment  in  technology  and  development  of  MIS 
tools to incorporate the internal risk-based approach. The risk-based approach to capital allocation will 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2006
be the inherent theme, as each asset will be allocated a rating both externally and internally. This will 
ultimately influence the capital charge for each asset and would thus help minimize the reckless risk-
taking by banks on account of the heavy capital charge. 
As  financial  innovation  becomes  ubiquitous  and  new  technology  and  standards  evolve  to  make 
financial transactions more complex and volatile, the role of the regulators is going to become tougher 
in  the  days  ahead.  This  brings  me  to  the  concluding,  but  not  the  least  important  section,  i.e.  the 
changing role of and expectations and demands for regulators. 
Changing role of regulator 
The central bank has been transformed substantially. It is today a very user friendly institution, based 
on feedback of the industry. It is candid in putting forth its views, and over the years has withstood a 
number of political challenges. 
Over  the  next  few  years,  we  plan  to  :  First,  with  the  support  of  the  Government,  launch  adequate 
initiatives to strengthen the governance of the central bank. In this context, SBP is in the process of 
benchmarking itself with the other central banks that have attained good governance standards. The 
evaluation  of  central  banks’  governance  practices  is  judged  on  the  basis  of  the  roles  and 
responsibilities  of  the  Management  and  the  Board  of  Directors,  and  the  appropriate  interaction  and 
interface between the central bank and the government. In deciding an appropriate balance in these 
roles and responsibilities, it is critical that central bank’s independence is not compromised in terms of 
the conduct of monetary policy as well as the oversight of the financial sector. In all contexts, it has to 
be  recognized  that  independence  has  to  be  accompanied  by  effective  accountability  of  the  central 
bank. The institution has to be accountable to the Parliament and the Senate, and work in conformity 
with the Federal Government’s goals, as the central bank, among other functions, also serves as an 
advisor to the Government. 
Second,  SBP  needs  to  examine  where  there  is  further  need  for  internal  strengthening.  Few  areas 
where SBP will gear itself further would be in terms of increased responsive to industry changes in 
order to align prudential regulations accordingly. Among others, SBP needs to be equipped to assess 
banks when they adopt higher standards of risk management which will be promoted when Basel II is 
introduced.  Another  area would  be  for  the  central  bank  to  strengthen  its  oversight  and  supervision, 
with particular emphasis on closer supervision of the emerging conglomerate structures in the banking 
industry as some of the commercial banks are now owned by industrial groups and brokers. 
Third, in conclusion, the central bank should energize itself to finance the under-served areas, regions 
and segments. And, the central bank would like to promote the Islamic Banking Industry, as it has the 
potential  to  introduce  innovations  in  the  market.  As  part  of  the  reorganization  of  the  central  bank, 
which is currently in process, we plan to set-up a separate department for development finance, which 
will push for this objective.  
Having assumed office in January, I am in the midst of developing a strategy for the next ten years of 
the  financial  sector,  and  my  talk  today  presents  some  ideological  thoughts  on  the  long-term  vision 
paper  for  the  central  bank,  which  will  be  developed  in  consultation  with  the  stakeholders.  We  then 
need to set up an implementation task force, which will be a combined effort of the banking industry 
and  the  central  bank  to  take  forward  these  reforms.  There  has  been  tremendous  change  in  the 
banking  industry  in  the  last  few  years  and  we  need  to  fine-tune  our  strategic  direction  as  we  go 
forward.  
BIS Review 42/2006 
 5
