Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at a dinner hosted by Scottish Financial 
Enterprise (SFE) and Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce (ECC), Edinburgh, 12 June 2006. 
 It  is  230  years  since  David  Hume  died  and  Adam  Smith  published  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and 
Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Economists will be forever indebted to two of the greatest minds of 
the  Scottish  Enlightenment.  Both  Smith  and  Hume  were  members  of  the  Poker  Club  in  Edinburgh, 
formed,  as  the  name  might  suggest,  to  stir  up  opinion  and  make  the  sparks  fly.  Alexander  Carlyle 
described the Club as so “frugal and moderate” that “a very constant attendant told me that he never 
observed even an approach of inebriation on any of the members”. Perhaps that’s why it faded away 
in the 1780s. In any event, I’m glad we are not at the Poker Club tonight, but enjoying your splendid 
hospitality here.  
Given Edinburgh’s importance to the Scottish Enlightenment, it is appropriate that I start by discussing 
an intellectual puzzle. The puzzle is the following. After 1945 governments felt they had the secret to 
managing  the  economy.  They  thought  that  by  boosting  the  level  of  demand  through  higher 
government spending and lower interest rates, they could secure permanently higher levels of output 
and employment. If we were prepared to accept a somewhat higher rate of inflation, then we could 
achieve a somewhat higher rate of economic growth. In other words, there was a trade-off between 
inflation, on the one hand, and employment and output, on the other.  
There did seem to be something to this proposition in the short run. But in the 1970s, economists and 
governments alike came to recognise that higher inflation did not, in the long run, lead to higher output 
and employment; rather it led simply to even higher inflation. Inflation accelerated if economic activity 
was run at too high a level. In other words, if we plot a graph with inflation on the vertical axis and 
unemployment  on  the  horizontal  axis,  we  should  expect  to  see  a  vertical  line.  In  the  jargon  of 
economists  this  is  known  as  a  vertical  Phillips  curve,  showing  that  there  is  no  trade-off  between 
inflation and unemployment in the long run (shown in Chart 1).  
This conventional wisdom has governed macroeconomic policy in almost all advanced – and indeed 
emerging market economies – ever since, and underlies our inflation targeting framework in the United 
Kingdom.  That’s  the  theory.  Does  it  work  in  practice?  Well,  if  you  plot  a  graph  of  inflation  against 
unemployment in the UK since the adoption of inflation targeting at the end of 1992, you find that far 
from  being  vertical,  the  Phillips  curve  has  in  fact  been  completely  horizontal  (see  Chart  2).  The 
conventional wisdom appears to have been overturned.  
Chart 1. The Vertical Phillips Curve 
Inflation (% )
15
10
5
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
Unemployment (% )
12
 Chart 2. The United Kingdom Phillips Curve, 1993-2005 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 1
Inflation (% )
15
10
5
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Unemployment (% )
 Source: ONS. The unemployment rate used here is the Labour Force Survey measure. Inflation is measured using the Retail 
Price Index excluding mortgage interest payments (RPIX). 
 
So  what  is  going  on?  The  explanation  is,  I  believe,  straightforward,  but  it  contains  some  important 
lessons for the conduct of monetary policy today. In the 1950s and 1960s our experience was that the 
rate of structural unemployment was rather stable, so that large swings in the growth rate of money 
spending eventually showed up in movements of inflation. In those circumstances the Phillips curve 
does  indeed  appear  vertical.  But  since  1992  monetary  policy  has  kept  inflation  broadly  constant  – 
within  1  percentage  point  of  its  target  every  single  month  since  December  1992  –  while  structural 
changes have reduced the sustainable rate of unemployment in every part of the United Kingdom – 
including Scotland. So the Phillips curve appears horizontal.  
In the decade up to 2004, that is until the recent slowdown, unemployment fell from double-digit levels 
to around 5% on the internationally comparable measure and to 3% on the claimant count. Over the 
same  period,  employment  grew  at  its  fastest  rate  over  any  peacetime  decade  since  1920,  raising, 
probably  temporarily,  the  growth  rate  of  the  supply  capacity  of  the  economy.  Output  growth  was 
noticeably  faster  than  its  post-war  average.  Behind  that  expansion  were  three  significant  structural 
changes: one at home and two overseas.  
At home, there has been a sequence of reforms to the labour market which began in the 1980s and 
have  continued  since.  Reforms  such  as  the  New  Deal  and  Working  Tax  Credit  have  encouraged 
benefit  recipients  back  to  work.  Changes  to  pay  bargaining  and  a  decline  in  the  share  of  wage 
settlements  covered  by  collective  bargaining  have  made  the  labour  market  more  flexible.  Those 
reforms reduced the rate of structural unemployment. 
The two other structural changes reflect globalisation and the openness of the British economy. The 
first is the rise in the prices of the goods and, especially, services that we export relative to the prices 
of goods and services that we buy from abroad. The so-called terms of trade have improved markedly 
over the past decade. Countries such as China and India are now major players in the world trading 
system,  and  the  prices  of  manufactured  goods  globally  have  fallen  as  a  result.  That  has  produced 
changes  in  the  pattern  of  international  trade,  and  in  our  own  industrial  structure.  Although  those 
changes were, and are, uncomfortable to make, they benefit us all as consumers. The rise in the value 
of what we can buy with our take-home pay has allowed businesses to recruit from a larger pool of 
labour without having to raise wages.  
The other factor is migration. Over the past few years, the impact of migration, particularly from the 
new  member  countries  of  the  European  Union,  has  been  substantial.  The  official  data  on  total  net 
migration are derived from small and incomplete surveys, so we cannot pretend to have an accurate 
idea of the real extent of migration. But, based on responses to the International Passenger Survey, 
net inward migration between 1995 and 2004 was estimated to have been 1.3million, compared with a 
rise in the labour force as a whole of 1.7 million. We do know that the labour force has recently been 
expanding  twice  as  fast  as  in  the  rest  of  the  post-war  period.  Migration  on  this  scale  raised  the 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2006
potential growth rate of the UK economy and probably dampened the response of costs and prices to 
changes in demand. 
That was the past. What of the future? Is there a lesson for the Monetary Policy Committee from the 
experience since 1992 of stable inflation with large changes in unemployment? I think there is. It is 
that  the  MPC,  in  trying  to  keep  inflation  close  to  our  2%  target,  must  recognise  that  movements  in 
demand  and  employment  cannot  be  considered  independently  of  changes  in  the  structure  of  the 
economy. Focussing too much on short-run movements in demand may lead it to misjudge the outlook 
for inflation. It is not possible to form a view about the extent of spare capacity in the economy – the 
so-called output gap – without explicit judgements on how much the economy is capable of producing. 
But  it  is  really  quite  difficult  to  disentangle  movements  in  the  output  gap  from  changes  in  supply 
capacity. One economist’s output gap is another economist’s change in supply potential.  
That issue has been central to the deliberations of the Monetary Policy Committee in recent months. 
The current outlook for inflation – and hence interest rates – depends not only on the prospects for 
demand but also upon whether the changes to the supply capacity of the economy that we observed 
in the past will persist or reverse. Over the past year or so, a degree of uncertainty has entered the 
economic landscape on both the supply and demand side.  
So  what  is  causing  this  uncertainty?  On  the  supply  side,  inflows  of  migrant  workers  from  the  new 
member countries of the EU remain high. That may or may not continue, and we cannot be sure that 
migrants would stay in the UK if the labour market were to turn down. And it is also unclear whether 
businesses will be able to recruit staff as easily as in the past when, as the prices of imported goods 
and services fell, the real value of take-home pay rose without higher wage settlements. Last year, 
non-oil  import  prices  rose,  depressing  the  growth  of  real  take-home  pay.  And  oil  prices  increased 
further.  
On the demand side, our central view remains a relatively benign one. The economy slowed in the 
first  half  of  last  year,  led  by  consumer  spending.  But  growth  has  begun  to  pick  up.  Averaging  the 
growth rate of consumer spending over the final quarter of last year and the first quarter of this, shows 
that consumption growth has returned to not far off its long-run average. Export growth and business 
investment both seem to be recovering. So in its May Inflation Report, the Monetary Policy Committee 
had, as its central outlook, a return to steady growth with inflation close to the 2% target. But there are 
many risks and those have been bought into sharp focus by the recent financial market turbulence. 
And, just as for England in the World Cup, the threats come mainly from the rest of the world.  
The recent volatility in financial markets is reflecting the real risks which face us as, after a period of 
robust world economic growth, we approach a somewhat bumpier stretch of the road. A rebalancing of 
global demand is desirable, but the way ahead may not be smooth.  
One  risk  is  that  during  the  fastest  three-year  period  of  world  economic  growth  for  a  generation, 
monetary  policy  around  the  world  may  simply  have  been  too  accommodative.  In  the  main 
industrialised regions – the US, Euro area and Japan – official interest rates were very low for a long 
period. The liquidity created by low official interest rates around the world has helped to push down 
long-term  real  interest  rates  and  compress  credit  spreads  to  unusually  low  levels.  That  monetary 
stimulus  is  now  being withdrawn.  Since  January,  long-term  interest  rates have  moved up,  and now 
other asset prices are responding. So far we have seen little more than a modest correction to the 
prices of a wide range of assets that had risen sharply over the previous two years. The realisation 
that such levels of asset prices were unlikely to be sustainable, coupled with a tightening of monetary 
policy in many countries, has injected uncertainty into financial markets. And it is hardly surprising that, 
as  investors  searching  for  yield  realised  that  they  might  have  underestimated  the  uncertainties,  the 
price of risk moved up. 
Even though the monetary stimulus around the world is now being withdrawn, its effects are still being 
felt. There are some signs of inflationary pressures in the main industrial countries. Even in China, with 
its  growing  manufacturing  base  and  large  pool  of  labour,  some  indicators  are  showing  upward 
pressures on export prices. And in turn that is raising our import prices, over and above the increases 
resulting from higher energy costs.  
At home, we can take some comfort from the fact that, despite sharp increases in energy prices, both 
consumer price inflation and inflation expectations have remained close to the target. Pay pressures in 
the labour market are muted, reflecting in part the need of employers to adopt a tough stance in wage 
bargaining when faced by such large increases in other input costs. Companies facing higher costs for 
energy, raw materials and other inputs, have been willing to offer only moderate wage increases in 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 3
order to minimise the squeeze on their profit margins. The rapid rise in input prices and the muted 
degree of pay pressures are not independent of each other.  
Inflation expectations – whether measured by household surveys or implicit in government bond yields 
– have moved up during the course of this year. Although not of serious concern as yet, the MPC will 
monitor inflation expectations carefully. Inflation itself remains volatile as increases in oil and natural 
gas prices pass through to household bills. Those increases will dampen the growth of real household 
disposable incomes and moderate consumer spending. 
So the economic outlook is far from certain. In these circumstances the Monetary Policy Committee 
must examine carefully all information, learn and, if necessary, revise its judgements, and question all 
received wisdom. In other words, it must be enlightened.  
The Scottish Enlightenment, it is generally agreed, began and ended in the 18th century. Our present 
framework for monetary policy is of more recent vintage. But just as the Scottish Enlightenment still 
influences our thinking today, so the twin features of that framework – namely inflation targeting and 
independence of the Bank of England – will be crucial to successful monetary policy in the future.  
Just as the Monetary Policy Committee meets monthly to decide on interest rates, so David Hume and 
Adam  Smith  met  regularly  in  the  Poker  Club  to  debate  the  policy  issues  of  the  day.  Hume  was  an 
officer  of  the  Club with  the  unusual  title  of  the  Assassin’s  Assessor, “without  whose  assent  nothing 
could be done”, and whose role was to ensure that in meetings “there was likely to be no bloodshed”. 
So I take it that Hume at least would have been content with last week’s decision to leave interest 
rates unchanged. There is no Assassin’s Assessor on the Monetary Policy Committee, nor – you will 
be relieved to hear – any bloodshed. But, month by month, we shall be debating the prospects for the 
economy in order to decide in which direction, if any, interest rates need to move.  
4 
 BIS Review 52/2006
