Svein Gjedrem: On business cycles, monetary policy and property markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Næringseiendom conference, Bergen, 12 May 2006. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s  monetary policy meeting on 26 April, Inflation 
Report 1/06 and on previous speeches.  
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Introduction 
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation, with annual consumer price 
inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. This is also the most important contribution monetary policy 
can make to sound economic developments in the long term. Low and stable inflation provides the 
economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  This  contributes  to  predictability  for  agents  who  look  ahead  when 
they make decisions about saving, investment, wages and prices.  
In its conduct of monetary policy, Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that 
weight is given to both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment. Flexible inflation 
targeting builds a bridge between the long-term objective of monetary policy, which is to keep inflation 
on  target  and  provide  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations,  and  the  more  short-term  objective  of 
stability in the real economy.  
Growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy  has  been  strong  since  summer  2003.  The  reduction  in  Norges 
Bank’s  key  rate  through  2003  and  into  2004  resulted  in  low  interest  rates.  Low  interest  rates  have 
contributed to a relatively sharp rise in household demand throughout this upturn. At the same time, 
solid growth in other countries has generated increased demand for many Norwegian export goods, 
resulting in high prices. Petroleum sector fixed investment has increased strongly, resulting in growing 
demand for goods and services supplied by mainland enterprises. Mainland fixed investment has also 
picked up.  
Commercial property markets 
After several years of fairly low activity, the number of commercial building starts is now increasing 
nationwide, including in Hordaland, where growth in this industry is solid.  
Through last year and so far this year, building activity has been particularly high in the retail trade 
sector. Commercial building starts have more than tripled since the trough in 2003.  
These  developments  are  reflected  in  the  lending  figures.  Through  2004  and  2005,  banks’  and 
mortgage companies’ lending to enterprises in property management and services, and the retail trade 
and hotel and restaurant sectors increased markedly. In the first quarter of this year, total lending to 
these sectors was NOK 440 billion, an increase of close to NOK 73 billion compared with the same 
quarter last year.  
The value of shop premises has risen more than the value of office premises since the mid-1990s, and 
more in line with the rise in the housing market.  
Developments in the value of office premises in Norway have tracked developments in a number of 
other  European  countries.  Office  premises  have  a  dominant  role  as  investment  vehicles  and  are 
therefore most important for the commercial property market as a whole.  
Investment  in  new  commercial  properties  partly  depends  on  developments  in  rental  rates  and  the 
number of vacant premises.  
Developments in rental rates for office premises in Norwegian cities over the past twenty years appear 
to  have  been  fairly  uniform,  with  very  high  rates  at  the  end  of  the  1980s,  followed  by  a  marked 
negative correction towards the mid-1990s. Rental rates then rose considerably up to the end of the 
century, followed by another downward correction. Stavanger seems to have experienced a relatively 
even rise in real terms throughout the period. Rental rates in Trondheim and Bergen seem to have had 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 1
a less pronounced peak at the end of the century than Oslo, while rental rates in Tromsø have been 
relatively stable since 1992.  
Last  year  rental  prices  for  office  premises  began  to  pick  up  in  several  Norwegian  cities.  There  is 
considerable variation within  the  various  quality  and  location segments.  The prestigious segment  in 
central  business  areas  shows  the  highest  rise  in  prices,  while  rental  prices  in  some  less  attractive 
areas have remained virtually unchanged.  
During the cyclical peak between 1997 and 2001, only 4 per cent of the office premises in Oslo were 
vacant.  More  moderate  economic  growth  in  2002  and  2003  contributed  to  a  fairly  sharp  rise  in  the 
vacancy rate. Over the past two years, the rate has fallen again. At 8 per cent, the vacancy rate is still 
relatively high, although in some central areas, it has fallen to below 4 per cent. The share of vacant 
office premises in Bergen has been lower than in Oslo for the past three years.  
The value of property has increased, both in Norway and in other countries, even though the rise in 
rental rates has been moderate and the vacancy rate has been high. Investors have been willing to 
pay more than previously for a krone, a dollar or a euro in future net rental income. The direct return, 
i.e. annual rental income minus operating costs as a share of the price paid for the property, for office 
premises in Oslo has fallen to a historically low level. This is probably related to developments in long-
term interest rates. An investor will expect a higher return on property, and property as an asset class 
is  probably  midway  between  equities  and  bonds  in  terms  of  both  risk  and  return.  Since  nominal 
interest rates are low, many investors prefer to move their low-risk investments from the bond market 
to alternative vehicles such as property.  
Developments  in  the  real  value  of  office  premises  and  our  estimates  of  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
Norwegian  economy  seem  to  co-vary  in  the  period  1980-2005.  The  effect  on  the  value  of  office 
premises  prior  to  the  banking  crisis  was  much  greater  than  the  effect  of  a  similar  level  of  capacity 
utilisation in the years 1998-2000. This supports the interpretation of the first price peak as a property 
price bubble.  
The  value  of  office  property  increased  in  2005,  from  a  historically  low  level.  In  relation  to  historical 
levels, the rise in the value of commercial property seems to be moderate, compared with the rise in 
capacity utilisation. One possible reason for this may be that employment growth was for a long period 
relatively low in this upturn compared with the upturns in the 1980s and 1990s. This has now changed. 
In addition, signals from market participants indicate that the rise in value for 2005 as a whole will be 
sharper than the chart estimate, which was calculated as of July 2005.  
Developments  in  real  house  prices  also  tracked  developments  in  capacity  utilisation  from  1985  to 
1998. In the period since then, however, house prices have increased further at a steady pace, even 
when  business  cycles  have  fluctuated.  This  sharp  rise,  combined  with  similarly  strong  growth  in 
household  debt,  may  be  viewed  to  some  extent  as  a  delayed  adaptation  to  the  deregulation  of  the 
housing and credit markets in the 1980s, after many households burned their fingers immediately after 
deregulation.  In  recent  years,  household  income  growth  has  been  solid,  household  confidence 
regarding  the  future  has  been  strong  and  households  probably  perceive  higher  income  levels  as 
permanent.  This  may  have  resulted  in  a  further  rise  in  house  prices  and  debt.  In  addition,  low  real 
interest rates are currently making a contribution.  
Sales in the commercial property market reached a very high level in 2005. House sales totalled NOK 
44 billion, twice the total for the previous year. Syndication companies and property funds account for 
almost half of total sales.  
In  Sweden,  the  share  of  foreign  investors  has  been  relatively  high,  and rising,  for  several  years.  In 
comparison, foreign ownership in the Norwegian property market is modest, but probably increasing. 
For  example,  the  German  property  fund  DIFA  purchased  parts  of  the  Norwegian  School  of 
Management’s college premises in Nydalen in Oslo, and the Scottish Kenmore Property Group has 
purchased commercial property in Norway for more than NOK 1.4 billion.  
In  a  comparison  of  property  markets  conducted  in  2004,  Norway  was  classified  as  “highly 
transparent”.1 Increased liquidity and transparency promote foreign interest in Norwegian property.  
                                                      
1   Jones Lang LaSalle, Global Real Estate Transparency Index 2004. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2006
The economic situation 
The mainland economy expanded by 3.7 per cent in  2005. Growth in private services, construction 
and  electricity  production  was  strong.  So  far,  a  substantial  share  of  output  growth  has  been 
attributable to a sharp rise in person-hours worked. The fall in sickness absence in 2004 provided an 
additional supply of labour to enterprises, but sickness absence increased through 2005.  
Wage developments reflect and influence business cycles. Strong employment growth in the 1990s 
resulted in a rise in labour costs, which in turn had a dampening impact on growth. Moderate wage 
growth in recent years is being accompanied by a strong cyclical upturn.  
The  labour  market  continues  to  tighten.  It  is  likely  that  continued  strong  growth  in  output  and 
employment will result in a higher rise in prices and costs, but it may take time. According to Statistics 
Norway’s  Labour  Force  Survey  (LFS),  employment  growth  picked  up  markedly  towards  the  end  of 
2005 and into 2006. LFS unemployment fell again in January. The number of registered unemployed 
fell  somewhat  in  April  and  now  stands  at  2.8  per  cent.  Measured  in  per  cent  of  the  labour  force, 
seasonally adjusted LFS unemployment was 3.9 per cent.  
The labour supply is also being influenced by an increase in inward labour migration from the new EU 
accession  countries.  The  Central  Office  –  Foreign  Tax  Affairs  recorded  an  increase  of  about  7400 
employees from the new EU accession countries from 2004 to 2005. This figure covers employees in 
both Norwegian and foreign enterprises. The size of the actual supply of labour behind these figures is 
uncertain, because there is no information about the duration of such employment relationships. On 
balance, however, there have been signs that the use of foreign labour has contributed to dampening 
pressures on real economic resources through the upturn. The effect has probably been most marked 
in  the  construction  industry,  as  evidenced  in  particular  by  the  fact  that  wage  growth  remained 
moderate last year, despite the very high level of activity. The figures for the first quarter of this year 
indicate that inward labour migration is still rising.  
There is competition for the best labour in the EU countries. Many people have travelled to the UK and 
Ireland  in  particular,  and  the  barriers  to  inward  labour  migration  may  be  greater  in  the  Norwegian 
labour market than in the British and Irish labour markets. Activity is edging up in the central European 
countries.  Therefore,  there  is  uncertainty  about  how  large  the  supply  of  labour  will  be  from  these 
countries in the future.  
There is also considerable inward labour migration from other Nordic countries, but measured in terms 
of  number  of  persons,  the  supply  of  labour  from  these  countries  has  not  changed  substantially  in 
recent  years.  Swedish  nationals  have  comprised  the  bulk  of  the  supply  of  labour  from  the  Nordic 
countries. In view of the tightening taking place in the Swedish labour market, there may be reason to 
expect a reduction in the supply of labour from Sweden.  
The supply of labour is also affected by developments in persons on disability benefit and sickness 
absence. The trend in sickness absence has reversed, and is now rising, and the number of persons 
on disability benefit continues to show a steady increase.  
Consumer price inflation has edged up, but is still very low even 2½ years after the cyclical change. 
The year-on-year rise in the consumer price index (CPI) was 2.7 per cent in April. Price impulses from 
consumer  goods  imported  to  Norway  have  been  negative  virtually  every  year  since  the  mid-1990s. 
This is due to international trade liberalisation and a shift towards imports from low-cost countries.  
The rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services slowed somewhat towards the end of 
2005  and  into  2006.  The 12-month  rise  in  prices  for  these  products  is  estimated  at  1.6  per  cent  in 
April,  adjusted  for  the  effects  of  lower  maximum  day-care  rates.  However,  several  factors  point 
towards rising inflation. Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy is increasing, and tighter labour 
market  conditions  may  result  in  higher  wage  growth  in  the  coming  years.  The  rise  in  oil  prices  is 
resulting in higher input costs for producers.  
As a rule, monetary policy shall not take account of the direct effects on consumer prices resulting 
from changes in the interest rate level, taxes, excise duties and extraordinary, temporary disturbances. 
However,  there  is  no  certain  method  for  distinguishing  extraordinary,  temporary  disturbances  from 
more long-lasting price changes. The inflation measure CPI-ATE excludes the effects of changes in 
taxes  and  energy  prices.  Norges  Bank  has  given  weight  to  this  indicator  of  underlying  inflationary 
pressures in the economy, but also keeps an eye on other indicators. The 12-month rise in the CPI-
ATE adjusted for the effects of lower maximum day-care rates is estimated at 1.0 per cent in April.  
BIS Review 41/2006 
 3
However,  the  CPI-ATE  not  only  strips  out  temporary  effects  of  changes  in  tax  changes  and 
fluctuations in energy prices, but also trend changes in these variables. Thus, this indicator is not a 
perfect measure of underlying inflation. In the last 10-20 years, where energy prices have risen at a 
faster pace than other consumer prices and the tax level has increased somewhat, the CPI-ATE has 
tended to underestimate underlying inflation. This is illustrated in the chart, which shows the difference 
between  the  year-on-year  rise  in  the  CPI  and  the  CPI-ATE  over  a  moving  10-year  average.  Since 
1997, the difference has been about 0.35 percentage point. However, even when taking into account 
trend  increases  in  energy  prices,  inflation  is  still  moderate.  The  indicators  that  provide  the  best 
expression of underlying inflationary pressures in the economy may vary over time.  
Driving forces ahead 
Oil prices are of importance for the activity level in the Norwegian economy and government revenues. 
In recent years, oil prices have risen sharply. High demand for oil, limited idle production capacity and 
uncertain production levels in many oil-producing countries have contributed to this. Oil prices have 
risen to over USD 70 per barrel, partly as a result of the uncertain political situation in a number of 
producer countries. Futures prices for Brent Blend are now also above USD 70 per barrel until autumn 
2008. Futures prices indicate that oil prices will remain around this level several years ahead. This is 
higher than the level assumed in the previous Inflation Report. Statoil and Hydro gas prices have also 
increased sharply in recent months.  
Petroleum production is expected to increase gradually in the period to 2011, and decline thereafter. 
Developments  in  the  gas  market  will  become  increasingly  important.  In  the  next  10  years,  gas 
production could rise to at least the same level as oil production, measured by energy content.  
High  oil  prices  have  led  to  a  strong  increase  in  activity  on  the  Norwegian  continental  shelf.  Many 
projects have been launched to increase recovery from fields in operation. A number of companies 
have revised up the long-term oil prices that are used as a basis for investment decisions, but they are 
still moderate compared with futures prices.  
Further  out  in  the  projection  period,  developments  in  petroleum-related  investment  become  highly 
uncertain. It is assumed that overall activity will decline somewhat when the Snøhvit and Ormen Lange 
projects are completed, but high oil prices are expected to contribute to maintaining investment at a 
relatively high level throughout the projection period.  
The  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global,  previously  called  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund,  will 
increase  substantially  in  the  years  ahead.  The  fiscal  rule  entails  a  gradual  phasing-in  of  petroleum 
revenues into the economy, approximately in pace with the expected real return on the Fund, which is 
estimated at 4 per cent. On the basis of our assumption in the March Inflation Report for developments 
in oil prices (oil futures prices), the fiscal rule allows for an increase in petroleum revenue spending of 
more than NOK 30 billion from 2006 to 2009.  
If the Norwegian economy continues to exhibit solid growth, it will nevertheless be in line with the fiscal 
guidelines specifying that petroleum revenue spending is lower than the expected real return for a few 
years.  Our  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption that  fiscal  policy  will  provide  some  stimulus  to 
aggregate demand and output in 2008 and 2009, but somewhat less than a mechanical application of 
the fiscal rule based on our oil price assumption would imply.  
High growth in the global economy has pushed up prices for non-oil commodities as well. Over the 
past year, copper prices have more than doubled and aluminium prices have risen by more than 60 
per  cent.  Futures  prices  have  also  risen  markedly,  indicating  expectations  of  a  permanent  upward 
revision of metals prices similar to the revision of oil prices.  
Rising commodity prices and buoyant activity in markets that are important for Norway have fuelled 
growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy,  even  though  growth  has  been  low  in  some  of  Norway’s  most 
important export markets.  
Overall, prices for our imported goods are falling in relation to prices for goods we export. Norway’s 
terms of trade are improving. The impact of the rise in oil and gas prices is particularly strong, but the 
terms-of-trade gains for the mainland economy have also been high. The domestic economy is partly 
insulated  thanks  to  the  oil  fund  mechanism.  The  situation  in  Norway  differs  from  that  of  its  Nordic 
neighbour countries. Sales of Swedish and Finnish high-tech products are growing strongly in volume 
terms, but prices are falling. Denmark has a diversified business sector, which is overall moving on a 
steady path.  
4 
 BIS Review 41/2006
Growth  among  our  trading  partners  remains  solid.  High  commodity  prices  are  exerting  upward 
pressure on consumer price inflation in a number of countries, although underlying inflation remains 
low.  Economic  growth  in  the  US  probably  picked  up  again  in  the  first  quarter.  In  Japan,  growth 
appears to be solid. In the euro area, confidence indicators point to optimism in the business sector. 
There  is  a  broad-based  expansion  in  the  Swedish  economy,  while  some  indicators  in  the  UK  have 
shown weak developments.  
The central banks in Canada and Switzerland have raised their key rates by 0.25 percentage point 
since mid-March, while the Federal Reserve has raised its key rate by 0.5 percentage point. Market 
expectations concerning key rates in other countries have risen slightly. For the coming year, market 
pricing indicates that key rates will be increased in the euro area, the UK, Sweden, Switzerland, the 
US, Canada, Japan and Australia.  
In Norway, the key rate was last raised by 0.25 percentage point to 2.5 per cent at the monetary policy 
meeting on 16 March this year. Financial markets still expect a gradual increase in the sight deposit 
rate ahead. In line with developments in global markets, the rise in Norwegian long-term interest rates 
has gathered pace. Markets have factored in that the key rate will be lower in Norway than in the US 
and the UK at the end of 2009, but higher than in the euro area and Sweden.  
Monetary policy assessments 
Since last summer, interest-rate setting has been oriented towards a gradual increase in the interest 
rate – in small, not too frequent steps – towards a more normal level. According to the assessment in 
the March Inflation Report, higher growth in the economy could, in isolation, warrant a faster rise in the 
key rate ahead. This would reduce the risk of bottlenecks in the economy, with rising cost inflation and 
continued debt build-up. On the other hand, the objective of bringing inflation up to the target of 2.5 
per cent and anchoring inflation expectations suggested in isolation that further interest rate increases 
should be delayed until there are clearer signs of a further rise in inflation.  
The  trend  in  prices  for  consumer  goods  over  the  past  two  or  three  years  is  a  result  of  favourable 
developments in the Norwegian and global economy. The shift in trade towards low-cost countries has 
led  to  lower  prices  and  higher  real  income.  In  addition,  the  changes  in  the  world  economy  have 
provided  Norway  with  higher  income  because  our  terms  of  trade  have  improved.  Increased 
competition has curbed the rise in prices for a number of domestically produced goods and services.  
When inflation deviates substantially from the target for a period, the interest rate will be set with a 
view  to  gradually  returning  it  to  the  target,  so  that  we  avoid  substantial  variations  in  output  and 
employment.  Through  the  1990s,  inflation  generally  remained  in  the  interval  1½  –  3½  per  cent. 
Inflation has varied slightly more in the past few years. In a period of increasing cross-border labour 
flows,  substantial  technological  advances,  changes  in  competitive  conditions  and  new  trading 
patterns,  we  may,  with  our  very  open  economy,  have  to  accept  a  somewhat  greater  variation  in 
inflation and deviations from the target, as we have witnessed over the past two to three years.  
An overall assessment implies that the interest rate in the baseline scenario gradually increases to a 
more  normal  level.  The  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  interest  rates  in  Norway  and 
abroad  will  rise  somewhat  faster  than  may  be  implied  by  today’s  forward  rates.  Since  the  previous 
Inflation  Report,  the  upward  movement  in  Norwegian  and  international  long-term  interest  rates  has 
become more pronounced. Exchange rate movements are difficult to project. In Inflation Report 1/06, 
the  path  for  the  interest  rate  in  Norway  and  abroad  was  assessed  to  be  consistent  with  an 
approximately unchanged krone exchange rate.  
The  high  rate  of  economic  growth  implies  that  price  and  cost  inflation  will  edge  up  after  a  period. 
Inflation measured by the CPI-ATE is projected to increase from today’s level of around 1¼ per cent, 
up to almost 2 per cent at the end of 2007. There are prospects that inflation will increase further and 
be close to the target of 2.5 per cent three years ahead. With a gradual reduction in unemployment, 
Norges  Bank  expects  wage  growth  to  edge  up.  At  the  same  time,  it  will  probably  be  easier  for 
enterprises to pass on cost increases to prices in pace with the rise in demand and capacity utilisation.  
Capacity utilisation is now projected to be somewhat higher than its normal level. Mainland GDP is still 
growing  strongly  in  2006.  Capacity  utilisation  in  the  economy  is  expected  to  rise  over  the  next  two 
years.  Even  though  a  gradual  increase  in  the  interest  rate  will  result  in  somewhat  weaker  growth 
impulses after a period, monetary policy will still be expansionary. A further interest rate increase will 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 5
stabilise  growth  in  output  and  employment.  Capacity  utilisation  may  in  time  be  brought  down 
somewhat and stabilise. This will curb the rise in inflation, so that it stabilises close to target.  
Developments in inflation and capacity utilisation seem to provide a reasonable balance between the 
various objectives of monetary policy. The interest rate is sufficiently low for inflation to approach the 
target of 2.5 per cent while avoiding a capacity utilisation level that is too high.  
Projections are uncertain. We have illustrated this uncertainty in the projections for the interest rate, 
the  krone  exchange  rate,  inflation  and  capacity  utilisation  using  fan  charts.  The  width  of  the  fan  is 
based on historical disturbances. However, there is no certainty that future disturbances will be of the 
same character or scale. The wider the fans, the more uncertain the forecasts are. In other words, 
uncertainty  with  regard  to  the  interest  rate  reflects  the  monetary  policy  response  to  unexpected 
disturbances in inflation, output and the exchange rate.  
When the interest rate, as forecast in the baseline scenario, is raised to a more normal level, Norges 
Bank  will  be  able  to  assess  the  effects  of  interest  rate  changes  and  other  new  information  about 
economic  developments.  According  to  our  projections,  inflation  will  be  close  to  target  three  years 
ahead.  We  are  uncertain  as  to  the  functioning  of  the  economy  and  how  long  it  will  take  for  the 
resource  shortages  observed  in  some  sectors  of  the  Norwegian  economy  to  translate  into  higher 
inflationary pressures. This may warrant small steps in interest-rate setting.  
Employment  is  now  rising  more  rapidly  than  expected.  Corporate  earnings  are  rising  sharply,  with 
higher growth in corporate demand for credit. The sharp rise in household debt is continuing. House 
price inflation remains high. This is to some extent due to structural adjustments, but gives cause for 
some concern nevertheless. Wide fluctuations in asset prices may be a potential source of instability in 
demand  and output  in  the  somewhat  longer run.  Prices  for  oil  and several other  commodities  have 
picked  up  further.  At  the  same  time,  the  underlying  rise  in  consumer  prices  remains  low.  So  far,  a 
tighter labour market does not seem to have resulted in higher-than-expected pay increases, but there 
is  a  risk  that  wage  growth  may  subsequently  rise  faster  than  projected.  The  krone  is  stronger  than 
assumed. Overall, there are not sufficient grounds for changing the outlook for inflation and output or 
the risk assessment.  
The press release following the monetary policy meeting on 26 April states that in line with the forecast 
in  the  March  Inflation  Report,  there  are  prospects  of  another  interest  rate  increase  in  the  second 
quarter – at the monetary policy meeting in May or June – and a further increase thereafter.  
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 41/2006
