Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – economic outlook and prospects 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Adam Smith Institute, 
Thun, Switzerland, 27 June 2006. 
 Economic turnaround of Pakistan has been remarkable and impressive. This is more obvious if one 
keeps in perspective 
(i) 
the context of the pre-2000 scenario when un-sustainability of macroeconomic imbalances 
and debt threatened medium term economic prospects; 
the  fact  that  achievements  and  gains  have  been  realized  in  the  midst  of  economic 
complications  caused  by  high  oil  prices,  growing  global  and  regional  competition  both  for 
investment  and  trade  and  the  fiscal  consequences  of  the  earthquake  that  rocked 
north-Pakistan in 2005; and 
that  Pakistan  opted  to  graduate  from  IMF’s  structural  adjustment  program  and  has  since 
designed its own economic policies, steered their implementation and addressed effectively 
emerging challenges. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Aside from reducing and restructuring its external debt in a short period, the Government’s resolve to 
unleash  Pakistan’s  real  economic  potential  has,  within  a  period  of  4-5  years,  strengthened  the 
country’s  fundamentals  and  has  improved  its  medium  term  economic  outlook  and  prospects. 
Sequentially, I propose to discuss: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
key features of this success story 
structural reforms that have helped this turnaround 
medium term economic prospects and challenges 
Economic turnaround – its key features and structural shifts 
FY05 was a record year for Pakistan. Its economic growth at 8.6% surpassed the average economic 
growth  of  8.2%  recorded  for  emerging  Asia.  Backed  by  significant  across  the  board  growth  in  all 
productive  sectors,  this  growth  has  been  primarily  consumption  led.  Aggregate  demand  pressures 
were at an all time high as the per capita income grew and public had easy access to low interest 
credit for almost 4 years in a row. Four fold increase in remittances inflow since FY01 also contributed 
to  strong  demand.  Pakistan’s  growth has  trickled down  as  the  poverty  head  count  ratio declined  to 
25.4% relative to 32.1% in 2001 and the unemployment rate also declined to 6.2%. 
The  macroeconomic  imbalances  remained  at  manageable  levels  despite  fiscal  pressures,  and  the 
external current account registered a deficit relative to surpluses achieved in the preceding year. The 
higher aggregate demand manifested itself in the build up of inflationary pressures and CPI rose to 
9.3% in FY05 – more than double the average inflation rate recorded in the preceding 4 years. 
Prudent  economic  management  has  helped  change  the  dynamics  of  external  debt  since  FY00. 
Pakistan’s external debt and liabilities fell by $ 1.3 billion – down from $37.9 billion in FY00 to $ 35.8 
billion  by  end-FY05  as  it  prepaid  expensive  debt  and  a  part  of  debt  was  written  off.  The  combined 
effect of this debt reduction and greater prudence in fresh borrowing coupled with GDP growth, helped 
reduce the external debt and liabilities/GDP ratio to 32.5% by end-FY05 relative to 51.6% in FY00, and 
external  debt  and  liabilities  as  a  %age  of  foreign  exchange  earnings  declined  to  134%  relative  to 
almost 300% in FY00. Aside from the decline in external debt, the external debt burden also fell as a 
consequence  of  the  real  cost  of  borrowing.  With  the  pace  of  foreign  exchange  earnings  gaining 
momentum, the country’s debt carrying capacity grew. At the centre of all these developments was the 
pursuance of prudent monetary, fiscal and exchange rate policies. 
Against  this background, S&P  has  revised  its  outlook  on  Pakistan:  B+/Positive/B  to  B+/Stable/B  for 
foreign currency, while keeping BB/Stable/B rating for local currency. Pakistan returned once again to 
the international capital markets earlier this year and the sovereign bond issue was oversubscribed. 
This reflected investor appetite for long term sovereign paper which was tightly priced relative to the 
earlier  two  issues:  a  $500  million  5-year  Eurobond  in  February  2004  which  was  priced  @6.75% 
BIS Review 71/2006 
 1
implying 370 bps spread over US Treasuries and a Sukuk for $ 600 million issued in January 2005 
carrying  a  yield  of  220  bps  over  the  six-month  LlBOR.  The  benchmark  set  for  Pakistan  sovereign 
paper  is  expected  to  help  Pakistan’s  firms  with  stronger  balance  sheets  to  turn  to  the  international 
capital markets for raising their financing requirements. This has already been contemplated as the Oil 
and Gas Development Corporation plans to float a Global Deposit Receipt soon. 
Enabling policies 
Fiscal responsibility: To promote fiscal stability and sustainability, the Government promulgated the 
Fiscal Responsibility and Debt Limitation Act 2005 in June 2005 which encourages a steady reduction 
in revenue deficit to nil by 30th June 2008 and maintaining it thereafter and reducing the total public 
debt to sixty % of GDP by 2013 and below that limit thereafter. 
Sound fiscal management helped Pakistan reduce its overall fiscal deficit, from an average of 7% of 
GDP in the 1990s to around 4% in recent years. Although the deficit levels are higher than what is 
desirable this reflects the strains of (i) the recent loss to the budget of the Petroleum Development 
Levy  (PDL)  as  the  oil  price  increase  has  not  been  passed  to  the  domestic  consumers,  (ii)  the  low 
tax/GDP ratio, even though tax collections in nominal terms have been higher, and are expected to 
support  a  modest  increase  of  0.4%  in  the  tax/GDP  ratio  for  FY07,  (iii)  higher  transfer  to  provincial 
governments,  (iv)  unforeseen  spending  on  earthquake,  and  (v)  determination  of  the  Government  to 
raise both infrastructure and social expenditures which for some time were not raised in real terms. 
Despite  these  fiscal  strains,  key  structural  changes  are  notable.  Aside  from  near  elimination  of  the 
revenue deficit, prudent fiscal management has helped reduce the share of interest payments in the 
total outlay from 33% in FY02 to 17.6% in FY05 – a 15 percentage points decline in just four years. 
This in turn helped achieve primary surplus. In wake of these developments the public debt burden 
continued  to  decline  to  62.5%  of  GDP  from  84%  in  FY00.  Over  the  medium  term,  greater  fiscal 
sustainability  can  only  be  achieved  if  there  are  more  substantive  tax  reforms  which  extend  the  tax 
base beyond the corporate and professional tax payers. It is with this intention that the Government 
has now started to tax the financial services industry, though the agriculture sector and other services 
remain outside the ambit of the tax regime. 
Monetary policy now for some years has been largely supportive of the dual objective of promoting 
economic  growth  and  price  stability.  It  achieves  this  goal  by  targeting  monetary  aggregates  (broad 
money supply growth as intermediate target and reserve money as operational target) in accordance 
with  real  GDP  growth  and  inflation  targets.  The  fiscal  responsibility  legislation  and  central  bank’s 
mandate to formulate, conduct and implement its monetary policy combined to somewhat help reduce 
the fiscal subservience of monetary policy. With the rising inflationary pressure in FY05, the central 
bank raised its discount rate by 1.5% to 9% in April 2005 and maintained its tight monetary stance by 
conducting frequent Open Market Operations (OMO) to manage liquidity, while minimizing the volatility 
in overnight rates. The policy stance has yielded results as headline CPI has reduced by 1.4% to 7.9% 
in FY06, in line with the annual target of 8%. 
Like  other  developing  countries  where  transmission  mechanisms  are  not  immediately  obvious  or 
efficient, it takes well over a year or more for high interest rates to curb the credit growth. Thus far 
while credit growth has decelerated, it remains fairly robust as demand pressures from both public and 
private sector remained high during the course of the year. 
Consequently, it is no surprise that while food CPI decelerated as the Government eased constraints 
by  allowing  imports  of  essential  products  (sugar,  cement  and  selected  pulses)  and  enhanced  its 
distribution mechanism, the core inflation (excluding volatile components of CPI i.e. food and energy) 
is  7.1%  for  FY06.  Although  the  rate  of  passthrough  from  the  higher  prices  of  energy  and  other 
commodities to core consumer price inflation appears to have remained relatively low, the cumulative 
increases  in  energy  and  commodity  prices  have  been  large  enough  to  account  for  the  recent 
inflationary pressures in core CPI. 
Anecdotal reports suggest that the labor market in Pakistan is tight. While labor productivity remains 
low,  the  wage  increases  will  generate  additional  pressures.  Over  the  medium  term,  managing 
inflationary expectations and perceptions and designing an appropriate monetary stance, which aligns 
economic activity with the economy’s productive capacity, will remain a challenge. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2006
Financial  sector  reforms:  Consistent  with  trends  observed  in  growing  Asia,  structural  changes  in 
financial markets have been remarkable and significant. First, a word on the financial sector’s scope 
and scale: 
- 
Financial assets grew by 70% over the past five years and in CY05 reached Rs 5.1 trillion ($ 
85 billion), equivalent to 80% of GDP; 
The banking sector grew at a faster pace relative to non-bank sectors and accounts for 71% 
of the financial industry assets; 
Market  capitalization  of  the  stock  exchange  grew  steadily  and  recently  peaked  at  44%  of 
GDP relative to 10.3% in June FY00 
  Latest Financial Sector Assessment for Pakistan and the Banking Sector Review 20051, which will be 
released by July 2006, together lend comfort that: 
(i) 
Banking sector profitability (after tax), at over $1 billion, is at an all time high and the return 
on  assets  (after  tax)  increased  to  1.9  %  in  CY052  from  1.2  %  in  CY04;  surpassing  the 
relevant  international  benchmark.  The  rapid  growth  in  profits  also  resulted  in  considerably 
higher return on equity (after tax), which improved to 25.8 %3
Falling NPLs to loans and net NPLs to net loans ratios improved to 8%4
respectively. 
With strong profits, declining NPLs and fresh capital injections, the solvency position of the 
banking  system  strengthened  further.  Capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR)  increased  to  11.3  %6 
from 10.5 % in CY04. 
Despite losing some momentum in FY06, the overall performance of the corporate sector, 
which is the major user of banks’ funds, remained satisfactory. 
 from 20.3% in CY04. 
 and 2.1%5
 in CY05 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
While the banking system has grown significantly in strength, credit growth in a high inflation and a 
rising  interest  rate  environment  could  pose  a  potential  risk  if  the  debt  burden  on  banks’  borrowers 
exceeds  their  capacities  and  potentially  erodes  their  repayment  capacity.  So  far,  the  exposure  and 
default rates on advances to the consumer, SME and agriculture sector has been manageable as the 
risk management systems within banks have improved significantly. Greater disclosure requirements, 
strengthened  corporate  governance  structure  and  Credit  Information  Bureau,  which  now  provides 
access  to  the  credit  reports  of  all  borrowers,  irrespective  of  the  loan  amount,  are  all  effective  risk 
mitigants. 
Pakistan is now embarking on the next phase of financial sector reforms which would focus on: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Further consolidation and restructuring of the banking sector; 
Strengthened risk management; 
Developing capacities to cater for unmet requirements of special segments of the economy 
and diverse needs; 
Diversification  of  the  financial  sector  by  further  development  of  the  securities  and  debt 
markets,  which  while  fairly  vibrant,  need  to  play  a  more  significant  role  in  meeting  the 
country’s financing requirements; and 
Promoting financial product innovation. 
(v) 
Trade liberalization  has been  underway  steadily.  With  lifting  of  quotas and abolishment  of  several 
special and industry specific regulations, all goods are today freely importable and protection granted 
in the past to the domestic industry has been lifted. Maximum tariff rate has been reduced from 120% 
(iv) 
                                                      
1    Annual publications of State Bank of Pakistan 
2   1.7% for Q1-CY06 
3   21.5% for Q1-CY06 
4   8.1% for Q1-CY06 
5   1.9% for Q1-CY06 
6    11.6% for Q1-CY06 
BIS Review 71/2006 
 3
in  1985  to  25%  since  FY01  and  tariff  bands  have  been  reduced  from  42  to  4.  Almost  half  of  the 
imports enjoy zero to 5% tariff and the simple average tariff is now only 8.5% on dutiable & exempt 
imports taken together and the SRO regime has been reduced to a bare minimum. 
The  trade  policy  aims  to  promote  exports,  which  despite  reaching  $16.5  billion  in  FY06  relative  to 
averages  of  $7-8  billion  over  early  FY00,  have  to  make  more  inroads  to  raise  their  share  in  world 
markets.  Pakistan  is  launching  a  stronger  drive  to  revive  its  exports  which  can  only  grow  on  a 
sustainable  basis  if  there  is  (i)  sufficient  surplus  to  export,  (ii)  if  there  is  product,  sector  and 
geographical diversification combined with value addition through capacity building and enhancement, 
(iii)  textile  industry  which  contributes  close  to  60%  of  export  earnings  positions,  repositions  itself  to 
withstand new competitive forces emerging in the post quota regime, and (iv) the cost of infrastructure, 
which is still suffering from bottlenecks, is improved. 
Medium term economic prospects and challenges 
High growth rates can be sustained. Pakistan being at the crossroads of one of the ancient trade 
routes of the world and being richly endowed with natural resources has enormous potential and has 
shown increased resilience to withstand economic shocks both domestic and external. The economy 
is  set  to  grow  at  around  7%  in  FY07.  In  FY06,  despite  set  backs  to  agriculture  and  the  industrial 
sector,  the  buoyancy  in  the  services  sector  helped  real  GDP  to  grow  by  6.6%.  Structural  changes 
underlying the real sectors, albeit slow, are emerging. 
In agriculture, it is worth mentioning that Pakistan attained self sufficiency in major crops a long time 
back. Notwithstanding, disruptions in production are inevitable given the uncertain weather conditions 
as well as low yields which require far reaching efforts in research and extension and appropriate use 
of inputs that have benefited from the rise in agriculture credit and fertilizer input use. More exploitation 
of water resources is critical to ensure timely supplies of water. In agriculture, significance of livestock, 
poultry  and  dairy  products  is  visible  and  encouraging.  The  former  accounts  for  46.8  %  (FY05)  of 
agricultural value added and about 10.7 % of the GDP, while providing livelihood to one third of the 
population, and the latter produces 28 billion liters of milk a year, whose value is more than that of the 
combined value of wheat and cotton. 
Although  the  manufacturing  sector  grew  at  18%  and  15%  respectively  in  the  preceding  two  years, 
decline  in  its  growth  rate  is  notable.  The  performance  of  this  sector  is  impacted  by  some  of  the 
structural issues typical of Pakistan’s manufacturing sector. Manufacturing sector is now beginning to 
slowly diversify and modernize itself. Presently, almost three-fourths of the production stems from the 
large-scale  manufacturing  sector.  The  key  contributor  is  the  textile  and  apparel  group,  though 
chemicals, petroleum, engineering, tyres and tubes, fertilizers, cement, and automobile and durable 
white  goods  are  adding  capacities  and  are  likely  to  boost  industrial  production.  SME  Policy  and 
enhanced flow of credit for this segment would eventually enhance the linkages of this sector. 
Macroeconomic  sustainability:  After  a  consistent  reduction  in  macroeconomic  imbalances  over 
FY00-04, the fiscal and external current account  deficits have been above targeted levels for FY06 
and are likely to be in that range in FY07. Most notable is the concern regarding trade deficit that is to 
range around $8.2 billion in FY06.7
 Almost 45% of the increase in trade deficit for FY06 stemmed from 
the rise in import bill for crude oil and petroleum products. 
Demand pressures are likely to grow further as the Government accelerates social and infrastructure 
programs,  and  segments  of  population  and  businesses  benefit  from  the  FY07  fiscal  package. 
Infrastructure sector programs, while ambitious, are absolutely needed as businesses are set to grow, 
capacities are being enhanced, new industries and sectors are being opened up and development of 
industrial parks and additional EPZs are in the offing. 
After a span of price stability, Pakistan continues to face inflationary pressures that emerged in late 
2004  in  response  to  an  accommodative  monetary  policy.  Thus  far  effective  monetary  management 
and  administrative  measures  to  ease  product  supplies  have  controlled  inflation  which  is  now  well 
within single digits. With demand pressures expected to grow, SBP will continue to pursue monetary 
tightening but there will be need to strike an appropriate balance between promoting economic growth 
                                                      
7   As reported by Statistics Department, State Bank of Pakistan 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2006
and  price  stability.  Over  the  medium  term,  Pakistan  is  well  positioned  to  deal  with  these  emerging 
trends effectively. 
While  the  consumption  demand  would  remain  high,  there  are  strong  indications  that 
investment has picked up – though perhaps not fully captured by national accounts statistics. Rising 
investment demand is confirmed by: First, the rise in gross fixed capital formation over the last two 
years by 29.6% in nominal terms and by about 9.8% in real terms. This has raised investment levels to 
Rs 1.42 trillion, equivalent to 20% of GDP and is likely to result in a reversal of the declining trend 
observed in the preceding years. Private investment accounts for two thirds of the gross fixed capital 
formation.  Second,  the  rise  in  imports,  which,  excluding  crude  and  POL  products,  grew  by  35%. 
Third,  the  rise  in  private  sector  credit  which,  while  decelerating,  still  grew  by  19%  in  FY06  despite 
rising  interest  rates.  Fourth,  foreign  direct  investment  flows,  excluding  privatization  proceeds,  also 
contributed to the rise in investment. Finally, high corporate profits have largely been reinvested in 
industry and there is a high degree of self financing taking place. 
Furthermore, the Government is confident that all spade work undertaken in the last few years will now 
pay off as approved or lined up industrial and infrastructure investments take off. The Medium Term 
Development  Framework  (MTDF)  anticipates  a  rise  in  the  investment/GDP  ratio  of  20.7%  by  2010. 
Early indications are that both domestic and foreign investors are upbeat about the future prospects, 
and  there  are  already  investment  commitments  lined  up  from  Gulf  states.  During  its  economic 
transition, Pakistan will have to develop capacities to tolerate and finance the required level of trade 
deficit  as  fresh  investments  will  bring  in  additional  import  demand.  Over  this  period,  leveraging 
non-debt foreign flows will be critical to finance and sustain the external current account deficit. 
Growth prospects for Pakistan are fairly promising. Sustainability of investment trends would, among 
others,  depend  on  Pakistan’s  success  in  improving  the  business  climate  by  removing  investment 
constraints, continuity in financial reforms coupled with strong vigilance of credit growth, and success 
in  curbing  inflationary  pressures  and  tendencies  within  manageable  levels.  The  World  Bank  report 
‘Doing Business in 2006’ has placed Pakistan amongst the leading economic reformers of the world 
and  the  top  one  in  South  Asia.  For  foreign  businesses,  investing  in  Pakistan  not  only  facilitates 
production but also provides opportunities to export to the Middle East, and Central and South Asian 
markets.  To attract  investment,  Pakistan  has  fully  liberalized  its incentives  framework.  All  economic 
sectors are open to foreign investment, foreign investors are allowed to hold 100% foreign equity in all 
economic sectors, barring very few exceptions, and there is equal treatment given to local and foreign 
investors with flexibility to easily remit Royalty, Technical & Franchise Fee, Capital, Profits, Dividends 
etc.  No  Government  sanction  is  required  for  setting  up  any  industry,  in  terms  of  field  of  activity, 
location,  and  size.  Tourism,  housing  and  construction  sector,  computer  software  and  information 
technology (IT) have been declared as industries and provided a set of tax incentives. 
BIS Review 71/2006 
 5
