Donald L Kohn: Nomination as Vice Chairman to the Board 
Testimony  by  Mr  Donald  L  Kohn,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  United  States  Senate, 
Washington DC, 8 June 2006. 
 Chairman  Shelby,  Senator  Sarbanes,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am  honored  to  have  been 
nominated  by  President  Bush  to  be  the  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System and grateful to this Committee for scheduling this hearing so expeditiously. I have 
enjoyed a long and productive relationship with the Banking Committee and its staff over the years, 
working  together  to  determine  how  the  Federal  Reserve  can  best  contribute  to  the  economic  well-
being  of  our  citizens.  As  a  governor  and,  if  you  confirm  me,  as  Vice  Chairman,  I  look  forward  to 
continuing to be a part of the shared pursuit of that goal.  
The Board's Vice Chairman has a very limited role under the Federal Reserve Act--to preside over the 
Board  in  the  absence  of  the  Chairman.  By  tradition  and  practice,  however,  the  Vice  Chairman  has 
played a leadership role within the System. He or she has acted as the Chairman's deputy or alternate 
in important international groups, has headed ad hoc committees within the Board, System, or Federal 
Open Market Committee to help develop policy alternatives for consideration by the larger group, has 
helped  the  Chairman  to  lead  the  Board,  and  has  worked  closely  with  the  Chairman  in  a  variety  of 
circumstances, including when responding to disturbances in the financial sector that had the potential 
of affecting the broader economy. 
The  Federal  Reserve  faces  considerable  challenges  today  in  meeting  the  responsibilities  that  you 
have given us: for fostering price stability and maximum employment at a time of rapid change in the 
U.S.  and  global  economies;  for  helping  maintain  a  safe  and  sound  banking  system  and  stable  and 
efficient  payments  and  financial  systems  in  the  face  of  innovations  in  financial  instruments  and 
institutions; and for protecting and educating consumers as they take advantage of the greater variety 
and  sophistication  of  financial  instruments  available  to  them.  I  believe  that  my  long  and  wide 
experience within the Federal Reserve--at a Reserve Bank and at the Board, on staff and as governor-
-along  with  my  close  working  relationship  with  Chairman  Bernanke  will  enable  me  to  make  even 
greater contributions  to  the  work  of  the  Federal Reserve  as  the Board's  Vice Chairman  should  you 
choose to confirm me to this position. 
BIS Review 51/2006 
 1
