Su Ning: Pilot bank card service in Guizhou Province 
Speech by Mr Su Ning, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Inauguration of Pilot 
Bank  Card  Service  tailored  for  rural  migrant  workers  in  Guizhou  Province,  Guiyang,  29  December 
2005. 
 to 
implement 
the  scientific  development  approach, 
Distinguished Guests,  
Comrades, 
Migrant Farmer Friends, 
This ceremony marks the launching of Pilot bank card service in Guizhou tailored for migrant workers 
from the countryside. This service, after its inauguration, enables migrant workers to deposit cash on 
China Union-Pay bank cards in the place where they work and withdraw money from the rural credit 
cooperative service network at their home town. This pilot project provides service to migrant workers 
and is made possible by joint efforts of the People's Bank of China and other relevant parties as a 
concrete  measure 
facilitate  coordinated 
development of rural and urban China, properly solve problems associated with the development of 
rural  economy,  and  build  a  well-off  society;  it  is  an  important  step  to  improve  the  clearing  and 
settlement environment in rural areas, expand the bank card service system, diversify fund remittance 
methods  for  migrant  workers,  and  enhance  the  financial  services  in  rural  areas.  I  would  like  to 
congratulate,  on  behalf  of  the  People's  Bank  of  China  (PBC),  on  the  opening  of  this  service  in 
Guizhou,  and  express  our  sincere  thanks  to  the  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of  China  (ICBC), 
Agricultural  Bank  of  China,  China  Union-Pay  and  Guizhou  Rural  Credit  Cooperatives  who  have 
completed operational and technical preparation for the project, and to the PBC Guiyang Sub-Branch 
who has organized the project's implementation. Our thanks also go to everyone who has worked hard 
for it. 
The State Council has attached great importance to rural economy and formulated a series of strategic 
plans  to  solve  problems  associated  with  the  development  of  rural  economy.  The  11th  5-Year  Plan 
adopted at the 5th Plenum of the 16th CPC Central Committee put forward strategic ideas, objectives 
and plans to build a socialist new countryside. The PBC has always regarded rural financial service as 
a high priority. In response to the call by the State Council, the PBC has taken active measures to 
support  structural  reform  of  the  rural  credit  cooperative  system,  including  formulating  and 
implementing a plan to provide financial support for the reform. In addition, a number of steps have 
been  taken  to  diversify  clearing  and  settlement  modes  for  rural  credit  cooperatives  and  boost  their 
payment  capacity.  The  large-value  payment  system  launched  on  30  June  2005  and  introduced 
nationwide  has  significantly  improved  the  payment  methods  of  rural  credit  cooperatives  and 
contributed to providing a level playground for the rural credit cooperatives. This pilot project of bank 
card services tailored for migrant workers is another important measure by the PBC to speed up rural 
financial infrastructure building and increase competitiveness of rural credit cooperatives.  
In  recent  years,  thanks  to  the  efforts  of  many  parties,  bank  cards  have  seen  rapid  development  in 
China.  With  issuance  increasing  significantly,  card  acceptance  environment  and  payment  function 
improving continuously, band card has become the most frequently used means of non-cash payment. 
But  the  development  has  not  been  evenly  distributed  among  regions;  therefore  we  have  always 
attached  importance  to  introducing  this  modern  payment  instrument  to  rural  areas  and  enabling 
farmers  to  benefit  from  it.  This  pilot  project  in  Guizhou represents  a  business  innovation  that  offers 
migrant workers the convenience of withdrawing their deposit from a different location. It also helps 
broaden the business scope of bank card operating institutions such as card issuing banks, rural credit 
cooperatives  and  China  Union-Pay  Co.  Ltd,  brings  a  win-win  situation  for  all  and  promotes  a  rapid 
development of the industry. 
This tailored service effectively offers another way for migrant workers to send money to their home 
town. According to statistics, there are more than a hundred million migrant workers in mainland China 
that produce fund flow totaling several hundred billion yuan between urban and rural areas each year. 
The flow is expected to increase by dozens of billion annually in the future. At the moment, the fund 
remittance  system  is  not  fully  developed  for  migrant  workers  as  the  fund  transfer  mode  is  not 
diversified and takes a long time. The need of these workers for a convenient, safe and rapid way of 
BIS Review 11/2006 
 1
transferring fund is yet to be satisfied and many of them have to personally carry large amount of cash 
home.  With  the  opening  of  tailored  bank  card  service,  rural  migrant  workers  can  transfer  the  fund 
deposited at their place of work to the rural credit cooperatives at their hometown and withdraw cash 
at  the  rural  credit  cooperatives  with  a  swipe  of  card,  in  a  matter  of  several  seconds.  This  not  only 
offers a new way of fund transfer, but also helps migrant workers use card more than cash and build a 
socialist new countryside. 
Comrades,  
The pilot project of bank card services tailored for migrant workers is of far-reaching significance. We 
should look at this project from the strategic point of serving the people and the economy in the rural 
areas and explore, through the project, effective ways and experiences of rural bank card services. 
The PBC, as the organizer and coordinator, shall continue to give publicity to the project, monitor and 
examine  the  services;  the  ICBC  and  Agricultural  Bank  of  China  shall  continue  to  conduct  cash 
withdrawal business according to the established plan and provide good cash issuing service as well 
as security support; the China Union-Pay Co. Ltd. shall provide technical support and related training 
to improve the quality of cross-bank service; the rural credit cooperatives in Guizhou shall continue to 
seize the good opportunity to improve service, provide a safe transaction environment, and work to 
prevent  crimes  such  as  fraud  and  money  laundering.  The  PBC  and  all  other  parties  will  study 
problems that come up in the experiment and gradually spread the service to other areas. 
I  am  confident  that,  with  the  support  of  PBC  and  the  Guizhou  Provincial  Government  and  the  joint 
efforts  of  ICBC,  Agricultural  Bank  of  China,  China  Union-Pay  Co.  Ltd  and  the  Guizhou  rural  credit 
cooperatives, this pilot project will definitely contribute to rural economic development and the building 
of a well-off society in the countryside.  
Thank you!  
 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2006
