Rakesh Mohan: Asia’s urban century - emerging trends 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Conference  on  Land  Policies  and  Urban  Development,  organised  by  the  Lincoln  Institute  of  Land 
Policy, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 5 June 2006. 
I would like to express my deep appreciation to Shahid Yusuf for bibliographic guidance and inspiring discussions that brought 
me uptodate on Asian urbanization. Assistance of Kumarjit Mandal and Partha Ray is gratefully acknowledged. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of India’s website. 
 Urbanisation: a recent phenomenon 
I. 
Widespread all pervading urbanisation is a truly twentieth century phenomenon. Although cities have 
always existed, even cities such as Memphis, Babylon, Thebes, Athens, Sparta, Mohen-ja-daro and 
Anuradhapura existed in antiquity, there is little evidence of widespread urbanisation in the early years 
of civilization. Rome was perhaps the first settlement to reach 1 million people in BC; only in 1800 did 
London become the second city to reach this population size. 
In 1800, only 2 per cent of the world’s population was urbanised. By the year 1900, out of a total world 
population of close to 1.5 to 1.7 billion, only 15 percent of the population, about 250 million, lived and 
worked in urban areas, a number lower than the total urban population of India alone today. By the 
year  1950  the  proportion  of  urban  to  total  global  population  had  risen  to  30  per  cent,  with  Europe, 
North  America  and  Oceania  having  the  highest  levels  of  urbanisation  then.  By  the  year  2000,  2.8 
billion people lived in urban areas equaling approximately 49 percent of the world's population. So the 
pace of urbanisation witnessed in the twentieth century was truly unprecedented, and it is a wonder 
that the world has coped as well as it has. We are now at a turning point in human history: the number 
of people living in cities is about to exceed those in the countryside, perhaps in this calendar year.  
The  last  50  years  have  been  truly  remarkable  in  terms  of  the  number  of  people  who  have  been 
successfully absorbed in cities in a time period that is incredibly short by historical standards. While 
the world’s urban population grew by approximately 500 million between 1900 and 1950, it grew by 
2.1 billion in the next fifty years; and is expected to grow by a similar magnitude in just the next thirty 
years.  The  speed  of  urbanisation  in  Latin  America  in  the  second  half  of  the  twentieth  century  was 
spectacular, vaulting from a just over 40 percent urbanisation level to 75 percent by the end of this 
period  which  was  also  a  period  of  rapid  population  growth  and  demographic  transition.  As  may  be 
seen (Table 1) the focus of change is now in Asia with the urban population expected to double in the 
next 30 years or so. This phenomenon of such rapid urbanisation is indeed unprecedented and it has 
changed  human  geography  beyond  recognition.  In  the  process  the  complexion  of  development 
objectives and processes has also undergone significant change. 
In  the  last  two  centuries,  cities  have  consistently  provided  the  environment  for  institutional  and 
technological innovation, and have often been referred to as “engines of economic growth”; “agents of 
change” and “incubators of innovation”. Between 1960 and 2000 world output went up four fold, while 
urban population almost tripled, taking the world from 33 percent urban to 47 percent urban in forty 
years (Table 2).  
Table 1: Urban population growth across the globe 
Urban 
Population 
1900 
in
Millions
Per 
cent of 
total 
 
 
 
  Region 
Africa 
Asia 
Latin 
America & 
Caribbean 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 Urban Population  Urban Population Urban Population 
1950 
in 
Millions
Per cent 
of total
2000 
in 
Millions
32
244
70
14.7
17.4
41.9
295
1376
391
Per 
cent of 
total
37.2
37.5
75.4
2030 
in 
Millions 
Per cent 
of total 
787 
2679 
608 
52.9 
54.1 
84.0 
1
Oceania 
Europe  
North America 
Global Total 
Increase 
Source: United Nations (2002) 
 
 
 
~250 
 
 
 
 
~ 15 
 
8 
287 
110 
751 
501 
61.6
52.4
63.9
29.8
14.8
23
534
243
2862
2111
74.1
73.4
77.4
47.2
17.4
32
540
335
4981
2119
77.3 
80.5 
84.5 
60.2 
13.0 
Table 2: Global GDP and growth in urban population 
 
World GDP (constant 1995 $ trillion) 
Share of agriculture in world GDP 
Share of industry in world GDP 
Share of services in world GDP 
World population (mm) 
Per cent urban population 
Source: World Bank database. 
1960
7.9
-
-
-
3020
33.3
1970
13.5
-
-
-
3675
36.5
1980
19.5
  6.5
38.0
55.5
4428
39.3
2000 
34.3 
  3.9 
20.8 
66.3 
6053 
46.7 
The twenty-first century will therefore be an urban century. For the first time in human history, more 
people will live in cities than in the countryside. The urban situation will get more pronounced as the 
century unfolds. As in the last fifty years, developing countries will be urbanising at a much more rapid 
pace than developed countries.  
A review of the regional dynamics of urbanisation reveals interesting developments (Table 3). There 
has been a dramatic shift of the fulcrum of urban population away from Europe and North America to 
the developing regions of the world. During the period 1950-2000, the growth rate of urban population 
in  Europe  and  North  America  was  about  1.5  per  cent.  The  share  of  Europe  and  North  America  in 
global  urban  population  declined  from  about  53  per  cent  in  1950  to  27.5  per  cent  in  2000  and  is 
expected  to  decline  further  to  about  17  per  cent  by  2030.  Africa  has  experienced  consistent  high 
growth in its urban population, which grew at an annual rate of 4.4 per cent during 1950-2000, and its 
share in global urban population is expected to rise to 16 per cent by 2030 (from 4.3 per cent in 1950). 
Latin America has now become predominantly urban, surpassing urbanisation levels in Europe and 
will  almost  be  at  par  with  North  America  by  2030.  Interestingly,  Asia  is  where  almost  half  of  urban 
population of the world lives and soon it will have the majority of the world's urban population.  
2 
 BIS Review 60/2006
Table 3: Global urbanisation trends – level of urbanisation  
 
       Region 
World Total 
Less Developed Regions 
Africa 
Asia 
Latin America 
More Developed Regions 
Europe 
North America 
Oceania 
Source: Mohan and Dasgupta (2005) 
1920
19
10
7
9
22
40
46
52
47
 (Per cent) 
2030 
61 
57 
54 
55 
85 
85 
83 
85 
75 
technological  developments. 
Information  asymmetries  contribute 
It  is  now  well  established  that  the  acceleration  of  urbanisation  generally  takes  place  with 
corresponding acceleration of economic growth. Urbanisation is promoted by (i) economies of scale in 
production particularly in manufacturing; (ii) the existence of information externalities; (iii) technology 
development, particularly in building and transportation technology; (iv) substitution of capital for land 
as  made  possible  by 
to 
agglomeration economies. As economies of scale in production begin to take hold larger size plants 
become  necessary,  thus  contributing  to  the  need  for  larger  settlements  of  people.  The  services 
needed by the rising agglomeration of people gives rise to an even greater number of people living 
together: thus cities are born and how they grow. As technology develops and capital is substituted for 
land, taller buildings become possible, intensifying population densities further. Similarly, technology 
development in transportation, enabling faster speeds, enables people to live at greater distances thus 
contributing  to  the  expansion  of  city  size.  The  existence  of  agglomeration  economies  gives  rise  to 
continuing  accretion  of  people  in  a  settlement,  thus  promoting  city  growth.  These  linkages  become 
more  prominent  with  economic  growth  thereby  promoting  the  acceleration  of  urbanisation.  With  the 
growing weights of industry and services in developing countries, urbanisation has proceeded apace 
over the last 50 years. As we will see, the relatively concentrated pattern of Asian urbanisation that 
has occurred along with a very high rate of economic growth perhaps best illustrates the economic 
gains accruing from agglomeration economies and economies of scale. 
Asia becomes urban 
II. 
Presently the highest rates of economic growth are being witnessed in Asia, and hence high urban 
growth.  This  is  particularly  noticeable  in  China  and  India,  which  today  have  the  largest  rural 
populations but are urbanising rapidly. Even in other Asian countries where a large number of cities 
are witnessing high rates of economic growth, the growth in their urban population is also going to be 
higher.  Of  the  10  most  populous  countries,  6  are  in  Asia  (Table  4).  Even  as  more  than  two  billion 
people  will  be  added  to  Asia’s  population  in  the  next  30  years  many  of  these  countries  will  still  be 
rapidly  urbanising.  This  phenomenon  has  now  gained  such  prominence  that  even  popular  news 
magazines have begun to take note (Newsweek, 2003). This is also reflected in Figure 1 which shows 
that rural population in Asia is expected to decline, in absolute terms during 2000-2030, yet another 
unprecedented event, while urban population will almost double during the same period. Therefore, 
while  thinking  and  thought  processes  related  to  urbanisation  were  dominated  by  the  growth  of 
urbanisation  in  Latin  America  between  1950  and  2000,  the  21st  Century  will  be  the  “Asian  Urban 
Century”. 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 3
Table 4: Emergence of mega cities:  
Population of Cities with 10 million or more inhabitants 
1950 
1975 
12.3  1  Tokyo  
       2  New 
York 
3  Shangha
i 
4  Mexico 
5  Sao 
Paulo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       New 
York  
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Source: United Nations (2002). 
  2000 
1 Tokyo 
2 Sao Paulo 
3 Mexico City 
4 New York 
5 Mumbai 
19.8
15.9
11.4
10.7
10.3
     6 Los Angeles 
7 Kolkata 
8 Dhaka 
9 Delhi 
10 Shanghai 
11 Buenos 
Aires 
12 Jakarta 
13 Osaka 
14 Beijing  
15 Rio de 
Janerio 
16 Karachi 
17 Metro Manila
   25.2
18.3
18.3
16.8
16.5
13.3
13.3
13.2
13.0
12.8
12.1
11.4
11.0
10.8
10.8
10.4
10.1
(in Millions) 
2015 
1 Tokyo 
2 Dhaka 
3 Mumbai  
4 Sao Paolo 
5 Delhi 
6 Mexico City 
7 New York 
8 Jakarta 
9 Kolkata 
10 Karachi 
11 Lagos 
12 Los Angeles 
13 Shanghai 
14 Buenos 
Aires 
15 Metro Manila 
16 Beijing 
17 Rio de 
Janerio 
18 Cairo 
19 Istanlbul 
20 Osaka 
21 Tianjin 
27.2 
22.8 
22.6 
21.2 
20.9 
20.4 
17.9 
17.3 
16.7 
16.2 
16.0 
14.5 
13.6 
13.2 
12.6 
11.7 
11.5 
11.5 
11.4 
11.0 
10.3 
Figure 1: Growth in urban and rural population in Asia over the years 
Source: UN, 2002 
 By 2030, Asia alone will have about 2.7 billion urban people accounting for over 50 per cent of its total 
population.  All  the  other  regions  of  the  world  will  have  a  combined  urban  population  of  about  2.3 
billion.  Six  of  the  10  countries  with  the  largest  urban  populations  are  in  Asia.  Urbanisation  in 
Bangladesh  has  been  among  the  fastest  in  the  world  (5.6  per  cent  during  1950-2000).  The  only 
African country in the top 10 list, Nigeria, has also urbanized very rapidly in the past 5 decades (World 
 4 
 BIS Review 60/2006
Urbanisation Prospects, 2001). Interestingly, by 2010, Lagos is projected to become the third largest 
city in the world. 
Moving  to  the  city  level  urbanisation  trends,  the  growth  of  urban  agglomerations  in  developing 
countries  has  far  exceeded  that  in  developed  countries.  In  1950,  there  was  only  one  city  with  a 
population of over 10 million people: New York City. In 2000 there were 17 cities with a population 
above 10 million, 22 cities with population between 5 and 10 million; 402 with a population of 1 to 5 
million; and 433 in the 0.5 to 1 million category. An important characteristic of urbanisation in Asia has 
been the emergence of mega-cities – large multi-nuclear urban agglomerations of more than 10 million 
people. There were no such agglomerations in Asia in 1950, two in 1975 and by 2000, 10 of the 17 
global megacities were in Asia. It is expected that 12 out of the 21 mega cities in the year 2015 will be 
in Asia (Table 4).  
Of the 21 cities expected to reach 10 million plus by 2015, 17 of them will be in developing countries. 
Of these 17 cities, 11 of them will be in developing countries in Asia and those will be Dhaka, Mumbai, 
Delhi, Jakarta, Kolkata, Karachi, Shanghai, Metro Manila, Beijing, Istanbul and Tianjin (Table 5). 
Table 5: Out of the 10 most populous countries 6 are Asian 
2000 
  
  
  
  
  
Country 
1950 
Population 
(mn)
Per cent 
urban 
Per cent 
urban 
Population 
(mn) 
2030 
Per cent 
urban 
Population 
(mn)
Indonesia 
1  China 
2 
India 
3  USA 
4  Brazil 
5 
6  Nigeria 
7  Pakistan 
8  Mexico 
9  Japan 
1
0 
Source: United Nations (2002) 
Bangladesh 
12.5 
17.3 
64.2 
36.5 
12.4 
10.1 
17.5 
42.7 
50.3 
4.3 
555
357
158
54
79
30
40
28
84
42
35.8 
29.0 
77.2 
81.2 
41.0 
44.1 
33.1 
74.4 
78.8 
25.0 
1275 
1009 
283 
170 
212 
114 
141 
99 
127 
137 
59.5 
40.9 
84.5 
90.5 
63.7 
63.6 
48.9 
81.9 
84.8 
44.3 
1485
1409
358
226
283
220
273
135
121
223
The historical pattern of urbanisation suggests that countries tend to urbanise very slowly until they 
attain  urbanisation  levels  of  around  25  to  30  per  cent.  The  pace  of  economic  growth  and  overall 
development  then  quickens,  with  rapid  structural  shifts  occurring  in  the  economy,  away  from 
agriculture to industry and services. The pace of urban growth between urbanisation levels of 25 to 30 
per cent and 55 to 60 per cent has typically been observed to take place in a very short historical time 
frame of 25 to 50 years. This happened in European countries and North America at different times in 
the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century, and in Latin America during the latter half of 
the twentieth century. Japan went from about 25 per cent urbanisation level in 1930 to over 70 per 
cent in 1970; and Korea from about 25 per cent urban in 1955 to 50 per cent by 1975. During this 
rapid phase of urbanisation, the demand for urban infrastructure investment is massive and countries 
have usually been observed to need external savings to supplement available domestic resources to 
finance such investment. So far, the world has been able to cope with such demands as the scene of 
urbanisation has shifted from one region to another and the overall magnitude of increase in urban 
population has been manageable. What is new in the next 25 to 30 years is that three of the world's 
most  populous  countries,  China,  India  and  Indonesia,  with  combined  total  population  of  about  2.5 
billion  will  be  undergoing  this  process  simultaneously,  with  Pakistan  and  Bangladesh  not  much  far 
behind. The magnitude of the increase in urban population in Asia in this period will be unprecedented 
and will undoubtedly give rise to unforeseen problems as well as opportunities.  
BIS Review 60/2006 
 5
The popular view of towns and cities in developing countries, and of the urbanisation process, is a 
negative  one,  despite  the  benefits  it  brings.  For  many,  the  emergence  of  such  cities  connotes 
environmental degradation, the generation of slums, rampant urban poverty and unemployment, loss 
of  control  and  traffic  chaos.  But  what  is  the  reality?  Given  the  unprecedental  increase  in  urban 
population over the last 50 years from 300 million in 1950 to 2 billion in 2000 in developing countries, 
the wonder really is how well the world has coped, and not how badly. In general, the urban quality of 
life has improved in terms of availability of water and sanitation, power, health, education, telephones, 
and the like, and poverty has fallen. These improvements must be viewed against the fact that they 
have been achieved in the presence of rapidly increasing population, under difficult fiscal situations, 
and with strained human resources for the emerging needs of public management. 
By way of illustration, we can look at the coverage of water and sanitation services in Asian cities. As 
presented in table 6 a large number of urban residents have been provided with improved water in 
urban areas in Asia’s largest countries. Although in some countries such as China, Indonesia and the 
Philippines, the access to improved water in terms of percentage of total urban population seems to 
have  declined  from  1990 to  2000,  in  absolute  numbers,  millions  of  additional  citizens  have  actually 
been  provided  improved  services.  Although  the  definition  of  urban  areas  as  well  as  the  concept  of 
improved water services varies across the different countries referred to in the following tables, the 
increase in access is documented by each country within their own definitions as presented here. In 
the  four  countries  taken  together,  an  additional  population  of  approximately  262  million  has  been 
provided with improved access to water in urban areas during the 1990s, which is a population greater 
than that of most countries today. 
Table 6: Improvement in access to water in urban Asia 
Per cent of urban population with access to 
Improved water 
Additional people 
provided (million) 
  
Country 
  
1990 
99 
China 
88 
India 
92 
Indonesia 
93 
Philippines 
 
Korea, Rep. 
Source: World Bank database, 2003 
2000 
94 
95 
90 
91 
97 
1990 to 2000 
115 
107 
27 
12 
 
These  countries  in  Asia  have  made  significant  progress  in  the  provision  of  sanitation  services  too, 
together providing for an additional population of more than 293 million citizens within a decade. In this 
parameter there has been a consistent increase in the percentage of urban population covered in all 
the countries (Table 7).  
Table 7: Improvement in sanitation facilities in urban Asia 
Country 
 Per cent of urban population 
with access to 
Additional people 
provided (million) 
Improved sanitation facilities 
China 
India 
Indonesia 
Philippines 
Korea, Rep. 
Source: World Bank database, 2003 
1990 
57 
44 
66 
85 
 
2000 
68 
61 
69 
93 
76 
1990 to 2000 
130 
96 
23 
15 
29 
6 
 BIS Review 60/2006
This  general improvement  in  access  to  urban  infrastructure  and services  in  the  Asian cities  can  be 
observed in other sectors too such as health services, education and housing. Looking at the change 
in poverty levels too is revealing; in terms of both nutrition levels and life expectancy most of the Asian 
urban  areas have  seen consistent  progress. However,  in  income poverty  terms  the  experience  has 
been mixed, bringing to the fore the importance of macro-economic management of a country, and its 
relevance for urban poverty reduction. In India, a steady macro economic environment and economic 
growth in the 1990s has led to steady improvement in income poverty levels. 
Progress in the provision of essential urban services has been significant. Unlike the popular view that 
urbanisation causes deprivation, urbanisation has been relatively well addressed in Asian cities and 
has led to an increase in living standards and quality of life of its residents. Given the (i) vast increase 
in urban population in these countries, (ii) low per capita income, (iii) constrained fiscal circumstances 
of  governments,  leading  to  low  expenditure  on  urban  infrastructure,  and  (iv)  the  existence  of  weak 
local  governments  in  most  urban  areas,  the  progress  achieved  is  indeed  quite  noteworthy.  In  all 
probability the quality of life in developing Asian urban areas is significantly better than the situation 
witnessed  in  the  18th  and  19th  centuries  in  European  cities,  which  had  grown  under  similar 
circumstances, but perhaps at higher prevailing income levels. We may also recall that they did not 
have  to  cope  with  mega  cities  during  their  phase  of  rapid  urbanisation.  These  achievements  have 
probably been enabled by the availability of better technology and systems now.  
Some distinctive features of Asian urban growth 
III.  
The  rapid  economic  growth  of  Asia  in  the  last  half  century  must  be  amongst  the  most  spectacular 
periods of development in recorded human history. The magnitude of population that has benefitted 
from this growth far surpasses that of the rest of the world, and in particular of Western Europe and 
North  America.  Broadly  speaking,  the  evolving  pattern  of  Asian  urbanisation  has  naturally 
corresponded to the shifting focus of economic growth over this period. 
Economic growth in Asia was kindled by the remarkable post World War II recovery of Japan in the 
1950s and 1960s, and stretching into the 1980s when Japan became the second largest economy in 
the  world.  A  particular  characteristic  of  Japanese  economic  and  urban  growth  was  the  heavy 
concentration of economic activity in the Tokkaido region (Tokyo – Nagoya – Osaka corridor), which 
was aided and abetted by an apparent conscious choice of concentrated infrastructure investment in 
this region. The Japanese economy benefited from high savings and investment rates (almost 40 per 
cent  of  GDP  by  1970)  during  this  period,  which  provided  the  resources  necessary  for  the  heavy 
transportation  and  urban  infrastructure  investments  that  were  made.  The  rapid  increase  in 
manufacturing investment and production gave rise to high growth in manufacturing employment that 
was responsible for very high rates of rural urban migration. The Japanese countryside was literally 
drained  of  people  during  this  period  and  the  Tokkaido  region  became  one  of  the  most  densely 
populated urban corridors in the world. Between 1950 and 1970 Japan's rural population fell from its 
peak of about 52 million to less than 30 million; by then almost 40 per cent of Japan's total population, 
and as much as 60 per cent of its urban population was concentrated in the 500 km Tokkaido coastal 
corridor  (Mills  and  Ohta,  1970).  The  kind  of  economic  concentration  that  emerged  was  perhaps 
instrumental  in  economizing  on  infrastructure  investment  that  would  have  been  larger  had  it  been 
spread out over a larger part of the country. The geographical proximity of different activities gave rise 
to  agglomeration  economies  that  aided  rapid  productivity  growth  and  also  enabled  innovation  in 
traditional production processes through the introduction of new systems such as Just-in-Time (JiT) 
modes of inventory management. Such innovations enabled much more outsourcing of components, a 
process  that  contributed  to  the  drastic  reduction  in  manufacturing  costs  that  was  the  foundation  of 
Japan's  competitiveness.  The  more  efficient  inventory  management  resulting  from  JiT  and  overall 
supply  management  has  also  enabled  significant  reduction  in  corporate  need  for  bank  financing, 
leading  to  significant  changes  in  bank  portfolios.  Creativity  and  innovation  have  been  among  the 
distinctive characteristics of Japanese economic and urban growth. 
The focus of growth began to shift later to the Asian tigers: Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore and 
Taiwan.  What  is  noteworthy  is  that  the  overall  pattern  of  growth  was  similar  in  these  countries. 
Singapore and Hong Kong being city states were, of course, somewhat different and had to exhibit 
concentrated  growth.  But  South  Korea  and  Taiwan  also  concentrated  on  specialising 
in 
manufacturing. Like Japan they first specialized in labour intensive low technology goods production 
and  then  began  to  move  up  the  technology  chain.  While  Korean  manufacturing  production  was 
concentrated in large manufacturing conglomerates, that of Taiwan was spread over a large proportion 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 7
of  small  and  medium  enterprises.  However,  they  both  exhibited  a  strategy  of  concentrated  spatial 
development  in  urban  concentrations,  Seoul/Pusan  in  Korea  and  Taipei/Kaohsing  in  Taiwan.  The 
Seoul  and  Pusan  metropolitan  regions  accounted  for  almost  70  per  cent  of  South  Korea's  urban 
population  by  the  mid  1970s  (Mills  and  Song,  1979  p.188).  Each  of  the  Tigers  adopted  an  export-
oriented  and  outward  orientated  strategy,  which  also  necessitated  heavy  investments  in  key 
transportation and communication links with the rest of the world. The economic activities located in 
these cities were as connected with the rest of the world as with their hinterlands, if not more. This 
common heavy spatial concentration in these countries, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, can perhaps 
also be attributed to the fact that they are among the most densely populated countries in the world.  
Given the success of the tigers, it was then the turn of the cubs, the South East Asian countries of 
Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia during the 1980s. Once again, the pattern of concentrated heavy 
investment  was  repeated  in  the  metropolitan  cities  of  Bangkok,  Jakarta  and  Kuala  Lumpur.  The 
orientation here was also export oriented and hence, again, heavy investment had to be incurred in 
transportation and communication links, and in urban infrastructure. 
The urban development pattern that emerged in Asia was that of concentrated development around 
coastal regions of each country. Moreover, the transportation links that grew between these coastal 
cities in terms of economic linkages of communication, transportation and commerce, contributed to 
the emergence of trans-border virtual urban corridors. In fact, a look at the Asian urbanisation pattern 
as it has emerged reveals a long almost continuous urban coastal corridor stretching from Tokyo to 
Sydney,  through  Seoul,  Taipei,  Shanghai,  Hong  Kong,  Kuala  Lumpur,  Singapore  and  Jakarta 
(Douglas, 1998). 
Interestingly, early Chinese economic and urban growth in the 1980s and 1990s was also the result of 
a similar strategy: export-oriented labour-using manufacturing located in the coastal areas; initially in 
and  around  Shanghai  and  in  the  whole  Pearl  River  Delta  Region.  Once  again,  infrastructure 
investment  was  concentrated  in  the  Special  Economic  Zones  and,  as  in  the  other  countries,  heavy 
rural urban migration ensued. Given the size of China it is, of course, not easy to portray its pattern of 
urbanisation.  Until  the  1990s,  rural  urban  migration  was  heavily  constrained  through  the  urban 
residence  permit  system,  which  has  since  been  loosened  considerably.  Although  there  is  a  great 
degree of debate on the actual level of Chinese urbanisation, in 2000 it was somewhere between 30 
and  36  per  cent.  It  now  has  about  90  cities  with  more  than  1  million  population.  The  Chinese 
authorities have a clear priority objective of accelerating urbanisation to absorb surplus labour from 
rural areas into more productive urban systems (Webster, 2005). 
In contrast to this common experience, the Indian strategy was almost a mirror image of the East and 
South  East  Asian  strategy.  The  ethos  was  of  dispersed  development:  urban  concentration  was 
frowned  upon  and  actively  discouraged;  and  the  import  substituting  inward  oriented  manufacturing 
approach  persisted  till  the  1980s.  Investment  in  infrastructure,  particularly  urban  infrastructure  has 
been  of  lower  intensity.  As  I  have  documented  elsewhere,  unlike  the  East  and  South  East  Asian 
countries, during the period of accelerating economic growth in India in the 1980s and 1990s, although 
industrial  growth  was  high,  manufacturing  employment  and  urban  population  growth  decelerated 
(Mohan and Dasgupta, 2004). Despite being a peninsula with a long coastline, there was no attempt 
to  concentrate  economic  activity  in  the  coastal  areas:  in  fact  growth  in  the  old  concentrations  of 
Calcutta, Madras and Bombay (now Kolkata, Chennai and Mumbai) slowed down in the 1980s and 
1990s  while,  interestingly,  inland  cities  such  as  Bangalore,  Hyderabad  and  Delhi  prospered.  There 
have perhaps been few such examples of inland cities growing faster than coastal cities and regions. 
The fulcrum of global economic growth has now shifted to the large economies of China and India. In 
the case of China, with the initial growth impetus having come from the coastal zones, the emphasis is 
now  shifting  to  inland  cities.  Although  economic  growth  has  perhaps  now  got  more  concentrated 
regionally  in  India,  there  is  still  little  evidence  of  strategy  shifting  to  the  promotion  of  greater  urban 
concentrations. So the export led, coastal urban growth that has been characteristic of Asian urban 
growth in the last 50 years can now be expected to move inland in the large land masses of India and 
China.  Such  a  pattern  of  urban  growth  will  probably  necessitate  higher  degree  of  infrastructure 
investment  –  both 
international  economic 
competitiveness.  
intra-urban  and 
inter-urban 
to  ensure 
in  order 
8 
 BIS Review 60/2006
Emerging issues for the next wave of Asian urbanisation 
IV.  
By  all  accounts  Asia  has  coped  well  with  the  unprecedented  magnitude  of  urbanisation  that  it  has 
experienced in the last 50 years. The Asian habitat pattern has been transformed over a historically 
brief time period: an Asian is now almost as likely to be found living in an urban area as in a rural area, 
with a high probability of being found in a city of significant size. Because of the particular economic 
strategy  followed  over  much  of  Asia,  its  cities  are  engines  of  economic  activity  exhibiting  ever 
increasing productivity gains and prosperity. This has enabled Asia to finance its urban infrastructure 
investment without excessive international borrowing. In fact, the financial surplus that the region is 
now exporting to other regions of the world has come as a bit of a surprise, given its own resource 
needs for continuing investment, particularly in the infrastructure needed for further urbanisation. 
Although the rate of urbanisation will, no doubt, slow down overall, the magnitude of urban population 
accretion in Asia over the next 30 years will be roughly equal to that experienced in the last 50 years. 
In fact, this next wave of urbanisation in Asia will be the largest in magnitude over any 30 year period 
in human history. The key question that arises is whether the region will have enough resources to 
cope  with  this  magnitude  of  urbanisation.  It  is  the  most  populous  countries  of  China,  India  and 
Indonesia,  along  with  Pakistan  and  Bangladesh,  which  will  undergo  large  urbanisation  during  this 
period, even though the pace of change may well be faster in other countries such as Vietnam, Laos 
and Myanmar. 
China seems to have invested adequately in infrastructure already and there would appear to be little 
doubt  of  its  ability  to  generate  enough  internal  resources  to  finance  its  investment  needs  over  the 
foreseeable  future  and  its  ability  to  attract  external  resources  if  needed.  In  fact,  given  the  current 
magnitude of its current account surplus, coupled with the flow of external savings into the country, 
and  the  large  magnitude  of  forex  reserves  invested elsewhere,  it  has  enough  of  a  cushion  to  meet 
most  if  not  all  its  needs  in  the  foreseeable  future.  As  I  have  discussed,  the  change  that  can  be 
expected is that of a change in focus towards inland cities. The question that then arises is whether 
these cities will be productive and competitive enough to produce the economic surpluses necessary 
for  their  continued  sustainability.  The  attainment  of  such  productivity  will  necessarily  mean  greater 
inter-urban infrastructure investment, so that these cities are well integrated with their coastal cousins. 
Furthermore, given the information technology and communication revolution, along with the secular 
decline in per unit air transportation costs, they can now also be connected to the rest of the world 
without intermediation of the coastal cities. But this would also mean that they will need to specialize 
more  in  service  industries,  rather  than  in  manufacturing;  the  latter  could  be  handicapped  in  global 
competitiveness because of excessive transport costs. Thus, it is certainly the case that much greater 
inter-urban  infrastructure  investment  will  be  necessary  to  make  these  cities  competitive.  It  would 
appear that this has already begun in China in all the various facets of infrastructure: road, rail, airports 
and telecommunications. 
The Indian story is somewhat different with relatively low attention being paid to urban development 
over the years, and slowing urbanisation over the last quarter century. There have been systematic 
policy biases against labour using industrialization, location of industries in urban areas, and against 
urban  concentrations.  Correspondingly,  India  has  severe  problems  in  both  the  management  and 
financing of cities. With the new found economic resurgence of India, a result of consistent economic 
reforms since the early 1990s, the importance of urban infrastructure investment has finally begun to 
occupy  the  minds  of  key  policy  markers  and  a  new  "National  Urban  Renewal  Mission"  has  been 
launched. However, the biases against labour using manufacturing remain in overall economic policy 
making,  in  the  industrial  regulatory  regime,  labour  regulations  and  in  urban  land  policy.  Thus 
employment growth in manufacturing remains low. As I have argued elsewhere, these polices could 
have contributed significantly to the slow down observed in Indian urbanisation over the last quarter 
century (Mohan and Dasgupta, 2004). 
Industrial  competitiveness  in  India  has  now  recovered  after  the  shock  of  competition  having  been 
absorbed through significant financial and business process restructuring in Indian firms. The export 
orientation  of  Indian  industry  at  large  has  also  increased  significantly  in  recent  years.  On  average 
(since  2000-01),  about  14  per  cent  of  sales  of  Indian  firms  is  now  exported  and  this  proportion 
continues to grow, as compared with 7 per cent in 1991-92. Consequently, the continued high growth 
of  the  Indian  economy  would  get  strengthened  if  the  efficiency  of  Indian  cities  improves.  It  is 
noteworthy that those cities that have shown great economic vigor over the last decade in India, such 
as Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Pune and Chandigarh exhibit certain common characteristics. They 
have an unusually large endowment of educational institutions at all levels, and research institutions. 
As it happens, a good number of relatively high technology public sector industries were also located 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 9
in most of these cities. With the availability of such an educational and technical ethos, these cities 
have a knowledge base that is significantly superior to that of other cities. Consequently, they have 
been  able  to  lead  the  Indian  information  technology  revolution  and  to  benefit  from  all  the  high 
economic  growth  that  has  followed.  The  lack  of  appropriate  physical  infrastructure  and  transport 
linkage  inland  or  with  rest  of  the  world  has  not  come  in  the  way  since  the  information  technology 
exports  are  not  dependent  on  these  elements  of  infrastructure.  All  they  needed  was  appropriate 
communication infrastructure, which has indeed been provided progressively. However, the prosperity 
brought by the success of the IT industry in these cities has itself resulted in greater pressures being 
placed on the existing infrastructure. Traffic congestion has arisen due to much elevated levels of auto 
ownership; housing demand has escalated in both quantity and quality leading to rapid increases in 
land and housing prices; and much increased power demand is putting great stress on existing power 
supply systems. Businesses are therefore beginning to look for other locations. The competitiveness 
of  these  cities  will  therefore  depend  on  acceleration  in  urban  infrastructure  investment  and 
improvement in urban governance and management. The successful financing of such an enhanced 
level of investment will depend crucially on the financial viability of such projects. 
Given that the level of Indian urbanisation is still less than 30 per cent, and that 60 per cent of the 
Indian total population is still dependent on agriculture, the continuation of high economic growth will 
depend  on  the  success  of  a  higher  rate  of  labour  absorption  by  cities.  This  will  need  much  higher 
growth  in  labour  using  manufacturing,  higher  levels  of  urban  infrastructure  investment,  along  with 
knowledge based forward looking city management. Thus, the Indian situation is quite different from 
that of China. If Indian urbanisation does speed up as it surpasses the 30 per cent mark and as Indian 
per capita income approaches US $1000, in normal circumstances we should expect acceleration in 
Indian  urban  growth.  This  will  need  significant  acceleration  in  urban  infrastructure  investment  and 
hence  in  the  mobilisation  of  financial  resources  for  such  investment.  Although  so  far  India  has  not 
relied  significantly  on  external  savings  for  its  investment  needs,  it  is  possible  that  the  demand  for 
urban infrastructure investment will necessitate greater usage of external savings during this phase of 
India's urban growth. 
The other large country in Asia is Indonesia, which is spread over a large number of islands. Till the 
Asian financial crisis in 1997, Indonesia also exhibited economic policy characteristics similar to those 
of other East-Asian countries in terms of openness and export orientation, although it had more of a 
mix in economic policy, which was also concerned with promotion of import substituting industries and 
conscious dispersal of economic activities beyond the natural concentration in Java. Nevertheless, the 
greater  Jakarta  region,  known  as  the  Jabotobek  region,  exhibited  a  high  degree  of  urban 
concentration where a high proportion of Indonesian economic activities got concentrated despite the 
large  size  and  dispersed  nature  of  the  Indonesian  archipelago.  Given  the  somewhat  lower  level  of 
Indonesian  per  capita  income  and  the  very  rapid  growth  of  the  Jabotobek  region,  the  extent  and 
proliferation  of  slums  has  been  high  in  the  region.  (Webster,  2004)  Furthermore,  Indonesia  was 
perhaps the most highly affected of the Asian countries from the 1997 East Asian financial crisis. It has 
still  to  fully  recover  from  that  shock  and  is  yet  to  regain  earlier  economic  dynamism.  Thus  the 
persistence of slums and the accompanying urban distress is likely to persist in Indonesia longer than 
its  other  South  East  Asian  counterparts.  The  urban  future  of  Indonesia  is  more  beset  with 
uncertainties, reflecting the parallel economic uncertainties that it faces. 
How do we then look at Asia's evolving urban future over the next 30-50 years? How will it be different 
from  the  experience  of  the  last  half  century?  The  one  key  difference  is  that  with  increasing 
globalisation  and  ever  higher  levels  of  income  that  the  region  as  a  whole  is  now  blessed  with,  the 
residents of Asian cities will now be much more demanding relative to their predecessors in terms of 
the quality of urban services that they deem to be their right and the urban amenities of living that are 
now seen as normal. Hence it is likely that urban investment will be different in terms of its composition 
and intensity. Second, with increasing globalisation and reduction in trade protection, each Asian city 
will have to be more competitive on a global scale than has been the case in the past. In the larger 
countries  there  will  be  inevitable  tension  between  the  claims  of  coastal  urban  areas  that  possess 
natural comparative advantage and the vast hinterland that will need greater infrastructure investment 
for attaining competitiveness. Hence, policy makers probably need to give greater explicit attention to 
the ingredients of competitiveness, the corresponding public investment that will be appropriate in this 
regard,  and  the  modes  of  financing  that  will  need  to  be  mobilised.  Third,  as  discussed,  Asian 
urbanisation  in  the  last  half  century  has  been  based  disproportionately  on  rapid  city-based 
manufacturing growth in labour intensive industries that have pulled in labour from rural areas, thereby 
relieving rural areas of excess labour and hence enabling growth in both rural and urban productivity. 
With  the  changes  in  technology  that  have  now  taken  place  it  is  an  open  question  whether  labour 
10 
 BIS Review 60/2006
intensive industry will continue to survive and grow in the manner and experience of the previous 50 
years, and whether it will be as easy as in the past for urban areas to absorb the kind of rural urban 
migration experienced earlier.  
This issue is of great importance to India since the share of manufacturing in its economy is somewhat 
lower than could be expected at its current level of economic development (Mohan, 2002). If India is 
not able to change its economic and urban specific policies to encourage labour using manufacturing 
in  and  around  urban  concentrations,  and  if  the  global  economic  imperative  is  that  such  patterns  of 
industrialization are no longer feasible, how will its cities grow and absorb the large rural population 
that needs to get off the farm so that both rural and urban productivity can grow faster? Thus, we can 
expect  the  pattern  of  Indian  industrialization  and  urbanisation  to  be  different  from  that  of  East  and 
South East Asian countries.  
It must still be understood that for successful and sustainable urbanisation the share of manufacturing 
will still need to increase, but with somewhat different characteristics (Yusuf and Nabeshima, 2006). 
The  manufacturing  process  has  itself  changed  significantly  so  that  many  activities  that  were  earlier 
concentrated in one location in one plant are now often outsourced to many different locations within 
an urban concentration and even across borders. Often product design is now increasingly information 
technology dependent and typically locationally divorced from the core manufacturing plant. Moreover, 
product  development  and  design  is  now  increasingly  being  outsourced  on  a  global  basis.  The 
availability of competent engineering skills at a lower cost in India is contributing significantly to the 
relocation of product development and design from developed countries to India (Marsh, 2006, a,b,c). 
Conversely, Indian manufacturers are also outsourcing their product development and design in the 
reverse  direction.  Second,  increased  global  competition  is  also  leading  firms  to  look  for  continuous 
reduction  in  core  manufacturing  costs  in  whatever  ways  that  are  practical.  Local  outsourcing  of 
components and processes is one of the common practices that has been found to be useful in this 
regard.  The  requirements  of  inventory  control  and  management  require  the  location  of  such 
outsourced  manufacturing  activities  to  be  in  close  proximity  to  the  mother  plants.  Thus,  successful 
industralisation  in  this  manner  in  India  would  increasingly  require  greater  concentration  of  these 
activities than has been experienced in the past. With the quality of manufactured goods improving all 
the time, it is becoming clear that the demand for low skilled labour is unlikely to accelerate. Hence, a 
core component of economic and urban policy would have to be enhancement of skills of the labour 
force  at  all  levels.  The  provision  of  vocational  training  has  been  difficult  in  most  countries  since 
successful  training  needs  to  be  market  determined;  but  the  private  sector  often  finds  it  difficult  to 
design an appropriate revenue model and public provision is typically not market sensitive. The need 
is for public private partnership, which is not easy to design. Successful urbanisation in the future will 
be crucially dependent on the availability of labour with appropriate skills. 
Thus for Asian cities growing in the next 30 to 50 years it is becoming increasingly clear that the key to 
their  success  will  indeed  lie  in  the  continuous  enhancement  of  human  resources.  In  the  globalizing 
world,  creativity  and  entrepreneurial  dynamism  will  be  the  essence  of  successful  cities  (Yusuf  and 
Nabeshima,  2006).  All  the  East-Asian  cities,  such  as,  Bangkok,  Beijing,  Singapore,  China,  Seoul, 
Tokyo and others exhibit high levels of educational attainment, and have impressive endowments of 
educational and research institutions. In fact, it is noteworthy that some of these cities, such as Hong 
Kong  and  Singapore,  which  did  not  traditionally  have  higher  education  institutions  that  were 
particularly  noted  for  high  quality,  have  in  the  last  two  decades  consciously  invested  intensively  in 
higher education institutions in terms of both quantity and quality. Each of these major Asian cities now 
houses  large  numbers  of  universities.  Illustratively,  Tokyo  has  113  universities  and  Beijing  has  59 
although, there is a great deal of variation in the quality of these universities (Yusuf and Nabeshima, 
2006).  Similarly,  in  India,  it  is  the  southern  region  where  a  large  number  of  private  colleges  and 
universities  have  emerged  to  cater  to  the  increasing  demand  from  industry  for  technical  personnel. 
Thus,  apart  from  the  traditional  needs  for  physical  urban  infrastructure  investment  for  successful 
urbanisation,  similar  attention  now  has  to  be  given  to  the  soft  infrastructure  that  is  related  to  the 
creation,  production,  and  retention  of  knowledge,  along  with  facilities  that  enable  continuous  skill 
enhancement. 
Openness  to  the  outside world  does  not  just mean increase  in  trade  in  goods  and  services.  It  also 
means greater openness to ideas and new practices. In a recent conference on "Urban Dynamics in 
New  York  City"  organized  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (Yes,  Central  Banks  are 
interested  in  city  growth),  Kenneth  Jackson  attributed  the  great  success  of  New  York  city  to  its 
openness to new waves of immigrants over time. "The constant infusion of new energy and ideas into 
the metropolis over the years enabled New York to meet economic and technological challenges that 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 11
destroyed the prospects of competing cities" (Jackson, 2005). It is quite remarkable that most of the 
successful  East  and  South-East  Asian  cities  have  remained  very  open  to  the  presence  of  foreign 
citizens with high levels of education and skills. There are said to be almost 100,000 foreign citizens in 
Beijing  alone  (Yusuf  and Nabeshima, 2006).  Such presence of  foreigners contributes  greatly  to  the 
economic  vitality  so  needed  by  growing  cities,  as  it  provides  new  competition  to  residents,  while 
facilitating the flow of new ideas in both directions. In fact, a large number of universities and other 
technical institutions in the developed world have also begun to realize that it would be increasingly 
efficient for them to relocate some of their activities to Asian cities rather than drawing Asian personnel 
to their parent campuses. Thus, enhancement of human capital at different levels will evolve different 
strategies and increasingly greater openness to cross-border flow of institutions and personnel. 
The challenges of urbanisation in the twenty first century 
V.  
Of the total projected increment to world urban population between 2000 and 2030 of about 2.1 billion 
people  about  1.3  billion  or  about  60  per  cent,  will  be  in  Asia  (Table  1).  In  the  second  half  of  the 
twentieth century the total accretion to urban population in the world was similar in magnitude (about 
2.1  billion),  but  the  Asian  share  was  somewhat  lower  at  about  53  per  cent.  As  I  have  repeatedly 
emphasized, it is this expected magnitude of urbanisation expected in Asia that is unprecedented and 
hence the management of it is the key challenge facing us in all its multifaceted aspects.  
I have attempted to speculate about the possible changes in urbanisation patterns and requirements 
that  may  emerge  in  the  future.  Just  as  the  structure  of  American  cities  is  different  from  that  of 
European cities depending on their vintage, we can expect the 21st century Asian city to also exhibit 
different characteristics. The older European or Asian city is typically more densely populated and less 
spread out than the American cities, reflecting in particular the different degrees of motorization that 
existed  at  their  inception.  American  cities  are  much  more  dependent  on  privately  owned  motorized 
transportation than cities in the older continents. Even as early as the early 1970s, nearly 80 per cent 
of US urban commuters traveled by car, as compared with only 15 per cent in Japan. In fact, 65-70 per 
cent  of  Tokyo  commuters  and  60  per  cent  of  those  in  Seoul  traveled  by  public  transit  in  the  early 
1970s (Mills and Ohta, 1976; Mills and Song, 1979). With increasing incomes and aspirations the pace 
of growth in auto ownership in Asian cities is awesome as is the growth in traffic congestion.  
The current increase in oil prices is sharpening the kind of tensions that are typical in debates related 
to urban transportation. With the emergence of increased private motorized transportation there has 
been a noticeable intensification of investment in intra-urban expressways in many Asian cities. This 
typically leads to accelerated urban sprawl, a still faster increase in auto ownership and consequent 
demand for oil, and higher pollution. Over time, road traffic congestion inevitably catches up leading to 
further demand for road investment or for mass transportation that is then expected to reduce road 
traffic congestion and pollution. The current trends suggest that the result is high investment in both 
modes  of  transportation.  Given  the  higher  levels  of  income  that  already  exist,  and  expected  rapid 
increase in income growth, the emergence of these patterns is perhaps inevitable. The demand for 
both  financial  and  physical  resources  will  clearly  intensify,  and  the  question  is  whether  it  will  be 
possible for Asian cities to impose appropriate taxation systems and user charges that can finance the 
investments required.  
It is widely accepted that the current surge in oil prices is more demand related than to disruption in 
supply as was the case earlier. With the expected pace of Asian urban growth over the next 30 years 
do we then expect ever increasing oil price increases in response to ever increasing demand? Or will 
there be corresponding supply response, as has been the case in the past, which will contribute to oil 
prices  falling again?  In either  case,  appropriate  petrol  pricing and  urban  transport  pricing will  be  as 
crucial  for  urban  policy  as  for  economic  policy  as  a  whole.  As  is  well  known  the  emerging 
transportation  pattern  also  affects  city  structure  crucially:  so  urban  transport  policy  will  be  of  great 
importance to the kind of growth that we observe in Asian cities in the coming years. Will the growing 
Asian  cities  be  a  new  amalgam  of  the  typical  old  densely  populated  city  centre,  co-existing  with 
suburban  sprawl  characterised  by  motorized  transportation  modes,  shopping  malls  akin  to  the 
American pattern. In some Asian cities, the old city centres are beign completely reconstructed as in 
Beijing and Kuala Lumpur, whereas in others the tension between the old and new continues. 
Another general issue affecting the pattern of urbanisation will be the nature and pace of rural urban 
migration. In the case of China, because of the long standing one child policy, natural growth of urban 
population  is  low  and  hence  the same rate  of  urban  population  growth  gives rise  to  a much  higher 
order of rural urban migration than in other countries such as India where the natural rate of urban 
12 
 BIS Review 60/2006
population growth is higher. In the former, household size is presumably smaller and hence, for the 
same population size, investment in housing and associated infrastructure will have to be higher per 
capita.  Furthermore,  the  cultural  problems  associated  with  first  generation  migrants  are  likely  to  be 
greater. Conversely, it is also possible that with higher natural urban population growth there could be 
greater  local  resistance  to  in-migrants  giving  rise  to  associated  problems  in  economic  and  social 
policy.  Thus  policy  makers  also  need  to  give  attention  to  the  specific  nature  of  economic 
demographics in their respective countries as it affects urbanisation.  
As the South East Asian countries urbanized fast in the 1970s and 1980s the problems of slums and 
associated  deficiencies  in  urban  infrastructure  services  related  to  water,  sanitation,  sewerage  and 
solid waste disposal received great attention. Because of the high economic growth these problems 
have  taken  care  of  themselves  in  many  countries.  However,  in  still  low  income  populous  countries 
such as India, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Indonesia the existence of slums and lack of services remain 
a serious issue. Given the large numbers of people involved, issues related to change management 
are  as  important  as  those  related  to  financing  and  resource  management.  Flexibility  in  urban  land 
policy and zoning, the working of land markets, availability of housing finance, and facilitation of urban 
land  development  all  need  focused  attention.  The  availability  of  sympathetic  policy  makers  and 
professionals in these areas is at a premium in these countries. Generating skills and professionalism 
in  urban  management  in  all  its  aspects  will  therefore  be  among  the  key  challenges  that  Asian 
urbanisation will bring in the coming years. 
One of the consequences of globalisation, more open trade in both goods and services, and the vastly 
increased trans-border mobility of the professional classes, has led to the prevalence of international 
compensation levels for these groups despite lower average income levels in Asian cities, and hence 
to greater inequality in these cities. Members of these "creative classes" (Yusuf and Nabeshima, 2006) 
also  seek  an  assortment  of  urban  attributes  that  were  not  demanded  earlier.  They  are  much  more 
demanding  in  terms  of  quality  of  housing  and  urban  services,  health  and  education  services. 
Knowledge workers are also very interested in the availability of recreational amenities, cleanliness of 
environment, efficient and comfortable transportation, and international level communication services. 
Thus, in order to attract and retain the very people who are essential for city competitiveness, Asian 
cities will have to prematurely invest in world class facilities at much lower average income levels. The 
most competitive of Asian cities have clearly recognized this as is evident in cities such as Shanghai, 
Hong Kong, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur and Seoul, with Bangkok fast attempting to catch up. 
The task for policy makers for managing Asian urbanisation in the next thirty years is therefore more 
complex than in the previous fifty. In addition to the traditional problems of providing, financing and 
managing  basic  physical  infrastructure,  they  have  to  be  more  conscious  of  the  emerging  demands 
resulting from globalisation in terms of creating knowledge based cities that also boast of competitive 
urban amenities. Increase in the sheer number of large cities over any cut off point, one million, five 
million, or ten million, will also stretch the capability of government authorities of finding people with 
appropriate skills for city management. Here, it is perhaps correct to say that there has been some 
decline  in  international  attention  to  the  generation  of  such  skills,  and  may  well  be  an  area  for 
coordinated international attention.  
Finally, being a central banker, I can hardly conclude this address without making some remarks on 
the financing needs of Asian urbanisation over the next thirty years. Urban infrastructure typically lasts 
for long periods of time. Hence, while urban infrastructure investment has to be made ex-ante at the 
time of rapid urban growth over a period of 10-15 years, benefits may well flow for periods as long as 
fifty years or more. Life would be easy if financing sources were such that civic authorities could raise 
resources  in such  a  manner  that  the  repayment  schedule  matched  the  benefit  schedule.  A  scan  of 
urban  financing  systems  across  the  world  does  not  reveal  any  uniformity  in  pattern.  Germany  has 
used its mortgage banks to sell Pfandbrief bonds that enjoy high credit quality next only to the Bond, 
and then intermediate the funds to states and municipal authorities for infrastructure investment. There 
is a complex system of credit enhancements that makes it feasible to raise long term funds. But this 
credit  quality  has been  earned over more  than  a  century  over which  the  municipal authorities  have 
made  sure  that  their  tax  and  user  charges  systems  are  such  that  they  can  redeem  the  resources 
raised. In the United States, it is the decentralised municipal bond system that has largely financed 
urban infrastructure. Here also, since the ability to raise resources depends on the retention of healthy 
credit ratings, municipal authorities have a very strong incentive to stay solvent and service their bond 
holders.  In  principle,  therefore,  such  systems  have  been  successful  since  they  have  ensured  that 
towns  and  cities  face  on  incentive  structure  that  encourages  them  to  remain  creditworthy  and  are 
essentially self-financing. 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 13
In Asian countries, financial markets have not been sophisticated enough to allow for such financing 
methods  yet.  Financing  for  urban  infrastructure  has  usually  come  for  higher  tier  governments  who 
raise  resources  from  taxes,  or  from  banks  and  financial  institutions  that  have  been  typically 
government  owned  or  sponsored.  Such  systems  are  not  well  designed  to  avoid  moral  hazard:  the 
recipient  towns  and  cities  do  not  have  as  strong  an  incentive  to  be  essentially  self  financing.  The 
1990s have seen increasing attempts to privative the provision of urban infrastructure, but this has met 
limited  success  at  best.  Given  the  magnitude  of  urban  population  accretion  expected  over  the  next 
thirty years, I see little choice. If Asian cities are to thrive and prosper, they will have to develop self 
sustaining  local  taxation  and  user  charge  systems  so  that  they  can  tap  national  and  international 
financial markets for their financing needs. 
This brings me to the international dimension of urban infrastructure financing. It is usually the case 
that, when a country begins its rapid urban growth phase its financial markets are yet to develop, the 
only way to tap long term funds is to take recourse to external savings, which are then to be repaid 
over  a  long  period  of  time.  The  typical  historical  experience  has  been  that  the  regions  undergoing 
intensive urbanisation had to mobilise external savings intensively; followed by periods of balance of 
payments crises and debt defaults. In Asia, too, the 1997 financial crisis was also partially reflective of 
large external resource flows earlier that suddenly got reversed, as was the Latin American debt crisis 
of  the  1980s.  Since  then,  however,  it  is  puzzling  that  the  region  as  a  whole  is  exhibiting  financial 
surpluses that are being invested in Europe and North America. In the great current debate on global 
imbalances,  the  assumption  seems  to  be  that  these  imbalances  seem  to  be  of  a  relative  durable 
nature, partly reflecting the favourable economic demographics of Asia and the converse in the West. 
I remain somewhat puzzled by this financial turn of events. I would have expected that, the demands 
of  infrastructure  investment,  particularly  that  of  urban  infrastructure,  would  be  such  that  regional 
domestic  savings  will  not  be  adequate  to  finance  the  required  investment.  Perhaps  the  explanation 
really lies in the Asian reaction to the 1977 financial crisis and that we may expect higher investment 
levels  in  the  years  to  come.  The  magnitude  of  urban  population  growth  expected  in  China,  India, 
Indonesia,  Pakistan  and  Bangladesh  expected  over  the  next  30  years  is  such  that  pressures  on 
international  resource  mobilization  are  bound  to  arise.  Urban  infrastructure  investment  would  then 
exceed available savings in these countries and the current alleged savings glut will disappear over a 
period  of  time.  Will  there  then  be  enhanced  competition  among  Asian  countries  from  available 
international savings? With the emerging adverse demographics in the West, and hence low savings 
rates  there,  will  this  competition  lead  to  the  emergence  of  higher  real  interest  rates  in  the  years  to 
come: the exact converse of the current situation of excess world liquidity and low interest rates? If 
that happens, the task of urban policy makers and central bankers alike will become that much more 
difficult.  The  efficient  intermediation  of  financial  savings  within  countries,  and  across  countries,  will 
therefore be as important for urban development as for financial market development per se and for 
monetary policy makers in the years to come.  
14 
 BIS Review 60/2006
