Guy Quaden: Review of significant events in 2005 
Introductory speech by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the Ordinary 
General Meeting of the National Bank of Belgium, Brussels, 27 March 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to welcome you, both personally and on behalf of my colleagues on the Board of Directors, 
on the occasion of this ordinary general meeting of the shareholders of the National Bank of Belgium. 
I also hope that this meeting can proceed smoothly and enable us to answer, in a calmer atmosphere 
than last year, the questions which you have submitted to us and any others that you raise. We want 
to answer as many questions as possible, but reasonably quickly and in an orderly way. In particular, 
this meeting is not the place to answer questions concerning the legal actions which are still pending 
before the courts, nor questions which do not concern the past financial year. 
As last year, I would like to give you a brief account of the most significant events in the year under 
review,  before  handing  over  to  the  Vice-Governor  who  will  present  and  comment  on  the  annual 
accounts for 2005. 
Various  new  projects  entrusted  to  the  Bank  by  the  public  authorities  and  the  economic  agents  in 
general  bear  witness  to  the  confidence  which  Belgian  society  as  a  whole  continues  to  place  in  our 
institution. The principal project concerns the future of the means of payment. In 2004, the Ministers of 
Finance, Economic Affairs and Consumer Protection commissioned the Bank to organise a national 
dialogue on the efficiency of the payment systems in Belgium. To that end, the Bank set up a Steering 
Committee on the future of the means of payment, with representatives from all the parties concerned. 
In 2005, that Steering Committee published two reports: the first concerns the costs, advantages and 
disadvantages of the various means of payment, and the second deals with the modernisation of the 
payment  channels  used  by  the  public  authorities.  This  Steering  Committee  has  yet  to  address  the 
question of the transition to the Single Euro Payments Area, in which the payment systems of various 
countries will be integrated, augmenting the efficiency of cross-border payments. 
The establishment of synergies between the Bank and the CBFA, provided for by the law of 2 August 
2002 on the supervision of the financial sector and on financial services, has continued, particularly in 
regard to financial stability, IT systems and crisis management. However, the only way of fulfilling the 
ultimate  goal  of  the  reform  is  by  fostering  still  closer  links  and  the  spirit  of  cooperation,  with  due 
respect for the powers of each institution and the specific character of their respective areas of activity. 
For our institution, the year 2004 had featured a new strategic review of the future of its activities. In 
2005, that review led to the adoption of master plans which define the future pattern of activities and 
employment at the Bank. Those plans provide a stable medium-term framework up to the year 2009. 
For the Bank, it is a question of working within the Eurosystem, adopting a more selective approach 
with  increasing  specialisation,  maintaining  cost  control  and  continuing  to  improve  the  quality  of  the 
services provided for the community. 
 The progress of the various activities in 2005 is set out in the annual report which has been sent to 
you  and  which  is  also  available  on  our  website.  In  addition,  that  document  contains  the  annual 
accounts for the year and describes the governance of our enterprise. 
A number of questions have been sent to us by shareholders, particularly by the Deminor company, 
on the subject of the Bank’s corporate governance statement. Why does it not conform to the Lippens 
code  when  the  Bank  is  a  listed  company,  and  why  does  it  not  explain,  for  each  of  the  code’s 
provisions, the reasons for not conforming to it? 
First, it must be remembered that the special legal framework governing our institution and its specific 
position  as  a  central  bank  mean  that  we  cannot  systematically  compare  its  governance  with  the 
“Lippens Code” recommendations. The Belgian corporate governance code, which supplements the 
ordinary legislation on listed companies, itself affirms the code’s character as a recommendation. It 
cannot replace the existing laws and treaties, particularly those applicable to the Bank. The Bank is in 
fact governed first by the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty, and then by its Organic Law and its own 
BIS Review 54/2006 
 1
Statutes, and finally – on a purely additional basis – by the companies code. The Bank is therefore not 
subject to the same legal rules as other public limited liability companies. 
Furthermore, the Lippens code is inappropriate to the special characteristics of the Bank, a company 
which  –  unlike  other  listed  companies  -  does  not  aim  primarily  to  maximise  its  profit,  but  which,  in 
accordance  with  the  Treaty  and  the  law,  promotes  monetary  and  financial  stability  in  the  public 
interest.  It  is  the  dominance  of  the  public  interest  that  caused  the  legislature  to  determine  the 
composition  and  powers  of  the  Bank’s  organs.  These  are  different  from  those  of  the  companies 
addressed  by  the  Belgian  governance  code.  While  the  organs  of  conventional  companies  are  the 
administrative board, the general meeting and, perhaps the management board or chief executive, the 
organs of the Bank are the Governor, the Board of Directors, the Council of Regency and the Board of 
Censors. The special arrangements for the appointment of the members of these organs, the specific 
composition and role of the Council of Regency, and the provisions for the exercise of supervision are 
all examples of the way in which the dominance of the public interest is reflected in the Bank’s special 
governance structure. 
This is also the explanation for the quite specific role of the Belgian State, which is involved both as a 
shareholder  and  as  a  sovereign  State.  It  is  because  it  acts  primarily  as  a  sovereign  State  that  it 
granted the Bank the right of issue and has a priority right to the resulting profits. 
However,  the  National  Bank  has  always  been  scrupulous  in  ensuring  compliance  with  the  ethical 
principles  and  values  underlying  the  Belgian  corporate  governance  code.  It  can  be  said  that  the 
system  of  governance  and  control  imposed  on  us  is  just  as  exacting  as  that  recommended  by  the 
Belgian corporate governance code, and in some respects even more so. In fact, as a member of the 
European System of Central Banks, the Bank is subject to special rules and obligations which do not 
apply to any other Belgian companies. 
Moreover,  I  feel  that  there  are  few  companies  which  publish  such  detailed  information  as  that 
contained in Part 2 of the Bank’s annual report, which you have all received and which is available on 
the Bank’s website. That demonstrates our desire to act correctly in providing all possible information 
for the public, and more particularly for our shareholders, on the operation of our institution. 
 As in 2003 and 2004, the judgments handed down in 2005 and early 2006 following the legal actions 
brought by certain shareholders found in favour of the Bank. Thus, on 27 October 2005, the Brussels 
Commercial Court confirmed, as the Court of Arbitration had already done in 2003, that the Bank has 
not lost its right of issue and that it therefore does not have to liquidate its reserve fund. Since the start 
of monetary union, the Bank has in fact shared the right to issue euro banknotes with the European 
Central Bank and the eleven other national central banks of the Eurosystem. 
A second judgment passed on 2 February 2006, again by the Brussels Commercial Court, concerned 
a  write-back  from  the  provision  for  future  foreign  exchange  losses,  effected  at  the  end  of  the  2003 
financial  year  and  intended  to  adjust  the  amount  of  the  provision  in  line  with  the  change  in  the 
currency  risk.  The  amount  of  that  write-back  was  included  in  the  Bank’s  financial  income  shared 
between  the  Bank  and  the  State.  The  Brussels  Commercial  Court  rejected  the  demand  made  by 
certain shareholders to cancel that decision, and confirmed that the annual accounts for 2003 were 
perfectly legal. 
In helping to clarify the status of our institution and shed light on its special characteristics, these court 
decisions  should  put  an  end  to  certain  arguments  and  reduce  the  fluctuations  in  the  Bank’s  share 
price. In the foreword to the Annual Report, when I mention unjustified speculation concerning these 
shares, I mean that these fluctuations originated because of legal arguments which we consider to be 
incorrect, and which the judgments so far have also refuted. 
 In  2005,  the  Bank’s  profits  improved,  mainly  as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  the  amount  of  euro 
banknotes  in  circulation  (+15  p.c.),  and  hence  the  increase  in  the  Bank’s  share  of  that  issue.  This 
expanded  the  volume  of  interest-earning  assets  held  as  the  counterpart  to  the  banknotes,  and 
therefore increased the income which these assets generate. Moreover, the Bank earned a higher rate 
of interest on its dollar investments and did not have to constitute provisions, as it did in 2004, to cover 
losses incurred by the ECB. 
The  improvement  in  the  return  on  the  assets  meant  that  the  State  was  once  again  able  to  receive 
seigniorage income. It is in return for the right of issue which the State has granted the Bank that the 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2006
State is entitled to the part of the income from the net interest-earning assets which exceeds 3 p.c. of 
those assets. The dividend paid to shareholders is, as usual, increasing in line with inflation.  
Thank  you  for  your  attention.  I  will  now  hand  you  over  to  the  Vice-Governor  for  the  detailed 
presentation  of  the  annual  accounts  for  2005;  it  is  the  accounts  that  constitute  the  most  important 
information  for  the  general  meeting  and  which  have,  as  in  previous  years,  given  rise  to  the  largest 
number of questions from shareholders. 
BIS Review 54/2006 
 3
