Durmuş Yilmaz: Financial Stability Report – II 
Speech  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yilmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey,  at  the 
presentation of the “Financial Stability Report – II”, Ankara, 13 June 2006. 
 Distinguished Guests, Dear Members of the Press,  
Last  August,  we  shared  with  you  the  first  Financial  Stability  Report,  which  we  consider  to  be 
supportive  of  price  stability,  our  primary  objective,  and  involves  a  compilation  of  our  studies  on  the 
evaluations of financial stability. I am happy to present the second report to you today. I would also like 
to remind you that this report will be on the Bank’s web page as of today.  
Today, I would firstly like to focus on the definition and significance of financial stability and central 
banks’  approaches  to  the  issue.  Then  I  will  touch  on  the  duties  and  powers  of  the  Bank  regarding 
financial stability. Lastly, I would like to emphasize the main points in the Financial Stability Report.  
Distinguished Guests, 
Providing  a  clear  definition  of  financial  stability  is  as  difficult  as  achieving  and  maintaining  it.  In  a 
broader  sense,  financial  stability  can  be  defined  as  the  condition  of  an  economy’s  mechanisms  for 
pricing, allocating resources and managing financial risks functioning well enough to contribute to the 
performance of the economy.1 The European Central Bank defines financial stability as a condition 
whereby  the  financial  system  is  able  to  withstand  shocks  without  impairing  the  transformation  of 
savings to investment opportunities. Moreover, some definitions are also derived from the concept of 
instability.  
In recent years, globalization of financial markets, increased richness in financial instruments, financial 
deepening and structural changes have caused the system to become much more complicated, thus 
enhancing the significance of financial stability. Any fluctuation that may occur in foreign markets may 
rapidly spread to other countries. As a matter of fact, recent developments in international financial 
markets were also reflected on Turkey. I can say with great pleasure that the strengthened financial 
structure  of  Turkey  has  minimized  the  unfavorable  effects  of  recent  fluctuations.  This  case,  once 
again,  has  proven  the  significance  of  a  sound  financial  system  with  risk  sensitive  policies,  which  is 
reinforced  by  effective  monitoring  and  supervision.  It  is  a  widely  known  and  accepted  fact  that  the 
primary  objective  of  central  banks  is  to  achieve  price  stability.  Monetary  policy  is  conducted  via 
operations  carried  out  in  financial  markets  and  its  success  depends  on  the  flawless  operation  of 
financial institutions and markets. Therefore, financial stability is a sine qua non for effective monetary 
policy.  Besides,  the  responsibility  of  central  banks  for  the  operation  and  supervision  of  payment 
systems oblige them to monitor financial stability.  
The fact that financial instability may pose serious risks to macroeconomic targets such as sustainable 
growth and price stability enhances the significance of financial stability for central banks. Therefore, 
central  banks  and  governments  increasingly  pay  more  attention  to  the  monitoring  of  structural  and 
macroeconomic developments that may pose risks to financial stability as well as to the effectiveness 
and robustness of institutions operating in financial markets.2  
Under the CBRT Law, financial stability has been stated as a supportive objective. In this framework, 
the  Bank  is  empowered  to  monitor  the  financial  markets,  to  regulate  the  volume  and  circulation  of 
Turkish  lira,  to  establish  payment,  securities  transfer  and  settlement  systems  and  to  set  forth  any 
regulations  regarding  these  systems;  and  to  set  up  the  procedures  and  conditions  regarding  the 
liabilities  of  financial  institutions  for  reserve  requirements.  The  Central  Bank  takes  the  necessary 
measures in order to achieve stability in the financial system in the face of developments, shares its 
evaluations on financial stability with the public in line with the principle of transparency and issues 
warnings concerning the fragilities and risks in the financial system.  
                                                      
1   Schnasi, Gary (2004), “Defining Financial Stability” IMF Working Paper, WP/04/87. 
2  V. Sundararajan, Charles Enoch, Armida San José, Paul Hilbers, Russell Krueger, Marina Moretti, and Graham Slack, IMF, 
Occasional Paper No:212, 2002. 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 1
Distinguished Guests, 
As  I  have  just  emphasized,  the  function  of  monitoring  financial  stability  takes  place  within  the 
framework of the goals of central banks to achieve price stability and develop sound payment systems 
and  it  is  of  a  different  nature  to  the  supervision  of  other  institutions  operating  in  financial  markets. 
Indeed,  monitoring  the robustness  of  the  financial system  requires  the  evaluation  of  various  factors 
that  threaten  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  create  systemic  risks.  For  this  reason,  the 
perspective  of  the  Bank  is  a  macro  and  risk-focused  one,  similar  to  the  perspective  used  in  the 
financial stability reports published by other central banks. 
The  definition  of  objectives  and  functions  of  central  banks  are  different  from  those  of  supervisory 
authorities.  Though  central  banks  increasingly  tend  not  to  deal  directly  with  the  monitoring  and 
supervision of banks in recent times, they continue to monitor developments in the banking sector as 
well as the basic systemic risks.  
Today, 38 central banks around the world publish the Financial Stability Report. In a total of twenty 
countries, fourteen European and six non-European countries, supervisory authority is separate from 
the central bank.   
Especially in systems where the power to monitor is granted to autonomous institutions other than the 
central bank, the function of monitoring and supervising the financial system focuses on the issue of 
financial  soundness  and  effectiveness  of  individual  institutions.  However,  the  monitoring  of  the 
financial system as a whole in terms of financial stability is carried out by central banks.  
In countries such as England, Australia, Norway, Finland and Sweden, where the supervisory authority 
is not the central bank, central banks, including that of Turkey, focus on the objective of price stability 
and carry out operations consistent with monetary policies by monitoring the developments in financial 
markets.  Besides,  they  establish  a  strong  and  reliable  payment  system  and  take  the  necessary 
measures in order to prevent the problems faced by any financial institution from affecting the financial 
system as a whole. Central banks also function as the “lender of last resort”.  
Evaluations  made  by  supervisory  authorities  gain  importance  as  regards  the  sound  monitoring  of 
financial stability by central banks and, effective corporate cooperation with these authorities becomes 
more  critical.  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  the  cooperation  between  the  Central  Bank  and  Banking 
Regulation and Supervision Agency, the Undersecretariat of Treasury and the Capital Markets Board 
as supervisory authorities, is increasingly progressing.  
The Financial Stability Report, the first of which was published last August, analyzes macroeconomic 
developments  with  respect  to  their  effects  on  sectors,  presents  analysis  and  evaluations  about  the 
banks and evaluates current and future risk factors.  
Distinguished Guests, 
We are undergoing a period where the banking sector has increased intermediary activities, which is 
the  primary  function  of  banks,  and  where  mutual  interaction  between  the  sectors  in  the  financial 
system gains more importance because of the risks that require close monitoring. Therefore, in this 
part of my speech, I would like to discuss the developments in the banking sector within the framework 
of macroeconomic perspective and the risks involved.  
Despite the fact that giant steps have been taken regarding public finance thanks to current tight fiscal 
policy,  maintaining  fiscal  discipline  and  achieving  the  primary  surplus  target  are  still  of  great 
importance as regards financial stability.  
In the rapidly growing Turkish economy, the ratio of current account deficit to gross national product 
became 6.4 percent in 2005. The rapid increase in the share of long-term capital inflows and direct 
investments  in  the  financing  of  the  current  account  deficit,  which  is  expanding  due  to  high  growth 
rates, is deemed favorable for the sustainability of the deficit.  
As it is known, in parallel to changing interest rate policies of Bank of Japan, the Federal Reserve and 
the European Central Bank in recent periods, uncertainty about interest rates has increased globally, 
leading  to  capital  outflows  from  emerging  markets.  Nevertheless,  reinforced  macroeconomic 
fundamentals, tight monetary and fiscal polices, the shock-absorbing function of the floating exchange 
rate  regime,  the  reduced  ratio  of  short-term  foreign  credits  to  international  reserves  and  disciplined 
implementation  of  the  current  economic  program  minimize  the  adverse  effects  of  outflows  on  the 
Turkish economy.  
2 
 BIS Review 68/2006
The rapid rise in the consumption tendency despite the relatively low increase in disposable income 
increases the indebtedness of households. Therefore, close monitoring of likely risks for the household 
that  may  arise  from  the  increasing  demand  for  housing  loans,  which  is  still  low  compared  to  other 
countries, is of great importance. Indeed, as seen in (other) country experiences, asset prices can rise 
rapidly  in  periods  of  expansion  to  be  followed  by  slumps  in  housing  prices,  which  would 
simultaneously push down the value of the collateral for the financial sector and decrease household 
wealth. Therefore, these are important risk factors that should seriously be taken into account.  
Dear Guests, 
I would like to draw your attention to credit cards regarding the household indebtedness issue. As it is 
known, in general, the credit card is a payment instrument that enables its owner to purchase goods 
and  services  at  member  businesses  without  using  cash.  Moreover,  if  credit  card  users  wish  to 
withdraw cash or to delay their credit card payments for a determined period, the relevant amounts 
spent turn into credit and thus the credit card becomes a credit instrument. Institutions issuing credit 
cards  incur  POS  (Point  of  Sale)  machine  investment  and  membership  to  national  and  international 
payment  systems  expenditures,  and  they  are  exposed  to  liquidity  risk  due  to  unforeseen  cash 
withdrawals.  
Consequently,  banks  tend  to  determine  higher  credit  card  interest  rates  than  those  of  consumer 
credits  due  to  their  higher  risk  exposures,  namely  the  higher  credit  risk  because  of  weak  collateral 
structure and liquidity risk because of unforeseen cash withdrawals. A survey of country practices also 
reveals  that  credit  card  interest  rates  are  determined  higher  than  interest  rates  set  for  consumer 
credits.  Therefore,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  credit  card  users  to  meet  their  short-term  credit  needs  via 
consumer credits rather than their credit cards. 
Moreover, the interest rates applicable to credit card transactions differ significantly from bank to bank. 
The  tendency  of  customers  towards  credit  cards  of  banks  with  lower  interest  rates  will  enhance 
competition in the banking sector and the interest rates applicable to credit cards will be pushed down. 
The highest interest rates applicable to credit cards by banks are announced on the Bank’s web site.  
Distinguished Press Members,  
The  reduced  credit  costs  in  an  environment  of  falling  inflation  has  enhanced  credit  opportunities  of 
firms  in  the  corporate  sector  and  has  played  an  important  role  in  the  growth  of  investments 
expenditures.  Nevertheless,  we  consider  the  open  foreign  exchange  position  of  firms  that  utilize 
foreign exchange credits, despite their lack of foreign currency revenues, as a significant risk factor. 
Therefore, the effective use of risk aversion techniques, taking into consideration the İzmir Derivatives 
Exchange facilities, is of vital importance.  
Furthermore, considering the likely implications of Basel II, especially on the financial system, both the 
banking  sector  and  firms  should  carry  out  the  necessary  studies  relating  to  capital  accord  and 
accomplish  the  necessary  initiatives  and  arrangements  for  the  improvement  of  their  corporate 
management structures.  
Distinguished Guests, 
In  2005,  the  most  outstanding  development  pertaining  to  the  banking  sector,  which  constitutes  87 
percent  of  the  entire  financial  system,  was  the  gradual  acceleration  of  foreign  capital  inflows. 
According  to  the  final  figures  for  share  transfers,  the  share  of  non-residents  in  total  assets  of  the 
banking  sector  in  2005  was  12.4  percent.  Including  the  portion  of  shares  of  non-residents  in  some 
banks,  which  have  been  agreed  upon,  although  the  legal  permit  process  thereto  has  not  been 
completed yet, the share of non-residents in total assets has reached over 16 percent. Comparing the 
ratio of assets of the banking sector to the GNP in Turkey to those of developed countries, it is seen 
that Turkey ranks considerably lower on the list. As long as the favorable developments continue, the 
banking sector should grow in parallel or, even more. However, it is obvious that in a sector so capital-
intense, achieving growth will not solely be domestically. I believe that foreign capital inflows to the 
banking sector should be handled within this framework.  
In  2005,  while  the  balance  sheet  of  the  banking  sector  grew  in  size,  the  share  of  TL-denominated 
assets and liabilities increased. As the crowding-out effect of the public sector diminished, the share of 
credits in assets continued to increase. This indicates that the banking sector has come close to its 
fundamental function. Despite the fact that the rapid upsurge in credit volume has increased the credit 
risk,  the  decline  in  the  NPL  ratio  and  the  high  provisioning  policy  adopted  by  the  sector  during  the 
same  period  are  considered  as  favorable  developments.  Meanwhile,  the  monitoring  of  credit  risk, 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 3
which may increase due to the policies on credit allocation that are likely to be eased in the growth 
period of the economy, is of great importance. 
In  2005,  while  the  maturities  of  assets  of  the  banking  sector  were  extended,  the  liabilities  still  had 
short-term maturities. This shows that the vulnerability against the interest rate risk and the maturity 
mismatch  of  the  sector  increased.  In  order  to  facilitate  banks’  interest  rate  risk  management,  it  is 
deemed necessary to make regulations that will also allow floating rate consumer credits along with 
the currently available fixed rate credits. 
In  2005,  the  ratio  of  liquid  assets  to  total  assets  decreased  as  a  result  of  the  continuation  of  the 
upward  trend  in  credits.  Nevertheless,  despite  the  short-term  structure  of  deposits,  especially  the 
renewable nature of the major portion of term savings deposits, low condensation and the fact that the 
assets, which can be accepted by the Central Bank as collateral, comprise a significant part of the 
assets of the sector are considered risk-reducing factors with respect to liquidity management. 
Distinguished Guests, 
In  a  falling  inflation  environment,  increasing  fundamental  banking  activities  along  with  banks’ 
narrowing profit margins, and the rise in net wages and commission revenues, which is a more stable 
source  of  income,  make  a  positive  contribution  to  the  diversity  of  assets  and  income  of  the  sector. 
Hence,  they  have  a  favorable  effect  on  profitability  performance,  which  has  an  important  role  in 
financial stability.  
The capital adequacy ratio of the banking sector is realized well above the legal limit of 8 percent. The 
capital adequacy ratio is high due to the facts that the government securities portfolio of the sector is 
high and the mentioned portfolio is evaluated in the zero percent risk weight category. The high capital 
adequacy ratio improves the resistance of the financial structure of the banking sector against shocks.  
The Financial Strength Index, which provides information about the soundness of the banking sector 
and which has been enhanced by the sub-index of interest rate risk compared to the previous Report, 
reached its highest level at the end of 2005. Despite the declines in profitability, capital adequacy and 
interest rate risk indices, the recovery in the asset quality and liquidity indices were effective on this 
development. The Financial Strength Index is observed to maintain almost the same level in the first 
quarter of 2006 as well.  
In order to measure the resistance of the banking sector against shocks, the development of credit 
and market risks were analyzed via stress tests and scenario analyses. It was found that a sufficient 
amount of capital was maintained for the assumed risks and the sector’s resistance against probable 
shocks was strong. Thus, in May 2006, significant market movements were experienced, which can 
also  be  perceived  as  tests  of  the  resistance  of  the  sector.  It  was  observed  that  due  to  their  strong 
capital structures, our banks were less affected by these activities compared to the past.  
Distinguished Members of the Press, 
Now, I would like to give you some information about the Financial Sector Assessment Program that 
our country has recently participated in, which is of vital importance as regards the evaluation of the 
components of financial stability.  
The  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  was  established  in  May  1999  with  cooperation between 
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in order to strengthen the financial structures of 
countries  in  consideration  of  the  risks  and  problems  posed  by  the  financial  sector.  The  Program  is 
carried out with the support of numerous national central banks and supervisory authorities.  
The  major  objectives  of  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  are  to  encourage  the  pre-
determination of the fragilities of the financial system, to formulate necessary policies, to provide an 
environment for effective communication with national authorities and to create a joint platform in order 
to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  policy  proposals  and  the  technical  assistance  provided  by  both  the 
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. In addition to these functions, the Financial Sector 
Assessment  Program  aims  to  set  the  vital  priorities  of  the  financial  sector  and  encourage  the 
enhancement of the sector in this respect.  
The  number  of  countries,  which  have  already  participated  in  and  are  planning  to  participate  in  the 
Financial Sector Assessment Program in the near future, is 184. A report including the assessment of 
the financial system will be issued at the end of the program. It is planned to finalize the studies on the 
Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program,  which  were  started  at  the  beginning  of  2006  with  the 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2006
coordination  of  the  Undersecretariat  of  the  Treasury  in  order  to  contribute  to  the  ongoing  reform 
process of the Turkish financial sector, by the end of the year.  
The  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  process  in  Turkey  is  expected  to  contribute  to  the 
development of the financial sector in terms of institutional infrastructure. Furthermore, the resistance 
of the sector will be analyzed on an international platform via stress tests to be applied to banks within 
the framework of the Program.  
Distinguished Guests, 
Proper and effective implementation of macroeconomic policies, in other words, the achievement of 
macroeconomic stability, is the sine qua non of financial stability. It is very important for the banking 
sector, which should be able to cope with the Basel II process in the near future, that the improvement 
of  the  infrastructure  of  the  financial  system  continues  and  that  efficient  control  and  supervision  is 
carried out. As firms will contribute to stable growth with the funds that they obtain from banks, the 
compatibility of the corporate sector with the Basel II process is of great importance as well.  
In this framework, determined implementation of current economic policies, increased confidence in 
financial  markets,  the  establishment  of  risk  culture  and  the  adjustment  of  economic  actors’  risk 
perceptions according to dynamic conditions will strengthen the stability in financial markets.  
Esteemed Guests, 
Before concluding my speech, I would like to thank you for your participation. I hope our assessments 
and  analyses  will  help  the  participants  of  the  financial  market  to  undergo  a  better  decision-making 
process.  
BIS Review 68/2006 
 5
