Jarle Bergo: Projections, uncertainty and choice of interest rate assumption in 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Foreign 
Exchange Seminar of the Association of Norwegian Economists, Sanderstølen, 27 January 2006. 
Charts in pdf-format  can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
The 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech does not contain new assessments 
of the economic situation or of current interest rate setting. 
 Introduction 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this  seminar.  Participants  at  this  and  other 
seminars  have  occasionally  shown  some  interest  in  Norges  Bank’s  views  on  future  interest  rate 
developments. For a long period, our analyses were based on the assumption that the interest rate 
would move in line with market expectations, and the discussion was usually about whether the bank 
agreed with this interest rate outlook or had a different interest rate path in mind. In Inflation Report 
3/05,  projections were based on  the  Bank’s  own projected  path for  future  interest  rates  for  the  first 
time.  In  other  words,  from  using  technical  assumptions  and  others’  assessments  of  our  future 
monetary stance, we have now in a sense “assumed ownership” ourselves of the interest rate path in 
our projections.  
This seminar would therefore seem to give me an appropriate opportunity to provide some background 
on this issue and on the assessments underlying our forecasting.  
When we make forecasts for variables such as output and inflation, we must at the same time have 
formed  an  opinion  of  the  future  interest  rate  path.  Interest  rate  developments,  in  turn,  must  be 
considered in the context of other forecasts.  
The  choice  of  interest  rate  path  in  forecasting  is  important  because  monetary  policy  influences 
developments in the economy primarily through expectations. I will come back to this later on in my 
speech. First I will focus on the role of the interest rate in Norges Bank’s projections. I will then move 
on to describe the analytical tools used by the Bank to arrive at a projection for future interest rates. 
Finally, I will discuss the uncertainty inherent in the projections.  
Choice of interest rate assumptions in forecasting  
Norges Bank seeks to achieve an interest rate path that provides a reasonable balance between the 
objective of bringing inflation up to target and the objective of stabilising developments in output and 
employment. This means we have to judge how these variables will develop in the period ahead and 
how they are affected by the interest rate. Hence, in order to make forecasts for inflation and output, 
we must also judge how interest rates will develop in the future.  
The  interest  rate  can  be  approached  in  various  ways  in  forecasting.  There  might  be  arguments  in 
favour of basing the interest rate assumption on external factors, as an exogenous assumption, either 
by  assuming  that  the  interest  rate  will  remain  constant  through  the  projection  period  or  that  it  will 
develop in line with market expectations. The projections that result from such technical interest rate 
assumptions  do  not  necessarily  provide  a  reasonable  balance  between  the  different  objectives  of 
monetary  policy.  In  some  cases,  both  the  interest  rate  assumption  and  the  projections  may  seem 
unreasonable.  This  may  raise  the  question  of  the  purpose  of  forecasting.  However,  it  provides  a 
starting-point  for  discussions  about  how  the  interest  rate  path  might  be  adjusted  to  produce  more 
acceptable results.  
Alternatively, the interest rate can be treated in the same way as other variables forecast by the Bank. 
We would then have to try to make projections for inflation, output and the interest rate simultaneously, 
with  the  aim  of  arriving  at  an  interest  rate  path  that  provides  a  reasonable  balance  between  the 
different objectives of monetary policy. If the central bank has the intention of adhering to this interest 
rate path, this might be regarded as an interest rate forecast rather than a technical assumption.  
BIS Review 6/2006 
 1
Establishing  such  an  interest  rate  path  is  not  a  straightforward  matter.  Flexible  inflation  targeting, 
which is the system we use, means that the deviation from the inflation target and the output gap are 
both taken into account. There is considerable uncertainty surrounding the calculation of the output 
gap, and there is no simple relationship between developments in the output gap and developments in 
inflation.  It  cannot  therefore  be  claimed  with  any  great  certainty  that  it  is  possible  to  identify  one 
particular interest rate forecast that provides the indisputably “best” trade-off in monetary policy. More 
often than not, there will be a number of possible interest rate paths that might be said to provide a 
reasonable balance, in view of the uncertainty involved.  
Norges Bank’s treatment of the interest rate in forecasting has changed over time. In 1999 and 2000, 
forecasting  was  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  interest  rate  would  develop  in  line  with  market 
expectations as indicated by forward interest rates. In 2001 and 2002, the Bank based its forecasting 
on the assumption that the interest rate would remain constant to the end of the projection period. The 
constant  level  of  the  interest  rate  was  calculated  on  the  basis  of  historical  averages,  although  the 
historical  period  on  which  the  calculations  were  based  could  vary  from  one  period  to  the  next.  On 
some  occasions,  the  interest  rate  assumption  reflected  the  average  for  the  interest  rate  over  the 
previous three months, on other occasions, the average for the previous month. From mid-2003, the 
interest rate assumption was again linked to market expectations, and in autumn 2005 we published 
our own interest rate forecast.1  
In  addition  to  these  changes  in  choice  of  interest  rate  assumption,  Norges  Bank  has  on  some 
occasions commented on market expectations. In December 2000, the Bank stated in its editorial in 
the  Inflation  Report  that  market  participants  had  a  different  view  of  the  future  interest  rate. 
Communication  following  monetary  policy  meetings  sometimes  contained  information  concerning 
probable  interest  rate  developments  in  the  near  future.  After  the  inflation  target  was  introduced  in 
March 2001, monetary policy assessments had a more prominent position in the Inflation Report.  
In some cases, the Bank has indicated that it would prefer an interest rate path that differed from the 
path on which the projections were based. For example, Inflation Report 2/04 stated that “the most 
appropriate alternative now seems to be that the interest rate should be kept unchanged for a longer 
period than indicated by market expectations”. In other words, the interest rate considered by the Bank 
to provide a better balance was lower than the rate factored in by market participants.  
The  chart  illustrates  what  happened  in  summer  2004.  The  broken  blue  line  shows  the  interest  rate 
path underlying the projections. The line was consistent with interest rate expectations in the market 
as measured by forward rates. Norges Bank indicated in the Inflation Report that a lower interest rate 
than expected by the market would provide a better balance. What the appropriate interest rate level 
should be, however, was not stated explicitly, but the shaded area can perhaps provide an illustration. 
In the period following the publication of the Inflation Report, market expectations fell in the desired 
direction, as shown by the broken red line. Market participants did not, however, find any answers in 
the Report that would enable them to assess whether the new level, in the opinion of Norges Bank, 
would provide a reasonable balance.  
The answer did not appear until the following Inflation Report in autumn 2004, when the Bank stated 
that  market  interest  rates  at  that  time  provided  a  good  balance  between  the  various  objectives  of 
monetary  policy.  Against  this  background,  the  question  might  be  raised  of  whether  Norges  Bank’s 
guidance to the market in summer 2004 could have been even better.  
In the first and second issues of the Inflation Report in 2005, the interest rate assumption was based 
on forward interest rates. However, the curve was adjusted upwards in the last part of the projection 
period. The Report pointed to extraordinary factors that might imply that forward rates underestimated 
actual  expectations.  The  adjusted  interest  rate  path  –  the  baseline  scenario  –  was  considered  to 
provide a reasonable balance between the different monetary policy objectives.  
Over  time,  Norges  Bank  has  chosen  different  interest  rate  assumptions.  This  is  partly  because  the 
Bank has assessed whether the interest rate assumption is reasonable and has not based its decision 
on a purely mechanical application of certain technical assumptions.  
                                                      
1   For a more detailed description of how Norges Bank calculates market participants’ interest rate expectations, measured by 
forward  rates,  see  Kloster,  A.  (2000):  “Estimating  and  interpreting  interest  rate  expectations”,  Economic  Bulletin  3/2000, 
Norges Bank, and Myklebust, G. (2005): “Documentation of the method used by Norges Bank for estimating implied forward 
rates”, Staff Memo 2005/11, Norges Bank. Both articles are available on www.norges-bank.no. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2006
As from Inflation Report 3/02, the Bank has published a recommended interval for the sight deposit 
rate over the following four months. To begin with, the interval was published at the end of the period 
to which it applied. Since Inflation Report 2/04, it has been published ahead of the period. The interval 
reflects the Bank’s sight deposit rate projection for the following four months, conditional on economic 
developments  that  are  approximately  as  projected.  The  interval  is  an  important  part  of  the  Bank’s 
communication strategy. Since we now also publish an interest rate projection for the entire projection 
period and not only for the next four months, economic agents gain broader insight into the analytical 
base, the assessments made and the Bank’s response pattern.  
Possible advantages of an explicit interest rate projection 
In forecasting inflation and output, there may be a number of advantages to basing forecasts on an 
interest rate projection that in the Bank’s opinion provides a reasonable balance between the different 
monetary policy objectives.2  
A communication such as this makes it clear which interest rate path, in the Bank’s opinion, provides a 
balance  between  monetary  policy  objectives.  Given  the  information  at  the  Bank’s  disposal  and  the 
assessments made by the Bank at the time the projections are made, the interest rate forecast in the 
Inflation  Report  will  reflect  a  monetary  policy  that  provides  a  reasonable  balance  between  the 
objectives of stabilising inflation at target and stabilising output and employment. This forecast might in 
many cases be close to market expectations, but this will not necessarily be the case.  
When  the  interest  rate  forecast  reflects  a  monetary  policy  that  provides  a  reasonable  balance,  it 
contributes to monetary policy predictability. With a predictable monetary policy, market participants 
can  react  to  new  information  in  a  way  that  contributes  to  stabilising  developments  in  output  and 
inflation. This makes monetary policy more effective, especially if market participants share the central 
bank’s analyses and assessments. To be successful, monetary policy must be capable of influencing 
expectations. This is essential to effective monetary policy.  
The essence of this argument is that it is primarily through the expectations channel that the central 
bank can influence economic developments. The expectations channel is the most important channel 
for monetary policy transmission.3 The central bank determines the shortest money market rates via 
the key rate. The shortest rates, however, are of limited importance to economic agents’ consumption 
and investment decisions. These decisions depend more on agents’ expectations with regard to future 
developments in the key rate.  
The key rate is primarily effective because it influences market expectations concerning future interest 
rates. Economic agents therefore need to understand the central bank’s intentions in its interest-rate 
setting.  Otherwise,  agents  might  perceive  future  interest  rate  developments  as  unnecessarily 
uncertain. Decisions on consumption and investment will then be more difficult to make. This might 
lead to greater instability both in terms of variables in the real economy and in inflation. As I mentioned 
earlier,  Norges  Bank  only  influences  the  shortest  money  market  rates.  Open  communication 
concerning  our  future  response  pattern  will  probably  also  allow  us  to  have  more  influence  over 
somewhat longer-term interest rates and thereby conduct a more effective monetary policy.  
Many agents outside the Bank place considerable emphasis on Norges Bank’s projections when they 
make their decisions. The projections are also evaluated by agents outside the Bank and by Norges 
Bank  itself.  The  interpretation  and  evaluation  of  these  projections  will  be  more  difficult  if  they  are 
based on an interest rate assumption that is not consistent with the rate Norges Bank considers most 
realistic. If the forecasts for inflation and output are to reflect the Bank’s best estimates, the underlying 
interest rate assumption must be a rate the Bank believes to be realistic.  
                                                      
2   Arguments in favour of the publication of an interest rate forecast by the central bank are discussed in more detail in some 
of  the  papers  presented  at  the  conference  hosted  by  Sveriges  Riksbank  entitled:  “Inflation  Targeting:  implementation, 
communication  and  effectiveness”:  http://www.riksbank.com/templates/Page.aspx?id=15814.  Reference 
in 
particular to Archer, D. (2005): “Central-bank communication and the publication of interest rate projections”, Faust, J. and 
E.  Leeper  (2005):  “Forecasts  and  inflation  reports:  An  evaluation”,  Svensson,  L.E.O.  (2005):  ”Further  Developments  of 
Inflation Targeting" and Woodford, M. (2005): “Central-Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness". 
is  made 
3   This is further discussed by Woodford, M. (2005): “Central-Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness", see footnote 2. 
BIS Review 6/2006 
 3
If the Bank’s interest rate forecast is different from market expectations, then this is useful information, 
not only for market participants, but also for the central bank. This may indicate that the central bank 
and  market  participants  have  a  differing  perception  of  future  economic  developments.  It  may  also 
reflect differing views concerning the trade-offs in monetary policy. Market expectations, as reflected in 
forward  rates,  will  be  a  way  of  cross-checking  the  Bank’s  interest  rate  forecast.  If  Norges  Bank’s 
interest  rate  forecast  deviates  from  market  expectations,  the  Bank  should  be  able  to  explain  this 
satisfactorily in order to influence interest rates in the money market.  
In Inflation Report 3/05, there were only minor differences between Norges Bank’s interest rate path 
and calculated forward rates up to 2007. Forward rates indicated that interest rates would then level 
off, while our forecast indicated a continued gradual rise up towards a more normal level. After the 
publication of the Report and up to end-January, market expectations have fallen. This shows that the 
interest rate path envisaged by the Bank and the path expected by the market can differ. There may 
be several reasons for this.  
Calculated  forward  rates  will  usually  reflect  market  expectations  concerning  the  future  interest  rate 
path. Market interest rates may, however, be influenced by extraordinary supply and demand factors 
that do not have a bearing on the outlook for underlying economic developments or monetary policy. 
But market participants may also have a different perception of the interest rate path that is required to 
stabilise inflation at target. The difference can also be ascribed to the downward pressure exerted on 
long-term interest rates in many countries by extraordinary conditions in international capital flows.  
Possible challenges of an explicit forecast of future interest rates 
To  what  extent  a  central  bank  should  publish  an  interest  rate  forecast  has  been  the  subject  of 
discussion in international economic literature.4 The discussion has arisen as a result of the different 
solutions chosen by different central banks for different reasons.  
It has been argued that the central bank might feel too bound by a previously announced interest rate 
path.  Publication  of  the  Bank’s  interest  rate  forecast  might  impose  constraints  on  monetary  policy, 
making it more difficult to adjust the interest rate to changes in economic developments. The interest 
rate path may be perceived as a straightjacket, preventing the central bank from pursuing the policy it 
considers to be appropriate at any given time. In addition, if the central bank should deviate from the 
previously  published  interest  rate  forecast,  the  Bank  might  be  accused  of  misleading  the  market. 
Confidence in the central bank may thereby be undermined.  
Some economists stress that a published interest rate forecast may create problems in the practical 
implementation  of  monetary  policy.  Results  published  in  the  literature,  however,  seem  to  point  in  a 
different  direction.  First,  any  constraints  a  published  interest  rate  forecast  might  entail  are  not 
necessarily  a  disadvantage;  on  the  contrary,  they  may  be  an  advantage.  Indeed,  if  interest  rate 
expectations can be influenced, a response pattern that is binding for a shorter or longer period will in 
many  cases  be  useful  for  a  central  bank.  By  being  committed  to  a  response  pattern,  the  need  for 
interest rate changes today may be reduced. From mid-2003 to mid-2004, for example, the Federal 
Reserve  was  concerned  that  inflation  might  fall  too  low.  The  Fed  therefore  indicated  that  market 
participants  should  expect  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  for  longer  than  usual  in  periods  of 
increasing  activity.5  Norges  Bank  has  made  similar  statements  about  the  future  interest  rate.  For 
example, from mid-2004 to the beginning of 2005, the Bank stated that “the prospect of continued low 
inflation in Norway also implies that we should lag behind other countries in setting interest rates at a 
more normal level”. Statements such as this are intended to influence market expectations. Similarly, 
there  may  be  advantages  of  publishing  an  explicit  interest  rate  forecast.  This  may  lead  to 
commitments  that  increase  the  credibility  of  consistent  interest-rate  setting  by  the  central  bank. 
Nevertheless,  statements  related  to  the  interest  rate  path  can  still  be  useful  as  they  can  provide 
                                                      
4   Arguments against the publication of an explicit interest rate forecast by the central bank are discussed in more detail in 
Goodhart, C. (2001): “Monetary Transmission Lags and the Formulation of the Policy Decision on Interest Rates”, Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis  Review,  July/August  2001  (http://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/review/01/05/165-
182Goodhart.qxd.pdf) and Mishkin, F. S. (2004): “Can Central Bank Transparency Go Too Far?”, NBER working paper no. 
10829 (http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/fmishkin/PDFpapers/56959-w10829.pdf)
“In these circumstances, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period.", 
see press release from the Federal Reserve, Board of Governors, 12 August 2003, www.federalreserve.gov. 
5  
4 
 BIS Review 6/2006
information about why a particular path has been chosen. In addition, such statements can provide 
some information about our response to conditions outside the Bank’s control.  
Second,  when  the  central  bank  deviates  from  the  original  projection  for  future  interest  rates,  an 
explanation has to be provided. The interest rate forecast is based on incomplete information about 
the current situation and the functioning of the economy. If the economy is exposed to disturbances, 
the central bank's assessment of these disturbances must be communicated. The same applies if the 
central bank should change its view of the functioning of the economy. Professional financial market 
participants and other economic agents will have little difficulty in understanding that the interest rate 
will occasionally have to deviate from the forecast.  
Basis for the interest rate forecast 
In forecasting economic variables, Norges Bank uses an approach that captures and juxtaposes many 
different  elements.  The  chart  provides  an  illustration  of  the  structure  of  forecasting.  One  important 
source  of  information  on  the  current  situation  is  current  statistics.  In  addition  to  official  statistics, 
information from our regional network plays an important role. In the course of a year, around 1400 
interviews are held with leaders from various parts of the corporate and public sectors about economic 
developments  in  their  enterprises  and  institutions.  In  our  forecasting,  we  seek  to  build  a  bridge 
between  our  assessments  of  the  current  situation  and  the  knowledge  we  have  about  long-term 
relationships in the economy. As a tool in this work, the Bank uses several macroeconomic models: 
one core model and a number of smaller models.  
Central to this process is the use of judgment. The macroeconomic models provide a very simplified 
description of the economy and only serve as a forecasting tool. The forecasts for inflation, output, the 
interest  rate  and  other  variables  in  the  economy  must  be  perceived  as  a  result  of  the  Bank’s  best 
judgment. There is no mechanical relationship between the models the Bank uses and its forecasts.  
Nevertheless, the models are a very useful tool in the conduct of monetary policy. In the process of 
arriving at an interest rate forecast that in the Bank’s opinion provides a reasonable balance, a model 
system is needed where the interest rate and other variables in the economy are interdependent. The 
core model has this property.6  
The core model includes relationships that describe the demand and supply side of the economy and 
a relationship that describes interest-rate setting. The interest rate is set on the basis of a long-term 
normal  interest  rate  level  in  addition  to  information  on  inflation  and  output.  Disturbances  to  the 
economy that influence developments in inflation, output or the exchange rate also trigger interest rate 
changes. Interest rate changes in turn affect inflation, output and the exchange rate in such a way that 
these  variables  stabilise  over  time  around  their  equilibrium  values.  The  model  thus  also  embodies 
assumptions concerning long-term developments. In the literature, an interest rate path determined in 
this way is often referred to as an endogenous interest rate path. This means that the interest rate is 
simultaneously  determined  within  the  model  with  other  variables  such  as  inflation,  output  and  the 
exchange rate – the interest rate is not taken as a given outside the model.  
Economists  with  experience  of  other  Norwegian  macromodels  may  perhaps  argue  that  the  model  I 
have just described seems too small to describe a complicated reality. The strength of such a small 
model is primarily that it isolates the mechanisms we are particularly interested in. At the same time, 
we  also  want  to  focus  on  a  larger  set  of  variables.  In  addition  to  the  core  model  itself,  the  Bank 
therefore also uses a number of smaller additional models in its forecasting. This is illustrated in the 
chart, where the core model is represented by the yellow boxes at the top. The additional models are 
represented  by  the  blue  boxes,  while  the  red  boxes  represent  exogenous  factors.  The  additional 
models  are  smaller  models  used  to  forecast  variables  such  as  wage  growth,  private  consumption, 
investment and imports. We also look at conditions related to financial stability. The results produced 
by  the  core  model  and  the  additional  models  are  tested  against  each  other,  and  by  means  of  an 
iteration process based on judgment we arrive at forecasts we believe are reasonable.  
The forecasts that result from the models can be referred to as model-consistent. These forecasts will 
not necessarily be consistent with the Bank’s perception of realistic economic developments. This is 
                                                      
6   See  Husebø,  T.  A.,  S.  McCaw,  K.  Olsen  and  Ø.  Røisland  (2004):  “A  small  calibrated  macro  model  to  support  inflation 
targeting at Norges Bank”, Staff Memo 2004/3, Norges Bank, se www.norges-bank.no. 
BIS Review 6/2006 
 5
because the models are too simple to describe the real world, and as a rule, judgment will need to be 
applied to adjust the forecasts. Judgment is used to ensure that the forecasts for the different variables 
are economically consistent.  
The work on models at Norges Bank has partly been focused on describing the role of the interest rate 
in  the  economy  and  partly  on  developing  models  that  may  be  useful  to  decision-makers.  A  central 
element  of  the  core  model  is  that  agents  are  forward-looking,  reacting  to  expected  economic 
developments.  In  recent  years,  a  number  of  central  banks  have  developed  models  of  this  type. 
However,  it  must  be  stressed  that  our  core  model  and  the  models  we  develop  only  provide  a  very 
simplified description of reality. The Bank’s forecasts are based on a broad range of different sources 
of information, with judgment as a substantial component.  
Important elements in the assessment of what a good interest rate path is – and which underline the 
judgment component in this assessment – are reflected in six criteria that should be satisfied.7  
The criteria emphasise that if monetary policy is to anchor inflation expectations around the target, the 
interest rate must be set so that inflation moves towards the target. Inflation should be stabilised near 
the target within a reasonable time horizon, normally 1-3 years. Assuming that inflation expectations 
are  anchored  around  the  target,  the  inflation  gap  and  the  output  gap  should  be  in  reasonable 
proportion to each other until they close. The inflation gap and the output gap should normally not be 
positive  or  negative  at  the  same  time  further  ahead.  In  addition,  interest  rate  developments, 
particularly in the next few months, should result in acceptable developments in inflation and output 
also under alternative, albeit not unrealistic assumptions concerning economic developments and the 
functioning of the economy. The interest rate should normally be changed gradually so that we can 
assess the effects of interest rate changes and other new information about economic developments. 
Interest-rate setting must also be assessed in the light of developments in property prices and credit. It 
may also be useful to assess interest-rate setting in the light of some simple monetary policy rules. If 
the interest rate deviates systematically and substantially from simple rules, it should be possible to 
explain the reasons for this.  
These  criteria  are  important  guidelines  in  forecasting  an  interest  rate  that  provides  a  reasonable 
balance in monetary policy. Of course, the criteria cannot provide a precise instruction as to how the 
interest rate should be set, but points to factors we should have taken into account and assessed. In 
some contexts, the various criteria may be in conflict. In these situations, it is particularly important to 
exercise judgment in the trade-off between the different objectives of monetary policy.  
Uncertainty surrounding future interest rate developments 
What  I  have  said  so  far  about  interest  rate  forecasts  have  perhaps  left  the  impression  of  an 
exaggerated belief in control. This was not my intention. Our recent history underscores that economic 
developments involve a great deal of uncertainty. Even if the Bank publishes a forecast for the interest 
rate, this does not mean that the interest rate will follow the forecast throughout the projection period. 
Forecasts for inflation, output, the interest rate and other variables are based on an assessment of the 
current situation and a perception of how the economy functions. Disturbances to the economy may 
result in changes in the forecasts. Our ambition must be to reduce uncertainty with regard to our own 
response pattern. That actual interest rate developments will deviate somewhat from Norges Bank's 
forecast  must  be  expected  to  be  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception.  There  is,  in  other  words, 
substantial uncertainty associated with future interest rates. I would draw your attention to the fact that 
the Executive Board, when providing a more precise indication of where the interest rate level should 
lie  over  the  coming  four  month  period,  operates  with  an  interval  of  around  one  percentage  point. 
Uncertainty does not of course diminish as we look further ahead.  
This  is  a  familiar  situation  for  financial  market  participants,  who  are  constantly  changing  their 
expectations  concerning  future  interest  rates  as  the  economy  is  exposed  to  disturbances.  Market 
participants’  interest  rate  expectations  can  be  calculated  on  the  basis  of  observed  money  market 
rates. The deviation between market expectations and the actual interest rate has been substantial in 
periods.  One  important  reason  for  this  is  that  the  Norwegian  economy  has  been  exposed  to 
                                                      
7   For more about these criteria, see Qvigstad, J.F.Q. (2005): “When does an interest rate path “look good”? Criteria for an 
appropriate future interest rate path - A practician’s approach”, Staff Memo 2005/6, Norges Bank, se www.norges-bank.no. 
6 
 BIS Review 6/2006
unexpected  disturbances,  often  originating  in  the  global  economy.  As  a  result,  market  participants 
have  constantly  had  to  change  their assessments  of  future  interest  rate  developments.  There  is  no 
reason to believe that Norges Bank will not also have to reassess its interest rate forecasts as new 
information emerges about economic developments.  
While Norges Bank now publishes forecasts for inflation, output and the interest rate, we also try to 
provide information about the uncertainty in these variables. The charts show the forecasts in the most 
recent  Inflation  Report.  Uncertainty  is  illustrated  by  fan  charts.  The  broader  the  fans  are,  the  more 
uncertain  are  the  forecasts.  For  example,  our  calculations  indicate  that  there  is  a  90  per  cent 
probability  that  the  interest  rate  towards  the  end  of  2008  will  lie  in  the  interval  2  -  7¾  per  cent. 
Uncertainty with regard to the interest rate reflects uncertainty in inflation, output and the exchange 
rate when the central bank’s response pattern is taken into account. In other words, uncertainty with 
regard  to  the  interest  rate  reflects  the  monetary  policy  response  to  unexpected  disturbances  in 
inflation, output and the exchange rate.  
There  is  considerable  uncertainty  associated  with  constructing  these  fan  charts.  Not  only  are  the 
forecasts  themselves  uncertain,  but  the  forecasts’  uncertainty  is  also  uncertain.  The  core  model, 
described above, serves as a useful tool in constructing fan charts. The fan charts are of course only 
indicative and depend on a number of model-based technical assumptions. The model incorporates 
relationships for the demand and supply side of the economy. In addition, a relationship for interest-
rate setting is included. Within the framework of the model, we have sought to quantify uncertainty in 
key  variables  such  as  inflation,  output,  the  interest  rate  and  the  exchange  rate,  based  on  the 
disturbances in the Norwegian economy in the period 1993-2005. Within the structure of the model, 
we have exposed the economy to similar disturbances ahead through Monte Carlo simulations of add 
factors. This gives an indication of uncertainty surrounding the different variables based on historical 
disturbances.  Monetary  policy  responds  to  disturbances  to  the  other  variables.  This  increases 
uncertainty  about  the  future  interest  rate,  but  at  the  same  time  reduces  uncertainty  in  the  other 
variables.  
In other words, there are strict, model-based technical assumptions behind the fan charts we use to 
illustrate uncertainty in our forecasts. It goes without saying that it is difficult to be very precise as to 
exactly how great the uncertainty will be. Nevertheless – in spite of these strict model-based technical 
assumptions – the fan charts illustrate an important point: that the forecasts are very uncertain.  
Norges Bank seeks to achieve an interest rate path that provides a reasonable balance between the 
objective of stabilising inflation at target and the objective of stabilising developments in output and 
employment. Monetary policy influences the economy with a lag; when the interest rate has been set, 
a  period  of  time  elapses  before  the  effects  on  inflation  and  the  real  economy  can  be  observed.  In 
periods,  inflation  will  deviate  from  the  target  while  output  will  also  deviate  from  potential  output.  A 
successful monetary policy provides the economy with a nominal anchor and contributes to stabilising 
the economy. This reduces the uncertainty associated with future inflation.  
Conclusion 
Assessing uncertainty is an important part of the central bank’s communication strategy. An explicit 
forecast for inflation, output and the interest rate, in addition to assessing uncertainty in the forecasts, 
is intended to enable economic agents to better understand the central bank’s intentions in its interest-
rate setting. When the economy is exposed to disturbances, agents will have a basis for predicting the 
central bank’s interest rate response and helping to ensure that market interest rates move in the right 
direction, thereby increasing the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
Norges Bank has in recent years taken a number of steps towards greater transparency in monetary 
policy. The strategy intervals are published at the beginning of the period to which they apply. Each 
monetary policy meeting is followed by a broad review of the most important factors underlying the 
interest rate decision. The use of the Bank’s own forecasts for the interest rate path in the Inflation 
Report can be viewed as a further step towards increased transparency with regard to the basis for 
monetary policy.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 6/2006 
 7
