Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Extending the boundaries in the new financial landscape 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  10th  Malaysian 
Banking,  Finance  &  Insurance  Summit:  "Liberalisation  and  Consolidation  of  Malaysian  Banking  & 
Finance  Sector:  Enhancing  Competitiveness  &  Resilience  of  Our  Economy",  Kuala  Lumpur, 
9 June 2006. 
 This decade has become one of the most dynamic periods in the development of our financial sector. 
We  have seen  the  dramatic  transformation  of  the  financial  structure  to  becoming  increasingly  more 
diversified,  the  industries  becoming  more  consolidated  and  rationalized,  and  the  system  becoming 
more  internationally  integrated.  We  have  also  seen  the  financial  system  transition  into  a  more 
competitive environment in which the institutional arrangements are more deregulated and liberalised. 
The financial infrastructure has also evolved with fundamental changes to support this transformation. 
Finally, the regulatory and supervisory approaches have also advanced to becoming more principled 
and risk-based to improve the functioning and stability of the financial system.  
The  financial  transformation  has  taken  place  in  an  environment  of  economic  stability.  Malaysia  's 
economic  performance  has  been  characterized  by  sustained  high  quality  growth  and  stable 
fundamentals.  The  underlying  growth  in  the  Malaysian  economy  has  been  solid.  Malaysia  has 
benefited from both the favourable external environment and the strong domestic demand. Malaysia 
has  also  benefited  from  the  globalization  of  production  with  the  geographical  relocation  of  the 
production  chain  by  an  increasing  number  of  both  multi-national  and  local  corporations  across  the 
Asian region. This trend has leveraged on the respective comparative advantages in countries of the 
region. Malaysia 's distinct capabilities in a wide number of areas has increased its participation in this 
process.  In  addition,  increased  economic  integration  following  the  rise  of  intra-regional  trade  and 
investment has brought mutually reinforcing benefits in terms of the expanding regional opportunities. 
The strengthened corporate sector has also led to increased direct investment abroad by Malaysian 
companies. Going forward, developments in the Malaysian economy will also benefit from the Ninth 
Malaysian Plan.  
A major strength of the Malaysian economy has been its economic flexibility. Significant changes in 
the  structure  of  the  economy  continues  to  take  place.  The  manufacturing  sector  has  continued  to 
move up the value chain while the services sector has gained increasing prominence, with its share of 
GDP rising from 45% in 1995 to almost 60% today. The role of private consumption in the economy 
has also been enhanced, supported by steadily rising incomes, low unemployment, and access to the 
financial  system.  Of  importance  is  the  recovery  of  investment  activity.  In  addition,  the  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) have increased their role in the domestic economy. New areas of 
growth  are  also  emerging,  ranging  from  the  shared  services  and  outsourcing  industry  to  agro-
business, biotechnology and Islamic finance. The flexibility of the economy to continually adjust to new 
areas of activity has been an important factor contributing to the dynamism of the economy.  
About  a  year  ago,  Malaysia  took  the  opportunity  to  transition  into  a  more  flexible  exchange  rate 
regime. This has been achieved in an orderly manner. Of importance was that the preconditions had 
been  put  in  place  to  ensure  this  orderly  transition.  The  banking  sector  had  been  strengthened,  the 
bond market had been developed, and the capital account had been sequentially liberalised. These 
developments were reinforced by the further deregulation and liberalization of the domestic financial 
system, thus creating a more competitive financial environment. The successful transition to the new 
regime following these developments has seen a two-way movement in the exchange rate that reflects 
the underlying economy and the market conditions.  
Monetary policy in this environment will continue to be conducted in a manner that will ensure that the 
long-term growth prospects of the economy is achieved with price stability. As a small, open economy, 
Malaysia is not insulated from the inflationary forces being felt globally. In this regard, decisions on 
monetary policy will be determined by the Bank's assessment of a broad range of indicators of the 
domestic economy. The Overnight Policy Rate (OPR) remains the signalling mechanism to achieve 
the  policy  objectives.  Interest  rates,  therefore,  is  not  an  instrument  to  influence  capital  flows  or  the 
exchange rate.  
The  Bank  continues  to  undertake  initiatives  to  enhance  communication  to  promote  greater 
understanding of the objectives, processes and conduct of monetary policy. Extensive deliberations in 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 1
assessing  the  latest  domestic  and  global  economic,  monetary  and  financial  developments  are 
conducted at the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meetings, which are held eight times a year. The 
Monetary Policy Statement (MPS) remains the key monetary policy communication tool of the central 
bank to provide the rationale for monetary policy decisions.  
Given  the  pronounced  changes  in  the  economy  and  the  significant  changes  taking  place  in  the 
financial sector, the industry would essentially need to respond to the new challenges arising from:  
i. 
Greater  linkages,  integration  and  interdependence  between  nations.  This  trend  is  likely  to 
intensify as more countries embark on initiatives to promote closer regional economic and 
financial integration, to enhance their level of economic performance.  
The  challenge  of  intensified  competitive  pressures,  arising  not  only  from  changes  in  the 
financial  environment,  the  technological  advancements  and  financial  reforms  but  also  the 
entry of new players, including the non-traditional competitors such as non-financial services.  
Consumers are increasingly confronted with a wide range of new and innovative products 
and services that are delivered via new and more efficient delivery channels. As consumers 
are becoming increasingly demanding and financially sophisticated, greater emphasis needs 
to be given to the provision of the variety and quality products and services at competitive 
prices  through  the  most  effective  channels.  Banking  institutions  need  to  anticipate  and 
rapidly respond to these new demands and expectations.  
Policymakers  are  also  confronted  by  the  challenge of  maintaining  overall  financial  stability 
whilst at the same time, promoting efficiency in the financial system. Balancing the trade-offs 
arising  from  meeting  these  objectives  will  be  necessary  to  determine  the  best  course  of 
action. This needs to be achieved while developing the financial infrastructure, in addition, to 
allowing for the entry of new players into the system.  
The  emergence  of  international  players  that  possess  the  competitive  advantage  of  being 
more technologically advanced with greater capability and capacity to offer more innovative 
products  and  services  through  new  delivery  channels  will  further  intensify  the  competitive 
environment.  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
ii. 
Despite its challenges, the changing economic and financial landscape also offers many opportunities;  
New  growth  areas  present  new  opportunities  and  financial  institutions  need  to  take 
i. 
advantage  not  only  of  the  potential  return  but  also  the  options  for  further  diversifying  the 
sources of income.  
Alternative sources of financing from the capital market, development financial institutions, 
as well as from non-bank sources such as venture capital funds, have increased significantly 
in  recent  years.  Financial  institutions  need  to  develop  new  products  and  services  that 
reinforce these developments and meet the new requirements of corporate consumers. This 
includes providing world-class financial advisory services and wealth management services.  
The  emergence  of  new  delivery  channels  such  as  the  Internet  and  mobile  phones  have 
significantly  altered 
traditional  banking-customer  relationship.  Business  can  be 
conducted seamlessly across borders. Technological developments have also transformed 
the payment systems industry, with the introduction of new payment instruments and entry of 
non-banks  into  payment  services,  facilitating  the  migration  to  e-payments.  Market  leaders 
can capitalise on these developments in providing products and services to customers and 
businesses.  
the 
iii. 
The changing economic and financial landscape also brings about many opportunities for trade and 
investment. With the accelerating pace of regional integration, financial institutions are presented the 
opportunities to broaden beyond domestic borders to capture opportunities for the regional markets.  
It  has  been  more  than  5 years since  the  Financial Sector  Master  Pan  was  launched.  The strategic 
focus  has  allowed  us  to  promptly  emerge  from the crisis  management  mode and moved  full  steam 
ahead  towards  developing  the  financial  system,  The  initiatives  undertaken  have  now  laid  a  strong 
foundation for the development of a strong and diversified financial system. Significant progress has 
been achieved in building the capacity and capability of the financial sector and in putting in place the 
necessary  financial  infrastructure  including  the  supporting  legislation  and  the  domestic  financial 
markets.  
2 
 BIS Review 55/2006
The  financial  landscape  and  operating  environment  that  is  envisaged  in  Phase  2,  where  domestic 
banking institutions would have built greater capacity and capability to compete, is also progressing as 
planned. The level of competition in the financial system has increased significantly, fuelled by greater 
expectations  from  customers  and  facilitated  by  a  more  flexible  regulatory  framework  and  increased 
deregulation and liberalisation. This has resulted in improvements in the delivery of financial services 
and more  efficient pricing and risk  management,  all of  which  contribute  towards raising  the level  of 
economic performance.  
The  wide  range  of  measures  to  improve  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the  financial  institutions, 
include initiatives on improving risk management practices, further developing the human capital and 
building  talents  for  the  financial  sector,  as  well  as  measures  to  elevate  the  level  of  consumer 
awareness. These efforts have further enhanced the ability of the financial system to respond to the 
changes that have occurred.  
The banking sector recorded improvements on all fronts, enhancing the ability to compete effectively 
and  strengthening  the  resilience  to  weather  any  potential  adverse  developments  in  particular,  any 
external shocks to the system. The level of capitalisation remained consistently strong with the risk-
weighted  capital  ratio  of  the  banking  system  above  13%  for  the  period  concerned  with  quality  of 
portfolio continuing to improve further amidst sustained economic performance.  
The banking sector also continued to record strong profitability performance despite the increasingly 
competitive operating environment. In 2005, the banking system as a whole registered a pre-tax profit 
level  of  RM12.4  billion  with  a  higher  component  of  the  revenue  originating  from  service  related 
activities such as the sale of wealth management products and remittance services, as well as from 
trading and investment activities. With this stronger performance and enhanced capability to manage 
risk  exposures,  several  banking  institutions  have  also  taken  the  next  step  and  moved  forward  to 
expand in the regional market to reach new sources of business opportunities. On the domestic front, 
there has been a narrowing of the gap as compared with the foreign banks.  
Further  initiatives  undertaken  include  enhancing  the  operational  aspects  and delivery  of  services  to 
banking consumers through the rationalisation of the configuration within respective banking groups. 
This has resulted in leaner and more effective entities where common functions and capabilities have 
been  pooled  leading  to  more  cost-efficient  entities  as  well  as  allowing  for  greater  focus  in  the 
marketing  and  customer management.  Following  this  rationalisation,  the  cost  to  income  ratio  of  the 
domestic banks have improved from 55% in 2003 to 51% in the first quarter of this year.  
On  the  aspect  of  improving  customer  interface  and  improving  time  taken  to  conduct  banking 
transactions, branches have been redesigned with new business models. With this move, branch staff 
now  have  greater  opportunity  to  provide  value-added  consultations  and  interface  with  clients. 
Increased investments have also been made to improve information systems - to be better positioned 
to  understand  customers'  profiles  and  needs,  as  well  as  enhance  overall  risk  management. 
Technologies  such  as  data  warehousing  are  now  readily  available  to  aid  banking  institutions  to  be 
more customer-centric and thus be more focused in their approach. As a result, more institutions have 
undertaken to offer greater product differentiation and value added services.  
The  robust  growth  in  the  Malaysian  economy  has  also  contributed  to  an  increased  demand  for  life 
insurance coverage. The growth in premium income has continued to outpace economic growth. Over 
the period 2000-2004, the market penetration rate increased from 31% in 2000 to 39% in 2005. The 
per capita spending on life insurance products also increased at an average annual rate of 10% over 
the same period. Notwithstanding this wider reach, life insurance coverage has remained relatively low 
compared with the more developed markets in the region such as the Republic of Korea, Singapore 
and  Japan  which  reported  penetration  rates  of  more  than  80%.  Given  the  vast  untapped  market 
potential  and  the  increased  product  innovation  and  new  distribution  channels,  the  life  insurance 
penetration in Malaysia is expected to strengthen.  
Demographic changes leading to a growing ageing population has been a growing concern in many 
countries. Given the trends in rising life expectancy and falling birth rates, responding to the increased 
challenges  of  retirement  financing  has  been  high  on  the  nation's  socio-economic  development 
agenda. Going forward, there will be greater interest in private pension schemes representing an are 
of significant growth opportunities for life insurers.  
The financial performance of the Malaysian insurance industry has also continued to be impressive 
during the 2000 and 2005 despite the challenging underwriting and investment conditions, with growth 
primarily  driven  by  the  life  sector.  Total  insurance  fund  assets  of  the  industry  grew  at  an  average 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 3
annual  rate  of  13.8%.  The  insurance  industry  also  increased  in  importance  as  a  component  of  the 
economy and financial system. The ratio of total industry assets to nominal GNP rose from 16.1% in 
2000 to 20.4% in 2005, while the ratio to total assets of the financial system continued on an upward 
trend from 4.0% in 2000 to 5.1% in 2005.  
Moving forward, the Bank will step up its vigilance of the industry's state of readiness to cope with the 
changing environment. An orderly transition of the market-led adjustments is vital to ensure that the 
adjustments does not destabilize the market or undermine public confidence. To this end, efforts will 
continue  to  be  directed  towards building  institutional  capabilities and  putting  in  place  the  necessary 
supporting financial infrastructure to provide a firm foundation for orderly change. Initiatives in the area 
of financial education for consumers will be intensified to further expand the coverage as well as to 
promote the fair treatment of consumers.  
With a strong foundation in place to meet increased competition, further deregulatory and liberalisation 
measures  will  be  introduced.  This  will  include  greater  flexibility  accorded  to  foreign  insurers  to 
establish  branch  offices,  the  progressive  deregulation  of  pricing  for  tariff-rated  insurance  products, 
greater  investment  management  flexibility  and  removal  of  limits  on  management  expenses  and 
continuing  improvements  in  disclosure  standards  to  promote  greater  market  discipline  in  the  more 
deregulated  environment.  On-going  deregulatory  measures  will  also  further  enhance  the  ability  of 
insurers  to  respond  more  proactively  and  speedily  to  changes  in  consumer  demands  and  market 
conditions. The prudential framework will also continue to be adjusted to establish principles of sound 
financial and business practices in the changing environment, with a significantly stronger emphasis 
on risk-based supervision and effective board and management oversight.  
Further advancement towards greater international integration will be considered to provide Malaysian 
consumers  with  greater  access  to  world-class  products  and  services,  while  further  catalysing  the 
development  of  the  domestic  industry  towards  meeting  international  best  practices  and  standards. 
This  will  include  the  issuance  of  new  licences  in  specialized  lines  and  greater  opportunities  for 
internationally-reputed insurers to acquire equity interests in, or forge strategic alliances with domestic 
players, both in the direct insurance as well as re-insurance sectors. The progression towards further 
deregulation and liberalisation will continue to be managed at an appropriate pace, taking into account 
the  development  of  the  supporting  infrastructure  and  the  level  of  substantive  progress  achieved  by 
domestic institutions, in order to ensure market stability.  
Next on the agenda in the development of the domestic financial system is the formation of investment 
banks.  This  is  aimed  at  further  enhancing  the  delivery  of  financial  services  to  the  wholesale  and 
corporate  sector.  With  this  rationalisation,  the  business  community  will  have  a  more  streamlined 
access to banking services to fulfil their wider range of requirements. Comprehensive changes to the 
organisational structure of the development financial institutions have also been undertaken to provide 
a clearer scope and focus to service the needs of targeted sectors. At the same time, measures were 
also instituted to expand the role of the credit guarantee agency to further facilitate the development of 
the small and medium enterprises, a critical component of the nation's economy.  
On the regulatory front, a series of enhancements to the risk management regulatory framework has 
been  introduced  with  the  aim  of  promoting  a  more  robust  and  comprehensive  risk  management 
practices within banking institutions. In addition, significant effort has also been put in place to prepare 
the  industry  towards  the  implementation  of  Basel  II,  which  is  targeted  for  January  2008  for  the 
standardised approach and January 2010 for the IRB approach. The industry has responded well - 
with various improvement measures that have been instituted, and investments made to enhance their 
systems  and  approaches  to  elevate  their  capability  to  manage  risk  exposures.  This  will  contribute 
towards  enhancing  further  overall  financial  stability,  and  towards  the  development  of  new  products 
with better pricing of the financial services.  
The Islamic banking and takaful industries have been among the most dynamic in the sector. In terms 
of assets, the annual growth rate of Islamic banking and takaful averaged 19 percent and 25 percent 
respectively. In 2005, profitability of Islamic banking surpassed the RM1 billion mark for the first time, 
while its assets breached the RM100 billion threshold. As of end-March, the Islamic banking assets 
accounted  for  almost  12%  of  the  total  assets  of  the  entire  banking  system.  The  takaful  industry's 
assets stood at about 6% of the industry total.  
The  Islamic  banking  industry  has  begun  to  maximise  the  competitive  advantages  of  the  Islamic 
banking concept of profit and risk sharing. We are seeing this concept more keenly being exploited in 
profit  and  risk  sharing  ventures,  and  Islamic  fund  and  wealth  management  which  are  emerging  as 
rewarding banking activities. Developing a pool of the required skills and talent, and putting in place of 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2006
proper risk management systems and good corporate governance practices becomes vital to sustain 
the growth momentum of the industry.  
As we move towards the final phase of the Master Plan and into a more competitive landscape, we 
require robust  financial  institutions  that are resilient, effective,  efficient  and well  placed  to serve  the 
nation,  and  thus  support  sustainable  economic  growth  and  transformation.  In  the  area  of  Islamic 
banking and finance, our aim is to be a leading international Islamic financial centre. To achieve this, 
we have to strengthen our position and focus our resources on achieving two broad aims. The first is 
to  become  an  international  leader  in  the  origination,  issuance  as  well  as  trading  of  Islamic  capital 
market  and  treasury  instruments,  fund  and  wealth  management  services,  offshore  Islamic  financial 
services, and takaful and re takaful . As a services sector, the robustness of the industry is a direct 
function of the calibre of the workforce in the industry. As such, our second goal is to position Malaysia 
as  a  centre  of  excellence  for  Islamic  banking  and  finance  education,  training,  consultancy  and 
research. Not only will this provide a deep pool of highly trained and capable employees, it will also 
further promote the innovation of Islamic financial products and services.  
In  a  dual  financial  environment,  neutrality  in  treatment  between  Islamic  and  conventional  financial 
products is important in order to create a level playing field. It also sets the stage for greater innovation 
to take place to support the development of the Islamic financial services industry going forward. With 
the strengthened and robust Islamic financial infrastructure firmly achieved in the first two phases of 
the FSMP, the Islamic financial services industry is poised to tap new growth opportunities and grow to 
its full potential. This will inevitably increase the breadth and depth of the Islamic financial market and, 
more importantly, strengthen Malaysia 's position as an attractive and dynamic international Islamic 
financial centre.  
In  preparing  for  the  pressures  of  liberalisation  and  increased  competition,  continuous  review  of  the 
regulatory  framework  and  their  implications  on  the  efficiency  and  an  environment  conducive  for 
innovation is taken into consideration. The cost and benefits of regulations are carefully weighed to 
ensure a well-balanced regulatory framework that meets prudential objectives yet remaining relevant 
and adaptable to the changing environment. Premised on this, the prudential framework is evolving 
towards a predominantly principle-based regulatory approach.  
The  underlying  flexibility  inherent  in  the  principle-based  approach  would  involve  a  regulatory 
framework  that  relies  more  on  market  discipline,  where  the  market  will  be  entrusted  to  allocate 
resources  and  risks,  with  greater  reward  for  prudent  practices.  The  emphasis  is  on  self-regulation, 
where stronger corporate governance, integrity and transparency are critical for banking institutions to 
achieve investor confidence and public trust. Moving forward, as market discipline improves and both 
banking institutions and insurance companies are better positioned to undergo self-regulation, further 
deregulation  can  be  expected.  A  differentiated  regulatory  approach  will  increasingly  be  adopted, 
where banking institutions and insurance companies that exhibit strong corporate governance and risk 
management practices will be given greater regulatory flexibility.  
Whilst it is recognised that the regulatory framework should foster efficiency and competition, this has 
to be balanced with the objective of attaining soundness and preserving the stability of the financial 
system through the promotion of sound risk management practices. Commensurate with the diversity 
and  complexity  of  products  and  services,  the  financial  landscape  of  the  future  will  require  the 
continuous upgrade of the risk management practices with improvements in the governance standards 
and  enhancing  of  information  management  systems.  The  rationalisation  exercises  aimed  at 
maximising cost efficiency and reaping benefits of group synergies has led to the emergence of more 
complex group structures of more diversified financial conglomerates. In relation to this, a holistic and 
integrated  regulatory  approach  is  being  adopted  to  ensure  that  the  activities  of  these  financial 
conglomerates do not introduce excessive risks to the financial system. Risk management standards 
are  applied  across  the  group  and  safeguards  have  been  introduced  to  ensure  risks  are  efficiently 
managed with necessary infrastructure for an overall view of the risk exposures within the group.  
Fostering  a  customer-centric  culture  encompasses  fair  and  equitable  dealings  with  customers  to 
engender greater trust and loyalty among customers and serving customers in good faith by extending 
products and services that are appropriate to their financial requirements and circumstances. Greater 
innovation must therefore be complemented by higher levels of service quality. Greater attention on 
excellence in customer service requires continuous investment in staff development, which will be a 
vital  part  of  the  process.  Harnessing  the  technology  to  deliver  distinctive  customer  experience  that 
combines the right mix of convenience and value is also an essential part of the process. In addition, 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 5
adequate  emphasis  and  resources  need  to  be  accorded  to  protecting  customers'  privacy  and 
safeguarding their interests.  
In order to make a quantum leap forward, it is vital to continuously invest in human intellectual capital 
so  as  to  create  a  pool  of  talent,  skill  and  expertise  that  will  drive  the  performance  of  the  financial 
system. Skilled individuals are needed to be able to deliver high value-added products and services, 
adopt  advanced business  practices  and  have  the  necessary competence  to build  confidence  in  the 
financial market and trust of the consumer. Initiatives have been taken for putting in place specialised 
training organisations as part of the infrastructure for the development of highly skilled workforce for 
the  financial  sector.  The  International  Centre  for  Leadership  in  Finance  is  now  in  its  3  rd  year  of 
operations  and  more  recently  the  International  Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic  Finance  was 
established to meet the increased demands of Islamic finance professionals, both in the domestic and 
international markets. The programmes carried out by the Institut Bank-bank Malaysia and Malaysian 
Insurance Institute has also been reviewed to meet the demands of the financial sector.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
While Malaysia has approached liberalisation in a gradual manner, our track record has shown that 
the process is accelerated when it brings benefits to the country. Financial liberalisation has on several 
occasions  been  brought  forward.  In  particular,  liberalisation  has  been  focused  on  the  new  areas  of 
growth that is, in the insurance sector, in Islamic finance and in investment banking. New licences in 
Islamic banking to foreign financial institutions and larger foreign equity participation in both Islamic 
banking  subsidiaries  and  takaful  operators,  and  in  investment  banking  of  up  to  49%  is  aimed  at 
achieving  a  more  internationally  integrated  financial  system.  While  liberalisation  in  the  traditional 
sector will continue, its already highly liberalised status and its higher level of capacity relative to the 
economy does not introduce urgency to the liberalisation compared to the new growth areas. These 
traditional  sectors  may  lead  to  overcrowding.  The  focus  of  a  more  rapid  liberalisation  is  where 
significant market development are likely to take place. Emphasis would be towards attracting foreign 
players who are recognised as specialist in a specific segment. This would also include new growth 
areas such as micro-financing or agricultural lending. The aim is to produce niche players delivering 
specialized value added products and services that will be able to cater towards specific segments of 
the  market  and  over  time,  and  thus  develop  a  more  comprehensive  financial  system  that  would 
contribute towards the development of a more diversified economy.  
Given the background of emerging economies, the transition to a more liberalised environment would 
indeed  demand  appropriate  sequencing  of  measures  and  careful  management  of  the  liberalisation 
process that are guided by broad principles that would ensure that there are benefits and opportunities 
brought about by the liberalisation process. The financial sector is an important and strategic sector 
that has a significant role in supporting the economic growth and transformation. Liberalisation needs 
to commensurate with the pace of economic development and strength of the regulatory structure to 
avoid destabilising effects on the stability of the financial sector and the overall economy.  
Key considerations for the strategic opening up of the financial sector would be to steer the financial 
sector  towards  increased  competition  whilst  ensuring  domestic  financial  institutions  are  not 
marginalised  by  the  liberalisation  process.  Liberalisation  should  instead  serve  as  a  catalyst  for 
domestic banks to further improve their performance and enhance efficiency and capabilities in order 
to sharpen their competitive edge and elevate themselves to a level that is at par with the international 
players. Benefits of foreign direct investment are manifold ranging from efficiency gains brought about 
by new technologies to the introduction of innovative products and management techniques. Further, 
more advanced research and development facilities and adoption of best practices from more matured 
financial  markets  will  contribute  to  the  transfer  of  skills  and  knowledge,  adoption  of  sound  risk 
management culture, technology and ideas in the domestic financial system.  
Another  consideration  in  the  liberalisation  process  is  that  of  promoting  financial  inclusion,  where  all 
segments  of  society  will  have  access  to  adequate  financial  services.  The  wide  branch  network  of 
domestic  banking  institutions  has  ensured  that  non-urban  areas  have  access  to  banking  services, 
thereby  eliminating  the  use  of  informal  financial  services.  Domestic  banking  institutions  with  large 
presence  in  the  non-urban  areas,  some  as  high  as  20%  of  total  branches,  have  succeeded  in 
achieving  sustainable  performance  while  meeting  this  objective.  Locally  incorporated  foreign  banks 
are however located mainly in major cities and serve only certain segments of the banking public. A 
wider dispersion of branches of locally-incorporated foreign banks across the country would contribute 
towards  achieving  greater  financial  inclusion.  For  further  expansion  outside  major  cities  to  be  a 
commercially viable proposition, it is recognised that the attainment of critical mass is essential. In this 
6 
 BIS Review 55/2006
regard, in addition to the flexibility accorded to establish up to four new branches, consideration will be 
given to allow for greater presence in the non-urban areas and to serve the segments of the economy 
which are currently underserved.  
The banking sector is now in a prime position for the next step in evolution. The foundation for the 
development of a more efficient, effective and stable financial system has been laid. The task is now 
for  the  industry  to  move  forward  and  undertake  the  necessary  actions  towards  realising  goals  as 
envisaged in the FSMP. Nevertheless, this journey does not end in 2010. We should also look forward 
towards  what  lies  beyond  2010.  As  an  open  economy,  we  should  also  be  cognisant  with  the 
developments  that  take  place  around  us.  I  believe  that  the  Malaysian  financial  services  industry  is 
ready to take on this challenge to elevate the performance and standards of the sector. With this, I 
wish you a productive summit.  
BIS Review 55/2006 
 7
