Jean-Pierre Roth: Switzerland - a platform for global business  
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the 
Consulate General of Switzerland / Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce, New York, 1 June 2006. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to be with you today and I would like to thank my dear friend, Ambassador 
Loretan, for hosting this lunch of the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce.  
Swiss people always feel at home, here, in this fascinating city. New York is a unique place, not only 
because of its size, its beautiful skyline, its location, but foremost because of its openness to the world 
and its multiculturalism. Compared to New York, is Switzerland anything more than just a small village 
located in the heart of Europe, a country of watchmakers and chocolate producers? Is there anything 
to see other than the Matterhorn and the water fountain on Lake Geneva?  
It is interesting to note that, despite the strong presence of Swiss multinationals abroad and, of course, 
the  very  well-known  Swiss  flag  –  thanks  to  the  Red  Cross  flag  –  Switzerland  is  largely  ignored  in 
international surveys and is almost non-existent in European statistics.  
“To live happily, live out of sight!” (pour vivre heureux vivons cachés) is a well-known proverb. This 
may  well  be  true,  but  it  serves  to  fuel  many  clichés;  and  misconceptions  are  generally 
counterproductive.  
Let me show you the hidden side of Switzerland. You will see that modern Switzerland is adjusting 
rapidly to the changing reality of the world economy. Let's consider a few facts:  
• 
With 7.5 million people, Switzerland is indeed a small country. Although we have no natural 
resources, we have a highly developed economy and a GDP per capita that clearly exceeds 
the  European  average.  Contrary  to  the  situation  among  some  of  our  neighbours,  our 
population  is  still  growing,  thanks  to  immigration.  Our  foreign  population  now  represents 
about 20% of the total population and 25% of the labour force. Despite strong immigration, 
our unemployment rate – 3.5% – is relatively low.  
Switzerland remains a slow-growing country when compared to the United States. Our weak 
growth performance is due in part to the full employment, the relatively high level of personal 
income and the limited scope for domestic investment. However, in recent years, the Swiss 
economy  has  been  doing  better  than  its  neighbouring  countries  in  terms  of  growth  and 
employment,  and  also  in  terms  of  price  stability.  Obviously,  the  fact  that  we  are  not  a 
member of the European Union is not an obstacle to our development.  
Switzerland  is  increasingly  becoming  a  service-producing  country.  The  flagship  of  our 
service  industry  is  the  financial  sector,  which  expanded  markedly  in  the  90s  and  now 
accounts  for  15%  of  our  GDP  –  more  than  the  machine  tool  industry  and  the  chemical 
industry  together.  The  number  of  banks,  however,  was  reduced  by  half  during  that  period 
and the number of bank employees remained stable despite expanding financial activities. 
These  figures  show  that  our  financial  industry  has  been  eager  to  react  swiftly  to  the 
challenges posed by globalisation.  
Switzerland has a solid balance of payments position. Thanks to a large excess of savings 
over domestic investment, our current account surplus is constant and substantial. Contrary 
to  popular  belief,  my  country  is  not  an  importer  of  capital,  but  a  net  capital  exporter.  Our 
current account surplus represents 14% of our GDP, a level which can only be compared to 
that of some Asian countries. In recent years, our surplus in absolute terms was even larger 
than the surplus of the euro zone as a whole.  
Switzerland is well-known for its stable monetary framework. Average inflation over the last 
20 years amounted to 1.8%. We never went through monetary reforms as many European 
countries did in the past few decades. In fact, we still use the coins put into circulation in 
1850, when the Swiss franc was created. There is no better proof of monetary stability.  
Switzerland enjoys the lowest interest rate level in Europe. This situation has nothing to do 
with the appeal of our bank secrecy, as many believe, but with the abundance of savings 
        1/3 
and the high degree of price stability. Since the introduction of the euro in 1999, the average 
interest rate on three-month euro deposits has been 3%, while the three-month Swiss franc 
rate has been 1.4%. If we assume a difference of about 1% in the expected level of inflation 
between the euro area and Switzerland, the Swiss real interest rate advantage accounts for 
60 basis points.  
Switzerland is also a firm believer in flexible exchange rates. Our monetary regime has been 
unchanged since 1973, when the peg to the US dollar was removed. Today, the Swiss franc 
is freely determined by market forces. Our last foreign exchange intervention dates back to 
1995 – and that was a coordinated action in favour of the US dollar!  
And what about the European issue? As you know, we are not a member of the European 
Union;  nor  do  I  foresee  Switzerland  joining  the  EU  in  the  near  future.  The  Swiss  people 
remain sceptical about the efficiency of the Union and are very aware of what they stand to 
lose  in  terms  of  political  rights  and  economic  freedom  in  the  event  of  integration.  But  our 
relationship with the EU is of key importance, since Europe accounts for two-thirds of our 
foreign  trade.  In  order  to  secure  our  access  to  the  European  market  and  to  avoid 
discrimination, we concluded two packages of bilateral agreements with the Union – in 2002 
and  2004.  The  present  situation  –  with  free  movement  of  goods,  capital  and  labour,  but 
without monetary and fiscal integration – is probably the best solution for us.  
Since we are so well integrated, why don't we peg the franc to the euro instead of pursuing 
an independent monetary policy? Wouldn't this help eliminate the exchange rate risk, without 
giving up monetary flexibility entirely?  
There is no such thing as a free lunch in monetary affairs! It is not at all certain that a peg 
would  engender  the  foreign  exchange  stability  that  exporters  dream  of.  We  have  learned 
from  our  experience  with  flexible  exchange  rates  that  any  explicit  foreign  exchange  target 
stimulates the appetite of speculators instead of calming the atmosphere. And this would be 
especially true if our pegging decision were to be taken unilaterally, without the prospect of a 
full  and  permanent  integration  into  the  euro  area.  Today,  with  global  markets  and  global 
speculation,  it  would  be  an  illusion  to  believe  that  a  central  bank  can  defend  a  specific 
exchange rate target unless there is strong convergence of economic fundamentals with the 
economy whose currency it is pegging the domestic currency to.  
Furthermore, a nominal peg against the euro would do little to stabilise the real value of the 
Swiss franc – the only thing that matters for the international competitiveness of the Swiss 
economy – or to stabilise the franc vis-à-vis third currencies, especially the US dollar.  
Last but not least, if Switzerland were to give up its monetary independence by pegging the 
franc  to  the  euro  or  by  joining  the  euro  area,  it  would  lose  its  privileged  status  and, 
consequently, Swiss interest rates would increase to European levels. Since higher interest 
rates  mean  lower  asset  prices  and  lower  levels  of  investment,  and  also  higher  mortgage 
rates, the Swiss are understandably not keen on giving up their national currency. Since any 
major decision in Switzerland has to be approved in a public referendum, the prospect of EU 
and euro membership in the near future is thus highly unlikely.  
Given  our  exposure  to  global  economic  and  financial  shocks,  and  their  arguably  smaller 
importance for the euro area, pegging the Swiss franc to the euro is not a realistic option. 
Flexible exchange rates give us the room for manoeuvre we need.  
What  has  our  experience been  of coexistence with  the  euro so  far?  Very  positive.  Rather 
than  crowding  out  independent  currencies,  the  euro  has  stabilised  the  monetary  scene  in 
Europe.  In  fact,  the  franc  is  less  volatile  today  than  it  was  before  European  monetary 
integration. The price of the euro in Swiss francs these days is about 3% lower than it was in 
1999, in other words, almost unchanged. We did have periods, however, when the franc was 
under pressure, especially after September 11 and before the outbreak of the war in Iraq. 
The  safe-haven  function  of  the  franc  then  triggered  a  10%  appreciation  in  our  currency 
against  the  euro.  As  a  consequence,  we  had  to  conduct  a  more  aggressive  interest  rate 
policy  than  the  ECB  in  order  to  lower  the  attractiveness  of  our  currency  and  give  some 
leeway  to  our  economy.  Things  have  normalised  since  then  and  we  have  already  lifted 
interest  rates  on  four  occasions  in  the  last  two  years.  As  you  can  see,  we  conduct  our 
monetary policy independently of the ECB.  
 2/3 
          I'm sure you will agree, that Switzerland is most definitely not an isolated island, as many still believe. 
It  is  clearly  an  open  economy  which  has  chosen  to  take  up  the  challenges  of  the  world  economy. 
Large Swiss firms invest more money and create more jobs abroad than at home. Switzerland has 
become a major investor not only in Europe, but also here in the United States, as well as in Asia. 
Today, there are 4.2 million jobs in Switzerland and we count 1.8 million people working in Swiss firms 
abroad. Apart from Singapore and Hong Kong, there is no other country where foreign investments 
play that kind of leverage role.  
Actually, Switzerland is not an alpine fortress, but a home base for globally active industries…  
…in keeping with the long-standing tradition of watchmakers and chocolate producers!  
 
   3/3 
