Zamani Abdul Ghani: Research and development in the financial services 
industry in Malaysia 
Speech  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
Malaysian  launch  ceremony  of  the  IBBM-University  of  Nottingham  Financial  Services  Research 
Forum, Kuala Lumpur, 23 June 2006. 
 I would like, first of all, to thank the organisers for inviting me to participate in the launch today of the 
IBBM - University of Nottingham Financial Services Research Forum today. This Forum represents an 
important strategic platform for financial services providers, regulators and the academia to collaborate 
in joint research in financial services-related areas, and to share the findings among its members. In 
fact,  we  have  among  us  today  representatives  from  universities  in  Malaysia  as  well  as  Malaysian 
conventional and Islamic financial institutions. Indeed, this is a highly commendable alliance, as the 
benefits will be reaped by all members. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate IBBM for being the 
first  institution  outside  Europe  to  participate  in  the  University  of  Nottingham  Financial  Services 
Research Forum .  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Today's event marks yet another important milestone for the financial services industry in Malaysia. 
The IBBM-University of Nottingham Financial Services Research Forum will pave the way in the inter-
continental dialogue and research initiatives in the financial services industry. This collaborative effort 
is  a  positive  development  as  it  supports  the  Government's  initiative  towards  a  knowledge-based 
economy, in which joint research between the academia and the industry is encouraged.  
This  working  partnership  paves  the  way  for  the  financial  services  industry  and  the  academia  in 
Malaysia  to  work  with  the  University  of  Nottingham,  one  of  the  top  ten  universities  in  the  United 
Kingdom.  The  combination  of  academic  excellence  from  the  University  of  Nottingham  and  in-depth 
market knowledge of the financial services industry will spur greater innovation in financial services, 
leading to higher value added products and services.  
All of us can agree that the University of Nottingham is not new to us, as it is among the first foreign 
universities to establish a campus in Malaysia. It is also known as the university of choice by many 
Malaysians  for  its  academic  excellence  and  its  forte  in  research.  The  University  has  also  produced 
many  prominent  Malaysian  leaders  including  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  YAB  Dato'  Seri  Najib  Tun 
Abdul Razak.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Top-tier financial institutions are known for their commitment in research and development to enhance 
innovation,  especially  in  process  and  product  innovation  to  drive  competition.  In  the  process,  such 
financial players will be able to better position themselves to be part of the global financial community. 
Bank Negara  
Malaysia  encourages  and  supports  a  strong  culture  of  research  and  development  in  the  financial 
services  industry  in  Malaysia  in  both  the  conventional  and  Islamic  finance.  We  believe  that  the 
encouragement and support is important to ensure a wider range of high quality financial products and 
services to meet the changing demands of a progressive and dynamic Malaysian economy. Towards 
this end, Bank Negara Malaysia stands ready to  extend our assistance in accessing the necessary 
statistics on broad market trends and developments, where appropriate, to support such research and 
development.  
The emergence of new delivery channels such as the internet and mobile phones have significantly 
altered the traditional banking-customer relationship. Technological development has also transformed 
the  payment  systems  industry,  with  the  introduction  of  new  payment  instruments  and  entry  of  non-
banks into payment services, thus facilitating the migration to e-payments. Additionally, we are among 
the first in the world to migrate, on a national basis, towards the use of chip-based ATM, payment and 
identity cards. Through greater research and development in understanding the customer's behavior 
and preferences, financial players can further capitalize on these insights to develop new and more 
innovative products and services as well as distribution channels to meet customer demand.  
BIS Review 63/2006 
 1
In Malaysia , the changing economic and financial landscape brings about many opportunities for new 
products  and  services.  With  the  accelerating  pace  of  financial  integration,  financial  institutions  are 
presented  with  opportunities  to  broaden  beyond  domestic  borders  to  capture  opportunities  from 
regional markets. Infact, we are acknowledged as being in the forefront globally in Islamic banking and 
finance. But these opportunities cannot be fully seized without sound research and development work. 
Successful  financial  services  players  must  leverage  on  technological  expertise  to  deliver  superior 
products and services. The challenge is to enhance efficiency and reduce costs, respond to market 
and regulatory demands and, most of all, gain competitive advantage through innovative products and 
services.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The success of this IBBM-University of Nottingham collaboration will depend on the active involvement 
and support from the financial services industry. I therefore, encourage the industry to play a proactive 
role in supporting the activities organized by the Financial Services Research Forum.  
In  concluding,  I  look  forward  to  seeing  greater  collaborative  efforts  between  the  academia  and  the 
industry in research and development for the financial services industry. On this note, I am pleased to 
officially launch the collaboration between IBBM and the University of Nottingham , in the Financial 
Services Research Forum.  
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 63/2006
