Mario Draghi: Financial market integration and the intermediation of savings 
Address by Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 12th Congress AIAF - ASSIOM - ATIC 
FOREX, Cagliari, 4 March 2006. 
 1. The world economy: expansion and imbalances 
The world economy is enjoying a period of strong and widespread expansion. Despite sharp increases 
in the prices of raw materials, inflationary pressures remain moderate. Yet in some respects it remains 
fragile.  
The  expansion  began  in  2002  thanks  to  the  recovery  in  the  United  States  and  the  support  from 
China’s  booming  economy.  It  gained  strength  from  the  middle  of  2003  onwards,  with  the  average 
annual rate of growth rising to nearly 5 per cent, and has spread gradually, if unevenly, to every region 
of the world, although in somewhat weaker form in Europe. 
In  Italy,  after  stagnating  in  2005,  the  economy  now  shows  some  signs  of  recovery.  There  is  still 
uncertainty,  however,  about  the  extent  and  durability  of  the  country’s  economic  growth,  which 
continues to be weighed down by unresolved structural problems. 
World  economic  activity  has  benefited  from  the  persistence  of  stable  financial  conditions  that  have 
been  exceptionally  propitious  for  investment.  Apart  from  the  expansionary  stance  of  monetary  and 
budgetary  policies,  other  contributory  factors  have  been  the  integration  of  financial  markets,  their 
development in emerging regions, the spread of more efficient instruments for the management of risk 
and the progress made in the fields of crisis prevention and financial supervision. 
The  economic  upswing  has  generated  strong  demand  for  oil,  especially  by  China  and  the  other 
emerging Asian economies. Despite increased supply, this demand has been met with difficulty and at 
rising prices. The price of oil has doubled in real terms since the spring of 2003. So far this pressure 
has not been passed on to core inflation, which has remained moderate everywhere, testifying to the 
credibility gained by monetary policy in the leading countries. 
This credibility is precious and needs to be preserved. It is the reason, especially in the euro area, why 
monetary conditions continue to be very relaxed: interest rates remain near the lowest levels ever. The 
monetary  and  credit  aggregates  continue  to  expand  rapidly;  the  prices  of  real  assets  are  high;  no 
restrictive impulses are coming from the exchange rate. Keeping inflation expectations firmly anchored 
at a level consistent with price stability is essential for economic growth and the creation of jobs. The 
increase  in  the  key  rates  decided  on  Thursday  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  serves  this 
purpose. 
Although  the  world  economic  expansion  is  widespread,  it  is  accompanied  by  very  large  external 
imbalances.  These  are  caused  by  the  divergences  in  the  growth  of  domestic  demand  between  the 
main regions and the massive transfer of resources from oil-consuming to oil-producing countries. 
The US external deficit has been increasing since the middle of the 1990s, although the causes have 
changed over the years. Initially, it reflected the capital formation associated with the spread of new 
information  technology.  Boosted  by  increasingly  good  prospects  of  growth,  consumption  also  rose 
faster than disposable income. The current account deficit was financed thanks to massive inflows of 
private  capital,  attracted  by  the  high  yields  expected  on  the  stock  market,  especially  for  high-tech 
securities, while the appreciation of the dollar further exacerbated the trade deficit. 
In  2001  the  determinants  of  the  current  account  deficit  began  to  change.  In  the  face  of  the  risk  of 
recession,  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  were  made  expansionary.  The  saving  rate  continued  to 
decline. Consumption was sustained by the rising value of property; households’ propensity to save 
turned  negative  in  2005.  The  federal  budget  balance  deteriorated  by  6  percentage  points  of  GDP 
between 2000 and 2004 and will show another large deficit in 2006. 
The  manner  of  financing  the  external  deficit  also  changed.  The  inflow  of  private  capital  slowed 
between 2002 and 2004. The dollar came under downward pressure, despite much larger purchases 
by the monetary authorities of countries with current account surpluses. Such purchases are liable to 
undergo rapid change. In 2005 these countries reduced their accumulation of official reserves, only 
China  recording  a  further  massive  increase.  However,  the  widening  of  the  short-term  interest  rate 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 1
spread  prompted  renewed  private  sector  investment  in  the  dollar,  which  gained  strength  as  a 
consequence. 
The appreciation of the dollar came to a halt last November. However, as things stand, the exchange 
rates between the major currencies are not conducive to adjustment of the external imbalances. High 
rates of growth have so far made it possible to postpone the adjustment, but these conditions cannot 
last indefinitely. 
In 2005 various conditions arose that could help initiate a process of adjustment. Domestic demand 
accelerated in Japan, and to a lesser extent in Europe as well. The reform of China’s foreign exchange 
system, although it has only produced a small appreciation of the renminbi so far, is a step in the right 
direction;  a  cooling  of  the  US  property  market,  of  which  there  are  signs,  might  slow  the  growth  of 
private consumption. An adjustment of the underlying real imbalances is the best guarantee of orderly 
progress.  For  this  to  happen,  the  current  trends  need  to  be  supported  by  a  combination  of  more 
restrictive fiscal policy in the United States, greater exchange rate flexibility in the Asian economies, 
and structural reform in Europe. 
2. International financial conditions 
On the international financial markets real interest rates and the volatility of financial assets are low. 
Relaxed  and  stable  financial  conditions  foster  economic  growth,  which  in  turn  is  conducive  to  such 
conditions. At the same time they may reflect a reduced perception of risk by market participants and 
encourage them to build up illiquid and highly risky positions. 
The low level of long-term interest rates is mainly the result of continuing expectations of moderate 
inflation, even over a very considerable time span. These expectations are based on the credibility of 
monetary  policies.  Investors  accept  modest  returns  in  part  because  they  have  a  perception  of 
diminished  risk,  related  to  the  limited  volatility  of  securities  prices  and  to  conditions  in  the  real 
economy.  The  expansionary  cycle  and  wage  moderation  have  sustained  the  growth  in  corporate 
profits, thereby improving the state of firms’ finances. The insolvency rate is well below the long-run 
average. The spread between corporate and public-sector bonds is now unprecedentedly narrow. 
Other contributory factors in keeping interest rates down have been the investment of current account 
surpluses by the Asian economies and the oilexporting countries and an increase in investments by 
pension  funds.  These  flows  have  proved  unresponsive  to  the  tightening  of  monetary  policy  by  the 
Federal  Reserve  and  the  ECB;  its  effect  has  been  limited  to  the  shorter  term  maturities.  The  yield 
curve  has  flattened,  particularly  in  the  United  States.  In  view  of  the  historically  low  level  of  interest 
rates on risk-free assets, there has been a surge in the demand for riskier securities by investors in 
search of higher returns.  
In this context, the reduction in risk premiums no longer reflects only a diminution of the underlying 
risks, but also agents’ reduced risk aversion. Nor can it be ruled out that the premiums asked to hedge 
risks underestimate their true magnitude. The favourable conditions on the financial markets delay the 
correction of real imbalances, masking the symptoms without removing the causes. 
The international markets have become more robust, contributing to an orderly reallocation of financial 
flows. The conditions are right for this to take place gradually, in a context of more balanced but strong 
global growth. However, geopolitical events, such as sharper internal and international tensions in the 
oil-producing  countries  or  shocks  due  to  individual  corporate  events  or  linked  to  single  sectors  of 
production, could trigger brusque changes in agents’ attitudes and a sudden reallocation of savings 
and investments, leading to wide swings in the prices of real and financial assets and in exchange 
rates. 
This possibility is small today but not entirely absent. The widespread use of derivative instruments 
may offer a better means of risk management, but it could also accelerate the propagation of extreme 
events. 
3. Integrated, efficient and robust markets 
Efficient and well-regulated markets, apart from performing their normal function of allocating financial 
resources  in  the  best  way  possible,  are  crucial  to  ensuring  that  the  system  is  robust  enough  to 
withstand violent shocks, however unlikely. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2006
Policies  designed  to  speed  the  integration  of  Europe’s  financial  markets  and  their  infrastructure 
contribute to orderly and lasting economic growth. Market integration allows firms to exploit economies 
of scale by reducing the cost of access; it increases the opportunities for diversifying investments; it 
ensures more efficient allocation of resources; it improves the ability to absorb shocks; it strengthens 
the stability of the system. 
In  Europe,  market  integration  has  been  furthered  by  the  single  currency  and  the  stability-oriented 
monetary policy. It has not gone far enough yet. Additional measures are needed to harmonize laws 
and regulations and adapt the infrastructure. 
The  greatest  progress  has  been  made  in  the  money  market,  thanks  among  other  things  to  the 
development  of  the  TARGET  settlement  system.  In  November  2007  this  will  be  superseded  by 
TARGET 2, which will bring further benefits to firms in terms of liquidity management. As you know, 
the Bank of Italy has been a key figure in the project, alongside the French and German central banks, 
and intends to maintain that role. 
In the case of government securities, common platforms such as MTS have gradually extended their 
operations, increasing the liquidity and efficiency of the European market. 
The equity market is still fragmented. There are evident advantages, typical of a network economy, in 
concentrating trades; the attraction of a stock market for issuers and brokers grows with the number of 
present and prospective participants. On the other hand, for the stock of smaller firms in particular, the 
information  advantages  of  national  markets  lead  to  better  liquidity  conditions.  Forms  of  horizontal 
consolidation and federation between national markets would achieve both benefits. Unrestricted and 
equal access to settlement systems and multiple links between the various markets would foster both 
competition and efficiency.  
Italy’s stock exchange faces the challenge of adapting to the new context. Our primary goal should be 
to ensure ease of access to European markets and infrastructure for our firms and intermediaries. We 
need to reflect together on the best way to achieve this. 
The integration of securities clearing and settlement systems has not yet reached a satisfactory level 
owing to differences in national infrastructures that predated the launch of the monetary union. The 
existence  of numerous  national  systems,  with  their  non-standard  services,  diverse  market  practices 
and different laws and tax rules, increases the risks and costs of settling cross-border transactions. 
Some specific barriers to integrating post-trading systems have been clearly identified. The removal of 
those  created  by  differences  in  laws  and  regulations  will  require  sometimes  complex  legislative 
intervention. The removal of strictly technical barriers and barriers created by market practices can be 
effected at the initiative of market operators themselves. There is no reason to wait. 
A  set  of  European  rules  is  already  in  place  to  promote  market  integration  and  transparency  by 
regulating  such  matters  as  settlement  finality,  market  abuse,  collateral,  prospectuses  and  takeover 
bids. The directive on markets in financial instruments issued in April 2004 will spur competition by 
abolishing the requirement to conduct all transactions on regulated markets, encourage the provision 
of  crossborder  financial  services  and  strengthen  investor  protection.  The  complex  process  of 
implementing the directive must be speeded up, at both Community and national level. 
4. The role of intermediaries in asset management 
The saving rate of the Italian economy, especially among households, is still high, despite a long-term 
downward trend. It is associated with a level of household wealth that is also high. Savings continue to 
be a fundamental resource for economic growth. Efficient management of the country’s savings is a 
competitive  challenge  and  an  opportunity  for  growth,  both  of  the  economy  as  a  whole  and  of  the 
financial industry. 
In Italy as elsewhere the composition of households’ financial wealth has shifted in the last few years, 
as a result of more active, diversified and efficient portfolio management. Between 1995 and 2004 the 
share of bank and postal deposits fell from more than 40 per cent to barely 25 per cent and that of 
publicsector securities from 23 to 7 per cent, while the incidence of private-sector bonds, equities and 
investment  fund  units  increased.  Fund  units  are  now  as  important  as  in  the other  leading  industrial 
countries.  The  share  of  insurance  products  and  private  pension  funds  is  much  smaller,  however, 
essentially  because  of  the  broad  coverage  provided  by  the  public  pension  system.  The  share  of 
private-sector bonds, in particular bank bonds, is high, as they enjoy a more favourable tax regime 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 3
than  deposits.  Full  advantage  is  not  being  taken  of  the  portfolio  diversification  that  professional 
managers can provide. 
Banks continue to play a crucial role, both because the level of direct intermediation is still high and 
because  the  major  banking  groups  include  management  companies  that  control  almost  the  entire 
investment  fund  market.  This  market  therefore  contributes  decisively  to  the  size  and  profitability  of 
banks, which accordingly have a strategic interest in increasing its competitiveness. 
Management companies distribute their products almost exclusively through the networks of the group 
they belong to. This vertically integrated model enabled the Italian investment fund industry to grow 
rapidly, households to rely on relationships of trust with their banks when turning to asset management 
services, and banks to diversify their sources of income. 
Asset management offers Italian banks considerable scope for expanding their business, increasing 
their  profits  and  improving  their  stock  market  ratios.  However,  in  a  fast-changing  competitive 
environment,  this  will  require  appropriate  strategies  for  both  products  and  customer  relations.  The 
reliance  on  a  captive  market  and  the  small  size  of  most  asset  managers  are  not  conducive  to 
innovation or economies of scale, which are crucial to competitiveness and profitability in this sector. 
Foreign  competitors  are  gaining  ground  in  the  Italian  market,  especially  as  regards  innovative 
products; more than 85 per cent of the exchange traded funds listed by Borsa Italiana are managed by 
whether it is the result of decisions regarding 
foreign groups. The independence of asset managers 
their ownership or of strict corporate governance rules 
is essential not only for their growth but also to 
resolve the conflicts of interest inherent in their relationships with their parent banks. 
5. Financial regulation 
The  large  proportion  of  savings  not  entrusted  to  professional  investors,  the  scale  of  households’ 
investment  in  financial  products  and  the  growing  complexity  of  the  financial  instruments  available 
require the authorities to refine supervisory regulations and practices constantly. 
The  law  on  the  protection  of  savings  recently  approved  by  Parliament  strengthens  some  of  the 
safeguards for investors. The division of responsibilities between the Bank of Italy and Consob has 
always been based on the distinction between safeguarding the stability of intermediaries on the one 
hand  and  protecting  investors  and  supervising  markets  on  the  other.  This  distinction,  essential  for 
effective action and the clear attribution of responsibilities, requires cooperation among the authorities 
in  drawing  up  rules,  in  verifying  intermediaries’  compliance  and  in  promoting  investors’  financial 
education. The Bank of Italy stands ready to continue this cooperation. 
Regulation  of  the  markets  cannot  eliminate  risks  for  investors,  nor  should  it;  what  it  should  do  is 
facilitate  their  allocation  by  enhancing  transparency  and  limiting  and  managing  conflicts  of  interest, 
with a view to protecting the weakest investors. This is necessary on grounds of both efficiency and 
fairness.  In  preparing  laws  and  regulations,  every  effort  must  be  made,  with  the  assistance  of  the 
operators involved, to strike a better balance between pursuing objectives and containing the costs 
borne by issuers, intermediaries and investors. Without breaching the key principle of the distinction 
between functions, the Bank of Italy verifies intermediaries’ compliance with the rules for the protection 
of savings. Irregular or over-aggressive conduct exposes intermediaries to legal and reputational risks, 
which need to be addressed by prudential supervision. 
The management of both old and new banking risks is now set to reap the benefits of the substantial 
investments that have been made by banks and regulatory authorities to bring the Basel Accord into 
operation. The new regime creates incentives for banks to direct their choices towards the objectives 
of  prudential  supervision,  enhances  the  effectiveness  of  the  rules  and  reduces  their  distortionary 
effects under  a  highly  innovative  approach.  Based  on  the risk  management  techniques  of  the  most 
sophisticated banks, it will promote competition and significantly improve the quality of most banks’ 
operations.  
The Accord could become the model for the regulation of investment firms and insurance companies 
as  well.  The  convergence  of  the  three  sectors  of  financial  intermediation  should  reduce  the  risk  of 
regulatory arbitrage and rationalize the management of financial conglomerates. 
The supervisory review process, the second pillar of the Basel Accord, requires each bank to make its 
own assessment, which should also be forwardlooking, of the capital considered adequate in relation 
to its specific features, its risk exposures not considered for the minimum capital requirements and the 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2006
quality of its organization. It is up to the supervisory authorities to examine, discuss and approve the 
systems adopted. 
Using  the  analysis  of  different  scenarios  and  stress  tests,  this  instrument  can  also  serve  to  link 
supervisory  authorities’  micro-  and  macro-prudential  assessments,  by  exploiting  the  wealth  of 
theoretical and empirical models available. But we must aim higher, taking the opportunity offered by 
the Basel 2 system to arrive at a significant simplification of today’s supervisory rules and practices. 
The law on the protection of savings expressly provides for the periodic review of legislation, to check 
its  compliance  with  the  principle  of  proportionality  between  the  objectives  and  the  costs  borne  by 
supervised  entities,  and  for  the  assessment  of  the  impact  of  each  new  provision.  These  are 
reasonable and useful criteria, to which we must add that of achieving a high degree of convergence 
among  European  countries  on  supervisory  rules  and  practices,  a  goal  whose  importance  increases 
with the number of banking groups operating in more than one national market. 
6. The Italian banking system 
Good  laws  and  efficient  supervision  are  what  public  institutions  can  and  must  contribute  to  the 
strengthening of the Italian banking industry, to the benefit of the country’s economic growth. 
The Italian banking system has made significant progress in recent years. There has been a general 
increase in productivity. The quality of banks’ assets has improved considerably despite the weakness 
of  the  economy.  The  majority  of  banks  have  capital  in  excess  of  the  minimum  requirement.  The 
leading  groups  have  completed  complex  organizational  integration  and  rationalization  plans  in  the 
wake of mergers, with substantial cost reductions. The positive outlook depends on an improvement in 
net interest income, which is likely to follow as the European economy picks up, on continued growth 
in  lending,  especially  corporate  loans  and  consumer  credit,  and  on  realization  of  the  major 
opportunities  for  synergy  afforded  by  consolidation  at  the  national  level.  The  efficiency  gains  have 
been  reflected  in  profitability  and  market  sentiment,  which  has  responded  favourably  to  dividend 
policies. 
The  smaller  banks  have  consolidated  their  positions  in  local  markets,  exploiting  their  comparative 
advantage in lending to small and medium-sized enterprises. 
The  European  takeover-bid  directive,  which  provides  for  minimum  harmonization,  leaves  it  up  to 
national governments to decide on any further convergence of their laws and regulations and to set 
the course towards greater or lesser contestability of ownership. The present situation is unsatisfactory 
because it leaves open the possibility that cross-border consolidation will be undertaken not only on 
the basis of criteria of industrial and financial advantage but also for reasons of regulatory arbitrage. 
Opening the markets for credit and banking services to domestic and foreign competition in conditions 
of regulatory equality reconciles the private interests of shareholders with the general interest in an 
efficient allocation of resources. It is the most effective way to stimulate further gains in operational 
and allocative efficiency, innovation, cost reductions and improvements in the quality of the services 
supplied to firms and households. 
To exploit these opportunities, including by means of mergers and acquisitions, capital is available on 
a scale that was unthinkable until recently. Protectionism leading to worse regulatory arrangements 
than today’s would entail costs on a comparable scale. We must avoid such an outcome. Hopefully, a 
rational  and  constructive  spirit  will  prevail  and  interest  in  a  level  playing  field  for  financial  markets 
quickly re-emerge in the deliberations of the Heads of State and Government and Finance Ministers of 
the European Union. 
7. Closing remarks 
Italy  continues  to  benefit  little  from  the  favourable  developments  in  world  trade  and  international 
finance. In 2005 GDP stagnated, exports continued to lose market share, the budget deficit widened. 
Since  the  1990s  the  economy  has  been  as  if  bogged  down.  Cyclical  indicators  and  the  short-  and 
medium-term predictions of the main forecasting institutions now point to a pick-up in Italian GDP, but 
with growth still less than the potential, which is already lower than in the other major countries.  
The  growth  gap  reflects  Italian  industry’s  difficulty  in  competing.  This  is  rooted  in  the  lack  of 
improvement in productivity. In other countries the revolution in production sparked by information and 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 5
communications  technology  has  produced  its  full  effects:  firms  have  adapted  their  human  and 
organizational capital to the new technologies. Italy has been slow to seize the opportunities of this 
revolution. The gap is widest in total factor productivity. 
New  players  are  coming  onto  the  stage,  formidable  in  Asia  but  also  present  in  Latin  America  and 
Central and Eastern Europe. This has imparted an extraordinary impulse to world trade. It is a great 
opportunity for growth but also a major challenge, in the face of which Italy has stumbled. 
With the end of the illusory remedy of competitive devaluations, productivity growth is the only possible 
way to achieve prosperity, to create a solid, sustainable foundation for wage increases, and to ensure 
the development of the country, for ourselves and for future generations. 
The  structural  lags  of  the  Italian  economy  are  not  the  signs  of  inevitable  decline.  They  are 
manifestations  of  problems  that  are  profound  and  serious  but  that  can  be  overcome.  We  need  to 
devise lasting solutions and explain them clearly to the public. 
This week the European Central Bank raised its key rates by a quarter of a point. The time available 
for the adjustment of the public finances and a return to growth is running out. 
Savings, one of the strengths of our economy and our society, are an essential ingredient for growth. It 
is up to the financial system, markets and intermediaries, to channel them towards the most productive 
uses,  acting  in  a  fully  competitive  environment  and  in  compliance  with  the  rules. This is your –
and our – responsibility. 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2006
