Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Assessment of the thrift banking system 
Keynote address by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, at 
the Annual National Convention of the Chamber of Thrift Banks, Baguio City, 17 March 2006. 
 Good morning! 
I send my warmest greetings and congratulations to the membership of the Chamber of Thrift Banks 
(CTB)  on  the  occasion  of  your  National  Convention,  the  high  point  of  the  annual  celebration  of  the 
Thrift Banking Week. 
You have chosen the theme of responding to the challenges ahead. As both banking supervisor and 
monetary  authority,  we  welcome  your  cooperative  and  constructive  approach  to  the  many  issues 
confronting the banking system. Indeed, we continue to face many challenges ahead even as we have 
also made considerable progress. 
Assessment of the thrift banking system  
As I survey the thrift banking system today, I believe it has proven its resilience in the face of all the 
many challenges. 
In 2005, total resources of the industry grew by a very respectable 13.3 percent. Deposit level also 
continued to post double-digit growth of 16.8 percent, indicating strong confidence in the industry.  
Meanwhile, the industry remained adequately capitalized with capital adequacy ratio (CAR) averaging 
at 16.8 percent as of end-June 2005. This is well above the prescribed minimum ratio of 10 percent 
and more than double the international benchmark of 8 percent.  
Non-performing  loans  (NPL)  ratio  favorably  declined  to  8.9  percent  as  of  end-December  2005  from 
11.0 percent last year and from a peak of 13.4 percent at end-September 2002. Likewise, NPA ratio 
went down to 12.5 percent from 15.9 percent last year. 
The industry’s strengthening balance sheet also reflected a steady increase in the loss provisioning for 
bad assets. The industry posted a better NPA coverage ratio of 23.4 percent at end-December 2005 
from 17.2 percent the previous year. However, this is still much lower than the 42.1 percent total NPA 
coverage ratio in universal/commercial banks. The whole banking industry should actually be striving 
for at least 50 percent coverage. And the best way to do that is to rapidly get rid of your remaining 
non-performing assets that continue to impose a drag on your performance. Indeed, your profitability 
remained  marginal  with  return  on  equity  and  return  on  assets  ratios  at  just  0.2  percent  and  0.03 
percent, respectively. As an industry, thrift banks continued to be the least profitable.  
BSP reform agenda 
The  BSP  is  determined  to  pursue  a  banking  reform  agenda  to  shield  the  banking  system  against 
critical threats that may undermine its stability and integrity. 
Specifically,  we  are  intensifying  the  reform  process  aimed  at  addressing  core  aspects  of  banking 
operations and enhancing the regulatory framework for the effective conduct of banking supervision. 
First of all, we must bear in mind that high NPAs are a fundamental threat to the safety and soundness 
of the banking system. We must therefore act decisively to remove this threat. 
So far, we have been successful in trimming down the stock of NPAs in the banking system especially 
through asset disposition under the Special Purpose Vehicle Law (SPV) Law. Consequently, both NPL 
and NPA ratios of the banking system are currently at record lows. 
The imminent approval of a two-year extension of the SPV Law by congress will boost the momentum 
for  further  disposal  of  banks’  NPAs.  I  hope  the  industry  will  now  more  aggressively  utilize  this 
opportunity. This is the last chance. 
In a related development, the Monetary Board (MB) also recently approved the guidelines that would 
allow  banks  to  enter  into  Joint  Venture  Agreements  (JVA)  with  property  developers  to  provide  an 
BIS Review 25/2006 
 1
additional channel for banks to reduce their NPA holdings by helping convert bad assets into readily 
marketable or income producing assets.  
However, to prevent abuses, certain safeguards were adopted. In the first place, all JVAs under the 
program are subject to prior MB approval. Only pre-existing non-performing assets are eligible under 
the program to guard against potential moral hazard. Banks are also prohibited from providing funds to 
the joint venture either as a loan or capital contribution. However, banks may extend financing to JV 
partners  or  to  buyers  on arms  length commercial  basis.  Lastly,  banks  are  not  allowed  to  recognize 
income out of the properties they contributed to the joint venture regardless of the agreed valuation of 
said properties in the JVA. They are only allowed to recognize income upon receipt of the proceeds 
from the sale of the developed properties. Proper accounting is also required. 
Moving  on,  we  also  continue  to  seek  closer  alignment  of  existing  regulations  with  international 
standards  to  make  regulatory  policies  more  responsive  to  the  growing  competitiveness  and 
sophistication of the financial services industry. 
In particular, we are focusing on strengthening corporate governance, risk management, and capital 
adequacy in our banks. This will be complemented with effective and efficient enforcement.  
In pursuit of this objective, we have recently issued major regulations covering:  
•  The new Financial Reporting Package (FRP); 
•  The guidelines on supervision by risk;  
•  The guidelines on information technology (IT) risk management; and 
•  The amendments to the fit and proper rule 
•  The prompt corrective action framework. 
The  new  FRP  effectively  amends  the  Manual  of  Accounts  (MOA)  and  revises  the  reportorial 
requirements for banks, in accordance with the provisions of the new Philippine Financial Reporting 
Standards  (PFRS)/Philippine  Accounting  Standards  (PAS).  To  the  extent  possible,  we  have  also 
integrated into the new FRP the requirements of the Basel 2 Capital Adequacy Framework. The new 
FRP will greatly promote an enhanced level of financial transparency and also facilitate an enhanced 
off-site surveillance of banks and other financial institutions under our jurisdiction. 
Banks are constantly exposed to various risks because of the increasingly complex financial setting. 
Rather  than  constrain  product  innovation  and  operational  flexibility,  we  would  rather  espouse  the 
adoption  of  appropriate  internal  risk  management  mechanisms  to  ensure  that  banks  and  other 
financial  institutions  continue  to  operate  in  a  safe  and  sound  manner.  It  is  for  this  purpose  that  we 
have set out the guidelines on supervision by risks under Circular No. 510. Mainly, these guidelines 
specify BSP’s expectations on how banks and other financial institutions should manage their risks. 
These are also designed to provide guidance on how the risk-focused supervision will be applied to 
these risks. 
Meanwhile,  the  guidelines  on  I.T.  risk  management  are  intended  to  communicate  to  the  banking 
industry BSP’s expectations on how technology-related risks should be viewed in the context of bank 
risk  management.  We  all  know  how  pervasive  information  technology  has  become  in  our  banking 
business.  These  guidelines  will  aid  in  effectively  identifying,  measuring,  monitoring  and  controlling 
banks’ technology risk exposure.  
Building on previous initiatives to raise corporate governance standards, we recently came out with a 
stricter “fit and proper rule” encompassing all directors and senior officers of banks. This is to ensure 
that  officials  tasked  to  manage  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  possess  the  integrity  and 
competence required for the job.  
Very recently, the monetary board approved the Prompt Corrective Action (or PCA) framework. This 
basically  communicates  to  the  industry  how  the  BSP  will  deal  with  potential  problems  in  bank 
operations at a very early stage hopefully to forestall more serious problems from arising that would 
necessitate  more  drastic  and  painful  measures.  The  key  triggers  for  the  initiation  of  PCA  include 
substandard capital adequacy ratios and poor Camels performance. Whenever PCA is initiated, banks 
will be required to put forward an action plan to immediately correct the situation. The action plan will 
be in a memorandum of understanding to be executed between the bank board of directors and the 
BSP. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2006
To promote healthy competition in the banking system and allow your greater flexibility to respond to 
market  opportunities,  we  have  also  allowed  the  partial  lifting  of  the  moratorium  on  bank  branching 
primarily to facilitate the expansion of financial services in underserved areas.  
Likewise,  we  have  opened  up  outsourcing  possibilities  and  allowed  an  increasingly  wide  array  of 
treasury, consumer and wealth management products.  
All told, you can expect many more meaningful changes in the banking industry this year and in the 
coming years as we gear up for the full adoption of international best practices. I hope you will not see 
the  recent  changes  as  just  more  rules  to  cramp  your  style.  On  the  contrary,  by  shifting  to  more 
strategic  regulation  of  corporate  governance,  risk  management,  and  capital  adequacy,  we  hope  to 
give  banks  much  greater  flexibility  to  pursue  businesses  that  are  consistent  with  their  skill,  risk 
appetite, and capital position. Banks that are well-managed and well-capitalized will be fully liberated 
to pursue their corporate objectives in this evolving environment. In contrast, banks that are poorly run 
and  undercapitalized  will  find  themselves  severely  under  pressure  both  from  the  market  and  the 
regulator. 
We are also continuing our advocacy efforts in Congress for the passage of key legislative measures. 
Among others, we are seeking approval of the amendments to the BSP Charter which will make the 
BSP a more effective monetary authority and banking regulator. Another vital piece of legislation is the 
Credit Information System Act which will pave the way for the establishment of a truly comprehensive 
credit information system in the country. This is expected to lower the cost of credit, provide greater 
access to credit in general, and reduce the dependency on collateral-based lending.  
Taking the long view, what is the significance behind all these developments in the banking system? 
How are they going to affect the thrift banking industry? 
Essentially,  these  developments  would  alter  the  overall  banking  landscape.  The  change  will  be 
influenced mainly by the accelerated consolidation process in the banking system that is expected to 
take place within the next 3 years as a result of a combination of regulatory enhancements and the 
exacting standards posed by an increasingly complex financial environment. 
The  enhanced  competition  would  naturally  favor  the  stronger,  more  capable  banks  and  financial 
institutions.  On  the  other  hand,  the  smaller  banks  would  do  well  to  harness  their  core  expertise  in 
order to better serve their respective market niches.  
The  highly  global  and  complex  banking  scenario  leaves  no  room  for  complacency  for  all  banking 
industry  players.  To  survive,  thrift  banks  must  enhance  their  financial  strength,  conform  to  sound 
corporate  governance  practices  and  boost  their  competitive  advantage  by  honing  excellence  in 
specific target markets.  
Concluding remarks 
I would like to end my keynote speech by calling on all member institutions of the chamber to remain 
supportive of our policies and reform initiatives. The reform agenda that I have outlined to you today is 
a work in progress.  
In  the  past,  you  have  taken  a  proactive  role  in  the  pursuit  of  genuine  reforms  in  the  thrift  banking 
system. Now is the time to reaffirm that commitment. There is a lot of work ahead of us, but with vision 
to guide us and with steadfast action, we can be assured of success in achieving our shared goal of 
building a stronger, more competitive banking system.  
Thank you very much and more power to all of you! 
BIS Review 25/2006 
 3
