Y V Reddy: Credit counselling - an Indian perspective 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Foundation Day Function of 
the Bank of India, Mumbai, 7 September 2006. 
 Mr. Chairman, distinguished guests and friends, 
I  am  thankful  to  Mr.  Balachandran  for  providing  this  opportunity  to  be  with  this  eminent  gathering 
assembled  for  a  noble  cause.  Bank  of  India  has  been  among  the  banks  known  to  be  a  pioneer  in 
several  areas  of  commercial  banking.  In  this  context,  the  initiative  by  the  bank  to  establish  credit 
counselling centers on a pilot basis highlights the pro-active role being played by our banks. In fact, a 
major reason for my agreeing to participate in this ceremony is to demonstrate the Reserve Bank of 
India's commitment to the cause of credit counselling - a recent initiative in our country.  
In my remarks on this occasion, some introduction on the importance of this topic would be in order. 
An overview of the global practice in this area could then be followed by a discussion of the Indian 
context with regard to credit counselling. Any mechanism of credit counselling has to reckon with the 
processes, costs and benefits. The concluding thoughts are in the nature of illustrative issues towards 
initiating and popularising credit counselling in India.  
Introduction 
With  the  changing  growth  dynamics  of  the  economy,  it  is  not  difficult  to  envisage  situations  where 
certain  segments  of  the  population  become  susceptible  to  excessive  borrower  optimism  or  even  to 
vicissitudes in the economic environment. Such susceptibility could also arise from unforeseen shocks 
or emergencies that make repayment difficult. By providing sound advice to arrest the deterioration of 
incomes  and  restructure  their  debt,  credit  counselling  offers  a  meaningful  solution  for  borrowers  to 
gradually overcome their debt burden and improve their money management skills. In this regard, the 
question is whether there is a role for public policy in matters relating to credit counselling?  
We  must  recognise  that  financial  intermediaries,  the  corporates  and  high  net  worth  individuals 
generally possess in-house knowledge of matters relating to financial management and can afford to 
employ  outside  expertise  as  appropriate  in  regard  to  their  investment  decision  and  management  of 
distressed loans. Public Policy has enabled an operational mechanism in the form of Corporate Debt 
Restructuring  (CDR)  in  regard  to  loans  by  banks  and  development  financial  institutions  to  large 
corporates. Somewhat similar framework has also been provided to small and medium enterprise. In 
regard  to  agricultural  loans  and  most  of  the  small  borrowers,  however,  only  broad  guidelines  are 
issued  to  banks  from  time  to  time  on  parameters  for  restructuring.  The  extent  of  active  interaction 
between individual borrowers and banks is, therefore, not clear.  
It is increasingly felt that individuals are not in a position to take full advantage of the guidelines issued 
to  the  banks  for  variety  of  reasons. These  may  include  inadequacies  in  managing  their  finances 
especially  delinquent  accounts.  Further,  individuals  may  not  be  able  to  articulate  their  financial 
situation adequately to the banks. It will be in the interest of the banks themselves to help individual 
borrowers through appropriate credit counselling. Public policy could, therefore, have an advisory role 
in  encouraging  mechanisms  in  the  form  of  credit  counselling  in  regard  to  individuals.  There  are  a 
variety  of  ways  in  which  this  has  been  accomplished  in  different  countries,  but  in  India  we  are  just 
beginning to address the situation. Some urgency has been lent to this issue in India in view of rapid 
growth in consumer loans, housing loans and the more recent emphasis on financial inclusion. It is 
interesting to note that the terms of reference of the Financial Inclusion Task Force initiated by the 
Treasury of the United Kingdom to consider solutions to the problem of financial exclusion identifies 
three key areas. This includes face-to-face money advice in addition to access to banking and access 
to affordable credit. 
Global practice 
The first well-known credit counselling agencies were created in 1951 in the United States when credit 
grantors created the National Foundation for Credit Counseling (NFCC). Their stated objective was to 
BIS Review 82/2006 
 1
promote financial literacy and help consumers to avoid bankruptcy. Credit counselling, however, came 
into its own as a result of the passing of the Housing and Urban Development Act in 1968. Under this 
Act,  the  US  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  was  allowed  to  authorize  public  and 
private organizations to provide counselling to mortgagors. The resulting services and infrastructure to 
provide them led to the development of the credit counselling industry.  
In  1993,  the  Association  of  Independent  Consumer  Credit  Counseling  Agencies  (AICCCA)  was 
founded  in  the  United  States,  citing  a  need  for  industry-wide  standards  of  excellence  and  ethical 
conduct. This formally organized the NFCC’s competition. The AICCCA was formed from the group of 
counselors  who  favored  telephone  delivery  of  debt  management  programs.  The  NFCC  was,  in  the 
beginning,  strongly  opposed  to  this  telephone  business  model,  primarily  favoring  face-to-face 
counselling as a more effective solution. Eventually, all organizations practiced both phone and face-
to-face  processes  with  some  agencies  using  large  inbound  call  centers  driven  by  mass  media 
advertising.  
The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 made credit counselling a 
requirement  for  consumer  debtors  filing  for  bankruptcy  in  the  United  States.  In  order  to  meet  this 
requirement, during the 180-day period preceding the filing of bankruptcy, the debtor must complete a 
program  with  an  approved  non-profit  budget  and  credit  counselling  agency.  Such  a  program  may 
include, but is not limited to, one counselling session conducted by phone or over the internet. 
Quickly, the concept caught the attention of other countries and over the last several years, a whole 
host  of  countries  have  undertaken  significant  initiatives  towards  credit  counselling.  The  Consumer 
Credit Counseling Service (CCCS) in the UK, established in 1993, helps consumers with budgeting 
and better money management as also their debt repayment plans. Funding for CCCS comes from the 
businesses  in  the  community  which  benefit  from  repayment  they  would  not  receive  if  the  debtor 
defaulted. In addition, there is also a National Debt Line through which a bank customer can get free 
financial  advice.  In  fact,  the  Banking  Code  in  the  U.K.  provides  that  member  banks  shall  discuss 
financial problems with customers and together evolve a plan for resolving these problems. 
Canada established a non-profit counselling organization in 2000. Termed Credit Counseling Canada 
(CCC), the organization seeks to enhance the quality and availability of not-for-profit credit counselling 
for  all  its  citizens.  The  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  established  a  Credit  Counseling  and  Debt 
Management  (CCDM)  agency  to  provide  credit  counselling  and  loan  restructuring  advice  to 
individuals. The arrangement is expected to be a prompt and cost-effective means of debt settlement 
based  on  the  repayment  plan  between creditors  and  the  debtor  without  intervention  of  courts.  With 
rising  personal  bankruptcies,  primarily  on  unsecured  debt,  Credit  Counseling  of  Singapore  (CCS), 
established in 2003, is meant to assist financially distressed consumers.  
Indian context 
In India, there has been a sharp growth in credit to household in recent years. According to the all-
India Debt and Investment Survey 2003, nearly a fourth of the households were indebted in 2002. The 
per cent of indebtedness households in rural areas increased sharply from 23 in 1991 to 27 in 2003; 
the  corresponding  figures  for urban  areas  during  the  same  period  were  19  and  18,  respectively.  At 
end-March  2004,  the  total  number  of  loan  accounts  under  direct  finance  to  farmers  was  nearly  20 
million,  comprising  over  95  per  cent  of  total  number  of  loan  accounts  under  the  priority  sector;  the 
amount involved was well over 70 per cent of total priority sector loans.  
Even  taking  into  account  the  changes  in  classification  and  coverage,  bank  credit  to  housing  and 
consumer durables witnessed an exponential growth rate of over 50 per cent during 2001-2006, nearly 
double the growth recorded in overall non-food credit over the same period. As a consequence, the 
share of housing and consumer durables in overall non-food credit by scheduled commercial banks 
increased from around 5 per cent in 2001 to nearly 14 per cent in 2006.  
Rapid  economic  growth  coupled  with  demographic  dynamics  has  led  to  a  significant  change  in 
consumers’  perceptions  in  our  country.  With  a  burgeoning  middle-class  and  changing  lifestyle 
aspirations,  more  and  more  people  are  resorting  to  debt  to  finance  their  consumption  and  asset 
creation. At some stage in some cases, this could potentially lead to excesses, precipitating defaults. 
Such  defaults  could  also  be  the  fallout  of  circumstances  beyond  one’s  control.  Costly  medical 
emergencies,  retrenchment  from  job,  hardening  of  interest  rates  could  inadvertently  raise  debt 
burdens in some cases not easily manageable within a given income stream. This is partly reflected in 
the growing number of customer complaints against banks in the recent past. Over the period January 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2006
2003  to  June  2005,  the  number  of  complaints  relating  to  loans,  credit  cards  and  harassment  in 
recovery aggregated nearly 34 per cent of total number of complaints, which reinforces the need for 
credit counselling in a dynamic economic environment.  
The  proportion  of  people  dependent  on  agriculture  still  remains  high  in  our  country.  With  a 
predominantly rain-fed agriculture, monsoonal vagaries coupled with lack of adequate risk mitigation 
policies  could  sometimes  lead  to  hardship  for  the  rain-dependent  segment  of  the  population.  This 
needs to be considered in conjunction with the fact that the levels of literacy in our country are still 
relatively modest at 65.4 per cent in 2001, with wide differentials between urban and rural areas. For 
instance, in 2001, the proportion of rural literate was about 59 per cent as compared with 80.3 per cent 
in the urban areas. Additionally, the organised sector employment presently comprises less than 10 
per  cent  of  the  workforce,  leaving  the  vast  majority  of  the  working  population  with  irregular  income 
streams and paucity of defined safety net, making them susceptible to unforeseen contingencies. This 
assumes  even  greater  relevance  in  situations  where  the  penetration  of  formal  finance  is  less  than 
adequate,  presumably  compelling  people  to  take  recourse  to  costly  informal  finance,  often  in 
conjunction with loans from banks.  
While the ‘arithmetics’ of extending credit are often diligently followed by lenders, in the absence of 
consistent credit histories, banks are often at a loss in case of non-repayment by borrowers. Given the 
growing indebtedness, there is an increasing need to develop follow-up services to enable distressed 
borrowers overcome credit delinquencies. Credit counsellor thus offers a viable task-specific, advisory 
ad hoc intermediary between the borrower and the bank concerned.  
Counselling  on  the  above  lines  generally  serve  three  purposes.  First,  it  examines  ways  to  solve 
current  financial  problems.  Second,  by  creating  awareness  about  the  costs  of  misusing  a  credit,  it 
improves financial management and develops realistic spending plans. Third, it advises the distressed 
people to gain access to the structured financial system, including banking. However, such counselling 
will be appropriate only if it addresses unique situations of households in different parts of India.  
Processes, costs and benefits 
It  is  technically  possible  for  credit  counselling  to  be  ex  ante  or  ex  post.  Ex  ante  counselling  helps 
borrowers  to  decide  upon  the  quantum  of  loans  they  can  avail,  based  on  their  income  profile  and 
stream of cash flows. More importantly, ex ante counselling attempts to influence the stability of the 
borrowers’  flow  of  income  and  expenses,  thereby  lowering  the  probability  of  default.  Ex  post 
counselling typically occurs after a crisis event, when the borrower has already missed one or several 
payments.  The  purpose  of  such  counselling  is  to  prevent  default  and  foreclosure.  It  is,  therefore, 
curative in nature. 
Credit counselling in practice generally tends to be ex post in nature. Such counselling involves one-
on-one meetings, allowing the counsellor to observe the level of maintenance of the debt and other 
issues  relevant  to  the  stability  of  the  borrower's  situation.  It  includes  advice  on  not  only  crisis 
management, and budgeting but also exploring avenues and networks that can provide succour in the 
interim. Owing to these reasons, such counselling can be expensive, owing to the not-so-insignificant 
administrative costs involved. 
A credit counselling agency often receives most of its compensation from the creditors to whom the 
debt  payments  are  distributed.  This  funding  relationship  could  lead  to  the  impression  that  credit 
counselling agencies are merely collections wings of the creditors. It is therefore essential to guard 
against these undesirable possibilities.  
In  many  instances,  nurturing  a  borrower  back  to  health  after  a  default  can  be  a  time-consuming 
process,  besides  causing  severe  inconvenience  for  the  distressed  families.  Traditional  banking 
technologies rely mainly on a set of pre-assigned standards to determine whether a potential borrower 
will be able to service a loan. This lack of knowledge on low-income household circumstances restricts 
the banks ability to objectively assess whether the expected loan can be sustainable.  
Sometimes, a two-track approach towards mitigation of borrower risks is advocated. In the near-term, 
credit counselling can constitute an integral part of banks’ loan application, which can facilitate better 
assessment of credit risk and repayment capacity. In the urban areas, where people are more techno-
savvy,  such  counselling  can  take  place  over  the  internet  or  the  phone.  In  the  rural  areas,  such 
interface  could  be  made  more  personalised  through  direct  face-to-face  interaction  with  the  affected 
clientele. Such preventative counselling would enable the borrower to determine the optimal level of 
BIS Review 82/2006 
 3
sustainable debt and pre-empt deterioration of accounts at a future date. This is also likely to lower the 
incidence of customer complaints against banks.  
An important consequence of the counselling process may be that, as potential borrowers learn more 
about the way financial markets function, they may learn to behave more strategically and to prepay 
more  often  when  interest  rates  are  benign.  If  such  behavior  becomes  prevalent,  together  with  a 
positive effect of counselling on default, it may be an additional argument that counselling helps low-
income borrowers.  
Issues 
It is necessary to recognise that there are several issues which require to be addressed in identifying 
possible approaches to initiate and popularise credit counselling for individual borrowers. Let me flag 
some of these issues for your consideration.  
First, how well can we combine credit counselling with some elements of financial literacy?  
Second,  should  credit  counselling  concentrate  on  ex  ante  or  only  on  ex  post  elements  or  some 
combination of both?  
Third, should credit counselling agencies devise differential mechanisms to take into account different 
credit segments such as housing loans, consumer loans, farm loans as well as different categories of 
individual  borrowers  such  as  salaried,  self-employed,  seasonally  employed  etc? Is  it  better  to  have 
more general credit counsellors? 
Fourth, given the differential nature of cash flows and consumption patterns in rural and urban areas, 
is there a need for a segmented approach towards credit counselling? 
Fifth, should there be accreditation of credit counsellors? If so, who should do it - industry association 
or individual banks? Should counselling be a full-time or part-time work for the credit counsellors? 
Sixth,  what  should  be  the  elements  of  confidentiality  that  are  assured  in  this  process  to  gain  the 
confidence of distressed borrowers in need of counselling?  
Seventh,  how do  we  select  the  credit  counsellors,  equip  them  to  do  the  work  and  make  them 
accountable? What type of training - both in terms of knowledge and attitude - could be imparted to 
make credit counsellors effective? Can the training colleges of banks be of help in this respect? 
Eighth,  should  there  be  a  role  for  non-governmental  organisations  (NGOs)  and  consumer 
organisations in order to expand the outreach of counselling practices?  
Finally, should the findings emanating from the discussion of credit counsellors constitute part of the 
agenda for the District-Level Bankers' Committees?  
I have only touched upon some of the issue germane to the initiation of the process at the present 
juncture. What is, however, important is to recognise that instead of a 'one-size-fits-all', banks should 
be free to experiment and evolve their own mechanisms and adopt approaches best suited to their 
business philosophy. Since financial counselling pertains primarily to individual borrowers at the local 
level, a decentralised approach could prove useful. Being a relatively new area whose potential is still 
to be proved, it is imperative to proceed in measured steps and reassess the situation based on the 
experience  gained.  In  progressing  towards  this  laudable  objective,  we,  however,  should  not  create 
another  cadre  of  employees  or  potentially  avoidable  intermediaries  between  banks  and  their 
borrowers.  
We,  in  Reserve  Bank  are  happy  to  note  the  initiative  taken  by  Bank  of  India  in  starting  credit 
counselling centres on a pilot basis. The involvement of trust 'Abhay' lends value and credibility to this 
pilot project. It is also noteworthy that one each in urban and rural areas is being initiated. We are 
looking  forward  to  learn  from  the  experience  of  this  laudable  initiative.  I  commend  other  banks  to 
attempt some pilot projects, as considered appropriate by them, to explore the potential for beneficial 
use of credit counselling. 
Thanking you.  
4 
 BIS Review 82/2006
