Andres Sutt: Macroeconomic co-ordination and fiscal policy in the expanding 
Eurozone 
Statement by Mr Andres Sutt, Deputy Governor of Eesti Pank (Bank  of Estonia), at the conference 
“thinking EUconomy - Wirtschaftspolitik europäisch denken”, Berlin, 3 May 2006. 
 The enlargement of the European Union with the clear message that all countries without an opt-out 
clause  will,  in  the  future,  be  also  members  of  the  EMU,  is  a  most  welcome  and  forward-looking 
approach in view of an ongoing globalisation and integration processes in the world. Eventually, the 
adoption of the single currency by all Member States provides clear benefits for the Union as a whole. 
From  the  macroeconomic  point  of  view  it  would  support  further  economic  integration  and  higher 
growth  rates  by  fostering  trade  and  investments.  Therefore,  euro  area  enlargement  will  provide 
tangible benefits for all European citizens over time.  
The main policy challenge for both the current and prospective euro area members is to ensure that 
the best use is made of the monetary stability provided by the framework of the European System of 
Central Banks (ESCB). From the perspective of the new Member States, the issue at stake is how to 
maintain the economic structure supportive for sustained growth and rapid real convergence. Strong 
fiscal stance is instrumental in this regard. Convergence Programs of the new Member States should 
include ambitious Medium Term Objectives to ensure that not only the Maastricht criteria are met, but 
most  importantly,  the  emergence  of  excessive  deficit  situations  is  avoided  and  the  risks  of  taking 
recourse  to  exchange  rate  adjustments  after  joining  the  ERM2  (and,  eventually,  the  euro  area)  are 
minimized.  The  well  functioning  single  market  for  all  goods  and  services,  including  infrastructure 
networks, as well as pursuing the National Reform Programmes in the context of the reinforced Lisbon 
agenda is the other pillar for the success of the euro area and for the new Member States in particular. 
Estonia has been a de facto member of the euro area since the inception of its independent currency 
in  1992.  Fixing  the  local  currency  to  D-mark,  and  later  to  the  euro  meant  that  the  monetary  policy 
decisions  were  not  made  in  Estonia.  Estonia's  currency  board  regime  implies  prudent  fiscal  stance 
that has been largely adhered to since 1992, resulting in our general government having accumulated 
a relatively large net asset position of around 10 percent of GDP. A solid budgetary position and early 
deregulation of product and capital markets implies that Estonia has been well placed to absorb both 
positive and negative shocks during the last 15 years. Deregulation and reform in preparation of the 
EU membership has allowed us to fully integrate our economic and financial systems with the Single 
Market.  However,  that  kind  of  approach  requires,  in  today's  conjuncture,  forward-looking  structural 
reforms in almost all EU member states, e.g. in the product, services and labour markets, healthcare 
and social insurance systems etc.  
For Estonia the adoption of the euro is the only logical step and the overarching policy priority. In this 
context, we would like to emphasize that it is in the interest of the whole European Union that the Euro 
Area enlargement takes place in accordance with the clear set of well known rules while the criteria 
are applied, in line with the Treaty provisions, on an equal and economically meaningful manner. The 
countries joining should have a proven track record to fare well under the common monetary policy. 
This being the case, the Euro Area membership would fasten the catch-up process in these countries 
and strengthen the countries' ownership in the EU-wide macroeconomic co-operation at large. 
Macroeconomic  stability  and  economic  flexibility  are  prerequisites  for  the  new  Member  States  to 
ensure  that  investment  in  physical  and  human  capital  is  sustained  and  outlays  for  research  and 
development  further  increased.  Higher  growth  and  stronger  policy  coordination  on  the  EU  level  will 
also strengthen the social dimension of enlargement.  
BIS Review 60/2006 
 1
