Lucas Papademos: ECB Financial Stability Review June 2006 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the press 
briefing on the occasion of the publication of the June 2006 ECB Financial Stability Review, Frankfurt 
am Main, 1 June 2006.  
The slides and charts for this speech can be found on the ECB website at www.ecb.int. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
1.  
Welcome  to  this  press  briefing  on  the  occasion  of  the  presentation  of  the  June  2006  edition  of  the 
ECB’s Financial Stability Review. As usual, the financial stability assessment contained in the Review 
reflects  the  input  of  a  significant  number  of  experts,  and  it  builds  on  both  inter-departmental  work 
within the ECB and very close collaboration with the ESCB Banking Supervision Committee.  
The  report  that  has  been  made  available  to  you  follows  the  same  overall  structure  as  the  previous 
Reviews  which  the  ECB  has  been  publishing  semi-annually  since  December  2004.  However,  the 
scope of the analysis has been broadened to include dedicated sections on the euro area commercial 
property  markets,  credit  risk  transfer  market  issues  and  hedge  funds.  Specific  themes  of  particular 
interest have been addressed in a total of 17 boxes. There are also three Special Feature articles, 
notably a discussion of macro-level stress testing practices across EU countries, an assessment of 
banking system risk using extreme value analysis, and an investigation of the driving forces behind EU 
banks’ stock returns.  
I  should  note  that  the  Review  uses  data  that  was  available  up  to  5  May  2006.  In  my  presentation 
(some of the slides), I will refer to developments since this cut-off date. In presenting the main findings 
of the analysis, I will broadly follow the structure of the Review (as outlined on slide 2).  
Overview of the main risks and vulnerabilities  
2.  
I  would  like  to  begin  with  an  overview  of  some  pertinent  developments  in  the  euro  area  financial 
system  and  of  the  main  sources  of  risk  and  vulnerabilities  for  euro  area  financial  stability,  in 
comparison to the assessment in the December 2005 Review.  
Overall, the developments since last December lend support to the view that the euro area financial 
system is robust and well-capable of withstanding shocks. First, the pace of global economic activity 
has  strengthened  and  it  has  become  more  evenly  distributed.  Second,  the  balance  sheets  of  euro 
area banks and insurance companies have continued to strengthen.  
At the same time, these positive developments are clouded by the fact that the risks and vulnerabilities 
we  identified  in  the  December  2005  Review  remain  and  some  of  them  have  increased.  Global 
imbalances  have  continued  to  grow.  Moreover,  it  cannot  be  excluded  that  tightening  liquidity 
conditions  in  the  G3  economies could yet  expose  vulnerabilities  in  the  pricing  of  assets  following  a 
protracted period of hunt for yield in a low interest rate environment. Particularly at risk are leveraged 
investors, especially hedge funds, and this could accentuate the risks of disorderly market corrections. 
Finally, there are some signs of a maturing of the global corporate sector credit cycle and this has the 
potential to generate tensions in global financial markets, especially credit derivatives.  
Global macro-financial environment 
3.  
Let  me  now  illustrate  the  analysis  behind  our  assessment  in  more  detail,  starting  with  the  global 
macro-financial environment where the ever-expanding current account and financial imbalances and 
the high oil prices continue to feature as prominent sources of risk.  
BIS Review 50/2006 
 1
The Chart on the left draws your attention to the scale of global financial imbalances and to the fact 
that the United States remains the largest debtor country. However, there have been changes in the 
relative  importance  of  global  creditor  countries.  Indeed,  the  aggregate  contribution  of  the  Asian 
economies  to  financing  the  US  deficit  has  broadly  stabilised  while  the  oil  producing  countries  have 
surpassed them in importance. There have been concerns about the sustainability of global current 
account positions over the past six months as the cyclical support for the US dollar has been gradually 
waning. In this context, I would like to draw your attention to Box 1 of the Review that contains an 
overview of the recent debate on this topic.  
Oil  prices  have  been  volatile  and  they  have  surged  further  since  November  last  year,  against  a 
background of persistently strong demand and renewed geopolitical tensions. Financial stability risks 
arising from developments in commodity markets operate largely through indirect, or macroeconomic, 
channels as high and volatile oil prices can pose risks to economic activity and inflation and, thereby, 
contribute to financial sector stress. Speculative activity that has occasionally been blamed for fuelling 
the  momentum  in  oil  prices  seems  to  have  played  again  some  role  in  driving  the  recent  price 
developments (as shown in the chart on the right on slide 4). A comparison of the relative movements 
between oil prices and the net futures commitments of non-commercials – that is, entities not engaged 
in  oil  producing  or  refining  –  on  the  New  York  Mercantile  exchange  suggests  the  existence  of  a 
positive correlation.  
In the global fixed income markets, it is apparent that the protracted period of low long-term interest 
rateshas been coming to an end since the spring of 2006 both in the US and in the euro area.  
Until early May, the increase in long-term interest rates in the major economic areas (shown in the 
chart on the left on slide 5) has had relatively little impact on global asset prices or on asset allocation. 
But, there have been some signs that the “search for yield” which began in 2003 could be ending. The 
recent increase in financial market volatility, after the Review was finalised, and the flight-to-safety into 
government bonds suggests that a process of re-pricing of risk could be starting in financial markets. 
The  key  question  from  a  financial  stability  perspective  is  whether  this  process  will  proceed  in  an 
orderly manner.  
A  major  destination  of  funds  searching  for  yield,  namely  emerging  market  bonds,  were  particularly 
exposed to increased volatility over the recent weeks (as shown in the chart on the right on slide 5). 
While spreads widened, they still remained very narrow. While the longer-term narrowing of spreads 
on emerging market bonds over the past couple of years has to a considerable extent reflected the 
improved fundamentals, including substantially reduced indebtedness in emerging market economies, 
it cannot be excluded that some mis-pricing of risk will be exposed when capital inflows are reversed. 
The  turbulence  in  March  in  the  Icelandic  financial  markets,  although  contained,  reminds  us  that 
vulnerabilities exist in parts of the world financial system.  
Euro area macro-financial environment 
4.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  euro  area  macro-financial  environment,  focusing  on  developments  in  the 
corporate  and  household  sectors  that  are  of  particular  relevance  for  the  outlook  for  financial 
intermediaries’ credit portfolios. The balance sheet of the euro area non-financial corporate sector has 
strengthened significantly over recent years following notable improvements in profitability as well as 
debt restructuring efforts. Looking forward, however, a number of risks could be looming.  
The chart on the left on slide 6 shows that after several years of decline, corporate sector borrowing in 
the euro area has picked up considerably over the past year. The fact that non-financial corporations 
have  started  to  re-leverage  their  balance  sheets  can  be  interpreted  as  a  positive  indicator  for 
investment activity. At the same time, increased leverage is augmenting a significantly higher level of 
indebtedness than witnessed in past recoveries.  
It  cannot  be  excluded  that  corporate  sector  credit  quality  could  deteriorate  somewhat  in  the  future, 
especially if the macroeconomic environment turns out less benign than currently foreseen. The chart 
on the right of slide 6 shows the ratio of credit-rating upgrades-to-downgrades for euro area firms. This 
ratio has exhibited a general upward movement over the past year. However, more firms have been 
placed on review for a downgrade than for an upgrade by rating agencies.  
In the euro area household sector, the size of balance sheets continued to expand, a development 
closely related to borrowing for house purchases. While vulnerabilities in the sector are still assessed 
as  being  low,  risks  are  unambiguously  rising,  not  least  because  of  the  significant  increase  in 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2006
indebtedness in several euro area countries. In the euro area as a whole, lending for house purchases 
grew at a rapid pace, and both nominal and real residential property prices continued to rise. The chart 
on  the  left  on  slide  7  plots  nominal  house  price-to-rent  ratios  in  the  largest  euro  area  countries.  It 
shows that residential property markets have shown no sign of cooling down. The chart also illustrates 
that  there  have  been  large  differences  in  the  rates  of  house  price  increases  across  euro  area 
countries.  Spain,  France  and  Italy  have  experienced  the  most  rapid  growth  rates,  but  in  Germany 
further declines or only moderate increases in prices have been reported.  
An evaluation of the risks to euro area financial stability stemming from the household sector depends 
on the balance sheet situation of households as this determines their resilience to adverse financial 
shocks. Both the households’ debt-to-financial assets ratio and the debt-to-liquid financial assets ratio 
have continued to grow, but more moderately compared with the rapid increase at the beginning of the 
current millennium. Although this implies a further deterioration of households’ financial position, the 
household sector’s liquid assets still exceed its debts.  
5.  
Euro area financial system 
Euro area financial markets 
5.1. 
Let me now briefly turn to the euro area stock and corporate bond markets, both of which continued to 
develop dynamically until very recently. The Review points out that despite the favourable economic 
outlook,  a  risk  of  a  slowdown  in  market  dynamics  cannot  be  excluded  if  risk-free  interest  rates 
continue to edge upwards and credit ratings and/or earnings growth surprise to the downside. On the 
positive side, structural developments in euro money markets, described in Box 6 of the Review, and 
the increased use of collateral in borrowing and lending transactions, discussed in Box 7, suggest an 
overall strengthening of the financial system’s resilience to a systemic shock. 
The  price-earnings  ratio  of  the  euro  area  stock  market  (shown  on  the  left  of  slide 8)  indicates  that 
despite  the  rather  elevated  level,  this  valuation  measure  remains  well  below  its  peaks  reached  in 
2000.  However,  should  corporate  earnings  growth  unexpectedly  slow  down,  the  consequent  rise  in 
price-earnings ratios could make stocks look relatively expensive to other assets.  
The chart on the right plots the implied volatility of euro area stock prices and corporate bond spreads 
which both gradually declined throughout the first five months of the current year, despite rising long-
term bond yields. The rather sharp jump in these indicators during the last two weeks, suggests that 
there was room for adjustment to a higher pricing of risk in the context of changing views regarding the 
future macro-financial environment. 
Before  discussing  the  developments  in  euro  area  financial  institutions,  let  me  first  highlight  an 
important dimension of the market-based intermediation process: the rapid development of structured 
finance  products.  Although  the  risk-transfer  that  this  market  has  facilitated  has  very  likely  led  to 
efficiency  gains  and  a  better  management  of  risks  within  the  financial  systems,  there  are  several 
concerns  which  mostly  arise  from  the  fact  that  relatively  little  is  known  about  how  this  market  has 
effectively spread risk and how it would function in a situation of extreme stress.  
Since June 2002, the size of the global credit default swaps market has increased nearly exponentially 
(see chart on the right on slide 9). While the use of credit derivatives has substantially contributed to 
enhanced  risk-sharing  and  is  expected  to  have  improved  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system, 
questions  can  be  asked  about  the  sustainability  of  the  pace  of  growth  in  these  markets  as  well  as 
about their implications for the emergence of other forms of risk.  
Two issues in particular have surfaced in the course of the past year. First, the sheer complexity of 
many  of  the  structured  products  introduced  in  the  credit  derivatives  markets  implies  that  there  are 
potentially  large  risks  for  end-users  who  might  not  fully  understand  the  time-varying  risk  profiles  of 
such instruments. Indeed, as illustrated in several episodes of recent large corporate downgrades, the 
pricing  of  structured  credit  products  might  not  adequately  account  for  unanticipated  changes  in 
correlation  structures  among  the  assets  incorporated  in  the  underlying  pools.  Second,  the  rapid 
increase  in  trading  volumes  has  stretched  banks’  and  dealers’  settlement  systems  and  caused 
backlogs that could contribute to liquidity problems in a situation of increased trading activity. These 
problems could be particularly relevant for the European market, given the larger discrepancy in size 
between  the cash bond  market  and  the  derivatives market  than  in  the US.  There are signs  that,  in 
accordance with the recommendations of the Counterparty Risk Management Group II report, many 
BIS Review 50/2006 
 3
global  banks  have  successfully  worked  towards  solutions  to  these  problems.  However,  it  is  rather 
widely  acknowledged  that  pockets  of  vulnerability  remain  in  these  markets.  Box  8  of  the  Review 
discusses recent market initiatives for improving the functioning of the credit derivatives market.  
As shown by the chart on the right, the structure of market participants on the two sides of the credit 
derivatives market has changed over the past three years. Among the buyers of credit protection, the 
share of banks has declined in favour of hedge funds and other investors, such as private equity firms. 
Among the sellers of protection, insurance companies have increased their share at the expense of 
banks. It is worth noting, however, that hedge funds have been active also on the issuing side of the 
credit derivatives markets which is a business typically characterised by lucrative fees.  
Euro area banking sector 
5.2.  
With  regard  to  the  financial  situation  of  large euro area  banks,  the  financial results,  overall,  paint  a 
picture of a very profitable banking sector with rather comfortable solvency ratios. In most euro area 
countries, bank profits were driven by continuing cost control and volume growth in mortgage lending 
that more than compensated for the narrowing of interest rate margins. Moreover, banks have also 
benefited from a recovery in lending to the non-financial corporate sector, as well as from the buoyant 
growth in fees and commissions. It should also be kept in mind, however, that the introduction of new 
international accounting standards might have had an impact on banks’ profitability.  
The frequency distribution of the return on equity of large euro area banks (see chart on the left on 
slide 10) shows that the degree of dispersion among banks narrowed considerably in 2005. The banks 
with  the  lowest  returns  on  equity  managed  to  improve  their  performance,  shifting  the  overall 
distribution to the right. Banks’ profits were also supported by the fact that the frequency distribution of 
loan  impairment  charges  of  large  euro  area  banks,  previously  referred  to  as  provisioning,  shifted 
substantially to lower levels between 2004 and 2005 (as shown on the right-hand side of slide 10). 
Although this is an indication of an overall improvement in the quality of large euro area banks’ loan 
books,  questions  can  be  asked  about  the  sufficiency  of  banks’  charges  for  expected  loan  losses 
should the credit environment deteriorate from the current very benign conditions. Regarding banks’ 
buffers  for  unexpected  losses,  on  the  other  hand,  the  capital  ratios  for  the  same  (large  euro  area) 
banks  show  that,  in  general,  a  greater  proportion  of  banks  exhibited  higher  capital  ratios  in  2005 
relative to the previous year.  
The generally positive assessment of large euro area banks is complemented by a thorough analysis 
of risks related to interlinkages between banks. Special features B and C look at two different aspects 
of the relationships between banks: those running through extreme contagion channels and through 
earnings expectations. On both accounts, lessons learned suggest the need for continued and careful 
monitoring  of  banks  with  large  and  cross-border  operations,  as  these  appear  to  account  for  a 
disproportionate share of the systemic risk in the sector. With this in mind, Special Feature A takes 
stock  of  various  conceptual  aspects  of  designing  macro-stress  tests  for  the  banking  sector,  with  a 
focus on credit risk. 
Judging  from  market-based  forward-looking  indicators,  the  central  outlook  for  the  banking  sector 
remains  positive.  Market  participants’  perceptions  of  banks’  risks  have  continued  to  diminish,  also 
recognising  banks’  greater  ability  to  manage  and  shed  risks  in  their  balance  sheets.  However,  the 
increasing  reliance  of  large  euro  area  banks  on  non-interest  income,  and  in  trading  income  in 
particular, could imply increased risks in the future. As a reappraisal of market risk could take place in 
connection with an abrupt unwinding of the search for yield, banks could be exposed to greater market 
risks directly or indirectly through their exposure to counterparties. 
Box 13 in the Review analyses the downside risks in euro area banks’ stock prices. The chart on the 
left on slide 11 shows that the tail risk of portfolios consisting of stocks of banks from three different 
size categories (large, medium-sized and small listed banks) behave rather differently under different 
market  conditions.  Indeed,  while  the  risks  of  investing  in  different  types  of  banks  do  not  differ 
substantially under low volatility conditions, such as the one that prevailed until recently, the risks from 
investing in large euro area banks increase considerably when market volatility goes up.  
Overall, however, forward-looking market indicators provide a positive assessment of the outlook for 
the  euro  area  banking  sector,  although  the  uncertainty  surrounding  this  assessment  has  increased 
since  the  publication  of  the December  2005 Review.  The chart  on  the right on slide  11  depicts  the 
broadly  based  contraction  of  a  standard  measure  of  credit  risk  –  the  expected  default  frequency  – 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2006
across banks with different levels of risk. Notable in this regard is the substantial improvement in this 
indicator for the most risky banks.  
Other euro area financial institutions – insurance companies and hedge funds 
5.3  
Allow me now to turn to non-bank financial institutions, focusing on insurance companies and hedge 
funds, two sectors that have been at the centre of attention during the past year. Despite significant 
losses incurred by the reinsurance sector following the damage caused by natural catastrophes, the 
financial  performance  of  the  euro  area  insurance  sector  as  a  whole  improved  in  2005,  owing  to 
stronger  investment  income,  improving  underwriting  income  and  rising  equity  prices.  Market-based 
indicators suggest that the outlook for the sector remains favourable in the immediate future. However, 
there are a number of risks facing the industry in the period ahead. These include the possibility of 
premium competition in the non-life sector, longevity risk in the life sector, and the possibility, albeit 
diminishing, of an influenza pandemic.  
The chart on the left on slide 12 portrays the performance of the insurance sub-sectors relative to the 
Dow Jones EURO STOXX. Whilst the impact on the reinsurance sub-sector of the damage caused by 
natural catastrophes is evident, other sub-sectors appear more resilient. The chart on the right on slide 
12 shows the median expected default frequency and average subordinated debt spread for euro area 
insurance  companies.  Both  measures  of  risk  in  the  sector  have  reached  new  lows  since  2001, 
indicating that market participants see an improving resilience in the sector. 
The current Review contains for the first time a specific section dedicated to assessing developments 
in the global hedge funds sector. The pace of growth of the capital under management of global hedge 
funds,  which  had  moderated  in  the  course  of  2005,  fluctuated  rather  sharply  in  the  first  months  of 
2006, partly due to the mixed performance of most strategies in the last quarter of 2005 and improved 
results in the first quarter of 2006. After several quarters of reduced inflows into the hedge fund sector, 
and an outflow in the last quarter of 2005, inflows re-bounded in the first quarter of 2006 as shown by 
the  chart  on  the  left  on  slide  13.  Looking  forward,  however,  the  possibility  of  tighter  global  liquidity 
conditions has raised investor redemption risk for hedge fund managers, particularly as the share of 
less liquid assets has reportedly been increasing.  
At the same time, correlations of returns within some hedge fund investment strategies and among 
strategies  remained  high  or  even  increased,  raising  the  risk  of  disorderly  synchronous  exists  from 
similar trades in an environment of unexpected market turbulence. This is illustrated in the chart on the 
right on slide 13. 
Overall assessment  
6.  
Having  reviewed  the  developments  in  the  key  parts  of  the  financial  system,  I  will  now  turn  to  the 
overall assessment of risks to euro area financial stability. Let me first remind you of the scope and the 
nature  of  our  financial  stability  analysis.  In  particular,  drawing  attention  to  sources  of  risks  and 
vulnerability  to  financial  stability  does  not  seek  to  identify  the  most  probable  outcome,  but  it  rather 
entails highlighting potential and plausible sources of downside risks, even if the probability of their 
realisation is relatively low.  
Let  me  now  conclude  by  stressing  that  in  June  2006,  the  financial  stability  outlook  rests  upon  a 
delicate balance. On the one hand, the global economic activity is expected to remain robust and the 
shock-absorption  capacity  of  euro  area  financial  institutions  has  improved.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
risks  and  vulnerabilities  remain  and  some  have  grown  further.  Overall,  while  a  positive  outcome 
remains  the  most  likely  prospect,  the  possibilities  that  the  risk-management  systems  and  loss-
absorption  capacities  of  financial  institutions  may  be  severely  tested,  while  still  small,  cannot  be 
excluded.  
Finally, I would like to remark that many of the risks discussed in my presentation today have already 
been identified some time ago. The fact that they have not materialised to any significant extent does 
not  mean  that  these  risks  have  diminished.  Therefore,  we  should  not  be  complacent  in  the  face  of 
what might currently appear to be a reassuring stability in the euro area financial system. Continuing 
vigilance is required to safeguard financial stability in the euro area.  
I am now at your disposal to answer questions on the Review. 
BIS Review 50/2006 
 5
