Y V Reddy: The role of financial education – the Indian case 
Inaugural  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  International 
Conference  on  Financial  Education,  organised  by  the  OECD  and  co-hosted  by  the  Pension  Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority, New Delhi, 21 September 2006.  
 Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am thankful to Shri Swarup for inviting me to this august gathering. The Conference represents an 
important step by the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) to distil from the 
experiences  of  other  countries  in  its  quest  for  enhancing  the  levels  of  financial  education  in  our 
country.  The  collaboration  with  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD) 
which has been playing a pivotal role in this respect is a laudable idea which will certainly contribute to 
furthering the cause of financial education. The eminence of several speakers adds great value to the 
discussions. We in the Reserve Bank are also keen on this subject and look forward to benefit from 
the deliberations of this Conference.  
My  remarks  on  this  occasion  will  be  structured  along  the  following  lines.  I  will  provide  some 
introduction on the importance of this topic in modern day societies, followed by an overview of the 
global practice in this area. Any discussion on financial education in India would need to acknowledge 
the Indian realities as well. The concluding thoughts are in the nature of possible approaches towards 
expanding the outreach of financial education in India.  
Background 
Financial education can broadly be defined as the capacity to have familiarity with and understanding 
of financial market products, especially rewards and risks in order to make informed choices. Viewed 
from  this  standpoint,  financial  education  primarily  relates  to  personal  financial  education  to  enable 
individuals to take effective actions to improve overall well-being and avoid distress in matters that are 
financial.  
The  focus  of  any  discussion  on  financial  education  is  primarily  on  the  individual,  who  usually  has 
limited  resources  and  skills  to  appreciate  the  complexities  of  financial  dealings  with  financial 
intermediaries on matters relating to personal finance on a day-to-day basis. The process of economic 
reforms, which includes deregulation and marketisation, should have educating and empowering the 
common person to participate in the financial marketplace with knowledge and confidence, as a critical 
component of public policy.  
The  need  for  financial  education  is  felt  in  the  developed  and  the  developing  countries  alike.  In  the 
developed countries, the increasing number and complexity of financial products, the continuing shift 
in responsibility for providing social security from governments and financial institutions to individuals, 
and  the  growing  importance  of  individual  retirement  planning  make  it  imperative  that  financial 
education be provided to all.  
In  the  developing  countries  also,  the  increasing  participation  of  a  growing  number  of  consumers  in 
newly  developing  financial  markets  will  necessitate  the  provision  of  financial  education  –  if  these 
markets  are  to  expand  and  operate  efficiently.  In  addition,  the  substantial  growth  of  international 
transactions  during  the  last  decade,  resulting  from  new  technologies  and  the  growing  international 
mobility  of  individuals,  makes  the  improvement  in  financial  education,  increasingly,  an  international 
concern. 
From a regulatory perspective, financial education empowers the common person and thus reduces 
the burden of protecting the common person from the elements of market failure, attributable to, de 
facto, information asymmetries. For example, the emphasis on market discipline, as one of the three 
pillars  of  banking  regulation,  especially  under  Basel  II,  is  best  served  by  participation  of  financially 
literate bank customers in the financial marketplace.  
Financial education can make a difference not only in the quality of life that individuals can afford, but 
also the integrity and quality of markets. It can provide individuals with basic tools for budgeting, help 
them  to  acquire  the  discipline  to  save  and  thus,  ensure  that  they  can  enjoy  a  dignified  life  after 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 1
retirement. Financially educated consumers, in turn, can benefit the economy by encouraging genuine 
competition, forcing the service providers to innovate and improve their levels of efficiency.  
recently 
financial 
redesigned 
Federal  Reserve  System’s 
Global practices 
It has been said, particularly in the context of the developed economies that while the young do not 
save enough and do not fully understand the need for investments for future, many of the elderly tend 
to feel the pinch of poverty. In this background, priority need to be accorded to financial education.  
For example, in the UK, the Financial Services Authority has launched the biggest ever campaign to 
improve the financial skills of the population and imparting education to enable a better appreciation of 
the risks and rewards inherent in financial instruments.  
The US Treasury established its Office of Financial Education in 2002. The Office works to promote 
access to the financial education tools that can help all US citizens make wiser choices in all areas of 
personal  financial  management,  with  a  special  emphasis  on  saving,  credit  management,  home 
ownership  and  retirement  planning.  The  Financial  Literacy  and  Education  Commission  (FLEC), 
established  by  the  Congress  in  2003  through  the  passage  of  the  Financial  Literacy  and  Education 
Improvement Act, was created with the purpose of improving the financial literacy and education of 
persons in the United States through development of a national strategy to promote financial literacy 
and education. The Federal Reserve, along with numerous other federal government agencies, is a 
member of this commission, which is supported by the Office of Financial Education. 
The 
education  website, 
FederalReserveEducation.org,  is  dovetailed  to  increase  the  use  of  Federal  Reserve  educational 
materials and promote financial education in the classroom. The website has material intended for the 
general public, as well as materials specifically geared toward teachers and high school and college 
students. It provides easy access to free educational materials, a resource search engine for teachers, 
and  games  for  various  ages  and  knowledge  levels.  The  other  regional  Feds  also  have  various 
interactive on-line programmes on their website designed to generate awareness about better financial 
management and assessment of one's own financial position.  
In  Australia,  the  Government  established  a  National  Consumer  and  Financial  Literacy  Taskforce  in 
2002,  which  recommended  the  institution  of  the  Financial  Literacy  Foundation  in  2005.  Working 
closely with states and territories, the Foundation has produced a National Curriculum Framework for 
Financial Literacy to provide benchmarks for teaching the school children the importance of managing 
their money.  
In  Malaysia,  the  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan,  launched  in  2001,  includes  a  10-year  consumer 
education program. This agenda includes infrastructure and institutional capacity development in the 
areas  of  financial  education,  advisory  services,  distress  management  and  rehabilitation.  For  this 
purpose, the Bank Negara Malaysia in partnership with the financial industry and other government 
agencies, has introduced the Financial Mediation Bureau, Deposit Insurance Scheme, Basic Banking 
Services  Framework  as  well  as  created  a  new  class  of  licensed  Financial  Advisers.  Savings  and 
education  programs  are  also  being  promoted  in  schools.  A  one-stop  centre  has  recently  been 
established  within  the  central  bank  for  the  public  to  obtain  information  about  financial  services  in 
Malaysia  and  to  provide  face-to-face  customer  service  on  general  enquiries  and  complaints.  These 
initiatives have been reinforced by high levels of transparency and disclosure. 
In collaboration with the government agencies, Monetary Authority of Singapore launched a national 
financial  education  programme  (MoneySENSE)  to  enhance  financial  literacy  and  self-reliance  of 
consumers. The programme covers three tiers of financial literacy: basic money management covers 
skills in budgeting and saving as also tips on responsible use of credit (tier I); equipping citizens with 
the skills and knowledge to plan for their long-term financial needs (tier II); and imparting knowledge 
about different investment products and skills for investing (tier III). 
Above all, the OECD has been taking a pro-active initiative in generating awareness about financial 
education. It has recently released a major international study on financial education titled 'Improving 
Financial  Literacy'  encompassing  practical  guidelines  on  good  practices  in  financial  education  and 
awareness.  These  guidelines,  in  the  form  of  a  non-binding  recommendation,  are  designed  to  help 
countries  devise  and  implement  effective  financial  education  programmes,  drawing  from  the  best 
practices  in  this  area  in  OECD  countries.  They  promote  the  role  of  all  the  main  stakeholders  in 
financial education: governments, financial institutions, employers, trade unions and consumer groups. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2006
In addition, they also draw a clear distinction between public information provided by the government 
and regulatory authorities, and that supplied by the financial analysts.  
It is also important to devise ways to ascertain whether financial education has achieved its objective, 
such as generating increased consumer awareness or a changed behaviour, a point I will return to a 
little later. The balance of evidence, however, suggests that such programmes tend to be effective. For 
instance,  in  the  United  States,  it  has  been  observed  that  workers  increase  their  participation  in 
retirement  savings  plans  funded  by  employee  and  employer  contributions  when  the  latter  offers 
financial  education  programmes,  whether  in  the  form  of  brochures  or  seminars.  Consumers  who 
attend one-on-one counselling sessions on their personal finances have fewer delinquencies. 
Indian realities 
Prior  to  the  initiation  of  financial  sector  reforms  in  the  early  1990s,  the  Indian  financial  system 
essentially  catered  to  the  needs  of  planned  development.  Customers  had  little  choice  in  financial 
instruments. The segmented and underdeveloped financial markets meant that their exposure to risk 
was  also  limited.  In  such  a  situation,  customers  could  employ  their  basic  skills  to  invest  in  simple 
financial  products  with  assured  returns,  unconcerned  about  their  risks.  The  relevance  of  financial 
education was, at best, limited.  
Pursuant to the process of globalisation, the economic and financial landscape in India is undergoing 
a  significant  transformation.  In  the  process,  the  economy  has  become  more  diversified  with  new 
sources of growth. In tandem with these changes, we have seen the modernisation of the financial 
sector  that  has  also  become  increasingly  more  diversified  to  meet  the  new  requirements  of  the 
economy. The financial sector has also increasingly leveraged on advances in technology which has 
significantly changed the way financial business is being conducted. As market advances continue to 
expand  the  range  of  financial  products  and  services,  consumers  are  being  faced  with  increasingly 
multifaceted  choices  and  options  in  the  management  of  their  personal  finances  and  exposure  to  a 
gamut  of  risks.  In  this  complex  financial  landscape,  it  becomes  important  for  consumers  to  have 
improved access to information. 
Significant  changes  have  also  occurred  in  the  social  sphere.  While  on  the  one  hand,  costs  of 
education  have  increased  substantially,  the  longevity  levels  have  also  risen,  on  the  other.  Taken 
together,  this  implies  that  the  elderly  are  now  required  to  achieve  a  constant  rebalancing  of  their 
consumption and investment portfolios. The increased life expectancy has also compelled employers 
to move away from ad hoc funded superannuation schemes to defined contribution schemes. At the 
same time, the advances in information technology have lowered the costs of information acquisition 
and  processing  as  also  of  searching  a  job.  This,  in  turn,  has  significantly  raised  job  mobility  with 
attendant implications for family size and expenditure patterns.  
Financial education assumes importance in this changed financial environment. In considering means 
to  improve  the  financial  status  of  families,  financial  education  can  play  a  critical  role  by  equipping 
consumers with the knowledge required to choose from a myriad of financial products and providers. 
In addition, financial education can help provide individuals with the knowledge necessary to create 
household budgets, initiate savings plans, manage debt, and make strategic investment decisions for 
their retirement or for their children's education. Being educated financially also enables individuals to 
better appreciate the possible contingencies and save for a rainy day, in an appropriate manner. It can 
empower  consumers  to  become  better  shoppers,  allowing  them  to  procure  goods  and  services  at 
lower  cost.  This  process,  in  turn,  raises  consumers'  real  purchasing  power  and  multiplies  the 
opportunities for  them  to consume, save,  or  invest. Having  these  basic  financial  planning skills can 
help families to meet their near-term obligations and maximise their longer-term financial well-being. 
Financial education is also an integral component of customer protection. Despite concerted efforts, 
the  current  state  of  transparency  coupled  with  the  difficulty  of  consumers  in  identifying  and 
understanding the fine print from the large volume of convoluted information, leads to an information 
asymmetry between the financial intermediary and the customer. For example, customers are often 
penalised  for  minor  violations  in  repayments,  although  they  have  limited  redressal  mechanisms  to 
rectify deficiencies in service by banks, rendering the banker-customer relationship one of unequals. In 
this  relationship,  it  is  the  principal,  that  is,  the  depositor,  who  is  actually  far  less  powerful  than  the 
agent,  that  is,  the  bank.  The  representations  received  in  regard  to  levying  of  unreasonably  high 
service or user charges and enhancement of user charges without proper and prior intimation, and the 
growing  number  of  customer  complaints  against  the  banks,  also  testify  to  this  fact.  In  this  context, 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 3
financial  education  may  help  to  prevent  vulnerable  consumers  from  falling  prey  to  financially 
disquieting credit arrangements.  
There are however, issues that would need to be addressed upfront in the Indian context. First, the 
regional  profile  in  our  country  is  diversified,  with  people  across  different  regions  being  typically 
conversant  in  their  vernacular  languages.  Second,  there  exists  a  wide  divergence  in  literacy  levels 
across  States.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  several  States  and  union  territories,  the  literacy  rates  in  2001 
were  well  above  the  national  average  of  65.4  per  cent;  in  contrast,  there  were  also  regions  where 
literacy  levels  have  remained  perennially  low.  Third,  the  dependency  ratio  varies  markedly  across 
states. Fourth, within a State, there are marked differences between rural and urban areas. Fifth, there 
is  also  a  perceptible  variation  in  the  penetration  of  banking  across  regions.  Taken  together,  these 
unique conditions in our country create a role for the public policy to devise enabling mechanisms to 
improve  the  levels  of  financial  education,  reckoning  the  regional  differences.  To  the  extent  the 
common person is better able to understand and appreciate the need for financial education, the task 
of the financial regulators is greatly simplified, lowering the overall costs of regulation.  
Possible approaches 
It is an imperative of increasing globalisation that the difference in the pace of growth of the financial 
sector  and  financial  education  be  minimized.  There  are  several  ways  to  go  about  this  process.  For 
purposes of illustration, these can be classified as institutional mechanisms, delivery mechanisms and 
decentralisation of efforts.  
Institutional mechanisms 
As  regards  the  institutional  mechanism,  there  is  near  consensus  on  the  fact  that  any  attempt  at 
expanding the outreach of financial education needs to start at the grass-roots. Present day school 
pass-outs need to be a lot more financially literate than their parents were, if they are to manage their 
personal  finances  successfully  through  life.  In  addition,  universities  and  business  schools  have  an 
important  role  in  training  financial  specialists  able  to  provide  the  public  with  high  quality  advice  on 
financial matters.  
Yet another channel for imparting financial education could be the workplace where it can reach most 
of  the  working  adults.  It  would,  therefore,  be  a  potent  mechanism  for  providing  information  about  a 
number of financial services such as retirement schemes and insurance.  
The role of financial institutions in providing financial education, not only to the clients but also to their 
own  staff,  needs  to  be  better  defined  and  further  promoted.  More  information  is  needed  at  both 
international  and  national  levels  on  good  programmes  and  practices  and  on  the  ways  to  promote 
access to financial services by harnessing the role of non-government organisations (NGOs).  
International organisations are well-positioned to coordinate international surveys and studies on the 
various  aspects  of  financial  education,  to  evaluate  the  comparative  efficiency  of  various  financial 
education  programmes,  and  to  develop  guidelines  and  good  practices  for  policymakers  for 
implementation.  International  agencies  can  also  provide  a  forum  where  countries can  compare  and 
discuss strategies to educate consumers about financial issues.  
Several  governments  and  central  banks,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  are  actively  involved  in  the 
provision of financial education about consumer credit, investment, and other financial issues, often as 
part of a public policy campaign to improve the protection of individual borrowers and investors, for 
instance,  as  part  of  the  ongoing  pension  reform  efforts.  Exchange  of  experiences  amongst  central 
banks would thus be productive. 
Delivery mechanisms 
The delivery mechanisms for imparting financial education can be manifold. However, the content and 
delivery of financial education should correspond  to the needs of specific sub-groups of consumers 
that  is,  the  young  or  elderly,  less  or  better  educated,  well-  or  ill-informed.  Presentations,  lectures, 
conferences, symposia, training courses and seminars can be actively utilised for this purpose.  
Second,  publications  in  diverse  forms,  including  books,  brochures,  magazines,  booklets/pamphlets, 
direct mail documents, can also be useful in this regard.  
4 
 BIS Review 87/2006
Third,  leveraging  information  technology  through  concerted  media  campaigns  using  all  possible 
avenues  of  mass  communication  can  be  expected  to  impart  greater  efficacy  to  the  process.  Other 
methods  include  advisory  services  from  institutions,  including  the  fast  growing  telecommunication 
services.  
Not  only  the  supply  of  financial  education,  but  also  the  demand  is  very  important.  Most  delivery 
channels are good for those who are already interested in particular topics. An important challenge is 
to create demand for financial information and education.  
Decentralisation of efforts 
Given  the  unique  conditions  in  our  country,  any  attempt  at  expanding  the  outreach  of  financial 
education  should  take  cognisance  of  the  role  of  regional  differences  in  language,  workforce  and 
penetration of finance. Thus, banks with strong presence across different regions could explore the 
possibility of introducing a local-language based web-site providing details of facilities for customers.  
Second, in recent times, the explosion of the internet has altered the relationship between financial 
organisations and its clientele. Organisations can examine ways to better communicate with both the 
prospective and existing clients by enriching the information content of their website on the lines of 
those practiced in the mature markets.  
Third,  credit  counselling  can  be  a  potent  tool  for  financial  entities  to  expand  the  reach  of  financial 
education.  
Fourth, it might be of interest for reputed organisations like the National Council of Applied Economic 
Research  (NCAER)  to  conduct  surveys  at  periodic  intervals  to  ascertain  the  degree  of  consumer 
awareness about financial products and services. The findings emanating from such studies could be 
shared with financial entities to enable them to address the gaps in their service delivery and promote 
informed decision-making.  
Fifth, several bodies, such as the Financial Planning Standards Board of India (FPSBI), a professional 
standards  setting  body  constituted  with  public-private  enterprise,  are  reportedly  making  proactive 
efforts to uniformly regulate personal financial planning practitioners. Much more of such efforts will be 
required to guide the development and promotion of standards for financial planning professionals to 
benefit and protect the public in the country. 
Role of the RBI 
The RBI, on its part, wishes to advance the cause of financial education in our country as part of an 
overall strategy. The strategy pursued in this regard can be elucidated as follows. Concerted efforts 
are underway to expand the reach of formal finance in view of recent emphasis on financial inclusion. 
This  needs  to  be  buttressed  with  financial  education  to  generate  greater  customer  awareness  and 
understanding of financial products and services. Concurrently, a process of credit counselling is being 
encouraged  to  help  all  borrowers,  but  particularly  those  in  distress  to  overcome  current  financial 
problems  and  gain  access  to  the  structured  financial  system.  The  Banking  Codes  and  Standards 
Board of India (BCSBI) has also been instituted which is expected to ensure that the banks formulate 
and adhere to their own comprehensive code of conduct for minimum standards of banking services, 
which individual customers can legitimately expect. And finally, a Banking Ombudsman Scheme has 
been instituted for redressal of grievances against deficient banking services, covering all the States 
and Union Territories.  
The RBI has also been exploring the possibility of instituting a Depositor Protection Fund (DPF). The 
Fund can be utilised towards generating greater awareness for the common man on issues relating to 
financial  education  and  counselling.  This  could  be  complemented  with  providing  greater  role  to  our 
Regional Offices to promote financial education in their respective jurisdictions.  
Conclusion 
The  international  co-operation  of  the  kind  which  OECD  and  PFRDA  have  embarked  upon  is  a 
welcome development. I would like to congratulate them for undertaking this useful initiative and thank 
them for giving me an opportunity to be a part of this process. 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 5
I have no doubt that this Conference will prove to be an important milestone in the area of financial 
education for our country.  
We, at the RBI, too look forward to benefiting from the deliberations. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 87/2006
