Glenn Stevens: Capital flows and monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  “Investor 
Insights: ANZ Asia Pacific 2006” Seminar, Singapore, 17 September 2006.  
I thank Guy Debelle and Michael Plumb for their considerable contributions to the historical part of this paper. 
 The organisers of today’s seminar have suggested the topic of Capital Flows and Monetary Policy. It 
seems an appropriate one in an east Asian setting. 
It is common to hear of the difficulties created for the conduct of domestic macroeconomic policies by 
capital mobility. The fact that capital flows these days are so large, and so rapid, tends to add to the 
perception of policy complexity. This has only grown in the wake of the Asian financial crisis of the late 
1990s, though capital flows had caused serious problems for countries in Latin America and Europe 
on numerous occasions long before the Asian crisis occurred. Various countries in Asia are still wary 
of international capital flows, and even after accumulating very high levels of foreign reserves, many 
seem to worry more about the possibility of sudden outflow – as opposed to the very real problems 
associated with large inflows. 
Australia too has struggled on occasion with capital flows and their complicating role for the conduct of 
monetary policy. But Australia’s biggest problems for the conduct of monetary policy came in the days 
when  capital  flows  were  more  restricted  than  they  are  now,  but  financial  prices  were  regulated.  In 
those days – and I refer here to the period before the decisions in the early 1980s to allow markets to 
set the exchange rate and yields on government debt – the problem was basically one of monetary 
control:  policy-makers  could  not  accurately  control  the  amount  of  settlement  funds  available  to  the 
banking system because domestic policy actions to control these funds were often over-run by foreign 
operations we had to undertake to clear the foreign exchange market at the nominated exchange rate. 
That fundamentally impaired the Reserve Bank’s capacity to influence broader monetary conditions: 
we were not actually in control of the stance of monetary policy. 
Those days are now long gone. The market for foreign exchange clears entirely in the private sector 
(unless  we  make  a  choice  to  intervene).  The  Government’s  financial  operations  are  funded  at 
market-determined interest rates, relieving the central bank of any obligation to support a particular 
price  in  the  market.  The  result  is  that  the  Reserve  Bank  is  able  to  control  the  total  quantity  of 
settlement funds in the system, which allows us to set, for all practical purposes, the overnight rate of 
interest. 
That does not mean that capital flows are no longer a concern, but it does change the location, and in 
my view the size, of the problem they present. A deeper financial system can also absorb much larger 
flows with less disruption. More generally, after more than 20 years of experience, the economy and 
financial system have shown that they can adjust to even quite large changes in the exchange rate 
without undue disruption. This has involved a reasonable amount of learning by doing on the part of 
financial  markets,  businesses  and  policymakers –  and,  on  occasion,  the  learning  curve  was  fairly 
steep. But there is no doubt that the present world is preferable. 
The story of how we got to this position is an interesting one, and it is that story I would like to tell 
today. Let me do this by referring to two episodes. 
When capital flows were a problem 
The  first  is  the  year  1983.  At  the  beginning  of  that  year,  Australia’s  exchange  rate  regime  was  a 
crawling peg to a trade-weighted basket. (This regime had been in place since 1976.) The peg was 
determined daily by a management committee consisting of the Governor of the Reserve Bank and 
the  heads  of  the  main  economic  government  departments.1  This  group  set  the  peg  given  an 
assessment of economic conditions, with both external and internal factors taken into consideration. 
The  intermediate  target  for  monetary  policy  was  an  M3  growth  rate  set  by  the  Government.  The 
                                                      
1   The Secretaries of the Treasury and the Departments of Prime Minister and Cabinet and Finance. 
BIS Review 86/2006 
 1
Reserve Bank sought to achieve this through a combination of open market operations, changes in 
various  reserve  ratios  and  quantitative  lending  guidelines.  Interest  rates  on  various  financial 
instruments were in the process of being liberalised at that time, though some important regulations 
(e.g. on housing loans) remained in place. But the capacity of the Reserve Bank to control the quantity 
of settlements funds in the banking system, and therefore to influence broader monetary and credit 
conditions, was weak, because of the commitment to a particular exchange rate, even one that varied 
every day. An attempt to tighten conditions by withdrawing cash from the market, for example, was 
likely to be thwarted by the simple expedient of the private sector borrowing offshore and converting 
the proceeds into Australian dollars at the price nominated by the central bank. This would reverse the 
initial  withdrawal  of  cash.  Conversely,  when  private  capital  decided  to  move  out,  the  authorities 
struggled to keep the system supplied with adequate liquidity. 
In  the  lead-up  to  the  March 1983  federal  election,  markets  were  anxious  about  the  prospect  of  a 
change of government. In the week prior to the election, capital outflow amounted to about 3 per cent 
of the total money stock, or about 1½ per cent of Australia’s annual GDP. This occurred in spite of 
capital  controls  that  were  still  in  place,  because  the  distinction  between  current  and  capital 
transactions  was  blurring  and  market  participants  were  becoming  more  adept  at  circumventing  the 
controls. Exporters were by then skilled at delaying receipts when a devaluation was anticipated, while 
importers accelerated their payments, as did those servicing foreign currency debt. 
These swings caused operational difficulties in maintaining suitable conditions in the money market. 
As for achieving the target for M3 growth, I can well recall, as one involved in forecasting growth of the 
‘money supply’ in those days, the impossibility of forecasting the size and the persistence of the capital 
flows, which were one of the major drivers of the growth in the community’s monetary assets. 
The  newly  elected  Labor  Government  responded  to  the  crisis  by  devaluing  the  Australian  dollar  by 
10 per cent against the TWI. This was successful in reversing the flow of funds and generating capital 
inflow, as exporters, for example, brought onshore their pent-up receipts. But the problems were far 
from solved. Later in 1983, Australia’s external position was improving, due to a post-drought recovery 
in  the  rural  sector,  rising  commodity  prices  and  higher  demand  for  mineral  exports.  The  volume  of 
capital inflow gradually mounted, further encouraged by Australia’s positive interest differential with the 
major countries. 
This again caused problems for monetary policy as the Reserve Bank had difficulty withdrawing the 
resulting increase in cash in the banking system. The plan that was devised to counter these problems 
was one of a gradual appreciation of the exchange rate (achieved through adjustment of the daily fix), 
lower short-term interest rates but increased sales of government securities to fund the fiscal deficit, 
which was likely to see longer-term yields increase. That is, it was thought that currency speculators 
would be deterred by the very low short-term rates, notwithstanding the higher yields on offer at the 
longer  end.  This  would  help  achieve  the  M3  target  by  reducing  the  liquidity  resulting  from  capital 
inflow. The exchange rate management committee also sought to add a random element to the daily 
movements in the exchange rate, around the general trend appreciation, to reduce the predictability in 
the movements in the exchange rate and thwart the speculation. As capital inflow continued to mount 
during November, the Reserve Bank actually devalued the Australian dollar against the TWI.2  
Attempts to frustrate the speculators were unsuccessful. Inflows continued. Finally, the exchange rate 
was  floated  on  12 December 1983  and  most  of  the  remaining  capital  controls  were  removed 
simultaneously. 
Australia was one of the few countries to have taken a decision to float when the currency was under 
upward pressure, because the capital inflow just could not be adequately absorbed. The decision has 
rightly been regarded as one of the most important ever taken by an Australian Government in the 
field of economic policy, for a number of reasons. 
Most  important  from  the  perspective  of  monetary  policy,  the  system  for  control  over  the  amount  of 
settlement funds in the system became fully effective for the first time. If the Reserve Bank wanted to 
tighten  financial  conditions,  by  taking  funds  out  of  the  system,  the  private  sector  could  no  longer 
immediately offset that by getting those funds back by selling foreign exchange to the Reserve Bank: 
we were no longer obliged to buy or sell foreign exchange at a given price. 
                                                      
2   G. Debelle and M. Plumb (2006) ‘The evolution of exchange rate policy and capital controls in Australia’, Asian Economic 
Papers (forthcoming). 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2006
In summary, the operation of monetary policy in the pre-float period was significantly constrained by 
external considerations, and  was hampered  by  capital  flows.  While  we  had  a quantitative  target  for 
monetary growth, we had no way of exerting the required control in order to achieve that outcome. 
Eventually, this system was overtaken by events and we had to change it. Over a number of years, we 
evolved towards a floating exchange rate with a medium-term inflation target. Let me now turn to the 
more  recent  episode  of  Australia’s  experience  during  the  Asian  crisis,  to  illustrate  how  that 
arrangement worked. 
When capital flows were not quite so much of a problem 
At  the  onset  of  the  Asian  crisis  in  mid  1997,  the  Australian  economy  was  growing  at  around  trend 
rates, with domestic demand beginning to accelerate, and underlying inflation below 2 per cent. Given 
the inflation performance, monetary policy had been eased over the previous year as required by our 
2–3 per  cent  inflation  target.  Thus,  the  shock  hit  the  Australian  economy  at  a  time  when  it  was  in 
reasonable shape with the stance of monetary policy already relatively expansionary.  
Exports to east Asia accounted for around one-third of Australia’s exports at the time, so the decline in 
output  in  the  east-Asian  region  represented  a  significant  negative  demand  shock  to  the  Australian 
economy. Australia’s terms of trade also fell as commodity prices declined, further exacerbating the 
loss of income. 
Reflecting this and the expected negative effect on the Australian economy, there was less demand 
for  Australian  assets  (that  is,  ex ante,  capital  wanted  to  flow  out).  Twenty-five  years  earlier,  such  a 
situation  would  have  resulted  in  a  large  loss  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  but  under  a  floating 
exchange  rate  the  adjustment  was  mostly  borne  by  the  exchange  rate,  with  the  Australian  dollar 
depreciating by around 20 per cent. 
On  some  previous  occasions,  such  a  large  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  had  led  to  a  rise  in 
inflation expectations and a pick-up in inflation due to higher import prices, so requiring an increase in 
interest  rates  to  contain  and  eventually  reverse  the inflation  impulse.  In  contemplating  whether  that 
policy response was appropriate on this occasion, we came to the view that, even though in the short 
term inflation was forecast to rise above 3 per cent for a time, as the depreciation was passed through 
to  consumer  prices,  performance  would  most  likely  be  consistent  with  the  target  thereafter.  The 
forecast rise in inflation was not expected to be persistent, partly because the contractionary impulse 
from the decline in export demand would dampen growth. But, in addition, the credibility of the inflation 
target  was  by  then  quite  well  established,  and  this  could  be  expected  to  help  keep  inflation 
expectations  in  check.  The  flexibility  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  allowed  the  validity  of  this 
assessment to be reassessed as time passed. 
In the event, inflation rose by less than was forecast, in part because of a decline in the pass-through 
of the exchange rate depreciation, as well as a greater-than-expected disinflationary impulse from the 
Asian region, which put downward pressure on foreign-currency import prices. As a result, by the end 
of 1998, not only had we not lifted interest rates, we actually reduced them slightly. 
So the flexible inflation target served as a useful framework within which to manage the effects of the 
Asian crisis and the policy response to the capital flow. We also used, on occasion, intervention in the 
foreign  exchange  market  to  counter  the  downward  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate,  but  only  after 
allowing it to move a considerable distance. The important aspect of this whole episode for the issue 
at hand is that allowing the exchange rate to move provided a part of the mechanism that helped the 
economy adapt to the Asian crisis and the changes in capital flows that it brought about. This reduced 
any  disruption  to  the  domestic  economy  and,  most  importantly,  did  not  compromise  the  setting  of 
monetary policy. It has often been remarked that the decline in the exchange rate was expansionary 
for the traded sector and that this helped the economy through that period. That is true, but in my view 
the much more important point is that capital flows and exchange rate changes did not compromise 
the conduct of monetary policy, which remained relatively expansionary, consistent with the needs of 
the economy at the time. Had we been in the world of fixed exchange rates, we would not have been 
able to set policy in that way. 
Broader macroeconomic considerations 
The change to the exchange rate regime, with its accompanying improvements to monetary control, 
would be expected to have an effect on the volatilities of key financial prices. In particular, it would be 
BIS Review 86/2006 
 3
likely that, all other things equal, domestic interest rates would be less volatile and the exchange rate 
more volatile. Shocks in the form of swings in capital flows would show up more in the exchange rate 
and less in the level of domestic interest rates. 
Of course, all other things were not equal in this period. There has been a well-documented decline in 
macroeconomic  volatility  in  a  number  of  countries  over  the  same  period,  the  so-called  Great 
Moderation.3 Nonetheless, as shown in Graph 1, after the floating of the exchange rate, interest rates 
have been considerably less volatile, and it is highly likely, at least in the case of Australia, that the 
change  in  the  exchange  rate  regime,  along  with  other  reforms  and  the  establishment  of  consistent 
medium-term  frameworks  for  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,4  made  some  contribution  to  the  decline  in 
macroeconomic volatility.  
There has been an increase in the measured volatility of the exchange rate, though perhaps not by as 
much as might have been expected. Prior to the float, changes in the exchange rate were infrequent 
but  very  large,  as  the  authorities  made  periodic  adjustments  to  the  fixed  parity  in  response  to 
macroeconomic and financial developments, including some induced by capital flows as I described 
above. In the post-float period, the increased volatility generally reflects frequent small changes in the 
exchange rate, in this case determined by the market. And for significant periods in the floating era, 
such as the mid 1990s and the past two or three years as well, exchange rate volatility has been not 
very different from what it was towards the end of the managed exchange rate era in the early 1980s. 
Graph 1  
                                                       
3   O.J. Blanchard and J. Simon (2001) ‘The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output Volatility’, Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity, 1, pp. 135–164. 
4   D.  Gruen  and  G.  Stevens  (2000),  ‘Australian  Macroeconomic  Performance  and  Policies  in  the  1990s’,  in  D. Gruen  and 
S. Shrestha (eds), The Australian Economy in the 1990s, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, 
pp. 32–72. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2006
  
Short-term variability of the exchange rate is not necessarily costless, of course. Some people might 
argue that it creates a degree of uncertainty for exporters and importers, and those allocating capital. 
But  the  share  of  Australia’s  real  economy  engaged  in  international  trade,  and  the  extent  to  which 
Australians’  financial  assets  are  traded internationally,  have  grown  over  the same  period. No  doubt 
this was mostly a result of the general opening up of the economy to the international system, but it is 
difficult to support the claim that exchange rate variability has seriously impeded these developments. 
On the contrary, I think that the most serious potential problem for the internationally exposed sectors 
is  not  short-term  exchange  rate  variability,  but  medium-term  misalignment  in  the  exchange  rate. 
Allowing market forces to move the exchange rate makes such an outcome much less likely. Better 
monetary control afforded by the flexible exchange rate, on the other hand, has been an unalloyed 
benefit to all sectors of the economy, traded and non-traded. 
Lest  this  sound  as  though  we  never  have  a  care  in  the  world  about  the  exchange  rate  moving, 
however, it is important to add one caveat to this story. It is this: a strong monetary policy framework is 
essential.  Indeed,  there  were  plenty  of  times  when  the  movement  in  the  exchange  rate,  especially 
downward  ones,  made  the  Reserve  Bank  quite  uncomfortable.  Looking  back,  these  were  mostly 
periods  when  the  policy  framework  was  not  as  well  developed,  or  as  credible,  as  it  is  today.  On 
occasion, it seemed that the exchange rate was moving because of a change in confidence about the 
conduct of economic policies, including monetary policy, in Australia. This was more a feature of the 
1980s,  when  the  medium-term  inflation  targeting  framework  was  not  yet  in  place,  though  some 
episodes in the early 1990s were also troublesome as the inflation target really did not acquire strong 
credibility  until  about  1995.  In  some  such  episodes,  monetary  policy  did  respond  to  changes  in  the 
exchange rate by altering interest rates. 
But by the advent of the Asian crisis, when the exchange rate declined a lot, both we and the financial 
markets had developed sufficient confidence in our monetary policy framework that we were able to 
allow the exchange rate to do its job. The conduct of policy through that period is generally regarded 
as successful. 
Conclusion 
Capital mobility can complicate the conduct of monetary policy. In Australia, we have found that the 
complications which arise under a floating exchange rate – while often not trivial – are not of the same 
order  of  magnitude  as  the  monetary  control  problems  we  had  when  capital  was  less  mobile  but 
financial prices were heavily regulated. In the system we have had for some years now, the inflation 
BIS Review 86/2006 
 5
target, rather than the exchange rate, is our anchor for policy. When capital flows suddenly change, 
the exchange rate is free to move to absorb at least part of the shock, and we are able to decide how 
much of the shock should show up as changed financial conditions in Australia. This seems to be a 
pretty durable arrangement. 
Of course, it took some time to get to this position. I recognise that many other countries in the region 
are in a different position. Many are more open, so with perhaps less scope to allow large exchange 
rate moves without significant first-round inflationary or deflationary effects. Others are still working to 
develop  stronger  domestic  monetary  policy  frameworks.  Hence,  these  countries  probably  tend  to 
worry more about the flightiness of international capital flows than do we. Nonetheless, it does seem to 
me that Australia’s experience offers reasonable grounds for thinking that, over time, these problems 
can be contained sufficiently so that we can enjoy the benefits of openness to capital flows without too 
much cost.  
6 
 BIS Review 86/2006
