European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 6 April 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  welcome  you  to  our  press conference  and  report  on  the  outcome  of 
today’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council. The meeting was also attended by Commissioner 
Almunia.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we have decided to keep the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged, following the increase of 25 basis points on 2 March 2006. The information 
which  has  become  available  since  then  confirms  our  assessment  that  a  further  adjustment  of  our 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  was  warranted  to  address  upside  risks  to  price  stability.  It 
remains essential to ensure that medium to long-term inflation expectations in the euro area are kept 
solidly anchored at levels consistent with price stability. Such anchoring of inflation expectations is a 
prerequisite for monetary policy to make an ongoing contribution towards supporting economic growth 
and job creation in the euro area. With interest rates across the whole maturity spectrum still at very 
low  levels  in  both  nominal  and  real  terms,  and  monetary  and  credit  growth  remaining  strong  and 
liquidity ample, our monetary policy remains accommodative. We will continue to monitor very closely 
all developments to ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise.  
Turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis,  recent  information  has  confirmed  our  assessment  of  an 
improved outlook for economic growth in the euro area, following the more subdued developments in 
late 2005. On the basis of the latest data, survey releases and various indicator-based estimates, it 
appears that growth is strengthening and broadening in the first half of 2006. Indeed, the conditions 
remain  in  place  for  solid  growth  over  the  coming  quarters.  Activity  in  the  world  economy  remains 
strong,  providing  support  for  euro  area  exports.  Investment  activity  is  expected  to  remain  solid, 
benefiting  from  an  extended  period  of  very  favourable  financing  conditions,  balance  sheet 
restructuring, and accumulated and ongoing gains in earnings and business efficiency. Consumption 
growth should also strengthen over time, in line with developments in real disposable income, as the 
labour  market  situation  continues  to  gradually  improve.  This  outlook  for  economic  activity  is  also 
confirmed by available forecasts from international organisations and private sector institutions.  
The risks to economic growth appear to be broadly balanced over the shorter term. Further ahead, 
downside risks still relate to potential increases in oil prices and concerns about global imbalances.  
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 2.2% 
in March 2006, compared with 2.3% in February and 2.4% in January. In the short run, inflation rates 
are likely to remain above 2%, with the precise levels depending largely on developments in the more 
volatile components of the index. Beyond the short term, changes in administered prices and indirect 
taxes are expected to significantly affect inflation in 2006 and 2007, and an upward impact may also 
be expected from the indirect effects of past oil price increases. At the same time, wage dynamics in 
the  euro  area  have  remained  moderate  over  recent  quarters  and  growth  in  wages  is  expected  to 
remain  contained,  partly  reflecting  strong  global  competitive  pressures,  particularly 
the 
manufacturing sector. Over the recent past, moderate wage trends have helped to dampen domestic 
inflationary  pressures;  looking  ahead,  it  is  crucial  that  the  social  partners  continue  to  meet  their 
responsibilities in this regard, also in the context of a more favourable economic environment. 
Risks to the outlook for price developments remain on the upside and include further increases in oil 
prices,  a  possibly  stronger  pass-through  of  oil  price  rises  into  consumer  prices  than  currently 
anticipated, additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes, and – more fundamentally – 
stronger  wage  and  price developments  than  expected  due  to second-round effects of  past  oil  price 
increases.  
Turning to the monetary analysis, the latest developments confirm that the stimulative impact of the 
low  level  of  interest  rates  remains  the  dominant  factor  behind  the  high  trend  rate  of  monetary 
expansion. Moreover, the annual growth rate of credit to the private sector has continued to increase 
over recent months, with borrowing by households – especially loans for house purchase – and non-
financial corporations rising rapidly. Overall, strong monetary and credit growth in an environment of 
in 
BIS Review 31/2006 
 1
ample liquidity in the euro area continues to point to upside risks to price stability over the medium to 
longer term. 
To  sum  up,  annual  inflation  rates  are  projected  to  remain  elevated  in  2006  and  2007,  and  the 
economic analysis indicates that the risks to price stability remain on the upside. Given the strength of 
monetary growth and the ample liquidity situation in a context of improving economic activity, cross-
checking  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  supports  the 
assessment that upside risks to price stability over the medium to long term prevail. It is essential that 
medium-term  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability. 
Accordingly, the Governing Council will continue to monitor very closely all developments to ensure 
that risks to price stability do not materialise, thereby making an ongoing contribution to sustainable 
economic growth and job creation.  
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  while  the  budgetary  results  reported  for  2005  are  mostly  better  than 
anticipated a few months ago, the budget balances planned for 2006 imply no significant progress in 
fiscal consolidation for the euro area as a whole. Given the economic outlook, a faster pace of deficit 
reduction is necessary. Delaying fiscal consolidation in times of improving economic activity implies 
risks  for  the medium  term,  as has  been  observed  in  the past.  Speeding up  deficit  reduction  on  the 
basis of credible and fully specified measures as part of a comprehensive reform programme would 
help to enhance confidence in the medium-term prospects of the euro area and prevent a repeat of 
past experiences, when complacency in good times contributed to persistent budgetary disequilibria. 
As regards structural reforms, the Governing Council welcomes the call by the European Council, 
which met in Brussels on 23-24 March 2006, to maintain the momentum of the re-launched Lisbon 
strategy for growth and employment. As emphasised by the European Council, the focus should now 
be on ensuring the effective, timely and comprehensive implementation of the measures agreed in the 
national reform programmes presented by Member States and, if necessary, on strengthening them. 
These measures are designed to, among other things, enhance the sustainability and quality of public 
finances,  promote  flexible  labour  and  product  markets,  support  a  favourable  business  environment, 
and  ensure  a  fully  operational  EU  internal  market,  including  the  markets  for  energy  and  services. 
Applying comprehensive structural reforms is of particular importance for the euro area countries, in 
order to increase wage and price flexibility and the resilience to shocks, facilitate structural adjustment, 
raise potential output growth and job creation, and reduce price pressures, thereby facilitating the task 
of the single monetary policy.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2006
