Svein Gjedrem: Globalisation and monetary policy in Norway 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Central Bank of Norway, at the Nordic CFO Seminar, 
Stockholm, 10 May 2006.  
The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments  presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s 
monetary policy meeting on 26 April, Inflation Report 1/06 and on previous speeches. Please note that the text below may differ 
slightly from the actual presentation.  
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website.  
 Thank you Madame Chair,  
Let  me  first  say  that  I  am  glad  of  this  opportunity  to  address  you  on  the  issue  of  globalisation  and 
monetary policy in Norway.  
Effects of increased globalisation 
The term globalisation can mean different things to different people, but today I refer to the growing 
interdependence  of  national  economies  as  reflected  in  greater  and  freer  flows  of  goods,  services, 
capital and even labour across national borders.  
The  globalisation  process  has  accelerated  over  the  last  15  years  through  increased  trade 
liberalisation, political changes, technological advances, and a sharp reduction in transaction costs. As 
illustrated in this chart, cross-border flows of goods and capital are growing at a markedly faster pace 
than world production.  
These developments present challenges to monetary policy. Financial imbalances have been building 
up internationally as a result of a strong rise in cross-border capital flows and foreign asset ownership. 
In Norway, we are facing a significantly changed terms-of-trade pattern.  
One  important  feature  of  the  current  globalisation  wave  is  the  integration  of  China,  India  and  other 
emerging  economies  into  the  world  trade  system.  This  development  has  been  strongest  in  China, 
whose  share  of  world  exports  is  growing  rapidly.  The  countries  within  the  Commonwealth  of 
Independent States (CIS) have also increased their exports markedly since the early 1990s. India is at 
the starting-line.  
Many of these economies have large labour forces that offer their services at very low wages, and 
these labour resources are available to companies that compete on world markets. Low labour costs 
and  more  efficient  transport  and  communication  attract  labour-intensive  production.  Production  of 
goods  and  services  is  being  transferred  from  high-cost  countries  to  countries  like  Estonia,  Latvia, 
Poland, China and India.  
This shift in the international division of labour is now influencing real wage growth in industrialised 
countries. The risk that a business will have to wind up operations or move abroad is dampening cost 
pressures,  as  bargaining  power  is  being  transferred  from  workers  to  employers.  In  a  number  of 
European countries, wage growth is also being influenced by increased labour inflows from the EU 
accession states.  
As  Scandinavian  consumers,  we  are  benefiting  from  falling  prices  for  many  imported  goods.  Lower 
import prices are also ascribable to a shift in our imports towards a higher share of imports from low-
cost countries.  
The change in clothing prices in Norway may serve as an illustration. Prices rose by around 3 per cent 
annually for a long period, but since 1995 they have been falling by about 6 per cent annually. This 
kink  point  coincides  with  the  dismantling  of  the  restrictions  on  textile  trade  and  with  a  period  of 
rationalisation in retail trade in Norway.  
The  rapid  growth  of  production  in  China,  India  and  other  newly  integrated  economies  has  led  to  a 
substantial  rise  in  demand  for  oil  and  other  raw  materials.  At  the  same  time,  increased  trade  has 
engendered higher demand for shipping services and favourable freight rates for a period.  
BIS Review 39/2006 
 1
These changes have provided Norway with increased revenues thanks to a remarkable strengthening 
of our terms of trade. Prices for imported goods are falling in relation to prices for goods we export. 
The impact of the rise in oil and gas prices is particularly strong, but the terms-of-trade gains on goods 
in the mainland economy have also been high.  
The situation in Norway differs from that of its Nordic neighbouring countries. Sales of Swedish and 
Finnish high-tech products are growing strongly in  terms of volume, but prices are falling. Denmark 
has a diversified business sector, which is moving on a steady path overall.  
The  high  energy  prices  have  contributed  to  increased  cross-border  capital  flows  as  income  is 
transferred from oil importers to oil exporters. Consequently, a savings surplus has been building up in 
oil exporting countries such as Norway.  
Globalisation  has  also  had  an  impact  on  the  functioning  of  international  capital  markets  and  has 
created considerable global imbalances. The US trade deficit increased to over 6 per cent of GDP in 
2005,  while  oil  exporting  countries  and  East-Asian  countries  are  running  large  current  account 
surpluses and building up high levels of international reserves.  
The  increased  savings  of  oil  exporters  as  well  as  of  some  emerging  countries  have  pushed  down 
international interest rates. Bond yields have been low, and have stayed low even when short-term 
interest rates have been raised. However, in recent months bond yields have picked up somewhat. 
Although  the  world's  central  banks  have  pushed  short-term  interest  rates  in  recent  years  to  their 
lowest level for a century, this has not led to a significant rise in inflation.  
Challenges to monetary policy 
The Government has defined an inflation target for monetary policy in Norway. Norges Bank’s conduct 
of  monetary  policy  shall  be  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation,  with  annual  consumer  price 
inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, 
so that weight is given to both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment.  
Since summer 2003, the Norwegian economy has experienced a marked upturn. While it took some 
time for employment to pick up, this is occurring now. Employment is moving up and unemployment is 
falling rapidly.  
Although inflation has increased somewhat, it is still low, even 2½ years after the cyclical change. The 
trend in prices for consumer goods over the past two or three years is a result of a favourable supply 
shock  to  the  Norwegian  and  global  economies.  Low  inflation  is  being  accompanied  by  real  income 
growth and a rise in production.  
Since last summer, monetary policy in Norway has been oriented towards a gradual increase in the 
interest rate – in small, not too frequent steps – towards a more normal level. On the basis of current 
information, this interest rate path provides a reasonable balance between the objectives to be given 
weight by Norges Bank in its conduct of monetary policy:  
•  On  the  one  hand,  the  objective  of  bringing  inflation  up  to  the  target  and  anchoring  inflation 
expectations suggests in isolation that interest rates should be kept at a low level until there 
are clear signs of higher inflation.  
•  On the other hand, the Norwegian economy is growing at a solid pace. Capacity utilisation is 
slightly  above  the  normal  level  and  increasing,  and  house  prices  and  household  debt  are 
rising sharply. In isolation this would call for a tightening of monetary policy.  
Norges  Bank  has  decided  to  use  some  time  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target  and  has  chosen  to 
gradually shift to a less expansionary stance.  
The  assessments  of  economic  developments  ahead  will  determine  how  gradual  the  interest  rate 
increase will be. Our current assessment implies an interest rate path where the interest rate is raised 
by about 1 percentage point this year. This is also in line with expectations in the money and foreign 
exchange markets.  
The interest rate was last raised in March. In line with the forecast in the March Inflation Report, there 
are prospects of another interest rate increase in the second quarter – at the monetary policy meeting 
in May or June – and a further increase thereafter.  
2 
 BIS Review 39/2006
Conclusion 
Increased globalisation and the ensuing terms of trade improvements have exposed the Norwegian 
economy  to  a  significant  upward  income  shock.  This  has  amplified  the  domestic  upswing.  So  far, 
however,  strong  growth  impulses  have  not  led  to  major  imbalances  in  the  labour  market  or  strong 
upward wage and price pressures.  
This may be seen as an indication that the macroeconomic framework, most notably the fiscal and 
monetary policy regimes, has been quite successful so far in shielding the Norwegian economy from 
excessive fluctuations. More importantly, as long as we adhere to the macroeconomic framework, it 
will shield the economy when oil prices eventually fall and our terms of trade are reversed.  
Thank you for your attention!  
BIS Review 39/2006 
 3
