Timothy F Geithner: Policy implications of global imbalances 
 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the Financial Imbalances Conference at Chatham House, London, 23 January 
2006. 
 Good morning. 
Let me first thank the organizers of this conference for inviting me to speak to you today. Over the next 
two days you will focus on the substantial financial imbalances that characterize the world economy 
today. The size and duration of these imbalances, perhaps the most visible of which is the U.S. current 
account  deficit,  present  challenges—and  risks—for  the  world  economy.  Understanding  the  forces 
behind the international capital flows and the associated gaps between saving and investment within 
countries  that  led  to  these  imbalances  is  of  crucial  importance  to  economic  policymakers  as  they 
struggle to consider the implications of the imbalances on future economic growth. You have brought 
together an excellent group of people to explore these issues.  
You meet in the context of some remarkable developments in the world economy. I thought I would 
begin by touching on some that bear most directly on the subject of your conference. 
Naturally, as a central banker, I’ll begin by observing that over the past two decades, most of the world 
has  experienced  a  substantial  fall  in  inflation.  During  this  period,  the  rate  of  inflation  in  the  United 
States fell to levels broadly consistent with most definitions of price stability, and inflation expectations 
at  longer  horizons  imply  confidence  that  these  gains  will  also  prove  durable.  These  gains  were 
matched in many economies around the world, the result not just of the now widespread practice of 
having  a  central  bank  with  instrument  independence  commit  to  an  implicit  or  explicit  goal  of  price 
stability,  but  also  of  course  of  the  effects  of  global  economic  integration  on  competition  and  labor 
costs.  
Productivity  growth  in  the  United  States  has  continued  at  impressively  strong  levels,  adding  to 
confidence that the acceleration of the last decade will prove durable. It is not difficult to imagine a 
situation in which the driving forces behind U.S. productivity growth eventually manifest themselves in 
other  large mature economies.  So  far,  however,  this  positive  productivity  shock  has not been more 
generalized, and this has some implications for the central topic of this conference. 
Alongside the continuation of the U.S. expansion, global economic activity has strengthened, and the 
pattern  of  global  growth  has  become  somewhat  more  balanced.  Private  investment  spending  is 
growing at respectable rates in the United States and strengthening in much of the world economy. 
Although there will surely be variations over time, the process of economic reform and integration in 
China  and  India  is  likely  to  entail  a  sustained  period  of  relatively  high  investment  growth,  as  firms 
move to capture the higher returns available from adding capital to labor.  
In  addition  to  these  important  changes  in  relative  productivity  outcomes  and  more  general  gains  in 
reducing  inflation,  we  have  seen  a  large  increase  in  the  mobility  of  global  capital  and  a  wider 
dispersion in gaps between saving and investment in national economies. The increase in the size of 
the  U.S.  current  account  deficit  and  the  emergence  of  substantial  surpluses  in  emerging  Asia,  the 
major oil exporters and Japan, reflect changes in saving and investment behaviors, changes driven by 
very different forces in different countries. So far, of course, these imbalances have been financed with 
relative ease, and it is hard to find evidence in risk premia in financial markets of concern about the 
sustainability of these trends. 
One  final  point  about  the  broader  environment:  These  changes  have  taken  place  in  the  context  of 
unusually low forward interest rates, a subject that has been the focus of considerable attention in U.S. 
markets  in  particular.  Forward  nominal  interest  rates  in  the  United  States  at  the  five-  to  ten-year 
horizon  have  stayed  at  quite  low  levels  over  the  past  18  months.  Using  the  inflation  expectations 
derived from the TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities), along with measures of inflation risk 
premia, we can conclude with some confidence that a key factor holding down forward nominal rates 
is a significant reduction in expected future inflation and increased confidence in those expectations. 
Inflation  and  inflation  risk  are  not  the  whole  story  though,  as  forward  real  rates  in  both  the  United 
States and many other countries have declined to unusually low levels.  
BIS Review 3/2006 
 1
How much of the reduction in real forward rates is attributable to a drop in expected real returns and 
how much is a reduction in the real risk premium is still an open question. The low level of long-term 
real rates seems likely to reflect in part a general rise in the supply of global saving relative to demand 
for investment, and some have suggested this phenomenon may reflect concern about prospects for 
future returns on investment. However, there is also evidence from other financial market indicators 
that the required compensation for bearing real risk has fallen, raising the possibility that the declines 
in real rates are due not to pessimism (or at least not entirely), but instead to an increased appetite for, 
or a decreased perception of, real risk.  
Against this backdrop of a favorable but so far uneven productivity shock, lower inflation expectations 
and  risk  premia,  greater  economic  and  financial  integration,  and  divergent  saving  and  investment 
patterns, what are the implications of the imbalances that are the subject of this conference? 
It is important to note that the greater dispersion in external imbalances is the inevitable result of a 
fundamentally  healthy  change  in  the  world  economy.  As  the  world  progresses  toward  increasingly 
integrated financial and goods markets, other things being equal, we would expect to see an increase 
in the number of countries with surpluses or deficits, and larger surpluses and deficits, as flows of both 
assets and goods work to equalize desired saving and investment around the world.  
If we were confident that the imbalances we observe simply reflected a more efficient allocation of the 
world’s  stock  of  saving  to  its  most  productive  uses,  if  relative  prices  adjusted  freely  in  response  to 
changing fundamentals, and if economies were flexible and agile in adapting to those changes, then 
we  might  also  reasonably  expect  these  imbalances  to  rise  and  fall  through  smooth  and  gradual 
adjustments in relative prices and flows of goods and services. Of course, this is not quite the world 
we live in today.  
The fact that we’re discussing the issue of the sustainability at all reflects concern that the pattern of 
global  capital  flows  we  see  today  in  unlikely  to  be  consistent  with  the  likely  evolution  of  economic 
fundamentals over time. This suggests that it is worth focusing attention on the sustainability of the 
forces  behind  these  capital  flows  rather  than  simply  concluding  from  the  favorable  assessment  of 
underlying risk and return in today’s financial prices that these imbalances can persist for a protracted 
period of time.  
The size and durability of the imbalances that characterize the world economy today reflect a myriad 
of different forces: from differences in actual and  potential growth rates, the degree of openness of 
financial and product markets, the type of exchange rate regime in place, the borrowing requirements 
of the sovereign, the degree of financial market development, the extent of the official safety nets, to 
differences in attitudes toward risk and expectations about the future. The interactions of these forces 
are  complex  and  vary  over  time.  And  this  limits  our  capacity  to  judge  the  sustainable  level  of 
imbalances. 
On its face, the increase in the size of the U.S. current account deficit suggests that the United States 
has  been  the  principal  beneficiary  of  the  increased  availability  of  global  savings  and  the  greater 
apparent willingness of the world’s savers to invest outside their home countries. At the same time, 
however,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  if  the  deficit  continues  to  run  at  a  level  close  to  7  percent  of 
GDP—and most forecasts assume it will for some time—the net international investment position of 
the United States will deteriorate sharply, U.S. net obligations to the rest of the world will rise to a very 
substantial  share  of  GDP,  and  a  growing  share  of  U.S.  income  will  have  to  go  to  service  those 
obligations. This fact alone suggests that something will have to give eventually, and this raises the 
interesting question of how these imbalances have persisted on a path that seems unsustainable with 
so little evidence of rising risk premia.  
Part of the answer seems to lie in the fact that these capital inflows into the United States, however, 
are not solely the result of the decisions of private actors, but reflect official intervention by countries 
with exchange rate regimes tied to the dollar, including those in Asia and the major oil exporters.  
Research at the Federal Reserve and outside suggests the scale of foreign official accumulation of 
U.S.  assets has  put downward pressure on U.S.  interest  rates, with  estimates  of  the effect  ranging 
from small to quite significant. If this is right, the apparent reduction in real rates is less likely to signal 
concern  over  expectations  of  future  growth  and  future  returns  on  investment,  and  is  more  likely  to 
signal  the  special  consequences  of  these  exchange  rate  arrangements  and  their  effects  on  private 
behavior, as well as the increase in international capital mobility.  
What then can we say about the implications of the pattern of imbalances we see today?  
2 
 BIS Review 3/2006
The trajectory of the U.S. current account deficit has led most observers to conclude the U.S. external 
imbalance is unsustainably large and will have to come down over time. Beyond this general judgment 
about unsustainability,  there  is  little consensus  on how  this  adjustment process  will  unfold  or  on  its 
implications  for  economic  activity  and  financial  markets.  The  plausible  outcomes  range  from  the 
gradual  and  benign  to  the  more  precipitous  and  damaging.  The  size  of  the  imbalance  and  the 
inevitability  of  eventual  adjustment,  however,  mean  that  the  world  will  be  living  for  a  considerable 
period of time with some risk of large movements in relative prices, greater volatility in asset prices, 
and periods of slower growth in the United States and in the rest of the world.  
That said, a number of observers have suggested that living with these imbalances for an extended 
period  of  time  presents  very  little  risk  to  the  U.S.  and  world  economy.  These  arguments  are  worth 
some attention. 
One view is that the rise in the surplus saving of the rest of the world, the relative ease with which 
capital  now  moves  across  borders,  and  the  increase  in  the  relative  attractiveness  of  claims  on  the 
United States together may suggest that the world can sustain larger imbalances, more easily, for a 
longer period of time than would have been possible in the absence of these conditions. This is true. 
But even if we could be confident that the world would be comfortable financing the United States on 
these terms for some time, that fact alone does not mean that it is prudent for the United States to 
continue borrowing on this scale, particularly given that doing so means that the net obligations of the 
United States to the rest of the world are likely to rise sharply relative to GDP.  
Another argument for being relatively sanguine about the risks evokes the so-called Lawson Doctrine, 
noting  that  when  imbalances  are  principally  the  reflection  of  the  decisions  of  private  savers  and 
investors, those imbalances should not be a concern to policymakers. This may be true, but it does not 
apply to the present circumstances. The fact that we are using a substantial part of the resources we 
are borrowing from the rest of the world to finance an unsustainable level of public dissaving leaves us 
more  vulnerable  than  if  those  resources  were  being  used  for  productive  private  investment.  Large 
structural fiscal deficits limit the size of the sustainable external imbalance for any country, even the 
United  States,  and  they  necessarily  increase  concern  about  the  terms  on  which  we  are  likely  to 
finance the present imbalance.  
There  is  also  a  view  that  the  exchange  rate  arrangements  that  exist  in  the  present  context—the 
substantial share of the world economy that shadows the dollar—should increase our confidence that 
this  pattern  of  imbalances  could  be  financed  without  stress  for  some  time.  But  a  prolonged 
continuation of the exchange rate arrangements that have given rise to the large increase in foreign 
official investments in U.S. financial assets is unlikely to be consistent with the domestic requirements 
of those economies, and for this reason many are already in the process of change. The impact of a 
reduction  in  the  scale  of  official  accumulation  of  dollar  assets  could  potentially  be  fully  offset  by 
increases  in  purchases  by  private  investors.  But  even  in  the  context  of  a  continued  high  degree  of 
confidence in the relative return on claims on the United States, it is hard to know with confidence how 
the preferences of private savers will respond to the gradual evolution in their nation’s exchange rate 
regimes that is now underway.  
Some have drawn comfort from the adjustment process experienced by other economies with large 
external deficits. Industrial countries that have gone through a process of current account rebalancing 
have not generally experienced particularly damaging moves in interest rates or exchange rates. But 
the present circumstances seem sufficiently different from historical precedent that history may not be 
a  particularly  useful  guide.  And  even  in  these  past  cases,  the  adjustment  process  did  entail  a 
slowdown in GDP growth, increasing unemployment, and a sharp fall in investment.  
Finally, there is the belief that the nature of U.S. external assets and liabilities mitigate the potential 
problems ahead. U.S. residents do in fact earn more on their assets than they pay on their liabilities, 
and  U.S.  firms  operating  abroad  earn  a  higher  rate  of  return  than  do  foreign  firms  operating  in  the 
United  States.  Also,  the  fact  that U.S. gross  assets  are  denominated  in  foreign  currencies but  U.S. 
liabilities  are  mainly  denominated  in  dollars  implies  that  even  a  modest  rise  in  the  value  of  other 
currencies relative to the dollar can significantly reduce our net liability position by increasing the value 
of U.S. gross foreign assets relative to foreign liabilities.  
Nevertheless,  going  forward,  the  scope  for  positive  net  factor  payments  from  abroad  and  sizable 
valuation effects is limited. The U.S. trade deficit is now roughly the size of the current account deficit, 
and  U.S.  net  interest  earnings  have  fallen  to  quite  low  levels.  The  continuing  buildup  in  liabilities 
should  soon  push  U.S.  net  investment  income  balances  into  deficit,  with  progressively  larger  net 
transfers  of  income  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  In  that  event,  net  income  flows  will  begin  to  boost  the 
BIS Review 3/2006 
 3
nation's  current  account  deficit  instead  of  reducing  it,  reinforcing  the  deterioration  in  net  liability 
position of the United States. 
The arguments I have just described highlight factors that may improve the odds of a more protracted, 
gradual and benign scenario, but they do not really alter the general conclusion that these imbalances 
are unsustainable and that they will need to unwind at some point.  
Time  does  not  necessarily  help.  The  longer  these  gaps  continue  to  build,  the  greater  the  ultimate 
adjustment required, and the greater the risks that accompany that process.  
What  does  this  mean  for  economic  policy  in  the  United  States  and  the  rest  of  the  world?  The 
conventional  policy  prescription  includes  the  encouragement  of  higher  public  savings  in  the  United 
States,  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  designed  to  increase  flexibility  and  raise  potential 
growth rates in economies outside the United States, and movement toward increased exchange rate 
flexibility. The principal rationale for each of these policies is independent of the external imperative. 
But the fact that these policies would contribute to a benign external adjustment process strengthens 
the case for action on these fronts.  
Improving  the  U.S.  fiscal  position  is  the  most  effective  means  we  have  available  to  reduce  our 
vulnerability  during  this  prolonged  period  of  adjustment.  The  United  States  needs  to  produce  a 
substantial  reduction  in  its  structural  deficit  over  the  medium  term  and  begin  to  reduce  the  more 
dramatic  longer  term  gap  between  resources  and  commitments.  And  the  United  States  needs  to 
restore a reasonable cushion in its structural budget balance to help deal with future shocks.  
If we are unable to begin to generate more confidence in the capacity of the U.S. political system to 
produce  these  improvements,  we  would  face  a  greater  risk  of  future  increases  in  risk  premia.  And 
even though substantial fiscal consolidation would not by itself bring the external imbalance down to a 
more sustainable level, it would improve the prospect for a smoother adjustment to that outcome.  
The general risk inherent in these imbalances—the risk of more adverse growth outcomes and asset 
price volatility—reinforces the importance of sustaining the strength and resilience of the U.S. financial 
system. Our financial system today is in substantially stronger shape than it was even in the recent 
past, and the major institutions now appear to be managed so that they are less vulnerable to the type 
and magnitude of shocks they’ve experienced in the past couple decades.  
What is important of course is that they are as well positioned to deal with the full range of potential 
future  risks.  This  requires  continued  investments  in  risk  management  and  controls  to  match  the 
increasing  complexity  of  these  challenges,  and  it  requires  a  cushion  of  capital  and  liquidity  large 
enough to capture the potential risk of losses in a less favorable macroeconomic environment.  
The increase in the flexibility and resilience of the U.S. economy over the past two decades has a lot 
to  do  with  the  increased  openness  of  the  U.S.  economy.  And  sustaining  this  flexibility,  which  is  so 
important  to  our  capacity  to  adjust  to  shocks,  requires  that  we  continue  to  support  the  process  of 
openness and economic integration. We jeopardize future income gains if we are unable to sustain 
support in the United States for what has been a relatively open trade policy. How effective we are in 
meeting this political challenge is likely to depend significantly on how effective we are in improving 
educational  opportunity  and  achievement  in  the  United  States,  and  perhaps  also  in  improving  the 
design of the temporary assistance we provide those individuals who bear the brunt of the adjustment 
costs that come with greater global economic integration.  
These policies by the United States would help improve the prospects of a more benign adjustment 
process.  But  they  would  not  be  sufficient  to  produce  a  more  favorable  adjustment  path.  A  more 
favorable adjustment scenario would require policy changes in each of the major economic areas.  
For global growth to be sustained at a reasonably strong pace during this period of adjustment, the 
desirable  increase  in  U.S.  savings,  and  the  necessary  slowing  in  U.S.  domestic  demand  growth 
relative  to  growth  of  U.S.  output,  would  have  to  be  complemented  by  stronger  domestic  demand 
growth  outside  the  United  States,  absorbing  a  larger  share  of  national  savings.  Exchange  rate 
regimes, where they are currently closely tied to the dollar, will have to become more flexible, allowing 
exchange rates to adjust in response to changing fundamentals. Reforms to financial systems and to 
social  safety  nets  over  time  would  help  reduce  the  need  for  exceptionally  high  levels  of  domestic 
saving we see in many countries.  
The global nature of these requirements does not imply that the United States can put the principal 
burden for adjustment on others. If we focus adequate political capital on the factors within our control, 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2006
we will have more credibility internationally in encouraging policy changes outside the United States 
that might reduce our collective risks in the adjustment process ahead. 
What does this mean for monetary policy? 
Monetary  policy  itself  cannot  sensibly  be  directed  at  reducing  imbalances,  but  the  past  and  future 
evolution of global capital flows will of course matter for monetary policy by virtue of their impact on the 
outlook for output and inflation. For example, the forces that seem to be supporting an unusual level of 
capital flows into the United States may be materially dampening the level of forward nominal and real 
interest  rates,  and  other  things  being  equal,  this  would  tend  to  produce  higher  levels  of  demand 
growth than would prevail in the absence of those factors. Thus, the factors that have contributed to 
this pattern of external imbalances complicate the task of judging the appropriate stance of monetary 
policy in the United States today.  
Perhaps it makes sense to conclude with the more general observation that changes in the size of 
global  capital  flows  and  the  accompanying  imbalances  increase  the  importance  of  sustaining  the 
credibility  of  monetary  policy,  because  they  increase  the  costs  of  a  loss  of  credibility  or  a  negative 
shock  to  credibility.  We  live  with  considerable  uncertainty  about  the  sustainability  of  the  pattern  of 
global capital flows and the relatively low risk premia that prevail today. That uncertainty necessarily 
adds to the normally substantial degree of uncertainty we face in making monetary policy judgments. 
And it reinforces the case for preserving confidence in our commitment to keep underlying inflation low 
over  time, and  for retaining  the capacity  to  respond  with  flexibility  to  the challenges we  face  in  this 
uncertain world. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 3/2006 
 5
