T T Mboweni: The economic and financial context for supply chain 
management 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Professional Society 
for Supply Chain Management (SAPICS) Conference, Sun City, 5 June 2006. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  address  this  conference.  I  am  certain  that  the 
efforts of your members in ensuring successful supply chain logistics in many sectors have played a 
very important supportive role in South Africa’s impressive economic achievements in recent years. 
Your successes are also evidenced by the moon rock you have secured so successfully for this event! 
No doubt you will continue to contribute meaningfully to making 2006 yet another year of significant 
positive  growth  in  our  economy.  Customers  worldwide  are  demanding  ever  higher  levels  of  service 
and  efficiency.  And  your  society  is  to  be  commended  for  its  sterling  work  in  ensuring  that  South 
Africa’s growth potential is enhanced as companies adopt improved supply chain logistics in order to 
compete more effectively in a global environment that is characterised by increasing competitiveness 
and just-in-time processing and delivery. Of course, the economic context within which you operate is 
crucial to your success, too. 
Recent domestic economic developments 
2. 
The  South  African  economy  has  been  in  an  upswing  since  September  1999,  making  the  current 
business  cycle  expansion  phase  the  longest  on  record.  The  upswing  continues  apace,  with  strong 
growth in the South African economy during the first quarter of 2006 as global growth provided a solid 
tailwind,  inflation  pressures  were  relatively  calm  and  interest  rates  were  steady.  This  is  quite  a 
remarkable  achievement,  given  the  domestic,  regional  and  international  challenges  that  have 
confronted South Africa during the course of this upswing. 
Real gross domestic product recorded an average annual growth rate of almost 5 per cent for the year 
2005, which constitutes the highest annual growth rate since 1984. Although there was a deceleration 
from 4,1 per cent in the third quarter to 3,2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2005, growth accelerated 
once again in the first quarter of 2006 to 4,2 per cent. Despite negative growth being recorded in the 
primary sector, the acceleration in growth was achieved due to the recovery in manufacturing output 
and continued buoyancy in other secondary and tertiary sectors. The seasonally adjusted real value 
added by the agriculture, forestry and fishing industry decreased by an annualised rate of 6,9 per cent 
during the first quarter of 2006 mainly due to the poor performance in the production of field crops. 
Following the decrease of 5,4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2005, real value added by the mining 
and quarrying industry decreased at an annualised rate of 2,9 per cent during the first quarter of 2006 
due  mainly  to  declining  gold  production.  However,  growth  in  the  real  value  added  in  manufacturing 
recovered  significantly  in  the  first  quarter  as  other  sectors  such  as  construction,  trade  and  other 
services remained extremely buoyant in the first quarter of 2006. The real value added by the non-
agricultural industries (excluding the impact of the volatile agriculture industry) for the first quarter of 
2006 increased by 4,7 per cent compared with the fourth quarter of 2005. 
Importantly for our members, the manufacturing sector is in an expansionary phase. The seasonally 
adjusted PMI for May, released this past week, showed the manufacturing sector expanded for the 
third  consecutive  month  from  a  level  of  54,3  in  April  to  57,6  in  May.  Some  of  the  components  that 
strengthened include the business activity component, new sales orders and suppliers’ performance. 
However, the PMI indicates that inventories fell from April’s level. And indications are that inventory 
investments in the manufacturing sector slowed in the fourth quarter of last year partly because of low 
crude oil imports and problems with the change to unleaded petrol. Many of these areas affect the 
members  of  your  association  but  I  am  sure  you  are  generally  satisfied  with  the  economy’s 
performance, thus far. 
BIS Review 49/2006 
 1
to 
improve  key 
Growth in real gross domestic product in South Africa is expected to remain above the 4-per-cent level 
for this year as a whole, driven primarily by the robust trend in domestic expenditure. According to the 
April 2006 Reuters consensus forecasts, the South African economy is expected to grow at 4,5 per 
cent  in  2006  and  2007,  and  by  5,0  per  cent  in  2008.  In  its  Budget  Review,  the  National  Treasury 
expects economic growth of 4,9 and 4,7 per cent for 2006 and 2007, respectively. The strong growth 
momentum  in  household  consumption  expenditure  and  gross  fixed  capital  formation  is  expected  to 
continue to be the prime driver of growth over the medium term. 
Despite the recent increases in the fuel price which may somewhat dampen household spending on 
other items, growth in consumption expenditure is expected to remain robust as a result of sustained 
real disposable income growth due to expected continued generation of employment and real salary 
and wage increases. This, together with the favourable wealth effects of higher asset prices, the lower 
interest  rate  environment  and  the  up  to  now  contained  inflationary  pressures,  as  well  as  the 
government’s  personal  income  tax  relief  package  announced  in  the  February  2006  Budget,  should 
continue  to  sustain  the  expected  growth  momentum  in  real  household  spending.  Government  also 
remains committed to its objective of generating long-term sustainable economic growth through its 
planned spending on public-sector infrastructure and deeper micro-economic interventions (structural 
reforms). 
Government’s  continued  commitment 
infrastructure  and  social  development 
programmes was highlighted emphatically in the President’s state-of-the-nation address to Parliament 
earlier this year, when he announced that the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of South Africa 
(ASGISA) would serve as catalyst to efforts to halve unemployment by 2014. Under ASGISA, large 
investments  will  be  made  in  various  sectors  to  improve  infrastructure.  The  President  announced  a 
massive  investment  initiative  and  promised  that  government  would  tackle  the  skills  shortages  and 
speed up the process of achieving even higher levels of real economic growth. Government intends 
investing R372 billion within three years in order to push economic growth to higher levels. 
Business confidence levels generally remain upbeat and private-sector investment sentiment remains 
strong.  This  has  probably  been  meaningfully  supported  by  the  announced  increases  in  parastatal 
capital expenditure. The surge in business investment is also expected to translate into higher export 
volumes. A number of new projects in the mining of iron ore and gold have been identified and should 
commence in the medium term. Vehicle manufacturers are in the process of expanding capacity and 
cement companies have also been expanding their capacity in order to meet the construction sector’s 
demand for cement. Capital formation in the construction and commerce sectors should continue to 
benefit from robust domestic demand. In the 2006/07 Budget several projects were announced which 
should  boost  real  fixed  investment  by  the  general  government  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  These 
include: Infrastructural development to improve the provision of water and sanitation; construction of 
schools, clinics and provincial roads; the upgrading of informal settlements; the expansion of economic 
and transport infrastructure; and capital expenditure in preparation for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. The 
work that is underway at Transnet is absolutely central to the micro-economic story going forward.  
The comprehensive preparations for the World Cup Soccer tournament in South Africa in 2010 should 
help to stimulate construction activity significantly i.e. via the anticipated investment in soccer stadiums 
and the expansion and upgrading of accommodation facilities. Eskom, Transnet and Telkom also have 
exceptionally large capital projects in the pipeline and state-owned enterprises are projected to invest 
about  R123  billion  in  capital  expenditure  over  the  next  three  years  (with  R32  billion  of  this  amount 
being spent on rail and port infrastructure).  
As  could  be  expected,  the  lengthy  upswing  in  economic  activity  and  expenditure  has  been 
accompanied  by  a  strong  increase  in  import  volumes.  Import  volumes  primarily  reflect  the  strong 
growth in consumption and investment expenditure and are consequently expected to track the pace 
of growth in domestic demand closely. Accordingly, the current account of the balance of payments 
moved into deficit from 2003 and the deficit amounted to approximately 4½ per cent of gross domestic 
product in 2005. However, relatively favourable prices for most of South Africa’s export commodities 
have  been  helping  to  contain  the  trade  and  current-account  deficits.  At  the  same  time,  significant 
inflows  of  financial  capital  have  been  recorded  over  the  past  three  years,  exceeding  the  current-
account deficits and enabling the South African Reserve Bank to increase the gold and other foreign 
exchange reserves. Export volumes are also expected to continue benefiting from the projected global 
growth,  the  African  Growth  and  Opportunity  Act,  and  Government’s  Motor  Industry  Development 
Programme.  
2 
 BIS Review 49/2006
International economic developments 
3. 
The  international  economic  environment  has  also  supported  domestic  economic  developments. 
Although there was a slight slowdown in the latter part of 2005, global economic activity managed to 
maintain a solid pace of growth throughout the year. This lent further support to the rising trend in the 
international  commodity  prices  which  accelerated  strongly  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2005  and  first 
quarter of 2006. More recently commodity prices have retraced somewhat, but this may prove to be a 
temporary correction given consensus forecasts for global demand. 
Ministers from OECD countries last week expressed optimism about prospects for the world economy, 
with  continued  strong  growth  and  moderate  inflation,  but  warned  that  further  rises  in  energy  prices 
could pose a significant risk. OECD ministers expect the buoyant pace of world growth witnessed in 
the  past  few  years  to  be  sustained  in  the  near  future.  Their  comments  echoed  the  OECD's  twice-
yearly  Economic  Outlook  released  last  week,  which  painted  a  broadly  positive  picture  of  growth 
prospects while sounding a warning over future energy price rises and current-account imbalances. 
OECD  ministers  observed  that  inflation  was  likely  to  remain  under  control,  despite  shrinking  spare 
capacity  and  higher  commodity  prices,  this  being  so  because  heightened  international  competition 
would help contain prices. 
A Wall Street Journal report which was also published last week nevertheless sounded a warning and 
suggested  that  if  the  story  of  today's  international  economy  were  handed  down  as  a  fable,  recent 
developments might result in it being called "Global Goldilocks Meets the Three Bears." The reasoning 
behind this is that “Goldilocks -- a.k.a. the world economy -- has been enjoying a not-too-hot, not-too-
cold 4-per-cent plus growth rate over the past four years thanks to steady prices”, robust U.S. growth 
and  the  new  wealth  experienced  by  emerging  markets  countries.  However  the  Journal  goes  on  to 
identify the three growling bears that are threatening to spoil the fairy tale.  
Mama Bear is the “increasing energy insecurity, a beast spawned by rising oil prices but made more 
dangerous  by  escalating  political  risk  afflicting  almost  all  the  major  producers:  Iran,  Iraq,  Nigeria, 
Venezuela,  Russia  and  Saudi  Arabia.  Papa  Bear  comes  in  the  form  of  deflating  housing  prices  in 
several countries. The lost wealth effect of inflated property values, whether gradual or sudden, could 
unsettle not only” American consumers -- but also hit other countries with similar problems of high debt 
ratios and low savings. “Baby Bear is inflation, whose sudden growth in some countries” has spooked 
the global market and sparked the recent sell-off on the expectation that higher interest rates could 
slow corporate growth and consumer spending. The important question is whether recent significant 
market corrections were short-term in nature or whether they were the “sort of overdue awakening to 
risk” that many economists have been predicting. Some are even convinced that markets are finally 
responding  to  "unsustainable  global  imbalances"  --  symbolised  by  record  U.S.  deficits  and  Asian 
surpluses. But as we are all, too aware, markets do over-react from time to time. We hope that calm 
will soon return for there is a lot of value out there.  
Oil  prices,  property  prices  and  inflation  do  not  only  pose  dangers  to  the  US  economy  but  certainly 
pose significant dangers to many other countries including our own. Although economic doomsayers 
often have been proven wrong in the past few years by the remarkable resilience and flexibility of the 
U.S. and other leading economies, the threatening nature of these bears is something to keep a close 
eye on. 
Consumers are more likely to reduce their spending the longer energy prices stay high and the more 
they worry about asset values. Although some may argue that this is not much of a threat given that oil 
prices  have  risen  to  $70  a  barrel  without  slowing  global  growth  or  igniting  second-round  inflation, 
geopolitical risks unabated and could interrupt oil supplies from a number of important oil producers. 
Political risks could escalate even as oil supplies remain tight. We can only hope that the collective 
global political leadership will exercise wisdom in dealing with these geopolitical issues.  
This  time  the  real-estate-bubble  threat  is  more  global  than  is  often  realised.  It  has  become  the 
symptom in many countries across the world that, during this long period of low interest rates, they 
have  developed  similar  problems  in  real  estate.  As  market  pressures  on  such  nations  increase, 
investors  begin  to  worry  more  about  risk  exposure.  Currencies  are  trading  down  in  the  U.S.  and 
several  other  such  economies,  including  our  own,  followed  by  withdrawals  from  equity  and  bond 
markets.  
The release of U.S. consumer-price data for April triggered global shock waves as it was the strongest 
indication yet that prices were rising in a more sustained manner, particularly for services, a large part 
of the U.S. economy in which higher costs are not quickly reversed. The underlying concern therefore 
BIS Review 49/2006 
 3
revolves  around  the  sustainability  of  the  U.S.’s  five-year  expansion  if  the  three  bears  bring  a  triple 
setback  for  U.S.  consumers.  Global  Goldilocks'  safe  escape  depends  on  the  wisdom  and  political 
determination to simultaneously ensure that a benign energy demand/supply equilibrium is restored, 
that global imbalances unwind in an orderly fashion and that inflation is successfully contained. Global 
leaders' ability to tame these bears will be severely tested in the months ahead. In the meantime, the 
South African Reserve Bank will continue to monitor important indicators to ensure that the monetary 
policy stance remains appropriate.  
The outlook for inflation  
5. 
The primary role of the South African Reserve Bank in the domestic economy is to target inflation for 
the benefit of all economic players. CPIX inflation has remained within the target range for the past 32 
months and the Monetary Policy Committee has been greatly encouraged by the evolution of some of 
the  components  of  CPIX.  It  has  become  clear  that  there  has  been  a  steady  convergence  of  the 
inflation rates of many of the categories of goods and services which make up the index to within the 
target range of 3-6 per cent. In the meantime, domestic monetary policy has continued to emphasise 
price  stability  and  has  succeeded  admirably  in  reducing  inflation  expectations.  According  to  the 
Bureau for Economic Research inflation expectations survey, inflation expectations for 2006, 2007 and 
2008  of  all  the  categories  of  respondents  (business  executives,  trade  union  officials  and  financial 
analysts) are below 5 per cent which is nicely within the inflation target range. 
However there are a number of unfavourable trends and risk factors. These include rising crude oil 
prices  and  their  impact  on  global  growth  and  inflation,  including  the  possibility  that  secondary 
inflationary pressures may be stimulated; the recent acceleration in domestic producer price inflation; 
the  recent  movements  in  the  rand  exchange  rate;  and  the  possibility  of  rising  domestic  capacity 
constraints. 
Favourable factors contributing to downside inflation risks include increased competition from Asia that 
can potentially lower price pressure on a range of internationally traded goods; moderate unit labour 
costs;  encouraging  administrative  prices  trends;  and  a  continued  benign  global  inflationary 
environment. 
Conclusion 
6.  
In  conclusion,  the  macroeconomic  environment  remains  extremely  favourable  for  sustained  growth. 
The South African Reserve Bank will continue to play its part in strengthening South Africa’s economic 
growth  potential.  This  we will  do  by  striving  for  the appropriate  policy  setting  in  containing inflation. 
This,  we  are  convinced,  will  provide  the  supporting  factor  for  enhanced  growth,  development  and 
employment  creation.  The  significant  long-term  decline  in  the  inventory  to  GDP  ratio  that  we  have 
witnessed over the years is testimony to SAPICS’ important role. I wish you every success with this 
year’s conference and trust that your deliberations and networking during the next few days will lead to 
your  members  embracing  the  latest  technologies  and  supply  chain  methods  to  contribute  towards 
higher levels of productivity outcomes in the years ahead. Conferences of this nature are extremely 
important vehicles for enhancing knowledge transfer and ensuring a greater infusion of expertise in 
the  economy.  This  is  very  important  for  boosting  economic  performance,  competitiveness  and 
employment creation. Let us all do our bit. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 49/2006
