Panagiotis Thomopoulos: Banking regulation in Europe - a brief overview of 
current developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Panagiotis  Thomopoulos,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  an  event 
organised  by  the  European  Bank  Training  Network  and  the  Hellenic  Bank  Association,  Athens, 
4 May 2006.  
 Good evening, Ladies and Gentlemen.  
Allow me to begin by welcoming you to Athens and wishing you a pleasant stay. It is a great pleasure 
and honour for me to address such a distinguished audience. I would also like to seize this opportunity 
to thank the European Bank Training Network and the Hellenic Bank Association for organising this 
event and all of you for your participation. 
My objective here today is to provide you with a brief overview of the current developments in banking 
regulation  that  are  taking  shape  in  the  European  “arena”,  and  to  outline  the  main  challenges  that 
European  regulators  and  supervisors  face,  as  the  degree  of  integration  in  the  European  financial 
market increases. 
Before presenting you with some of my thoughts on this subject - a subject which, I am sure, all of you 
know well - I should like to say a few words about Greece, where I have a comparative advantage. 
Disciplined  by  the  requirements  of  euro  area  candidacy  and  membership,  Greece  succeeded  in 
lowering its inflation rate from over 16% in the fifteen years until almost the mid-1990s to just above 
3% from 2000 onwards. At the same time, GDP growth rose from less than 1% in the first period to 
almost 4% over the last ten years. The Greek economic scene has also been transformed thanks to 
the advantages derived from euro area membership, including the stable macroeconomic environment 
and low interest rates. The Olympic Games hosted in Athens in 2004 contributed, in turn, to creating a 
favourable  environment  for  growth.  However,  liberalisation  and  privatisations,  as  well  as  a 
reinvigorated private entrepreneurial spirit, have been the principal growth-driving forces. 
This  spirit  has  manifested  itself  in  Greece's  re-orientation  from  an  inward-  to  an  outward-looking 
economy.  We  now  see  ourselves  as  a  dynamic  part  of  South-East  Europe,  where  large  Greek 
communities, numbering hundreds of thousands, after taking root in the distant past, continued over 
the centuries to play an important role in the economic and social life of their respective countries. The 
story  of  these  communities  goes  back  a  long  way,  beginning  in  ancient  Greece,  followed  by  5 
centuries  under  the  Roman  Empire,  then  continuing  for  1,000  years  during  Byzantium.  Then  came 
nearly  600  years  of  Ottoman  rule  and,  more  recently,  the  communist  take-over  of  these  countries, 
which resulted in an expulsion of all non-communist Greeks. After an interlude of some 50 years, the 
historic forces are back at work. More than 5,000 Greek companies now operate in the neighbouring 
Balkan countries and are among the main foreign investors in Bulgaria, Fyrom, Romania, Albania and, 
more  recently,  Serbia.  This  development  has  resulted  in  a  delocalisation  of  Greek  industry  to  our 
neighbouring countries and a steady inflow of migrant workers to Greece. 
The  Greek  banking  sector  has  also  undergone  a  radical  transformation,  evolving  from  the  highly 
regulated sector it was 15 years ago, when the Bank of Greece set over 150 different levels of interest 
rates  to  become  a  free,  competitive  and  dynamic  sector  and  a  key  pillar  in  Greece’s  successful 
economic performance. Despite their relatively small size by European standards, the Greek banks '  
high  profitability  has  enabled  them  to  build  sound  foundations.  Just  like  other  sectors,  the  Greek 
banking sector has also expanded to South-East Europe. This offers Greek banks the opportunity to 
benefit  from  the  growth  potential  of  a  rapidly  developing  region  with  low  levels  of  financial 
intermediation, to increase their size and efficiency, and to continue to flourish in the very competitive 
international financial environment. The market penetration of Greek banks, based on their total assets 
in the neighbouring countries, ranges from 11% to over 30%. Moreover, the foreign claims of Greek 
commercial banks on the Balkan region countries have reached almost €11 billion, which represents 
25% of Greek banks’ total foreign claims and 58% of their own funds. 
Unfortunately, the state of the Greek economy is far from rosy and many challenges still lie ahead. 
After euro area entry, fiscal discipline was relaxed and during the last five years the fiscal deficit has, 
in  fact,  worsened.  Only  this  year  has  it  been  budgeted  to  fall  below  3%  of  GDP,  while  continuous 
efforts will have to be maintained to reach a balanced position, as required by the EU. 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 1
Moreover,  the  euphoria  after  euro  area  entry  prompted  a  ''  money  illusion  ''  with  labour  unions 
demanding and obtaining high nominal wage increases, regardless of the impact on real incomes and 
unemployment, as a result of the the loss of external competitiveness. This makes it even more urgent 
and  imperative  to  raise  productivity  growth  further  and  develop  high  value-  added  activities.  We, 
therefore,  need  to  intensify  our  structural  adjustment  efforts  in  the  labour  and  product  markets, 
promote  innovation  and  technology,  and  ease  bureaucratic  restrictions,  as  recommended  in  the 
Lisbon agenda. My personal opinion is that the morass of bureaucracy is the main impediment to a 
faster rate of growth. The Greek banking sector thus faces a double challenge: it has to apply all of the 
new regulations, control mechanisms and risk-based methods (Basel II), while expanding rapidly both 
in Greece and abroad, and, at the same time, from a risk management and internal control point of 
view,  it  has  to  rapidly  integrate  its  subsidiaries  and  branches  in  South-East  Europe,  where  the 
environment still differs from that of the average euro area country. Expansion toward potentially much 
larger markets - Turkey, Poland and Egypt today and Ukraine tomorrow - calls for even better internal 
risk exposure-monitoring systems. This is a parameter which the new capital adequacy framework, in 
combination with the recently established regulatory framework on internal control, deals with. 
The  Bank  of  Greece,  as  the  supervisory  authority,  has  indeed  been  adapting  its  regulatory  and 
supervision  apparatus  to  deal  with  the  new  challenges,  and  has  encouraged  the  banking  sector  to 
maintain  a  high  Capital  Adequacy  Ratio  (13%  at  the  end  of  last  year).  This  provides  a  more  than 
adequate buffer against the fact that uncovered non-performing loans are still slightly higher in Greece 
than on average in the euro area and the fact that Greek banks are still benefiting from a favourable 
cyclical phase and, therefore, have not yet experienced the adverse effects of a slowdown. In parallel, 
given the specificities of Greece ' s banking system and economy, the Bank of Greece has imposed 
stricter measures on some banks (e.g. a CAR much higher than 8%). Likewise, given the rapid growth 
of lending to households (30% on average since 2001), the Bank of Greece has instructed banks that 
debt-servicing  burdens  on  households should  not  exceed 30-40%  of  disposable  household  income. 
While  adhering  to  the  risk-based approach,  which  gives  individual  banks  more  freedom  to estimate 
their possible losses and manage their own risks, the Bank of Greece considers that the supervisory 
authorities should always be alert (not to say, vigilant) and, when necessary, not only adjust the capital 
requirements of individual banks, but also periodically test the internal control mechanisms and risk 
management  systems,  in  the  context  of  Pillar  III.  Only  as  a  last  resort  should  other  more  direct 
measures be applied.  
Current developments 
Now,  getting  back  to  the  subject  of  today  '  s  conference:  During  most  of  the  1990s,  efforts  in  the 
financial  services  sector  were  focused  on  achieving  a  smooth  changeover  to  the  single  European 
currency.  However,  once  the  euro  was  successfully  introduced,  attention  shifted  to  improving  the 
functioning of the single European financial market. The late 1990s saw the launching of an ambitious 
plan - the Financial Services Action Plan - , which contained a series of legislative and other measures 
that would allow the European financial services sector to gradually realise its full potential. 
Since then, major changes have taken and are still taking place in the financial regulation landscape. 
The  most  outstanding  of  them,  in  the  banking  sector,  is  the  forthcoming  new  capital  requirements 
framework, which is one of the final measures of the EU Financial Services Action Plan.  
The new capital requirements framework 
The new Directive - or CRD as it is called - will make the existing banking supervision framework more 
risk-sensitive and will promote enhanced risk management among financial institutions. This should 
improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  framework  in  ensuring  financial  stability,  maintaining  confidence  in 
financial  institutions  and  supporting  the  macroeconomic  environment  in  general.  Improved  risk-
sensitivity  in  capital  requirements  should  facilitate  a  more  effective  allocation  of  capital,  thus 
contributing  to  boosting  the  competitiveness  of  the  EU  economy.  There  has,  however,  been  some 
discordance of opinion about certain aspects of the CRD, which has fortunately been largely resolved. 
The new Directive is, in fact, a new supervisory framework of a rather revolutionary nature, adapted to 
the globalised world we live in. Apart from introducing new approaches for the calculation of capital 
requirements,  the  CRD  provides  for  the  establishment  of  intensive  cooperation  and  information 
exchange  mechanisms  among  supervisors,  the  option  of  delegating  tasks  among  supervisors, 
information exchange requirements among banking supervisors, central banks and finance ministries 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2006
in emergency situations, and - a completely new element - disclosure requirements both for banks and 
for supervisors. 
Of  the  above-mentioned  elements,  one  issue  that  has  sparked  much  debate  and,  to  some  extent, 
controversy, is the allocation of supervisory tasks or responsibilities between the home and the host 
supervisor, i.e.: 
(i) 
the  authority  that  supervises  the  parent  bank  (i.e.  the  consolidating  supervisor)  and  the 
authority that supervises a ''significant'' subsidiary bank or 
the supervisor of the bank located in the country of origin and the supervisor located in the 
country where a ''systemically relevant'' branch is established. 
(ii) 
The main concern in this debate is finding the right balance, so as to enhance the efficiency of the 
supervisory arrangements, while ensuring their effectiveness and respecting the existing accountability 
arrangements at the national level. 
The  Bank  of  Greece  has  a  strong  interest  in  the  outcome  of  this  debate,  in  which  it  actively 
participates, in the hope that an optimum balance will be reached. Needless to say, this interest also 
reflects the fact that the Bank of Greece is both the host supervisor for incoming EU banks and the 
home supervisor for outgoing Greek banks, which are expanding mostly to the neighbouring Balkan 
countries,  some  of  which are  preparing  to  implement  the  EU  framework.  In  performing  its roles,  as 
mentioned  above,  the  Bank  of  Greece  consistently  follows  policies  that  encourage  the  European 
integration process and refrains from creating unnecessary administrative burdens or erecting other 
obstacles, without, of course, putting the effectiveness of its supervisory tasks at risk.  
Other regulatory initiatives 
• 
 In  parallel  with  the  preparation  for  the  new  supervisory  framework  '  s  implementation, 
discussions  are  under  way  regarding  the  revision  of  the  Directive  on  Deposit  Guarantee 
Schemes and the Electronic Money Directive.  
Another  major  issue  that  has  sparked  considerable  controversy  concerns  the  so-called 
supervisory  approval  process.  The  debate  was  initially  triggered  by  certain  market 
participants,  who  fear  it  to  be  an  obstacle  to  cross-border  mergers  and  acquisitions.  The 
Bank of Greece and the central banks of many other countries have repeatedly stated that 
isolated cases, in which a misuse of supervisory powers may have occurred, should not be 
generalised. In Greece, as it is the case in the EU as a whole, the supervisory authorities 
base their decisions regarding the merger or acquisition by a foreign institution of a domestic 
bank strictly on supervisory criteria.  
The new decision-making structure for financial services 
Apart from the introduction of the new capital adequacy framework, another radical change that has 
been  introduced  involves  the  decision-making  process  at  the  EU  level  for  the  financial  sector,  also 
known  as  the  Lamfalussy  process.  A  new  financial  services  committee  architecture  has  been 
established. 
The Lamfalussy approach, which was originally elaborated for the securities sector, now extends to 
the banking and insurance sector, as well. Given the time constraint, an extensive presentation of the 
Lamfalussy framework would probably be inappropriate. However, there is reason to underline some 
of its main objectives, which are: 
• 
to  develop  regulation  that  can  adapt  quickly  to  new  market  developments  and  practices, 
support integration and enhance EU competitiveness, and  
to strengthen cross-border and cross-sector cooperation among supervisory authorities and 
the convergence of day-to-day supervisory practices and implementation.  
 It is worth mentioning that the new decision-making structure has not yet reached its full potential. On 
the  one  hand,  there  is  a  some  concern  about  the  potential  proliferation  of  work  among  the  various 
committees and working groups and the consequent risk of confusion and wasted resources. On the 
other hand, the process has started to yield significant benefits, especially in the field of supervisory 
convergence, which should overcompensate for few negative aspects.  
BIS Review 55/2006 
 3
The Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) 
The CEBS, as part of the Lamfalussy framework, is the institutional committee that brings together all 
the banking supervisors of the EU countries and the central banks, including the ECB, as observers. 
The CEBS has three main tasks: 
• 
• 
to provide advice to the Commission; 
to ensure the consistent implementation of Community legislation in the banking sector and 
the convergence of supervisory practices; and  
to promote supervisory cooperation and exchanges of information. 
• 
The  CEBS  has  an  advisory  role  within  the  EU  legislative  procedure.  The  CEBS’s  other  focus  is  to 
promote a consistent approach to banking supervision through increased convergence of standards 
and  practices  and  enhanced  cooperation  and  information  sharing.  The  ultimate  goal  is  to  build  a 
common  supervisory  culture  and  a  practical  operational  network  of  banking  supervisors  within  the 
established EU legal framework. This is of particular importance for the efficient supervision of cross-
border  banking  groups,  as  the  appropriate  dissemination  of  information  relating  to  risks  and  the 
elimination (if possible) of work duplication are expected to reduce the administrative burden and costs 
for the supervised institutions, while reducing the strain on supervisory resources. This does not mean 
that there are no benefits for smaller institutions, with a predominantly domestic or even local focus, as 
convergence will imply the establishment of a level playing field across the EU.  
Next steps 
Changes in the regulatory framework and the organisational structure of the decision-making process 
are  necessary  but  not  sufficient  conditions  for  the  realisation  of  the  EU  financial  market  '  s  strong 
growth potential. This can be more easily achieved if financial integration is accelerated. This belief is 
the driving force behind the new EU financial services strategy for the next 5 years, which is currently 
under  discussion  among  the  EU  institutions,  while,  at  the  same  time,  market  participants  are  being 
consulted. 
Up to now, the elements that seem to be part of this strategy and are closely related to the banking 
sector are the completion of certain ongoing projects (i.e. mortgage credit, consumer credit, the New 
Legal Framework for Payments, etc.) and the undertaking of new legislative initiatives (i.e. investment 
funds, bank accounts, credit intermediaries). 
One  of  the  legislative  initiatives  that  requires  special  attention  is  the  proposal  for  a  Directive  on 
payment services. The proposed Directive, which is part of the wider Single European Payments Area 
Project, aims to establish a modern and harmonised legal and operational framework necessary for 
the creation of an integrated retail payments market, which would enable payments to be made more 
quickly  and  easily  throughout  the  EU.  The  proposal  also  aims  to  introduce  more  competition  in 
payment systems and facilitate the realisation of economies of scale. This will improve efficiency and 
reduce the cost of payment systems for the economy as a whole, an issue of high importance to the 
Bank of Greece, as electronic payments systems are not very much in demand in Greece.  
Future challenges 
Supervisory architecture within the EU 
Lately, several discussions have revolved around the issue of the EU supervisory architecture, one of 
the  arguments  being  that  the  complexity  of  supervisory  arrangements  increases  in  parallel  with  the 
growth  of  a  banking  group  '  s  cross-border  activity.  Without  dismissing  these  concerns,  we  do  not 
share the view that the conduct of cross-border activities is connected with a significant supervisory 
burden. On the contrary, the most important obstacles to the expansion of cross-border activity in the 
banking  sector  are  the  differences  in  the  tax  treatment  of  banking  products  among  different  states, 
cultural differences and the lack of proximity (except in the case of branches). 
Different  views  on  the  supervisory  architecture  advocate  alternative  models  of  supervision,  ranging 
from  complete  centralisation  to  total  decentralisation.  Each  approach  has  its  own  merits,  but  also 
raises a number of complicated strategic and operational issues that need to be addressed. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2006
I believe that in no way should extreme solutions be adopted and instead implement the Lamfalussy 
approach, which though is not a panacea, has the definite advantage of allowing for a lot of flexibility. 
First of all, it provides for a range of different degrees of centralisation in the regulatory process, which 
would  entail  a  more  or  less  harmonised  set  of  rules  depending  on  the  issues  that  need  to  be 
addressed. In this way, it facilitates the swift adaptation of community legislation to new developments 
in  the  financial  markets,  which  in  many  cases  have  cross-sectoral  dimensions.  Moreover,  it  boosts 
regulatory and supervisory convergence while at the same time allowing for the efficient handling of 
differences arising from the fact that the vast majority of the 8,000 credit institutions in the EU operate 
domestically and sometimes even locally, in markets with diverse characteristics and which can better 
be assessed by local supervisors, as the history of the last 50 years has taught us. 
In this context, I think that we can go a long way with the Lamfalussy framework. And I do not think we 
are anywhere near the stage where we can say that we have fully exploited all the possibilities it has 
to offer, at least in the banking sector. In addition, the Lamfalussy framework and the way it is applied 
will evolve over time in response to the evolution of markets.  
The Eurosystem’s perspective 
I would like to conclude my speech with a specific reference to the Eurosystem's perspective of the 
above-mentioned regulatory developments. It is worth noting that the Eurosystem's primary relevant 
concern stems from the fact that it is responsible for monitoring financial stability in the euro area, and 
at  the  same  time  recognises  that  a  smooth-functioning  financial  system  is  a  vital  transmission 
mechanism for ECB monetary policy. 
Within this context, the forthcoming implementation of the new capital requirements framework, as well 
as the strengthening of supervisory cooperation within the EU, are seen as particularly encouraging 
developments, as they considerably enhance the existing financial stability framework. 
Of  course,  as  the  financial  market  landscape  changes  and  the  degree  of  European  financial 
integration increases, new concerns are likely to arise, regarding, for instance, the ability of the system 
as a whole to respond to a possible emergency situation in a timely and effective manner. 
The  Bank  of  Greece,  as  a  member  of  the  Eurosystem,  keeps  a  close  eye  on  developments,  while 
participating actively in the respective discussions within the EU institutions for the establishment of 
common arrangements. 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 5
