David Longworth: The crucial contribution of the financial system and 
monetary policy to economic development 
Remarks by Mr David Longworth, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Conference of the 
Association des économistes québécois, Montréal, 5 May 2006. 
 The panellists in the preceding workshop challenged us economists to be more lucid and convincing. I 
will do my best not to disappoint you with my speech today, especially since I am genuinely grateful for 
this opportunity to address a subject as interesting as the topic of this conference. 
Over the past few days, you have examined some of the broad trends that have been observed in 
finance,  as  well  as  their  implications  for  economic  development.  These  are  matters  of  great  public 
importance. 
I  shall  begin with  a  brief  overview  of  what  research has  taught  us  regarding  the  contribution  of  the 
financial system to economic growth. Then I will discuss the particular role played by efficiency and 
regulation  in  the  good  functioning  of  markets,  and  draw  on  these  theoretical  elements  to  assess 
Canada's successes and how we can better rise to the challenges that await us.  
In the second part of my speech, I will look at the specific contribution of monetary policy to economic 
development. These two parts of my presentation are closely linked since, as you know, the Bank of 
Canada  uses  financial  markets  as  a  channel  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy—which  also 
strives to promote the well-being of Canadians. 
What have we learned from research? 
Many  analysts  have  examined  the  relationship  between  the  financial  system  and  economic 
development.  They  have  uncovered  some  interesting  facts  regarding  the  characteristics  of  the 
financial system—characteristics that contribute to the best possible allocation of savings to productive 
investments,  which  are  themselves  engines  of  economic  growth.  We  know  that  in  some  countries, 
particularly  those  of  continental  Europe,  a  large  part  of  the  allocation  of  capital  is  provided  by  the 
banks,  but  that  elsewhere,  such  as  in  North  America,  this  task  is  performed  primarily  by  financial 
markets. Now, we have learned from the research that a country's economic growth does not depend 
on any specific structure of the financial system. And yet, if not the structure, then what are the factors 
of success? 
A more in-depth analysis sheds some light on the breadth and quality of financial services. The central 
issue is not to understand whether markets should replace intermediation by banks, but rather how 
banks and markets complement each other. As to the size of the financial sector, research reveals that 
it has a straightforward link with economic growth. Historically, we note that the share of this sector in 
the Canadian economy has expanded from 10 per cent of GDP after the Second World War to nearly 
20 per cent today. The financial industry is also one of the most productive in Canada, if we consider 
its relatively modest share in total employment—barely 6 per cent. 
A recent study by the OECD1 emphasizes the quality of regulation of the financial system as a factor 
of economic growth. Its main conclusion is that ". . .regulatory settings that maintain excessively high 
barriers  to  competition  in  banking,  or  that  provide  too  little  protection  for  investors  in  securities 
markets, hamper the development of financial systems, resulting in weaker economic growth." Thus, a 
balance  must  be  struck  between  competition  and  the  protection  of  investors.  This  is  of  particular 
importance for firms that are growing rapidly and that depend on injections of outside capital, such as 
those specialized in information technology and biotechnology. This suggests that the quality of the 
financial sector is reflected in the industrial structure of an economy, and not only in its growth rate. 
                                                      
1   OECD. 2006. "Regulation of Financial Systems and Economic Growth." In Economic Policy. 
BIS Review 39/2006 
 1
The efficiency and stability of the financial system 
At the Bank of Canada, we have devoted considerable effort to promoting the efficiency and stability of 
the financial system. When speaking of the financial system, we are referring not exclusively to banks 
and  markets,  but  rather  to  all  financial  institutions,  their  legal  and  regulatory  framework,  and  their 
infrastructures, such as the payment, clearing, and settlement systems. We say that a financial system 
is functioning well when two conditions are met. First, agents have access to the information they need 
to allocate capital to the most productive investment projects. Second, risk is managed in such a way 
that  it  is  assumed  by  those  who  are  most  prepared  to  do  so.  This  type  of  financial  system  also 
contributes  to  reducing  volatility  in  consumption  and  investment.  It  buffers  the  real  economy  from 
harmful shocks, making growth less volatile. 
Asymmetries  in  the  information  available  to  lenders  and  borrowers  are  an  example  of  frictions  that 
undercut  efficiency.  Typically,  the  borrower  has  better  information  on  the  value  and  the  risks 
associated  with  an  investment  project.  Other  examples  of  frictions  are  operational  inefficiencies 
resulting  from  relatively  weak  competition  among  suppliers  of  financial  services  or  from  market 
distortions caused by poorly designed regulation. If we want to bolster economic growth, we need to 
expose and correct these inefficiencies. However, before sketching out a solution, it may be wise to 
recall the basic principles of sound regulation. 
The efficiency resulting from good regulation 
Let us begin with a basic axiom. Operational efficiency and the optimal allocation of resources in a 
market economy rely on a solid legal and regulatory framework. Fundamental legal principles, such as 
property rights, the rule of law, and respect for contracts, must be in place for market forces to play 
their role and create wealth.  
Therefore,  before  a  government  agency  considers  imposing  a  new  regulation,  three  tests  must  be 
passed: ensure that the regulation is targeted at correcting market failure; ascertain that the proposed 
solution is effective; and see to it that the cure isn't worse than the disease. 
While  satisfying  these  conditions,  regulators  can  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  by 
acting on three complementary paths. The first is to foster competition in domestic and international 
markets.  Competition  stimulates  innovation  and  efficiency.  That  does  not  mean,  however,  that 
authorities  should  simply  get  out  of  the  way  of  market  operators.  Regulators  can  also  promote 
efficiency by—and this is the second path—reducing informational asymmetries through the adoption 
of  certain  transparency  requirements.  Here,  it  is  important  to  focus  not  only  on  the  quantity  of  the 
information revealed, but also on its relevance, which, in turn, depends on the specific nature of the 
market  and  the  preponderance  of  benefits  over  costs.  For  example,  the  optimal  degree  of 
transparency could differ between the bond and the stock markets.  
Finally,  efficiency  is  bolstered  by  promoting  financial  stability  in  general.  When  well-designed  rules 
give  rise  to  systemic  stability,  resources  are  freed  up  that  can  then  be  devoted  to  more  productive 
ends. To a large extent, this is the purpose of the international standards in Basel II, which sets banks' 
regulatory  capital  requirements  as  a  function  of  the  individual  risks  assumed.  The  current  Basel  I 
standards are not that sophisticated.  
The Canadian record 
Now  that  we  have  established  the  principles  for  the  well  functioning  of  the  financial  system  on  the 
basis of research and of some elements of the theory, we can take a look at the Canadian record. 
To gain a broader perspective, let us step back in time to the Porter Commission. In 1964, this Royal 
Commission on Banking and Finance recommended increasing competition, liberalizing markets, and 
creating a regulatory framework conducive to greater efficiency. These proposals may seem mundane 
today, but in postwar Canada the government retained a considerable presence in the economy and 
so they were quite avant-garde. 
The  Royal  Commission  won  the  day,  and  Canada  radically  amended  some  of  its  laws.  The  banks 
reacted  to  the  new  competitive  environment  by  innovating  and  improving  their  efficiency.  Canadian 
institutions  became  global  leaders  while  foreign  banks  lagged,  bound  by  more  restrictive  and  less 
efficient regulatory regimes. For a full 30 years, Canada maintained its lead on the world stage. Recall 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2006
that subsequent revisions to the law allowed greater competition between traditional pillars of finance, 
i.e., banking, insurance, brokerage, and trusts, thus driving down costs and increasing efficiency. 
Over the course of the past decade, efforts have focused on improving prudential regulation, which 
seeks to stabilize institutions and the financial system as a whole. In 1987, the federal government 
created  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  and  the  Financial  Institutions 
Supervisory Committee. The purpose of the latter is to facilitate the exchange of information between 
various federal bodies involved with financial stability, including the Bank of Canada. 
At the Bank, one of our less well-known mandates is to oversee payments infrastructures, especially 
the Large Value Transfer System. The LVTS is an electronic system launched in 1999 and operated 
by  the  Canadian  Payments  Association.  It  meets  or  exceeds  the  highest  international  standards  in 
matters of risk management, and does so at a fraction of the cost. Experience has shown that a solid 
and comprehensive infrastructure contributes greatly to the robustness of a financial system. Allow me 
to take advantage of this occasion to draw your attention to another less-recognized contribution of the 
Bank: its Financial System Review. In it, the Bank presents its current analysis of systemic risks, along 
with articles that tap into the wealth of research that we conduct into financial markets. 
In  other  matters,  the  restructuring  of  Canadian  stock  exchanges  at  the  end  of  the  1990s  allowed 
specialization  and  solidified  our  market  position.  Since  that  time,  the  Montréal  and  Toronto  stock 
exchanges, and the TSX Venture Exchange have experienced remarkable expansion. It remains to be 
seen how the inchoate movement to consolidate markets elsewhere in the world will affect us here, 
and the new challenges it will pose to Canadian stock exchanges. Also, even though North American 
financial markets are more integrated than ever before, their regulation has not always kept pace, and 
non-tariff  barriers,  which  one  would  have  expected  to  disappear  in  an  era  of  free  trade,  persist.  In 
particular, I am thinking of the constraints imposed on small U.S. investors wishing to buy Canadian 
stock.  
All in all, even though the Canadian financial system has continued to develop since the Porter report, 
it is clear that a number of countries have now caught up to us, and some might even say that they 
have surpassed us. 
Challenges for the future 
The competitive capacity of the Canadian economy depends largely on the ability of its financial sector 
to compete on the world stage. Canada needs to follow best practices in regulation. But this does not 
mean  blindly  importing  any  and  all  flavours  of  the  month  in  terms  of  innovations,  not  even  those 
originating with its principal trading partner. 
A  telling  example  will  allow  me  to  illustrate  several  principles.  Enron,  along  with  a  number  of  other 
similar scandals, drove the U.S. Congress to rush into legislating the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX). This 
law regarding corporate governance reflects some sound principles, and several equivalent provisions 
have  been  enacted 
in  Canada.  However,  after  careful  consideration,  Canadian  Securities 
Administrators recently opted not to require external audits of the internal controls of publicly traded 
companies,  as  under  SOX.  Of  course,  large  Canadian  corporations  that  draw  on  U.S.  capital  will 
continue to comply with this law, but Canadian companies with more modest capitalizations—which, 
we should recall, are considerably smaller than their U.S. equivalents—will not have to bear this very 
heavy burden. 
What  conclusions  can  we  draw  from  all  of  this?  That  it  is  essential  that  the  Canadian  regulatory 
framework  be  guided  by  principles  that  are  at  least  as  good  as,  if  not  better  than,  those  of  other 
countries. However, our rules, and their implementation, must be adapted to domestic requirements 
and  reflect  the  diversity  in  size  and  complexity  of  our  publicly  traded  companies.  So  "yes!"  to 
regulatory requirements that vary with size, but "no!" to regulatory requirements that vary by province. 
At this time, I would like to welcome and encourage the harmonization efforts that are ongoing among 
provincial securities commissions, including Quebec's Autorité des marchés financiers.  
Enron  gave  rise  to  the  adoption  of  Sarbanes-Oxley  in  the  United  States.  On  a  smaller  scale,  the 
Portus, Norshield, and Norbourg affairs force us to look at ways to strengthen the application of the 
law in Canada. I do not deny the need to foster the development of a culture of compliance and the 
implementation  of  appropriate  internal  controls  within  financial  institutions.  Unfortunately,  this  is  not 
always enough. Some research suggests than insider trading is not prosecuted with the same vigour 
BIS Review 39/2006 
 3
here  as  in  the  United  States,  tainting  the  reputation  of  Canadian  financial  markets.  It  can  even  be 
argued that this less- than-stellar reputation results in higher financing costs for our firms. 
Thus,  it  is  necessary  that  the  behaviour  of  market  operators  be  monitored  and  that  violators  be 
prosecuted and appropriately punished. A regulatory framework that ensures strict application of the 
law  and  that  punishes  dishonest  players  will  reinforce  the  credibility  of  markets  and  investor 
confidence. 
Rising  to  this  challenge  will  involve  complementary  and  sustained  action  by  several  bodies  at  both 
levels of government: securities commissions, police forces, prosecutors, and the courts. It will also 
require that all stakeholders develop a solid expertise. Integrated Market Enforcement Teams (IMETs), 
which unite various law-enforcement forces, are a step in the right direction. However, we must push 
for  greater  co-operation,  since  only  in  that  way  will  we  be  able  to  mobilize  the  complementary 
expertise of all participants. 
The Canadian economy faces stiff international competition. To continue to prosper, it must be able to 
count on the support of an efficient financial system under a modern regulatory framework. The Porter 
Commission  provides  good  advice  for  legislators  and  regulators:  The  future  of  our  financial  system 
remains ever and always dependent on competition and innovation.  
From monetary policy to economic development 
What is the role of monetary policy in all of this? In a narrow sense, monetary policy is a user of the 
financial  system.  It  targets  the  overnight  rate,  but  relies  on  efficient  markets  to  transmit  its  impact 
throughout the economy. This explains the strong interest of the Bank of Canada in the issues that I 
have discussed earlier. At the same time, solid monetary policy reduces costs and volatility in credit 
markets. It's a matter of give and take, so to speak. More generally, we can further assert that good 
monetary policy, like an efficient financial system, yields considerable benefits to a country's economy. 
We observe a positive feedback mechanism. In short, the Bank of Canada believes that by keeping 
inflation low, stable, and predictable, it maximizes its contribution to the well-being of Canadians. Let 
us look at that in greater detail. 
The adoption of an inflation-targeting regime in 1991 stabilized inflation at approximately 2 per cent 
and  provided  an  anchor  for  medium-  and  long-term  expectations.  Together  with  the  restoration  of 
fiscal health, this stability permitted a decline in both the level and the volatility of interest rates. Over 
the past 15 years or so, we have all witnessed a sharp drop in short- and long-term interest rates, at 
times to levels lower than U.S. rates—which in the past would have been unthinkable. However, what 
is less obvious is the decline in volatility: The standard deviation of the variability of 10-year rates has 
fallen  by  half  since  the  early  1990s,  to  below  U.S.  levels.  These  results  have  certainly  benefited 
Canadian borrowers and, by extension, investments. 
The  reduced  uncertainty  of  all  economic  agents  has  paved  the  way  for  loans  with  longer  terms  to 
maturity. The ratio of long-term debt to total business debt has risen from 45 per cent in 1981 to over 
70 per cent. Also, the benefits extend far beyond financial markets. For example, the duration of union 
contracts has increased, with typical maturities having risen from approximately 25 months at the end 
of the 1970s to nearly 40 months in recent years.  
The  manner in  which monetary  policy  responds  to  fluctuations  in  the  business  cycle also promotes 
greater stability in the economy, which then runs closer to its full capacity. For example, if a negative 
demand shock drives inflation below the 2 per cent target, interest rates are cut or held at lower levels 
than they would otherwise be, so as to bring economic activity back to production potential. Naturally, 
the Bank's actions are symmetric, and interest rates will typically rise when an overheating economy 
threatens to drive inflation above target. 
Having a credible monetary policy also makes it possible to abstain from reacting to most relative price 
shocks. For example, if a sudden jump in the world price of oil translates into a greater-than-expected 
rise in the CPI, the fact that we are focusing on inflation 18 to 24 months down the road means that we 
can ignore this effect, since it will likely have no impact on inflation expectations. 
Finally, monetary policy facilitates the structural adjustments required of the Canadian economy in two 
ways. First, high and variable inflation masks the strong economic signals conveyed by changes in 
relative  prices.  With  inflation  under  control  in  Canada,  firms  and  individuals  are  better  able  to 
understand what rising energy prices and the appreciating Canadian dollar mean for them, and in this 
way, they can make better informed decisions. Second, resources released by sunset industries can 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2006
more  easily  migrate  to  growth  sectors  when  the  economy  is  running  at  full  capacity.  This  is  our 
monetary  policy  strategy  for  the  current  period  of  significant  change.  Fortunately,  the  adjustment 
seems to be unfolding relatively smoothly, despite the real difficulties encountered by some firms and 
their employees. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. I hope that my remarks today have helped to emphasize that behind the abstract 
concept  of  financial  system  efficiency  lies  a  very  important  factor  for  the  competitiveness  of  the 
Canadian economy. 
What  can  be  done  to  improve  things?  I  submit  to  you  that  our  financial  system  does  not  need  a 
comprehensive,  dramatic  reform.  There  is,  however,  a  genuine  need  for  tenacious  efforts  from  all 
financial system participants to bring about a long series of ongoing improvements—especially in the 
area of enforcement, competition, and innovation.  
As  good  economists,  we  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  continue  to  advocate  efficiency.  And,  as  for 
monetary  policy,  rest  assured  that  control  of  inflation  will  help  markets  function  as  efficiently  as 
possible. All of these efforts will strengthen our economy and its ability to generate a high standard of 
living for our fellow citizens. 
BIS Review 39/2006 
 5
