Jean-Claude Trichet: EMU and the euro - successes and challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Institute  of 
International Finance Spring 2006 Membership Meeting, Zurich, 30 March 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  grateful  to  the  organisers  of  this  event  (Institute  of  International  Finance)  for  inviting  me  here 
today and allowing me to share with you my views on EMU and the euro. This year, the euro is in its 
eighth year, with a single currency and a single monetary policy for more than 300 million citizens. All 
in all, EMU has worked very well since its inception. Naturally, there are also significant challenges, 
pointing to the need for change and reform going forward. But allow me to start with the successes to 
date. 
Successes of EMU and the euro 
I would like, first, to refer to the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999, an event of the greatest 
significance that has turned Western Europe into an even more economically integrated area. I will not 
dwell long on this, but the logistics of the cash changeover on 1 January 2002 for over 300 million 
European citizens represented a tremendous organisational and technical challenge. The changeover 
however  took  place  in  a  very  smooth  fashion,  and  the  euro  in  its  physical  embodiment  was 
immediately accepted by the citizens of Europe. The transition to the new banknotes and coins was 
facilitated  by  the  fact  that  the  financial  markets  were  already  fully  accustomed  to  the  euro  since 
January 1999. At that point in time, the introduction of the euro in book-entry form had represented 
another complex task that was carried out successfully and in a perfectly coordinated manner.  
At  the  time  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  a  completely  new  monetary  policy  framework  was 
introduced with the European Central Bank conducting a single, stability-oriented monetary policy for 
the entire euro area. However, the European Central Bank and the euro could inherit the high level of 
credibility achieved by the most stable national currencies and the monetary policy framework of these 
national  central  banks.  The  new  framework,  together  with  the  convergence  of  general  economic 
policies  that  was  implemented  during  the  run-up  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  generated  an 
environment supporting enhanced macroeconomic stability. As you know, the European Central Bank 
aims  to  maintain  price  stability  by  keeping  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium 
term. Looking back at the period since the euro was launched, the inflation rate in the euro area was 
on average very close to 2%. It has occasionally risen above the 2% ceiling as a result of temporary 
disturbances, such as the recent hike in oil prices. However, when such shocks occur, it is important 
for  us  to  ensure  that  price  stability  is  maintained  over  the  medium  term.  In  this  regard,  it  is  worth 
mentioning that inflation expectations over the next 10 years (as measured in particular by Consensus 
Economics)  have  never  exceeded  2%  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  i.e.  exactly  at  the  level 
consistent with a definition of price stability – “below but close to 2%”. During the last seven years, 
monetary policy in the euro area has been successful in maintaining stable prices, thereby making the 
best  possible  contribution  it  can  make  to  sustained  output  growth.  Along  the  way,  stability-oriented 
policies  have  also  directly  improved  the  well-being  of  households,  inter  alia,  by  supporting  the 
purchasing power of their income and savings. 
Nominal and real interest rates have remained at low levels ever since the euro was introduced and 
are expected to stay at historically low levels over a long period of time. Looking back in time, it is 
interesting to note that, all along the yield curve, market interest rates in euro area countries became 
aligned with the lowest – instead of the average – rates prevailing prior to the euro. This low level of 
interest rates is of course supportive of the economic recovery in the euro area, while at the same time 
being  consistent  with  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  Moreover,  interest  rates  have  over  time 
reflected a high degree of “consonance” between the European Central Bank’s policy intentions and 
the market views concerning the course of policy. Such a level of predictability of policy, which signals 
a high degree of transparency, is particularly rewarding, considering that a significant part of our job is 
devoted  to  explaining  and  discussing  our  actions  and  our  goals  to  the  public.  Transparency  is  a 
precondition  for  accountability  and  improves  communication  with  the  public  regarding  how  the 
European Central Bank conducts monetary policy, thereby fostering predictability and making policy 
much more effective. In this regard, allow me to stress that the European Central Bank was the first 
BIS Review 26/2006 
 1
major central bank to introduce a real-time press conference displaying in detail the diagnosis and the 
monetary policy decisions of the Governing Council.  
Another  important  result  of  monetary  unification  is  the  increase  in  European  financial  integration.  A 
large, liquid and integrated money market was created after 1 January 1999. The euro bond market 
quickly turned into the second largest bond market in the world. Within the euro area, the elimination 
of exchange rate risks and the lower transaction costs which followed have created new opportunities 
for businesses, thereby being conducive to a more efficient allocation of capital. As a result, European 
firms  have  attained  higher  levels  of  efficiency  and  competitiveness,  which  is  by  itself  supportive  of 
greater potential growth in the long term. EMU itself has contributed to further reducing financing costs 
owing to the lower premia associated with the increased focus on stability-oriented economic policies. 
The  available  data  indicate  an  overall  high  degree  of  integration  in  the  euro  area  money  market 
following  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  as  illustrated  in  particular  by  the  drop  to  close  to  zero  in  the 
cross-country standard deviations of unsecured money market rates. Government bond yields have 
converged in all euro area countries and increasingly tend to be driven by common news. Ten-year 
euro area government bond yields are currently at levels significantly below 4%. Furthermore, financial 
deepening is evident in the rapid growth of new market segments, such as the corporate bond market, 
reinforcing  the  access  of  investors  to  funds  and  thereby  contributing  greatly  to  economic  growth. 
Finally,  measures  of  cross-country  equity  flows  point  to  a  rising  degree  of  integration,  with  the 
advantages of sectoral diversification gaining ground over those of geographical diversification. 
Productivity and growth 
Let me now turn to the major challenges facing us. First of all, I will refer to the medium- to long-term 
trends for growth and productivity. If we compare growth in the US and the euro area since the mid-
1990s, we find that it has been significantly higher in the former. Between 1996 and 2005, average 
real GDP growth per year was 3.3% in the US and 2.1% in the euro area. The difference between the 
growth performance in these two economies is partly related to demographic trends. However, it also 
stems from higher productivity growth in the US. Labour productivity growth (per hour worked) was 
1.3% in the euro area during the period 1996 to 2005 compared to 2.3% in the US. Over the same 
period, the annual rate of increase in employment (in terms of hours worked) was around 0.8% in the 
euro area, which was only moderately below that in the US, at 0.9%. It is worth mentioning the euro 
area experienced a slowdown in labour productivity growth (per hour worked) at around year 2000, 
with productivity growth declining from 2.0% in 1996-2000 to 0.8% in 2000-2005 (compared with rates 
of 2.0% and 2.6%, respectively, in the US). 
One  important  factor  constraining  euro  area  productivity  growth  has  been  the  slowdown  in  capital 
deepening. As you know, capital deepening is the increase in the volume of capital per unit of labour 
input. During the last decade the contribution to growth from capital deepening in the euro area was 
below  that  observed  in  the  early  1990s,  and  significantly  below  that  in  the  US.  At  a  more 
disaggregated  level,  recent  studies  have  highlighted  the  role  of  the  information  and  communication 
technology (ICT) in explaining the acceleration of productivity growth in the US in the mid-1990s. We 
have all witnessed the profound change of the economy in the domain of the production of goods and 
services that has been brought about by lower costs of computing and communicating information. 
Overall, the different incorporation in the economy of the ICT revolution helps explain the diverging 
trends in labour productivity growth between the euro area and the US in recent years in two ways. 
First, we observe lower productivity growth in the ICT-using sectors in the euro area compared with 
the US. In particular, key ICT-using services, such as retail, wholesale and financial services, missed 
out to raise productivity growth in recent years in the euro area. The deceleration in labour productivity 
in  these  sectors  seems  primarily  related  to  strong  employment  growth,  which  reduced  the  pace  of 
capital deepening.  
Second, ICT-producing sectors have made a smaller contribution to overall labour productivity growth 
in the euro area compared to the US (approximately 0.5 percentage points between 1996 and 2002 in 
the euro area, compared with 0.8 percentage points in the US during the same period). This can be in 
part attributed to a relatively small output share of the ICT-producing sector of 5.3% in the euro area, 
compared with 7.0% in the US. 
The latest empirical studies have found evidence that economic growth is associated with the degree 
of  development  and  structure  of  the  financial  system.  Well-developed  financial  systems  help  to 
channel resources towards the most rewarding activities and therefore encourage the most efficient 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2006
allocation  of  capital.  A  further  development  of  the  euro  area  financial  system  can  be  achieved  via 
deeper financial integration. In this regard, one requirement for increased cross-border financial flows 
is  the  establishment  of  pan-European  payment  systems.  The  banking  payment  system  put  in 
operation  at  the  same  time  the  euro  was  introduced  –  TARGET  –  has  successfully  linked  up  all 
national payment systems and allowed settlements between financial institutions to be made gross at 
any time during the day. At the retail level, one prerequisite for enhanced financial integration that is 
still needed is the fulfilment of the single euro payments area - SEPA. The SEPA project, in which the 
European Central Bank acts as a helping hand, will create, out of the many different national payment 
schemes,  an  integrated  scheme  for  each  of  the  three  main  payment  instruments  (credit  transfers, 
direct  debits  and  cards).  This  process  would  also  enable  the  consolidation  of  national  retail 
infrastructures into more efficient pan-European infrastructures with competing operators. 
Sound  macroeconomic  policies  are  also  key  to  sustainable  long-term  growth.  In  particular,  recent 
studies  have  emphasised  the  benefits  of  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation  and  preventing 
unsustainable fiscal deficits and levels of debts. In this regard, a sound monetary policy is a necessary 
condition for sustainable economic growth and job creation. Price stability ensures the transparency of 
the relative price mechanism, thus enhancing the efficiency of resource allocation. High and uncertain 
inflation gives rise to inflation risk premia, implying that fewer investment projects will be profitable and 
the potential output growth rate is consequently reduced. 
The need for structural reforms 
Let me turn to another key challenge for the euro area, namely, to cope with accelerated globalisation. 
European  economies  and  workers  in  particular  need  to  be  increasingly  flexible  to  adjust  to  rapidly 
changing supply and demand conditions. The still high euro area unemployment rate of 8.6% in 2005 
is the most obvious evidence for the euro area’s insufficient ability to flexibly adjust to changes in the 
economic  environment.  Against  this  background,  urgently  required  are  structural  reforms  that  ease 
adjustment processes and that have the potential to increase both labour productivity growth as well 
as  labour  utilisation.  These  structural  reforms  must  aim  at  what  Wim  Kok  once  summarised  as 
“Europe  needs  more  people  in  work,  working  more  productively”.  Let  me  briefly  highlight  four  main 
areas for structural reform. 
First, the euro area needs labour market reforms that increase labour utilisation by raising employment 
as well as working hours on a life-time basis. Looking back, progress with labour market reforms in the 
euro area over the last years seems to bear fruit, as indicated by the overall decline in the aggregate 
euro area unemployment rate from 10.5% in 1995 to 8.6% in 2005. However, particularly worrying are 
the still high level of the unemployment rate of young persons aged 15-24, amounting to 17.8%, and 
the  still  low  rate  of  employment  of  older  workers  aged  55-64,  standing  at  just  40.2%  in  2005. 
According to the European Commission, population ageing will lead to a fall in the euro area working 
age population, i.e. the population aged 15-64, by 13 million between 2005 and 2030. In this context, a 
general  improvement  in  the  labour  market  position  of  young  and  older  persons  is  of  the  utmost 
importance. To increase labour utilisation, necessary labour supply side measures include reforms of 
tax and benefit systems that increase incentives to work. On the labour demand side, there is a need 
to promote wage flexibility and to address labour market rigidities. 
Second,  also  reforms  on  euro  area  goods  and  services  markets  have  a  substantial  role  to  play  in 
increasing employment and productivity growth. Policies improving the functioning of product markets 
include  the  extension  and  deepening  of  the  EU  internal  market.  With  service-related  activities 
representing around 70% of value added and employment in the euro area (against almost 80% in the 
US),  more  competition  in  EU  service  markets  would  be  required.  Overall,  a  higher  competition  in 
services markets would promote a more dynamic economy and create more jobs. Moreover, also a 
further opening up of network industries, representing around 9% of euro area production and 7% of 
euro area employment, should be beneficial for consumers as some substantial price reductions in the 
telecommunication sector over the last years have shown. 
Third,  creating  an  entrepreneurial-friendly  economic  environment  with  low  administrative  and 
bureaucratic costs for firms and business start-ups should help to create new jobs. To the extent that 
these  measures  increase  product  market  competition,  they  should  simultaneously  contribute  to 
fostering labour productivity growth. The immense importance of this issue is increasingly appreciated 
by  European  governments  and  several  initiatives  at  national  or  EU-wide  level  have  started  to 
implement  actions  for  a  “better  regulation”.  Let  me  illustrate  this  with  reference  to  some  figures 
comparing the US and the euro area. Following studies by the World Bank, in 2004, the average cost 
BIS Review 26/2006 
 3
of starting a business with up to 50 employees in the euro area (excluding Luxembourg) is estimated 
to have been around 10 times larger than in the US, amounting to roughly USD 2,700 (EUR 2,250). In 
2005, it took on average 27 days to set up a business in the euro area, compared to 5 days in the US.  
Fourth,  further  policies  are  required  that  aim  more  directly  at  raising  long-term  productivity  growth. 
According to the latest available information, roughly 1.9% of euro area GDP was spent on R&D, while 
the corresponding fraction was around 2.6% in the US. R&D needs to be accompanied by additional 
efforts that aim at improving the labour force’s level of education and expertise. The last decades have 
already  brought  about  an  enormous  increase  in  the  level  of  educational  attainment,  the  so-called 
“catch-up effect in education”. In the euro area, according to OECD data for 2003, an average of 73% 
of  those  aged  25-34  had  attained  at  least  upper  secondary  education,  compared  to  only  46%  of 
persons aged 55-64. Nevertheless, meeting the challenges of technological progress and ensuring the 
labour  force’s  employability  and  flexibility,  requires  that  human  capital  is  continuously  adjusted  to 
labour market needs through improved education and training as well as lifelong learning.  
Implementing  this  non-exhaustive  list  of  structural  policy  priorities  should  help  the  euro  area  to 
increase labour productivity and labour utilisation as well as increase its overall flexibility in response 
to economic shocks. To properly address national reform priorities, the euro area countries will benefit 
from ambitiously implementing the National Reform Programmes they have set up in 2005. For the 
euro area countries with a single currency, open, competitive and flexible labour, product and financial 
markets are especially important. For firms in the euro area, structural reforms should generally lead to 
a  greater  choice  between  suitable  investment  options  and  open  up  possibilities  of  cost  reductions, 
thus  helping  them  to  raise  competitiveness.  Within  a  monetary  union  with  increased  price  and  cost 
comparability it is of paramount importance that firms remain competitive by controlling domestic cost 
developments as captured by, for example, unit labour costs. This is exemplarily illustrated in the case 
of Germany which had lost competitiveness due to reunification, and which embarked on a catching 
up exercise between 1999 and 2005, witnessing only limited cumulated unit labour cost increases of 
2.6%  compared  to  a  euro  area  average  of  11.2%.  This  significant  improvement  of  the  German 
economy’s cost competitiveness is one of the explanations for its strong export performance. 
Fiscal policy 
Turning  to  the  fiscal  aspects  of  EMU,  there  is  no  need  to  discuss  at  great  length  the  merits  of 
maintaining  sound  fiscal  positions.  Sound  fiscal  positions  inspire  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of 
fiscal  policies.  This  reduces  the  uncertainty  surrounding  long-term  economic  decisions  and  is  thus 
conducive to stable and sustainable growth and employment. The importance of maintaining sound 
fiscal positions becomes even greater in a monetary union. In such an environment, the costs of fiscal 
profligacy to the individual government are reduced as negative implications for the interest rate are 
distributed  across  the  entire  union.  In  addition,  exchange  rate  variations  do  not  provide  signals 
regarding investor confidence in the domestic economy any more. 
The  EU  fiscal  framework,  as  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact, 
ensures that fiscal discipline is maintained in EMU. The Pact provides a system for the monitoring of 
fiscal policies and, if necessary, the timely correction of excessive deficits.  
Overall, the fiscal policy framework was successful in reducing average fiscal deficits in the euro area 
and  halting  the  trend  increase  in  the  debt  ratio.  At  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  most  euro  area 
countries showed sizeable imbalances in their public finances, with the average deficit reaching 5% of 
GDP and more. In the run-up to monetary union, fiscal balances improved substantially: the euro area 
average deficit ratio declined to 2.6% in 1997, the reference year for the decision on which countries 
were to join the common currency from its start in 1999. Since then, fiscal deficits have first improved 
before  consolidation  fatigue  set  in.  Some  countries  incurred  deficits  in  excess  of  the  3%  of  GDP 
reference  value,  in  some  instances  even  substantially  above  the  threshold.  Nevertheless,  the  euro 
area  average  deficit  ratio  has  remained  below  the  values  recorded  in  the  1980s  and  1990s.  As  a 
consequence, the long-run increasing trend in the debt ratio, which more than doubled between 1980 
(34.2%) and 1997 (74.7%) has been halted.  
Nonetheless, further reforms in the fiscal area are needed. Let me mention three major challenges: i) a 
number of governments still need to correct large fiscal imbalances and improve the structure of public 
finances; ii) national institutions for fiscal policy making should support the fiscal commitments under 
the EU framework and iii) governments must prepare for the fiscal burden arising from demographic 
ageing. 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2006
Regarding  the  first  challenge,  countries  with  large  imbalances  must  correct  them  in  line  with 
commitments under the Pact and country-specific ECOFIN Council recommendations. This will ensure 
the soundness of national fiscal positions and strengthen the confidence of households and investors 
in  the  sustainability  of  economic  policies.  Beyond  this  immediate  requirement,  most  euro  area 
countries are in need of a comprehensive and growth-friendly reform strategy, which must include the 
pursuit  of  fiscal  consolidation.  Structural  expenditure  reforms  are  essential  for  healthy  and  growth-
promoting  public  finances.  To  help  promote  investment,  innovation  and  employment,  expenditure 
needs to be directed towards productive goals. But, in many cases, it will also be essential to review 
government commitments, especially their less productive elements. 
Turning to the second challenge, the current very high expenditure shares may also be a reflection of 
the  way  in  which  fiscal  policy  frameworks  operate  at  the  national  level.  The  experience  shows  that 
some euro area countries have managed to translate the constraints under the EU fiscal framework 
effectively into their domestic fiscal policy institutions. As a consequence, these countries find it much 
easier  to  comply  with  the  requirements  while  maintaining  sole  responsibility  for  their  policies.  To 
ensure fiscal soundness over the medium and long term, euro area countries should have fiscal policy 
arrangements that ensure consistency with the requirements of the EU framework.  
Finally, in the long run, population ageing will put a substantial burden on public finances. This will 
occur  directly  through  the  impact  on  public  pension  and  health  care  expenditure  as  well  as  via  the 
growth-dampening effects of a gradually shrinking share of the labour force in the population. Public 
expenditure increases of up to 10% of GDP have been projected if no action is taken. Governments 
need to prepare for this burden before expenditure pressures start to increase rapidly after 2010. In 
many  countries,  this  requires  reducing  current  debt  ratios  and  reforming  public  pension  and  health 
care systems. In addition, reforms are needed that lead to higher labour market participation and lower 
unemployment.  Only  if  these  reforms  are  implemented  swiftly  can  we  cope  with  population  ageing, 
maintaining sustainable fiscal positions, a reasonable tax burden and sustained growth. 
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude  by  stressing  that  the  euro  has  been  firmly  and  credibly  established  as  a  stable 
currency.  The  euro  has  brought  a  period  of  currency  stability,  low  rates  of  inflation,  low  levels  of 
medium- and long-term market interest rates, and higher economic integration via enhanced trade and 
financial interdependence. I hope, however, that I have not communicated a sense of complacency 
over past achievements. At the European Central Bank we must continue to comply with our mandate 
of maintaining price stability and, through this, contribute to a macroeconomic environment supportive 
of  economic  growth.  The  challenges  ahead  of  us  are  a  reminder  that  European  integration  is  a 
dynamic process and that it will bring about deeper structural transformations. As a matter of fact, the 
historical process of European integration is moving steadily forward and will require our utmost effort 
and commitment for years to come. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 26/2006 
 5
