Rakesh  Mohan:  Reforms,  productivity  and  efficiency  in  banking:  the  Indian 
experience 
Address  by  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  21st  Annual 
General Meeting and Conference of the Pakistan Society of Development Economists, Islamabad, 21 
December 2005.  
The assistance of Abhiman Das, Saibal Ghosh and Partha Ray in the preparation of the paper is gratefully acknowledged. 
The references and tables for this speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of India’s website www.rbi.org.in 
 Let me at the outset congratulate the Pakistan Society of Development Economists for organising this 
Conference.  Issues  of  productivity  and  efficiency  have  been  at  the  centre-stage  of  discussions  in 
recent years. Nowhere is this truer than the financial sector, which is perceived to be the ‘brain’ of the 
economy (Stiglitz, 1998). Even within the financial sector, given the dominance of bank-based financial 
systems  in  most  emerging  markets  including  ours  and  the  systemic  importance  of  banks  in  the 
financial  system,  the  banking  sector  continues  to  be  the  centre  of  attention  for  academia  and 
policymakers alike. Not surprisingly therefore, performance of the banking sector has repercussions 
across the length and breadth of the economy. Judged thus, the theme of the Conference immediately 
appealed to me in view of its topicality and timeliness. As a central banker, the obvious topic for me to 
speak on relates to productivity and efficiency in Indian banking. 
The objective of reforms in general is to accelerate the growth momentum of the economy, defined in 
terms of per capita income. Typically, improvements in the growth rate can be effected through three, 
not necessarily mutually exclusive channels: improving productivity of capital, through investments in 
human capital and raising total factor productivity (TFP). 
The  quality  of  functioning  of  the  financial  sector  can  be  expected  to  affect  the  functioning  and 
productivity of all sectors of the economy. Efficient financial intermediation should help in improving 
economy-wide resource allocation thereby promoting productivity growth all round. Thus discussion on 
economic efficiency and productivity should involve analysis of developments in the financial sector. 
Improvements in the financing of physical and human capital, both in terms of increasing magnitudes, 
and in terms of allocative efficiency, should raise efficiency and productivity across the economy. This 
approach justifies the choice of my topic today.  
Financial  intermediation  is  essential  to  the  promotion  of  both  extensive  and  intensive  growth.  The 
efficient intermediation of funds from savers to users enables the application of available resources to 
their most productive uses. The more efficient a financial system is in such resource generation and in 
its allocation, the greater is its contribution to productivity and economic growth. As resource allocation 
improves  and  real  returns  increase,  savings  would  presumably  respond  and  higher  resource 
generation should result. Thus, development of the financial system is essential to the generation of 
higher productivity and economic growth. 
I will structure my address along the following lines. First, I will explore in brief the impact of banking 
sector productivity on the rest of the economy. This is relevant in view of the fact that any discussion 
on productivity and efficiency issues in banking would need to be judged in conjunction with the level 
of financial development and other country-specific features. This will be followed by a brief review of 
banking  sector reforms  in  India.  The subsequent section will examine,  in  some  detail,  the  trends  in 
productivity and efficiency in Indian banking. My concluding remarks will be in the nature of the way 
ahead on areas germane to this sector at the present juncture.  
How does productivity in banking influence the rest of the economy?  
2. 
Economic  history  provides  support  for  the  fact  that  financial  development  makes  a  fundamental 
contribution to growth. Financial development helped in the promotion of industrialisation in developed 
countries  by  facilitating  the  mobilisation  of  capital  for  large  investments.  Well-functioning  banks  or 
other  financial  intermediaries  such  as  venture  capital  funds  also  spur  technological  innovation  by 
identifying and funding entrepreneurs who are perceived to have the best chances of developing new 
products successfully and for implementing innovative production processes.  
Recent  research  has  provided  robust  evidence  supporting  the  view  that  financial  development 
contributes to economic growth.  
BIS Review 15/2006 
 1
At the cross-country level, various measures of financial development (including measures of financial 
sector  assets,  domestic  credit  to  private  sectors  and  stock  market  capitalization)  are  found  to  be 
positively related to economic growth.  
Other  studies  establish  a  positive  relationship  between  financial  development  and  growth  at  the 
industry level (Rajan and Zingales, 1998).  
Similarly, at the firm level, firms in countries with deeper financial development are able to obtain more 
external funds and thereby enabled to grow faster (Demirgúc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998). 
A basic indicator of financial development is the contribution of finance-related activities to GDP. The 
share of real GDP originating from finance-related activities in India tripled from just around 2 per cent 
during the 1970s to around 6 per cent during the 1990s and further to 7 per cent during the first half of 
this decade. Within the services sector, the share of finance rose from less than 5 per cent to more 
than 12 per cent over the same period.  
The broad-based indicators of financial development, as culled from the flow-of-funds accounts, are 
also  testimony  to  gradual  widening  and  deepening  of  the  economy.  Most  of  the  commonly  tracked 
ratios  exhibited  an  upward  trend  during  the  1970s  and  1980s,  while  moderate  fluctuations  in  these 
ratios  were  observed  during  the  1990s.  What  is  of  interest  is  that  the  Finance  Ratio,  a  proxy  for 
financial deepening, witnessed remarkable improvement over this period. 
When we move away from these broad-based indicators to more specific liquidity- and credit-based 
indicators, a similar picture emerges. Illustratively, the ratio of aggregate deposits to GDP exceeded 
50 per cent during the first half of the current decade; M3/GDP has averaged around 50 per cent since 
the  1990s.  At  a  slightly  more  disaggregated  level,  while  bank  credit  to  government  has  witnessed 
some tapering off in the second half of the 1990s, credit to the commercial sector averaged over 30 
per cent of GDP during the first half of the current decade. These observations are particularly relevant 
from the standpoint of the role of banks in the intermediation process. Juxtaposed with the financial 
sector reforms, this suggests that the enhanced freedom of banks since the liberalisation process has 
provided them with the flexibility in resource mobilisation and deployment, which has manifested itself 
in the uptrend in these ratios. Thus financial deepening has been taking place continuously in India 
and is still in progress. 
Studies  by  the  Reserve  Bank  (RBI,  2000)  on  the  association  between  finance  and  growth  for  an 
extended time span from 1971-72 to 1999-2000 find that the causality between finance (proxied by 
real M3 growth) and growth (proxied by real GDP growth) is bi-directional. However, in the absence of 
any structural model underlying such relationships, these ‘causality’ estimates can only be interpreted 
in terms of the predictive content of each of the variables. Subsequent research on the inter-linkage 
between finance and growth in India has veered around to the view that the Indian growth process has 
essentially been ‘finance-led’: expansion in the financial sector played an enabling role in promoting 
capital accumulation, which, in turn, engendered higher growth (Bell and Rousseau, 2001). Typically 
however, studies of this genre tend to be susceptible to the time period and choice of variables, so that 
a different period with another set of variables could possibly lead to different conclusions. What is, 
however, accepted is that finance did play a role in influencing the growth process in India, although 
such  observations  related  to  financial  deepening  have  little  to  say  about  efficiency  and  productivity 
growth.  
The aforesaid observations do not take into account the changing dynamics of the financial system. 
The traditional classification of the financial system as bank- or market-based often tends to be static; 
in contrast, financial systems evolve and develop over time in response to changes in the institutional 
environment, legal set up and other country-specific features. This has been the case in India as well. 
Many  of  you  would  be  aware  that,  cross-country  classifications  of  financial  system  have  typically 
classified India as a ‘bank-based’ system. This is not surprising, since banks have traditionally been 
the  dominant  financial  intermediaries.  However,  the  relative  share  of  banks  in  total  financial  sector 
assets, which was nearly three-fourths in the early 1980s, came down gradually over a period of time 
and has hovered around the two-thirds mark since the 1990s (Ray & Sengupta, 2004).  
More  importantly  however,  following  the  rapid  growth  of  stock  markets  since  the  1990s,  the  role  of 
‘market-based’  finance  has  been  on  the  rise.  The  most  commonly  employed  measure  of  financial 
system orientation – the ratio of market capitalisation to bank assets - supports this observation. This 
suggests that not only have financial institutions gained in terms of financial assets, but there is also 
considerable  potential  for  market  financing  to  develop.  However,  the  magnitude  of  market 
capitalisation is obviously dependent on the vagaries of the stock market: it is not expected to exhibit a 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2006
consistent increase as a ratio of GDP, whereas the growth in bank assets/GDP ratio is much more 
regular.  
Whereas financial deepening is easier to measure, analysing productivity and efficiency changes in 
banking is more complex and needs to be viewed in relation to the changing contours of the banking 
industry in India.  
Contours of Indian Banking Sector Reforms1
3. 
The transformation of the banking sector in India needs to be viewed in light of the overall economic 
reforms process along with the rapid changes that have been taking place in the global environment 
within  which  banks  operate.  The  global  forces  of  change  include  technological  innovation,  the 
deregulation  of  financial  services  internationally,  our  own  increasing  exposure  to  international 
competition and, equally important, changes in corporate behaviour such as growing disintermediation 
and  increasing  emphasis  on  shareholder  value.  Recent  banking  crises  in  Asia,  Latin  America  and 
elsewhere have accentuated these pressures.  
As many of you would be aware, India embarked on a strategy of economic reforms in the wake of a 
serious balance-of-payments crisis in 1991; a central plank of the reforms was reform in the financial 
sector  and,  with  banks  being  the  mainstay  of  financial  intermediation,  the  banking  sector.  The 
objective of the banking sector reforms was to promote a diversified, efficient and competitive financial 
system  with  the  ultimate  objective  of  improving  the  allocative  efficiency  of  resources  through 
operational flexibility, improved financial viability and institutional strengthening. A summary profile of 
the banking industry over the last 15 years is presented in Table 5. 
As  you  are  aware,  the  financial  system  in  India  by  the  late  1980s  was  characterized  by  dominant 
government  ownership  of  banks  and  financial  institutions,  widespread  use  of  administered  and 
variegated  interest  rates,  and  financial  repression  through  forced  financing  of  government  fiscal 
deficits by banks and through monetisation.  Thus, although a great degree of financial deepening had 
indeed taken place and financial savings had increased continuously, financial markets were not really 
functioning, and there was little price discovery in terms of the cost of money, i.e., interest rates. The 
efficiency  and  productivity  enhancing  function  of  the  financial  system  was  severely  handicapped. 
Hence, a widespread financial sector reform effort has been underway since 1991.   
Let me briefly sum up the major areas of banking sector reforms2:  
•  Financial  repression  through  statutory  pre-emptions  has  been  reduced,  while  stepping  up 
prudential regulations at the same time.  
Interest rates have been progressively deregulated on both the deposit and lending sides (Box 
I).   
 Restoration of the health of the banking system has involved: 
•  Restoration of public sector banks' net worth achieved through recapitalisation where needed 
(total cost less than one per cent of GDP). 
•  Competition increased through entry of new private sector banks and foreign banks. 
•  Higher levels and standards of disclosure achieved to enhance market transparency. 
•  Bank regulation and supervision strengthened towards international best practice. 
•  Micro prudential measures instituted. 
•  Supervision  process  streamlined  with  combination  of  on-site  and  off-site  surveillance  along 
with external auditing. 
•  Risk based supervision introduced. 
                                                      
1 
2  A detailed discussion on this aspect is contained in Bhide et al. (2001).  
I have discussed the details of financial sector reforms in India elsewhere; see Mohan (2005). 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 3
•  Process of structured and discretionary intervention introduced for problem banks through a 
prompt corrective action mechanism. 
•  Ownership  of  public  sector  banks  has  been  broadened  through  disinvestment  up  to  49  per 
cent, and banks have been listed. 
•  Mechanism  for  greater  regulatory  coordination  instituted  for  regulation  and  supervision  of 
financial conglomerates.  
•  Measures taken to strengthen creditor rights (still in process). 
 
                                                                   Box I 
                                                   Interest Rate Deregulation 
 
Deposit Rate Deregulation 
April 1992: (a) interest rates freed between 46 days and 3 years and over, but ceiling prescribed, 
(b) October 1995 : Ceiling removed for deposits over 2 years 
July 1996: Ceiling removed for deposits over 1 year 
October 1997: Interest Rates on Term Deposits Completely Deregulated  
2004: Minimum maturity for term deposits reduced to 7 days 
 
Lending Rate Deregulation 
1992-93: Six categories of lending rates  
5 slabs for below Rs.2 lakh 
Minimum lending rate above Rs.2 lakh 
October 1994: Lending Rate freed for Loans above Rs.2 lakh & Minimum Rate Abolished 
October 1996: Banks to specify maximum spread over PLR 
1997-98: Separate PLRs permitted for cash credit/demand loans and term loans above 3 years. 
Floating Rate permitted. 
1998-99: PLR made ceiling for loans upto Rs.2 lakh 
1999-00: Tenor linked PLR Introduced 
2001-02: PLR made benchmark rate; sub PLR permitted for loans above Rs.2 lakh 
2002-03: Bank-wise PLRs made transparent on RBI website 
2003-04: Computation of Benchmark PLR rationalized tenor linked PLRs abolished 
 
As  the banking system has been  liberalised  and  become  increasingly  market-oriented  and  financial 
markets have developed concurrently, the conduct of monetary policy has also been tailored to take 
into account the realities of the changing environment (switch from direct to indirect instruments). 
This macro approach to financial monitoring has enabled policy makers to fine-tune their regulatory 
stance in consonance with the changing market and institutional dynamics so as to balance growth 
and stability concerns.  For  instance,  despite  the  gradual  tightening  of  prudential  norms,  the  ratio of 
non-performing  loans  (NPL)  to  total  loans,  which  was  at  a  high  of  15.7  per  cent  for  scheduled 
commercial banks (SCBs) at end-March 1997, has declined by more than two thirds to 5.2 per cent at 
end-March 2005. Net NPLs also witnessed a significant decline, driven by the improvements in loan 
loss  provisioning  and  improved  recovery  management,  which  comprises  over  half  of  the  total 
provisions  and  contingencies.  Capital  adequacy  of  the  banking  sector  also  recorded  a  marked 
improvement and reached 12.8 per cent at end-March 2005, well above the stipulated level of 9 per 
cent.  Banks  have  also  been  sensitised  to  develop  robust  risk  management  systems  for  credit  and 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2006
operational risks and focus on their asset-liability maturity profile to withstand adverse movements in 
market risk parameters such as interest rates and take corrective measures.  
Another heartening development in banks’ balance sheets, driven by the twin forces of international 
accounting  irregularities  and  regulatory  initiatives  has  been  the  increasing  focus  on  corporate 
governance.  As  part  of  their  Annual  Report,  banks  presently  disclose,  under  the  head  ‘Report  on 
corporate  governance’,  details  of  their  boards  of  directors,  number  of  board  meetings  attended  by 
members,  details  of  the  various  sub-committees  of  the  boards  and  provided  the  banks  are  listed, 
information  on  their  stock  price  movements.  This  is  complemented  with  the  banks’  philosophy  on 
corporate  governance  and  the  enabling  mechanisms  undertaken  by  the  banks  to  achieve  their 
philosophy. As you would be aware, such listing is an important component of the process of ‘market 
discipline’,  which  complements  the  regulatory  initiatives  undertaken  by  the  authorities.  To  take  the 
governance process in banks a step further, we had some time back issued guidelines laying down 
transparent criteria for determining the ‘fit and proper’ status of owners and directors in private banks. 
Given our focus on a consultative approach to policy formulation, the document was posted on the RBI 
website for encouraging a debate on this issue. Based on the feedback received, the draft is being 
reviewed before final guidelines can be issued to banks. 
The  whole  policy  reform  process  has  been  designed  to  make  the  banking  system  more  market 
oriented  to  enable  efficient  price  discovery  and  to  induce  greater  internal  efficiency  in  the  resource 
allocation process.  Thus, whereas the efforts in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s were essentially devoted 
to  financial  deepening,  the  focus  of  reforms  in  the  past  decade  and  a  half  has  been  engendering 
greater efficiency and productivity in the banking system in particular, and in the financial sector as a 
whole. How well have we succeeded? 
Efficiency and productivity analysis in banking 
4. 
In recent times, a significant body of literature has evolved which explores the performance of financial 
institutions  in  the  wake  of  financial  liberalisation.  These  studies  are  essentially  micro-economic  in 
nature  and  seek  to  analyse  the  efficiency  and  productivity  of  banking  systems.  Such  analysis  is  of 
relevance  from  the  policy  standpoint,  because  as  the  finance-growth  literature  suggests,  if  banks 
become  better-functioning  entities,  this  is  expected  to  be  reflected  in  safety  and  soundness  of  the 
financial system and ultimately, lead to increases in the rate of economic growth. More importantly, 
such analysis is useful in enabling policymakers to identify the success or failure of policy initiatives or, 
alternatively,  highlight  different  strategies  undertaken  by  banking  firms  which  contribute  to  their 
successes.  
A  priori,  deregulation  is  expected  to  unleash  competitive  forces.  Such  competition  would,  in  turn, 
enable  banks  to  alter  their  input  and  output  mix,  which  when  combined  with  technological 
developments facilitates increase in output that raises overall bank productivity and efficiency. Second, 
liberal entry of de novo private and foreign banks as a part of the deregulation process is expected to 
raise bank efficiency, productivity and technology levels, because de novo private/foreign banks are 
associated  with  superior  management  practices  and  technology,  which  can  be  fruitfully  imbibed  by 
those which are not. A third strand of thinking, borrowing from the public choice framework, contends 
that different ownership structures may engender different efficiency levels. The theoretical argument 
is  straightforward:  lack  of  capital  market  discipline  weakens  owners’  control  over  management, 
enabling the latter to pursue their own interests, and provides fewer incentives for them to be efficient. 
Finally, as banking in the current world is technology driven and technological progress itself is scale 
augmenting, the relationship between bank size and efficiency becomes important. Skeptics, on the 
contrary, argue that deregulation is, in general, accompanied by an increase in banks' operational cost 
and could induce financial fragility due to over-expansion of banking activity. Thus, productivity gains 
after  deregulation  could  be  temporary  and  not  sustainable  in  the  long  run.  As  a  result,  evidence  in 
support  of  a  unidirectional  relationship  between  deregulation  and  efficiency/productivity  is  not 
conclusive. 
  
Besides  various  methods  of  estimation,  the  efficiency  and  productivity  studies  in  banking  are 
constrained by the absence of precise definitions of inputs and outputs of banks. As a result, several 
approaches  exist  and  the  appropriateness  of  each  approach  varies  according  to  the  circumstances 
(Box II).  
 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 5
                                                                     Box II  
                                       Inputs and outputs of commercial banks 
Banks are typically multi-input and multi-output firms. As a result, defining what constitutes ‘input’ 
and ‘output’ is fraught with difficulties, since many of the financial services are jointly produced 
and prices are typically assigned to a bundle of financial services. Additionally, banks may not be 
homogeneous  with  respect  to  the  types  of  outputs  actually  produced.  In  view  of  these 
complexities,  four  approaches  have  come  to  dominate  the  literature  on  banking  output:  the 
production approach, the intermediation approach, the operating (income-based) approach and 
more recently, the modern approach.  
Under  the  production  approach,  banks  are  primarily  viewed  as  providers  of  services  to 
customers. The input set under this approach includes physical variables (e.g., labour, material, 
space or information systems) and the outputs represent the services provided to customers and 
are best measured by the number of deposit and loan accounts.  
Under  the  intermediation  approach,  financial  institutions  are  viewed  as  intermediating  funds 
between savers and investors. Banks produce intermediation services through the collection of 
deposits  and  other  liabilities  and  their  application  in  interest-earning  assets,  such  as  loans, 
securities and other investments. This approach includes both operating and interest expenses 
as inputs, whereas loans and other major assets count as outputs. In principle, there are three 
variant of intermediation approach, viz., the asset approach, the user cost approach and value-
added  approach.  The  asset  approach  is  a  reduced  form  modelling  of  the  banking  activity, 
focusing exclusively on the role of banks as financial intermediaries between depositors and final 
uses  of  bank  assets.  Deposits  and  other  liabilities,  together  with  real  resources  (labor  and 
physical capital) are defined as inputs, whereas the output set includes earning assets such as 
loans  and  investments.  The  user  cost  approach  determines  whether  a  financial  product  is  an 
input or an output on the basis of its net contribution to bank revenue. If the financial returns on 
an asset exceed the opportunity cost of the funds or alternately, if the financial costs of a liability 
are less than the opportunity cost, they are considered as outputs; otherwise, they are considered 
as inputs. The value-added approach identifies major categories of produced deposits and loans 
as outputs because they form a significant proportion of value added.  
The operating approach (or income-based approach) views banks as business units with the final 
objective of generating revenue from the total cost incurred for running the business. Accordingly, 
it  defines  banks’  output  as  the  total  revenue  (interest  and  non-interest)  and  inputs  as  the  total 
expenses (interest and operating expenses).   
Finally, the modern approach seeks to integrate some measure for risk, agency costs and quality 
of bank services. In this approach, the individual components of CAMEL3 are derived from the 
financial tables of the banks and are used as variables in the performance analysis.  
 
Source: Adapted from Berger and Humphrey (1992) and Frexias and Rochet (1997) 
 
Competition and profitability of Indian banks 
Beginning  from  1992,  Indian  banks  were  gradually  exposed  to  the  rigours  of  domestic  and 
international  competition.  Newly  opened  banks  from  the  private  sector  and  entry  and  expansion  of 
several foreign banks resulted in greater competition in both deposit and credit markets. Consequent 
to these developments, there has been a consistent decline in the share of public sector banks in total 
assets  of  commercial  banks.  The  evidence  of  competitive  pressure  is  well  supported  from  the 
declining trend of Herfindahl’s concentration index.4 Notwithstanding such transformation, the public 
sector banks still remain the mainstay, accounting for nearly three-fourths of assets and income. It is 
also important to note that public sector banks have responded to the new challenges of competition, 
                                                      
3   CAMEL is the acronym for Capital adequacy, Asset quality, Management, Earnings and Liquidity. 
4   Defined as the sum of squares of the market shares of individual banks. Decreases in the index generally indicate a loss of 
pricing power and an increase in competition. 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2006
as reflected in the increase in the share of these banks in the overall profit of the banking sector. From 
the position of net loss in the mid-1990s, in recent years the share of public sector banks in the profit 
of  the  commercial  banking  system  has  become  broadly  commensurate  with  their  share  in  assets, 
indicating  a broad  convergence  of  profitability  across  various  bank  groups.  This  suggests that,  with 
operational flexibility, public sector banks are competing relatively effectively with private sector and 
foreign  banks.  The  ‘market  discipline’  imposed  by  the  listing  of  most  public  sector  banks  has  also 
probably  contributed  to  this  improved  performance.  Public  sector  bank  managements  are  now 
probably more attuned to the market consequences of their activities (Mohan, 2005).  
Since  the  late1990s,  in  line  with  the  benign  interest  rate  regime,  both  interest  income  and  interest 
expenditure  of  banks  as  proportions  of  total  assets  have  declined.  However,  interest  expenditure 
declined  faster  than  interest  income,  resulting  in  an  increase  in  net  interest  income.  However,  non-
interest income, which emanates mostly from fee-based activities, has been increasing consistently in 
the post-reform period. For example, non-interest income as a proportion of total assets of the banking 
sector increased from 1.2 per cent in 1993 to more than 2 per cent in 2004 (Table 9). In this context, it 
is also appropriate to mention that Indian banks, in particular the public sector banks, are yet to catch-
up fully with their foreign counterparts. 
Efficiency of Indian banks 
Improvements  in  efficiency  of  the  banking  system  are  expected  to  be  reflected,  inter  alia,  in  a 
reduction  in  operating  expenditure,  interest  spread  and  cost  of  intermediation  in  general.  Several 
indicators  have  been  employed  in  the  literature  to  compare  banking  production  costs  across  time. 
Illustratively, intermediation cost, defined as the ratio of operating expense to total assets, witnessed a 
gradual reduction  in  the  post  reform  period  across various  bank  groups  barring  foreign banks.  This 
decline  in  intermediation  cost  needs  to  be  weighed  against  the  large  expenditures  incurred  in 
upgradation  of  information  technology  and  institution  of  ‘core  banking’  solutions.  Admittedly, 
intermediation costs of banks in India still tend to be higher than those in developed banking markets.  
At a more disaggregated level, it is evident that5 Indian banks have improved their efficiency in the 
post reform period as evidenced from the declining trend in per unit cost of output, irrespective of the 
choice of outputs. The operating cost per unit of earning assets declined from 2.1 per cent in 1992 to 
1.8 per cent in 2004; similarly, operating cost per unit of total volume of business declined from 3.4 per 
cent to 2.6 per cent during the same period. Among the components of operating expenses, employee 
cost  per  unit  of  output  witnessed  a  noticeable  decline  in  the  post-reform  period.  This  decline  is 
discernible  across  all  bank  groups,  and  especially  for  public  sector  banks  in  the  post  2001  period 
consequent to the voluntary retirement scheme across several nationalised banks. On the other hand, 
the change in physical capital cost per unit of output has been marginal, reflecting the fact that Indian 
banks  maintained  a  steady  flow  of  investments  towards  physical  capital  formation,  especially  on 
automation and information technology.  
From the efficiency standpoint, the intermediation cost needs to be viewed in conjunction with non-
interest income. Till 2001, the burden (the excess of non-interest expenditure over non-interest income 
as  a  percentage  to  total  assets)  of  commercial  banks  hovered  around  1  to  1.5  per  cent.  This  gap 
between intermediation cost and income from fee-based activities has narrowed considerably in recent 
years. For example, the burden of Indian commercial banks declined from 1.2 per cent in 1992 to 0.2 
per cent in 2004. Moreover, there has been a lowering of the burden across bank groups in recent 
years.  The  improvement  in  respect  of  Indian  private  banks  has  been  remarkable;  their  non-interest 
income in recent years has surpassed their intermediation cost and has resulted in a negative burden. 
The  cost  income-ratio  (defined  as  the  ratio  of  operating  expenses  to  total  income  less  interest 
expense) of Indian banks showed a declining trend during the post reform period. For example, Indian 
banks paid roughly 45 per cent of their net income towards managing labour and physical capital in 
2004 as against nearly 72 per cent in 1993. In other words, Indian banks recorded a net cost saving of 
nearly 27 per cent of their net income during the post reform period. According to the data reported in 
The Banker 2004, the cost-income ratio of world’s largest banks varied markedly from a low of 48 per 
                                                      
5  Total operating cost can be broken down into labor cost and cost of physical capital. To create per unit cost measure, we 
deflate the operating cost and its two components by either (i) the total earning assets (deposits plus investments), which is 
justified by the asset approach in measuring banking outputs, or (ii) the aggregate of advances and deposits, which can be 
justified by the value-added approach in measuring banking outputs. 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 7
cent to a high of 116 percent and the ratio around 60 per cent is an indicative benchmark (RBI, 2005). 
In  that  respect,  the  cost-income  ratio  of  Indian  banks  is  now  comparable  internationally.  Among 
various  ownership  patterns,  public  sector  banks  have  tended  to  have  relatively  higher  cost-income 
ratio as against private banks and foreign banks.  
This  explanation  needs  to  be  viewed  in  conjunction  with  the  differential  ownership  profile  of  banks. 
Early studies (Sarkar et al., 1998) found somewhat weak evidence to suggest that ownership was an 
important  determinant  of  performance.  More  recent  studies  exhibit  mixed  evidence:  while  certain 
studies  (Keova,  2003)  suggest  ownership  to  have  some  effect  on  bank  performance,  others  (e.g., 
Bhaumik  and  Dimova,  2004)  veer  around  the  view  that  competition  induced  public  sector  banks  to 
eliminate the performance gap that existed between them and both domestic and foreign and private 
sector banks. More recent research reported differences in the efficiency of Indian commercial banks 
with different ownership status, level of non-performing loans, size and asset quality (Das and Ghosh, 
2006).  More  importantly,  their  study  uncovered  evidence  that  public  sector  banks  (PSBs)  recorded 
higher efficiency gains in the post-reform period. Clearly, the evidence here is not conclusive, because 
comparisons are beset with several difficulties. Given the size and variety of PSBs, it is possible to find 
banks that could equal the good private sector banks as well as bad ones. In addition, PSBs have to 
reckon  with  ‘legacy’  problems,  such  as  many  of  the  non-performing  assets  that  they  have  been 
saddled with. Some PSBs operate in relatively backward areas with limited discretion to pull out from 
such areas. The question still remains: whether there is a better payoff in enabling PSBs to improve 
their performance while promoting private sector banks, as compared with an alternative policy that 
provides for transfer of ownership and control from the public to the private sector. Will greater scope 
for mergers and acquisitions within and between public and private sector add to greater efficiency?  
Another important indicator of efficiency of banks is net interest margin (NIM), defined as the excess of 
interest income over interest expense, scaled by total bank assets. Broadly speaking, this ratio reflects 
the allocative efficiency of financial intermediation, a lower ratio being indicative of higher efficiency. It 
is quite reasonable to believe that the decline in deposit rates ushered by the deregulation process will 
be manifested in the lending behaviour of banks. In practice, however, lending rates have tended to be 
sticky downwards and seem to operate with a time lag. Historically the NIM of Indian banks is rather 
high. Around the onset of the reform process in 1992, the NIM of Indian banks was about 3.3 percent. 
Thereafter,  it  recorded  a  relatively  modest  decline  to  around  3  per  cent  in  recent  years.  And 
traditionally, it is the foreign banks, which by virtue of their ability to mobilise low-cost deposits, have 
the  highest  NIMs,  whereas  those  for  private  banks  have  been  the  lowest  in  recent  years.  These 
comparisons  are  not  watertight:  typically,  small  and  medium  banks  had  high  NIM  until  1997.6 
Thereafter, NIM for big banks recorded a rise. Contextually, it may be mentioned that banks in most 
developed countries and several emerging economies have NIM (as a percentage to total assets) of 
around 2 per cent. This provides some indication that competition in banking still has some way to go 
in India.    
Productivity 
Studies on productivity in Indian banking have only begun to emanate of late. A recent study found 
that total factor productivity growth has improved marginally in the post deregulation period, but there 
was  little  evidence  of  narrowing  of  productivity  differentials  across  ownership  categories  following 
deregulation (Kumbhakar and Sarkar, 2003). Among various productivity indicators, labour productivity 
indicators like business per employee and profit per employee are most commonly used. In addition, 
business  per  branch  is  also  used  to  judge  branch-level  productivity.  The  business  per  employee  of 
Indian banks increased over three-fold in real terms from Rs.5.4 million in 1992 to Rs.16.3 million in 
2004, exhibiting an annual compound growth rate of nearly 9 per cent. At the same time, the profit per 
employee  increased  more  than  five-fold:  from  Rs.20,000  to  Rs.  150,000  over  the  same  period, 
implying  a  compound  growth  of  around  17  per  cent. Branch  productivity  also  recorded concomitant 
improvements. Overall, the balance of evidence suggests distinctive productivity improvements in the 
banking sector over the reform period. The extant literature suggests that such improvements could be 
driven by two factors: technological improvement, which expands the range of production possibilities 
and a catching up effect, as peer pressure amongst banks compels them to raise productivity levels. In 
                                                      
6   Definitions of small, medium and big banks are as follows: small banks are those  with asset upto Rs.50 billion; medium 
banks  are  those  with  asset  exceeding  Rs.50  billion    and  upto  Rs.100  billion;  big  banks  are  those  with  asset  exceeding 
Rs.100 billion but and upto Rs.200 billion; and large banks are those with asset exceeding Rs.200 billion. 
8 
 BIS Review 15/2006
is  clear: 
the  bottomline 
the  context  of  gradual  deregulation  of  financial  sector,  several  factors  could  have  been  at  work:  a 
significant  shift  of  the  best-practice  frontier,  driven  by  a  combination  of  technological  advances, 
financial innovation and different strategies pursued by banks suited to their business philosophy and 
risk-return  profile,  changing  composition  of  banks’  input–output,  and  reduction  in  total  cost  due  to 
improvements in overall efficiency. While it is difficult to pinpoint the relative mix of these factors in 
raising  productivity, 
Indian  banks  witnessed  significant  productivity 
improvements, post-reforms.  
In a wider framework, cross-country studies of deregulation and productivity growth of banks report 
divergent  views.  Typically,  cross-country  comparisons  are  often  fraught  with  difficulties,  not  only 
because of the different regulatory and economic regimes encountered by financial entities, but also 
owing to the differential quality of services associated with deposits and loans in different countries. 
Maudos and Pastor (2001) analysed the cost and profit efficiency across 14 EU economies, as well as 
Japan and the USA. The results uncovered the evidence that, since the start of the 1990s increasing 
competition  has  led  to  gains  in profit  efficiency  in  the  USA  and Europe  but  not  so  in  the Japanese 
banking system. Their results also show that the variance in of profitability between countries would be 
considerably  reduced  if  inefficiencies  were  eliminated,  efficiency  gains  thus  being  a  very  important 
source of improvement in profitability. A recent study in the Asian context analysed various efficiency 
measures  of  South-East  Asian  (Indonesia,  Korea,  Malaysia,  Philippines  and  Thailand)  banks  in  the 
context of corporate governance (Williams and Nguyen, 2005). Although the motivation of the study 
was different, their empirical results found economic justification for the policy of bank privatisation.  
Let me encapsulate this section by making some general comments on the efficiency and productivity 
growth  of  Indian  banks  vis-à-vis  leading  Asian  nations  like  China  and  Korea.  As  far  as  real  growth 
(adjusted  for  price  movement  and  exchange  rate  fluctuations)  in  banking  business  is  concerned, 
Indian banks are favourably placed. In recent years, the real growth of deposits and of loans of Indian 
banks were noticeably higher than those of other Asian countries such as China and Korea. At the 
same time, profitability of Indian banks, as determined by the return on assets, is also much higher. 
The intermediation cost of Indian banks seems to be relatively higher than that of Korea and China. 
Nonetheless, higher operating cost in India is well compensated by the higher non-interest income, as 
compared to other Asian countries. Finally, the labour productivity of the top 4 banks in India (which 
includes one de novo private bank) and the four state-owned Chinese banks indicates that except the 
private bank, the top three public sector banks in India recorded much lower employee productivity. 
However, in the absence of data on employment for banks in other countries, it is difficult to ascertain 
the degree of labour productivity differentials across countries. 
A clear message emanating from these findings is the role of technology in driving productivity and 
efficiency improvements. In today's world of banking, technology is considered as the basic tool of the 
"process engineers" of the organisation. It is crucial for the design, control, and execution of service 
delivery in banks. Therefore, a key driver of efficiency and productivity in the banking industry today is 
the effective use of technology. This is a crucial pre-requisite for capitalising on future opportunities for 
the  banking  sector.  In  effect,  it  has  become  the  key  to  servicing  all  customer  segments  –  offering 
convenience  to  retail  customer,  corporates  and  government  clients.  The  increasing  sophistication, 
flexibility  and  complexity  of  products  and  servicing  offerings  makes  the  effective  use  of  technology 
critical  for  managing  the  risks  associated  with  banking  business.  However,  the  ‘technological 
penetration’  in  India  has  been  quite  modest.  According  to  data  reported  in  the  World  Development 
Indicators  database,  as  of  2002,  the  number  of  computers  per  1000  persons  was  about  7  in  India 
compared to anywhere between 70-500 in most emerging markets and even higher in most developed 
economies.7 Wide disparities exist within the banking sector as far as technological capabilities are 
concerned: the percentage of ‘computer literate’ employees as percentage of total staff in 2000 was 
around 20 per cent in public sector banks compared with 100 per cent in new private and around 90 
per cent in foreign banks (Reserve Bank of India, 2002). Data reported by the RBI suggests that nearly 
71  per  cent  of  branches  of  public  sector  banks  are  fully  computerized.  However,  computerization 
needs to go beyond the mere ‘arithmeticals’, to borrow a term from the Report of the Committee on 
Banking Sector Reforms (Government of India, 1998), and instead, needs to be leveraged optimally to 
achieve  and  maintain  high  service  and  efficiency  standards.  In  fact,  recent  research  on  the  role  of 
technology  in  driving  productivity  improvements  in  banking  demonstrates  that  computer  employees 
and IT capital exhibit higher productivities than their respective non-computer employees and non-IT 
                                                      
7   The reported figure for Pakistan was 4.21 in 2001. 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 9
capital, respectively (Huang, 2005). The challenge, therefore, remains three fold: acquiring the ‘right’ 
technology, deploying it optimally and remaining cost-effective whilst delivering sustainable returns to 
shareholders.  In  effect,  ‘managing’  technology  so  as  to  reap  the  maximum  benefits  remains  a  key 
challenge for the Indian banks.  
Way Ahead 
5.  
How do we see the future? In this context, I would like to share with you some of the issues that need 
to  be  kept  in  view  while  discussing  productivity  and  efficiency  in  banks.    Needless  to  state,  these 
issues  remain  relevant,  in  varying  degrees,  in  economies  that  share  similar  features  in  the  banking 
sector, as ours. 
First, many of you would be aware that small and medium enterprises (SMEs) constitute an important 
segment  of  the  industrial  and  services  sectors  in  India  in  view  of  their  significant  contributions  to 
employment  generation  as  also  exports.  With  the  emergence  of  new  activities  in  the  rural  segment 
such as agri-clinics, contract farming and rural housing with forward and backward linkages to SMEs, 
lending  to  SMEs  has  become  a  viable  revenue  proposition  for  banks.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  also 
initiated several measures to streamline the flow of credit and address structural bottlenecks in credit 
delivery  to  this  segment.  Salient  among  these  include  fixing  of  self-set  targets  for  financing, 
rationalisation  of  cost  of  loans,  expanding  the  outreach  of  formal  credit,  and  formulation  of 
comprehensive  and  more  liberal  policies  for  credit  extension.  Public  sector  banks  have  also  been 
advised to constitute specialized SME branches in identified clusters/centers with preponderance of 
small and medium enterprises. A noteworthy development in this context has been the passage of the 
Credit  Information  Companies  (Regulation)  Act,  2005  in  the  Parliament.  The  Act  is  expected  to 
encourage setting up of credit information companies and thereby, improve exchange of information 
on credit histories of borrowers. Coupled with appropriate risk assessment models and mechanisms, 
this is expected to lower transactions costs of banks. The overall effect of this process is likely to be 
reflected in a lowering of the risk premium embedded in interest rates charged to SMEs with positive 
spillovers for bank lending to the SME sector. 
Although  liberalisation  of  financial  services  and  competition  has  improved  customer  services, 
experience  shows  that  customers'  interests  are  not  always  accorded  priority.  More  importantly, 
concerns have been raised with regard to banking practices that tend to exclude vast segments of the 
population.  In  this  context,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  announced  its  intention  to  implement  policies  to 
incentivise  banks  to  provide  extensive  services  responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  under-privileged.  As 
part  of  the  process,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  recently  advised  all  banks  to  make  available  a  basic 
banking ‘no frills’ account either with ‘nil’ or very low minimum balances as well as charges that would 
make such accounts accessible to vast sections of population. The nature and number of transactions 
in such accounts could be restricted, but made known to the customer in advance in a transparent 
manner. Banks have been urged to give wide publicity to this facility so as to ensure greater financial 
inclusion. 
The  growth  performance  of  the  Indian  economy  during  the  last  few  years  indicates  a  possible 
ratcheting up of the trend rate of growth from around 6 per cent to around 8 per cent per year. Yet, 
there  is  a  need  to  undertake  significant  efforts  to  achieve  higher  rates  of  growth  in  a  sustained 
manner. The current levels of investment might not be adequate to achieve such growth rates, even 
after  accounting  for  reductions  in  the  existing  incremental  capital-output  ratios.  Looking  beyond  the 
aspect  of  fiscal  consolidation,  action  on  several  fronts  needs  to  be  pursued  vigorously  to  step  up 
growth rates. First is the issue of investment in agriculture and allied activities, a sector that produces 
21 per cent of GDP, but supports nearly 60 per cent of the population. There is often substantial loss 
of output owing to inadequate storage and transport facilities and paucity of adequate food processing 
capacities. This necessitates greater public and private investment on these post-harvest facilities to 
not only increase value addition, but also to improve the agriculture-industry linkage. The second issue 
of import is the simplification of procedures. Cumbersome procedural formalities introduce delays and 
results  in  significant  output  losses.  Added  to  these,  the  de-reservation  of  items  from  exclusive 
production  under  SSI  units  is  likely  to  permit  the  sector  reap  economies  of  scale  and  scope  and 
enhance  competitiveness.  The  third  is  the  issue  of  finances.  The  incipient  investment  boom  in 
infrastructure,  industry  and  services  will  yield  best  results  only  if  enormous  resource  flows  are 
successfully  intermediated  at  a  low  cost.  This  will  depend  on  the  ability  of  the  financial  sector  to 
process information properly and to intermediate the extant savings into optimal investment by specific 
firms  and  sectors.  The  fourth  aspect  of  stepping  up  investment  is  to  address  the  deficiencies  in 
10 
 BIS Review 15/2006
infrastructure. The decline in public spending on infrastructure has not been adequately compensated 
by the private sector, possibly owing to difficulties in the regulatory environment. Therefore, nurturing 
an  appropriate  policy  framework,  with  a  conducive  environment  for  public-private  participation, 
remains  the  key  to  accelerating  investment  in  infrastructure.  The  final  aspect  is  the  need  to 
complement  domestic  investment with  higher  foreign  investment,  primarily  in  the  form  of  FDI.  Such 
investment is likely to trigger technology spillovers, assist human capital formation and more generally, 
improve the efficiency of resource use. 
Over the reform period, more and more banks have begun to get listed on the stock exchange, which, 
in  its  wake,  has  led  to  greater  market  discipline  and  concomitantly,  to  an  improvement  in  their 
governance  aspects  as  well.  This  has  led  to  a  broadbasing  of  the  ownership  of  PSBs.  Such 
diversification of ownership has also led to a qualitative difference in their functioning, since there is 
induction of private shareholding as well as attendant issues of shareholder’s value, as reflected by 
the market capitalisation, board representation and interests of minority shareholders (Reddy, 2002). 
The issue of mixed ownership as an institutional structure where government has controlling interest is 
a  salient  feature  of  bank  governance  in  India.  Such  aspects  of  corporate  governance  in  PSBs  is 
important,  not  only  because  PSBs  dominate  the  banking  industry,  but  also  because,  it  is  likely  that 
they would continue to remain in banking business. To the extent there is public ownership of PSBs, 
the  multiple  objectives  of  the  government  as  owner  and  the  complex  principal-agent  relationships 
needs  to  be  taken  on  board.  Given  the  increased  technical  complexity  of  most  business  activities 
including banking and the rapid pace of change in financial markets and practices, PSBs would need 
to  devise  imaginative  ways  of  responding  to  the  evolving  challenges  within  the  context  of  mixed 
ownership. All in all, this is an exciting phase for PSBs to grow and prosper, and it is up to these banks 
to respond to the challenges. 
Let  me  conclude:  the  address  has  have  traversed  a  modest  terrain,  focusing  on  the  efficiency  and 
productivity changes in Indian banking. The patterns of efficiency and technological change witnessed 
in  Indian  banking  can  be  viewed  as  consistent  with  expectations  in  an  industry  undergoing  rapid 
change  in  response  to  the  forces  of  deregulation.  In  reaction  to  evolving  market  prospects,  a  few 
pioneering  banks  might  adjust  quickly  to  seize  the  emerging  opportunities,  while  others  respond 
cautiously. As deregulation gathers momentum, commercial banks would need to devise imaginative 
ways of augmenting their incomes and more importantly their fee-incomes so as to raise efficiency and 
productivity levels. 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 11
