Lucas Papademos: Central banks in the 21st century 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  as  panellist  in 
Session 1 on Monetary Policy at a conference on “Central banks in the 21st century” organised by the 
Bank of Spain, Madrid, 8 June 2006. 
References to the speech can be found on the ECB’s website. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 I. Introduction 
Let me start by saying a few words of thanks and extending my best wishes to this great institution, 
which is celebrating 150 years of bearing the prestigious name of Banco de España. I would like to 
thank Governor Caruana and the Banco de España for organising this excellent conference and for 
inviting me to participate in this panel.  
To  kick  off  this  conference,  Alan  Blinder  has  prepared  an  impressive  survey  which  presents  and 
assesses the main critical issues that are currently truly relevant for monetary policy-makers. He has 
demonstrated  again  an  admirable  ability  to  blend  top  academic  research with  good central  banking 
practice  and  common  sense  to  produce  this  insightful  and  stimulating  review.  Alan’s  list  of  16 
questions  regarding  monetary  policy  is  fairly  long  and,  indeed,  somewhat  longer  than  the  list  he 
presented in 1999 at the first ECB conference. This may seem discouraging and might suggest that 
not much progress has been made over the past six years. However, the two lists are not identical: 
some of the original questions have been resolved, and new ones have arisen. Therefore, there are 
still  plenty  of  critical  issues  concerning  the  science  and  art  of  central  banking  that  need  to  be 
addressed, and Alan himself provides answers to most of them.  
Given the wide range of questions raised by Alan, I will inevitably have to be selective and do some 
cherry-picking,  by  focusing  on  issues  that  are  more  controversial  or  more  interesting  from  my 
perspective, and that can also be discussed adequately in the limited time available. I will discuss a 
number  of  issues  regarding  the  objectives  and  strategy  of  monetary  policy,  aspects  of  policy 
implementation  including  central  bank  communication  and  transparency,  the  relationship  between 
monetary policy and financial markets, and the implications of globalisation for monetary policy.  
II. Monetary policy objectives: some fundamental, strategic and analytical issues 
I  would  like  to  begin  by  addressing  some  critical  questions  concerning  the  institutional  design  of 
monetary policy, in particular issues relating to monetary policy objectives. These include fundamental 
issues regarding the choice and ranking of policy goals, as well as other important subjects pertaining 
to the strategy and analysis employed in pursuing these goals. 
A  fundamental  development  in  monetary  policy-making  over  the  past  two  decades  has  been  the 
emergence of a strong consensus – or at least a general acceptance of the view – that the overriding 
aim of monetary policy should be the attainment and preservation of price stability. This view is shared 
by an overwhelming majority of central banks and academic economists. It is presumably also shared 
by the political authorities, as manifested by the legislation that has been enacted in many countries to 
enable  central  banks  to  pursue  this  objective.  The  roots  of  this  consensus  are  (1)  the  greater 
appreciation of the benefits of price stability for durable economic growth and social welfare; (2) the 
recognition that monetary policy can effectively determine price developments over the medium and 
longer  run,  but  cannot  permanently  and  systematically  influence  economic  activity;  (3)  growing 
evidence that independent central banks can pursue price stability effectively while minimising output 
volatility. 
Despite the general agreement on the primacy of price stability as a monetary policy objective, there 
are differences of opinion on several related issues: (1) how this goal is linked and ranked relative to 
BIS Review 51/2006 
 1
other policy objectives; (2) what is the appropriate strategy for policy formulation; (3) whether and how 
the concept of price stability should be defined in quantitative terms; (4) how to operationally specify a 
final policy target and in particular the measures of inflation and economic activity that central banks 
should aim to control. These differences are not  inconsequential for the formulation and conduct of 
monetary policy. 
The central bank’s objective function 
In examining these issues, Alan uses, for part of his analysis and assessment, an objective function 
for monetary policy that is often employed in academic work: a quadratic loss function that penalises a 
weighted average of the deviations of the inflation rate (π) from its target value (π*) and the deviation 
of  real  output  (y)  or  the  unemployment  rate  (u)  from  their  “equilibrium”  or  “natural”  values  (y*,  u*). 
Although, as Alan acknowledges, this particular specification of policy-makers’ objectives is motivated 
(if not dictated) by “mathematical convenience” (in the theoretical analysis of monetary policy, given 
that it facilitates the derivation of results, especially under conditions of uncertainty, the fact is that it 
imposes unrealistic constraints on policy-makers’ preferences and does not appropriately describe the 
objectives of many central banks, including the ECB.  
In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  states  that  “the  primary 
objective of the ESCB shall be to maintain price stability” and that, “without prejudice to the objective 
of price stability, the ESCB shall support the general economic policies in the Community with a view 
to contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the Community”, which include a high level of 
employment and sustainable and non-inflationary growth. In the euro area, monetary policy goals are 
therefore not stated, and cannot be expressed in terms of their relative importance (which, in principle, 
cannot  be  captured  by  choosing  the  size  of  the  parameter  λ  defining  the  relative  weight),  but  are 
clearly  specified  in  a  hierarchical  (or  lexicographic)  manner,  which  emphasises  the  overriding 
importance  of  price  stability  and  also  implies  that  policy  should  not  be  formulated  in  terms  of  an 
objective function which trades off inflation volatility against output volatility. The underlying proposition 
is that, in general, price stability contributes to reducing output volatility.  
I should also briefly mention that the selected loss function does not seem to be able to capture the 
points  raised  by  some  economists  concerning  the  potentially  asymmetric  costs  of  high  and  low 
unemployment, relative to its natural or NAIRU level. It is also unclear as to whether it can provide an 
appropriate  representation  of  policy  preferences  for  those  central  banks  that  have  opted  for  an 
inflation-targeting strategy and at the same time aim to support a high level of economic activity. This 
observation partly relates to the specific functional form and partly to the results of Svensson (1997), 
who has shown that the parameters of a Taylor rule are not related in a straightforward way to the 
relative weight λ of inflation and output deviations from their target values. 
Monetary policy strategy and the operational target for price stability 
Given  the  choice  and  ranking  of  objectives,  a  key  aspect  of  the  policy  framework  is  the  strategy 
adopted  for  pursuing  them,  which  involves  decisions  concerning  the  method  of  analysis  and  the 
quantitative  definition  and  operational  target  for  price  stability.  The  approaches  chosen  by  central 
banks differ, but they are converging. Many central banks have opted for an inflation-targeting strategy 
based on a single analytic model and aimed at an inflation rate of 2% or 2.5% as the midpoint of the 
target range. The ECB has adopted a more general and eclectic strategy that includes both economic 
analysis  and  monetary  analysis.  It  has  also  adopted  a  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  –  an 
increase in the price level that does not exceed 2% – and, given this definition, it aims to maintain 
inflation  at  “below  but  close  to  2%”.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  not  yet  formally  adopted  a  precise, 
operational price stability or inflation target (though implicitly a target for core inflation at 1.75%-2% 
has recently been used). We have found the selection and announcement of a quantitative definition 
of  price  stability  extremely  important  for  policy  formulation  as  well  as  for  guiding  and  anchoring 
inflation  expectations  to  price  stability.  Moreover,  it  provides  a  yardstick  for  the  assessment  of  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy and for democratic accountability.  
However, despite the adoption of a quantitative definition of price stability to orient our policy, the ECB 
does not use the term “inflation targeting” to describe its own strategy – even if Alan tends to put us in 
the same camp. Presumably, there must be some real differences warranting this position, and indeed 
there are. First, for the Governing Council of the ECB, inflation projections based on a single model 
are  not  the  only  all-encompassing  tool  on  the  basis  of  which  decisions  and  communication  are 
organised; our projections are seen as important input to our economic analysis, but are strictly staff 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2006
projections and one element of our economic analysis. A second major difference is that we assign an 
important role to monetary analysis in assessing the medium to long-term inflation trends and risks. A 
final  point  is  that  our  policy  framework  has  a  medium-term  orientation  but  we  have  eschewed 
specifying a fixed time horizon for our assessment of the outlook for price stability.  
At the same time, there are no major differences in the practical implementation of monetary policy 
strategies among price stability-oriented central banks and, with regard to at least some aspects of the 
policy  framework,  remaining  differences  are  diminishing.  In  recent  years,  for  example,  we  have 
observed  a  greater  focus  by  some  inflation-targeting  central  banks  on  the  medium  and  long-term 
horizon and on the role of money and credit growth in determining medium to long-term inflation trends 
and in influencing asset price dynamics. 
Core versus headline inflation 
Despite the convergence of many aspects of the monetary policy strategies, there are still important 
differences. One such difference is whether the operational target for inflation should be the headline 
or  a  core  measure  of  inflation.  Alan  has  declared  that  he  is  firmly  in  the  “core”  camp  for  several 
reasons. He argues that a central bank should aim at core inflation because (i) it cannot effectively 
control  headline  inflation  given  its  inability  to  offset  supply  shocks;  (ii)  it  can  better  forecast  future 
headline inflation on the basis of past core-inflation dynamics, and (iii) targeting core inflation is likely 
to result in more sensible monetary policy in the presence of supply (energy price) shocks. 
In  this  debate,  I  am  firmly  in  the  “headline  inflation”  camp.  Let  me  explain.  To  begin  with,  our 
responsibility  as  central  bankers  is  to preserve  the stability  of  the  overall,  general price  level  which 
determines  the  public’s  purchasing  power  and  social  welfare.  The  inability  to  offset  immediately 
supply-side  shocks  does  not  change  this  responsibility,  while  the  medium-term  orientation  of  our 
monetary policy clearly indicates that we do not aim to offset such unanticipated shocks over the short 
run. I believe it is important to differentiate the role of a core inflation measure in the definition of the 
central bank’s objective from its relevance and potential usefulness in the assessment of the outlook 
for price stability and the formulation of policy. With regard to the monetary policy strategy, the price 
index used to define the medium-term objective should be a comprehensive and credible measure of 
citizens’ purchasing power which cannot be criticised for being defined in an arbitrary manner. Core 
inflation measures fall short of this requirement because of the exclusion of important items relevant 
for the public and because of the degree of arbitrariness in the definition of core inflation.  
Another issue concerns the use of an appropriate measure of core inflation as an information variable 
in the formulation of monetary policy. There are two pertinent questions: first, which measure of core 
inflation  provides  reliable  information  about  domestic  underlying  inflationary  pressures  by  removing 
short-term  noise  from  headline  inflation  due  to  transitory  shocks,  and  second,  whether  different 
measures of underlying inflation can better forecast developments in headline inflation. 
Many  concepts  of  core  inflation  have  been  proposed,  such  as  HICP  inflation  excluding  energy  and 
food  components,  trimmed  means  of  the  HICP  sub-indexes  and  model-based  measures.  While  the 
proposed different core measures can be helpful in removing transient noise from trend inflation, there 
is  no  strong  evidence  in  the  euro  area  that  a  specific  core  inflation  measure  is  a  reliable  tool  for 
forecasting  headline  inflation  at  relevant  horizons.  Our  experience  and  analysis  leads  to  different 
conclusions than those derived from the US experience cited by Alan (see Blinder and Reis, 2005). In 
the euro area, the gap observed between headline and core inflation often closes with core inflation 
increasing and converging towards higher headline inflation. 
For  example,  in  the  euro  area  in  the  period  1999-2002,  a  considerable  positive  gap  opened  up 
between the headline inflation and the underlying measure which excludes food and energy prices. 
However, following a period of strong demand growth, this gap was closed not by a significant drop in 
headline inflation, but by a delayed upward movement in this “core” measure. Following the indication 
of the core measure on this occasion would have been a costly policy mistake (see ECB, 2005). 
This  episode  shows  that  the  usefulness  of  core  measures  might  be  generally  limited,  and  that 
medium-term inflationary pressures are very much related to various underlying causes and processes 
as well as to the nature and dynamics of the shocks affecting the economy. Consequently, the optimal 
monetary policy response cannot be determined on the basis of a simple rule relying on a measure of 
core inflation; it depends on the size, nature and persistence of shocks affecting the economy. And 
such shocks cannot, in general, be identified and their effects cannot be adequately assessed only by 
using a measure of core inflation. 
BIS Review 51/2006 
 3
A  point  that  should  be  emphasised  with  regard  to  the  appropriate  response  of  monetary  policy  to 
supply shocks is that their ultimate effects on inflation and output dynamics will obviously and crucially 
depend  on  the  reaction  of  economic  agents,  especially  of  the  participants  in  product  and  labour 
markets,  which  is  influenced  by  their  expectations  about  the  response  of  the  central  bank  to  such 
disturbances. The fact that no significant second-round effects have been observed in the recent past 
does  not  imply  that  they  will  not  emerge  in  the  future,  if  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  is 
maintained,  especially  as  the  economic  recovery  gains  momentum.  If  a  central  bank  adjusts  the 
monetary  policy  stance  only  when  second-round  effects  have  become  clearly  visible,  by  relying  on 
some measure of core inflation, its response will come too late and it is likely that a larger dose of 
monetary tightening would be required than would have been the case if it had adjusted earlier on the 
basis of its assessment of all pertinent risks to future headline inflation. 
The  strategy  of  the  ECB,  therefore,  relies  on  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  shocks  affecting 
headline inflation as well as on a wide variety of economic indicators and methods of analysis in order 
to  assess  the  outlook  for  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  And,  importantly,  the  medium-term 
orientation  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  ensures  that  in  our  assessment  we  appropriately 
discount short-term volatility due to transitory supply shocks.  
III. Central bank transparency and communication of future policy rates 
The  second  big  theme  I  want  to  address  is  central  bank  transparency  and,  in  particular,  Alan’s 
suggestion that central banks should announce their conditional monetary policy plans, at least as part 
of their forecasts. When discussing the issues of transparency and communication, it is important to 
distinguish between general aims and principles, on the one hand, and practical and effective means 
of fulfilling them, on the other. 
I  fully  agree  with  Alan  on  the  importance  of,  and  the  reasons  for,  (maximum)  central  bank 
transparency and I partly share his view on the limits to (optimal) transparency. But I draw different 
conclusions  about  the  usefulness  of  pre-announcing  an  explicit  path  for  future  policy  rates  over  a 
period of one to two years. This is because of my different assessment of the nature and extent of the 
uncertainty we face, the quality of available information and the limitations to our analytical methods, 
which have implications for the effectiveness of Alan’s proposed communication strategy. 
A  high  degree  of  transparency  is  an  essential  element  of  the  democratic  accountability  of  central 
banks.  Transparency  also  enhances  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  by  helping  to  guide  the 
expectations  of  economic  agents  and  bring  them  into  line  with  policy  objectives  and  actions.  It  is 
particularly important that markets and the public at large have a good understanding of the systematic 
and conditional conduct of monetary policy by the central bank, so that expectations about future price 
developments and the path of policy rates are in line with the central bank’s mandate. For all these 
reasons, the ECB has always striven to be as transparent as possible and has tried to communicate 
clearly, and by a variety of means, its policy objective, its strategy, its assessment of the economic 
situation, as well as the outlook for price stability and the associated risks. 
The limits of central bank transparency 
Are there limits to the transparency of central banks? Alan’s view on this issue is nicely presented by 
paraphrasing Einstein: “Every central bank has to be as transparent as possible, but not more so.” The 
crucial issue is the meaning or interpretation of “but not more so”. Alan argues that the meaning of this 
proposition  is  that  the  default  option  should  be  disclosure,  unless  there  are  good  reasons  for  the 
central bank to maintain the confidentiality of certain information in its role of supervisor or fiscal agent. 
In my view, there is another interpretation of the meaning “but not more than possible”, which takes 
into  account  the  limitations  of  our  analytical  tools  and  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  medium  to 
longer-term outlook. This interpretation also relates to the second objective of transparency, which is 
to provide economic agents with useful information so as to enhance clarity and understanding about 
policy actions and to reduce pertinent uncertainty. If future policy actions over a fairly long time horizon 
depend  on  projections  about  the  future  paths  of  many  exogenous  variables  that  are  inevitably 
characterised  by  uncertainty,  as  well  as  on  various  shocks  that  by  definition  cannot  be  anticipated, 
and, more importantly, when there is considerable uncertainty about certain structural or behavioural 
parameters of the economy, then providing explicit guidance on the future policy rates, conditional on 
the  underlying  projections  and  assumptions,  generally  involves  risks  that  can  undermine  the 
usefulness of providing more information on the central bank’s policy intentions.  
4 
 BIS Review 51/2006
Let me elaborate on some of the risks. First, the general public may fail to fully understand that a pre-
announced path of future policy rates is conditional and that changes in the state of the economy will 
require changes to this policy path. Eventual deviations from the previously projected policy path may 
therefore be viewed, at least by many who are not experts in monetary economics, as a failure of the 
central  bank  to  follow  its  announced  intentions.  This  could  damage  its  credibility,  even  if  it  is 
conducting policy in an optimal manner. Second, the central bank is often faced with a high degree of 
uncertainty, including “Knightian” uncertainty, about the functioning of the economy and the response 
of economic agents to shocks and policy actions. Under such circumstances, it is difficult to determine 
an  optimal  or  appropriate  path  of  policy  rates  over  a  long  time  horizon  and  to  agree  about  such  a 
policy  path  in  a  policy-making  committee,  and  to  properly  convey  to  the  public  all  the  conditions 
underlying such a path. Finally, I do not think that publishing a path of future policy rates, which is 
mechanically  derived  from  an  empirically  estimated  reaction  function,  would  be  helpful.  On  the 
contrary, it would be difficult to explain the difference between this path and the one decided by the 
decision-making  body  in  the  context  of  a  forward-looking  strategy  with  a  medium-term  orientation. 
Confusion rather than greater clarity may be the outcome of implementing such an approach. 
For this reason, I suggest that a central bank should be as transparent as possible, but no more so 
than  is  realistically  useful for  enhancing  the  clarity  and  understanding  of  the  future  monetary  policy 
stance.[1]  This  does  not  mean  that  central  banks  cannot  give  qualitative  guidance  about  the  future 
policy stance by means of official statements, particularly in special circumstances when the size and 
balance of risks to the outlook for price stability dictates the provision of such guidance or when the 
central bank believes that market expectations about future monetary policy are deviating significantly 
from its policy intentions as determined by its own assessment. 
However,  I  share  some  of  Alan’s  considerations  on  the  limits  and  drawbacks  of  macroeconomic 
projections based on a constant interest rate assumption. As you know, in order to improve the overall 
consistency  and  forecast  quality  of  the  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  we  recently 
decided  to  change  the  assumption  about  the  future  path  of  short-term  interest  rates  that  is 
incorporated in the staff projections. With the projections released today, we have started to produce 
macroeconomic projections that are conditional on the path of future interest rates expected by the 
markets,  as  embedded  in  the  yield  curve  and  in  futures  prices.  This  approach  corresponds  to  the 
second  option  in  Alan’s  paper  and  addresses  the  concerns  expressed  by  eliminating  an  internal 
inconsistency and improving transparency. It will not solve all of his concerns, but it should mitigate 
some of them. 
IV. Monetary policy and asset prices 
I will turn now to the questions in Alan’s list that concern the relationship between monetary policy and 
financial markets. In Question 14, Alan asks: how should central banks react to asset price bubbles? 
To answer this properly, I would need at least another 20 minutes. Unfortunately, I do not have that 
much time, but let me make two remarks.  
First, I agree with Alan that asset price bubbles are difficult to identify in real time and are thus often 
only identified ex post. This notwithstanding, it appears to me that there are a number of tools that can 
help  identify  the  emergence  of  bubbles.  The  ECB  does  not  target  asset  prices,  but  pays  close 
attention  to  asset  price  movements  with  a  view  to  preserving  the  stability  of  consumer  prices  over 
longer horizons. In this regard, the role of money and monetary analysis in the ECB’s strategy helps 
us to assess developments in asset prices and the degree to which they pose a risk to price stability 
over the longer term. 
Second, excessive appreciations and subsequent rapid reversals in asset prices could have very high 
costs for price stability and for the real economy. Therefore, a policy of only “mopping up after” – to 
use Alan’s terminology – could have worked on some specific occasions, but this may not always be 
the case while, at the same time, it might create moral hazard problems. In light of this, a central bank 
may want to consider a policy of carefully “leaning against the wind” under certain, clearly exceptional, 
circumstances. It would then adopt a somewhat tighter policy stance in the face of an inflating asset 
market than would otherwise be the case if confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under 
more  normal  market  conditions.  Given  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  appropriate  monetary  policy 
stance  under  such  circumstances,  it  could  consider  to  err  on  the  side  of  caution  by  trying  to  avoid 
feeding the bubble with an overly accommodative policy. These issues, which have been extensively 
discussed, deserve further analysis and consideration. 
BIS Review 51/2006 
 5
V. The implications of globalisation for monetary policy and the global responsibilities of 
central banks 
My final remarks relate to the last, very challenging and open question raised by Alan on the global 
responsibilities of the main central banks. This is an important question that cannot be answered in a 
simple, straightforward manner and in a limited period of time. And Alan does not provide an answer, 
either. I would like to pose, however, a set of related questions on the implications of globalisation for 
monetary  policy.  In  a  globalised  economy,  should  the  role  and  orientation  of  monetary  policy  be 
changed?  Should  the  framework  for  analysis  and  policy  formulation  be  amended?  Is  the  required 
analysis for setting policy becoming more demanding? The direct and brief answers I recently gave to 
these questions are: no, no and yes to some extent. 
It  is  sometimes  argued  that  the  monetary  policy  of  a  major  central  bank  should  help  guide  the 
domestic  economy’s  adjustment  to  the  evolving  global  economic  environment  and  the  competitive 
pressures associated with globalisation; and that it should foster the adjustment of global imbalances 
and  even  assume  responsibility  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  global  economy.  In  my  opinion, 
globalisation does not affect the central role and overriding responsibility of central banks to preserve 
price stability “at home”. On the contrary, maintaining price stability in a rapidly evolving, globalised 
economy that may influence the dynamics of inflation in various ways becomes more essential and 
challenging, particularly in situations where adverse inflation shocks or inflationary pressures in some 
economies are now more easily transmitted to others.  
Consequently,  if  the  primary  objectives  of  monetary  policy  are  unaffected  by  globalisation,  the 
appropriate strategic framework for analysis and policy formulation should remain the same. However, 
the analysis required for policy formulation will have to carefully take into account the various effects of 
globalisation on the dynamics of inflation, economic growth and asset prices. For example: in the a 
globalised economy, traditional measures of core inflation are even more difficult to interpret and use 
as indicators of underlying domestic inflationary pressures; the estimates of potential output are more 
difficult  to  calculate  in  a  robust  manner;  and  the  measurement  and  usefulness  of  output  gaps  are 
subject to greater uncertainty than is usually the case. Consequently, our role and responsibilities as 
central bankers are fundamentally the same in the globalised economy, but the performance of our 
tasks may be becoming more challenging. Having said that, I would agree that other pertinent issues 
raised by Alan deserve careful consideration. 
VI. Concluding remarks 
Clearly, there are many questions still to be answered, and challenges to be addressed. We should, 
however, also not forget that during the last two decades, industrialised countries have experienced a 
marked  reduction  in  the  average  level  of  inflation  and  in  the  volatility  of  both  output  and  inflation.  I 
have  no  doubt  that  improved  economic  policies,  and  better  monetary  policy  in  particular,  have 
contributed,  perhaps  largely,  to  this  development,  and  despite  the  room  for  potential  further 
improvements,  as  suggested  by  Alan.  On  this  optimistic  note,  which  befits  such  a  celebratory 
conference, I should like to conclude. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 51/2006
