Philipp Hildebrand: The virtues of flexible financial markets - a central banking 
perspective 
Summary of a speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the CFA Institute Annual Conference, Zurich, 22 May 2006. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch) 
 Summary 
Rapid  technological  change  and  market  liberalization  have  been  the  driving  forces  behind  the 
remarkable evolution of global financial markets over the past three decades. The consequences of 
this development include a geographic rearrangement of global capital markets, a fast pace of product 
innovation and changes in the nature and composition of financial market participants.  
The benefits associated with today’s flexible financial markets are manifold. Financial markets have 
become  much  more  efficient  in  allocating  capital. New  products enable  a  better  distribution  of  risks 
and the liquefaction of previously illiquid assets. They have also increased market transparency. As a 
result,  modern  financial  markets  facilitated  innovation  and  likely  enhanced  economic  growth. 
Moreover, they have contributed to make economies more resilient to shocks.  
These extensive benefits notwithstanding, modern financial market also entails new risks. These risks 
tend  to  elicit  calls  for  increasingly  far-reaching  regulation.  While  some  regulation  may  indeed  be 
required to guarantee the integrity of financial markets, the threshold for such regulation should be set 
high.  Regulation  should  only  be  considered  if  the  objective  is  abundantly  clear  and  if  there  is 
overwhelming  evidence  that  market  participants  lack  the  incentives  or  the  capability  to  adequately 
manage  these  risks  themselves.  Rather  than  seeking  regulation,  market  participants,  central  banks 
and regulators should focus on strengthening an already active dialogue with the aim of furthering our 
understanding of new types of risk associated with modern financial markets. 
BIS Review 44/2006 
 1
