Davíð Oddsson: Promoting price stability and an efficient and safe financial 
system 
Speech by Mr Davíð Oddsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, at 
the annual meeting of the National Federation of Pension Funds, Reykjavik, 18 May 2006. 
 I thank the management of the National Federation of Pension Funds for inviting me to speak at this 
distinguished gathering.  
Various tasks are assigned to the Central Bank in the Central Bank Act. Article 3 states that its main 
objective is to promote price stability, and that by agreement with the Prime Minister, the Central Bank 
can declare a numerical target for inflation. According to Article 4, the Central Bank shall undertake 
such tasks as are consistent with its role as a central bank, such as to maintain external reserves and 
promote an efficient and safe financial system. The Bank is thereby assigned a role connected with 
financial stability.  
In my speech today I shall discuss these important Central Bank tasks, i.e. promoting price stability 
and an efficient and safe financial system. My concluding remarks will address the pension funds in 
particular.  
Economic developments and the inflation target 
The past few months have been eventful for the Icelandic economy. GDP growth has been robust over 
the past few years and a combination of factors caused private consumption to surge in 2005. Added 
to by large-scale imports for investment in the aluminium and hydropower sector, this development led 
to  a  significant  current  account  deficit,  the  largest  on  record.  One  effect  of  the  Central  Bank’s  tight 
monetary  stance  was  an  appreciation  of  the  króna.  From  mid-2004  to  the  end  of  2005,  the  króna 
strengthened  by  15%  and  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  reached  a  record  value.  Against  this 
background, and with such a wide current account deficit, the Central Bank had repeatedly described 
the strength of the króna as unsustainable. It would have to depreciate eventually, but exactly when 
was  uncertain.  However,  it  was  hoped  that  this  would  not  happen  until  the  domestic  economy  had 
begun to cool.  
Various factors which you are familiar with caused the króna to depreciate sooner and faster than was 
desirable.  From  mid-February  to  the  second  half  of  April  it  weakened  by  one-fifth.  The  trend  then 
unwound and the króna regained some of its former value. The foreign exchange market calmed down 
and expectations have clearly taken a change for the better. However, further tremors cannot be ruled 
out, among other things due to changes in the value of other currencies, as recent examples have 
shown. 
The króna is presently 15% weaker than in the closing weeks of last year. Of course this is a fairly 
sharp change over a short time. But the fact remains that the exchange rate index is currently hovering 
around the average for the period 2001-2005. I point this out because some of those who developed a 
sudden interest in the Icelandic economy overlooked the background to the depreciation of the króna 
so far this year which is important to keep in mind.  
The  Central  Bank’s  main  objective  is  to  contribute  to  a  twelve-month  rate  of  inflation  as  close  as 
possible to 2½%. For various reasons this target has proved difficult to attain recently. Probably the 
most important factor has been the structural changes in the mortgage loan market in 2004, with the 
easing of the Housing Financing Fund’s lending rules and the subsequent entry of commercial banks 
and savings banks into the market. These changes caused real estate prices and private consumption 
to surge. In the recent term, house price inflation has accounted for the lion’s share of the increase in 
the CPI. The Central Bank had hoped that house price inflation would slow down or stop before the 
króna  began  to  weaken.  If  housing  prices  had  risen  by  little  or  nothing,  they  could  have  offset  the 
effects of the eventual depreciation. Regrettably the outcome was as I described, i.e. the króna fell 
sooner and faster than had been expected, and before real estate price inflation began to come down 
to a sufficient degree. Inflation will therefore clearly remain some way above target over the months to 
come.  
BIS Review 46/2006 
 1
A  necessary  economic  adjustment  lies  ahead.  One  of  the  chief  characteristics  of  the  Icelandic 
economy is its high degree of flexibility and adaptability. This has often been demonstrated over the 
years  and  is  one  factor  that  international  rating  agencies  repeatedly  underline  in  their  reports  on 
Iceland’s sovereign ratings. Thus there is every reason to expect that macroeconomic imbalances will 
ease  quickly  in  the  near  term.  In  this  process,  investment  is  bound  to  contract  sharply  when  the 
aluminium sector projects come to an end and private consumption will shrink as well, to leave very 
low or even zero GDP growth in 2007. Such a scenario is necessary to achieve acceptable internal 
and external balance. After the robust growth episode of recent years, it is time to slow down for a 
while. Experience shows that the exchange rate plays a key role in macroeconomic adjustment. Given 
the precedents, a depreciation will smooth out imbalances fairly swiftly.  
In the current climate it is natural to ask whether the Central Bank has adequate instruments to keep 
inflation  in  check.  The  answer  is  yes.  But  it  cannot  be  denied  that  a  strong  counter-effect  by  other 
forces, actions or expectations will obviously make the Central Bank’s task more difficult. There are 
many reasons that inflation is above target and will remain there for some time, which I shall not dwell 
upon  here.  They  have  already  been  discussed  in  depth  in  the  Central  Bank’s  publications,  for 
example.  With  a  sufficiently  tight  monetary  stance,  the  Central  Bank  is  convinced  that  the  inflation 
target will be attained, and this is its goal. It will require a sufficiently tight stance for a sufficiently long 
time. The Bank’s most recent interest rate decision must be seen in this light. The rationale behind it 
was explained in a press release issued by the Central Bank this morning [May 18, 2006].  
As I mentioned, the rise in the housing component explains the bulk of recent increases in the CPI. So 
it is not surprising that people have wondered whether the housing component should be included in 
the index on which the inflation target is based. The Central Bank has held this view, partly because 
changes in housing prices tend to be a leading indicator of private consumption and inflation, and also 
because over the years the CPI excluding the housing component has been more volatile than with it. 
Including  the  housing  component  in  the  CPI  in  effect  makes  the  index  less  volatile.  Of  course  it  is 
natural to ask whether the right reference is being used for the inflation target and the Central Bank is 
obviously  open  for  such  discussion.  However,  it  is  absurd  to  change  the  CPI  or  strip  it  of  certain 
components  that  become  temporarily  troublesome.  The  monetary  policy  framework  and  its 
implementation must not be changed except when the economy is in balance, and then only on the 
basis of long-term perspective, not vague short-term interests.  
Financial stability 
Over the past weeks and months, the Icelandic financial sector has been in the spotlight domestically 
and, not least, internationally. Not all of this publicity has necessarily been worth striving for. At the 
beginning  of  May  the  Central  Bank  published  its  annual  Financial  Stability  report.  It  includes  an 
analysis of macroeconomic stability and the position and strength of financial companies. The Central 
Bank’s overall finding now was that in spite of rapid expansion and the macroeconomic imbalances 
that need to be tackled in the coming years, the Icelandic financial system is broadly sound.  
The position of the large commercial banks is crucial for the financial markets. They have produced 
robust profits and their capital position is very strong. Among other things, this has been shown by a 
stress test applied by the FME [Financial Supervisory Authority] and the Central Bank’s assessment of 
possible loan losses. These studies indicate firmly that the commercial banks’ capital position is strong 
enough  to  withstand  a  significant  economic  crisis  entailing  several  large  shocks  in  tandem.  Their 
financial foundations are therefore strong. An important part of the exceptionally high bank profitability 
in 2005 and the first months of 2006 stems from trading gains, but even if these items are excluded, 
their operating profit would still be very healthy. 
Dynamic  operations  by  Icelandic  banks  and  the  upgrading  of  their  credit  ratings  and  those  of  the 
Republic  of  Iceland  have  ensured  easy  access  for  them  to  international  capital  markets  in  recent 
years. This access has been used liberally and the banks have become more dependent on market 
financing. 
The commercial banks’ funding in international bond markets has changed recently. It was first noticed 
in the pricing of Credit Default Swaps in the autumn of 2005. Subsequently, yields rose on Icelandic 
bank  bonds  in  the  secondary  market.  These  new  conditions  prompted  extensive  discussion  by 
analysts  with  international  banks  and  others  about  the  position  of  the  Icelandic  banks.  Attention 
focused in particular on the banks’ business model, i.e. their high degree of leverage. It was pointed 
out  that  deposits  account  for  a  smaller  share  of  the  banks’  funding  that  is  customary  among 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2006
comparable banks in other countries. Thus Icelandic banks are more dependent on access to credit 
than  is  the  norm.  Also,  the  banks’  enormous  expansion  has  been  noted  and  some  observers 
wondered if it has not been unduly rapid. Whether or not the banks’ positions and strategies deserve 
to  be  called  into  question  is  immaterial.  The  banks  must  take  this  dialogue  seriously,  by  providing 
much more transparent information, correcting obvious misrepresentations and responding earnestly 
to criticism that may be justified. This is precisely what they have been doing in various ways and the 
results are already beginning to appear.  
Macroeconomic imbalances, rapid banking sector growth and recent negative press prompted foreign 
investors to raise Iceland’s risk profile. Higher required yields in the secondary market for bank bonds 
and for Credit Default Swaps indicate that the banks’ financing costs have risen, at least for the time 
being. While there is nothing unusual about such a development, what is surprising is how much wider 
spreads  have  been  required  relative  to  the  terms  offered  to  banks  with  comparable  credit  ratings. 
Required yields have now fallen again in the secondary market and so has pricing of Icelandic banks’ 
CDSs. The banks have also tapped international credit markets on favourable terms recently and have 
more than met their capital requirement so far this year. Their market position has therefore definitely 
improved again, which must be welcomed.  
The banks have vigorously expanded in other countries in recent years. Most indications are that their 
foreign investments have been successful, in the Central Bank of Iceland’s view. Their subsidiaries are 
sound financial companies subject to stringent supervision in their home countries, just like the parent 
companies in Iceland. Likewise, these companies operate in stable economies where the outlook is 
bright. At the end of 2005, two-thirds of the banks’ consolidated lending was to foreign borrowers. In 
effect, therefore, overseas expansion has strengthened the banks’ foundations. They are no longer so 
much at the mercy of economic fluctuations in Iceland or any other country. On the contrary, their risks 
are dispersed.  
Pension funds 
I shall now turn to the matters in which you are most directly involved, the position of pension funds in 
Iceland. Their position is remarkable in all respects, especially by international comparison. Most or all 
other  industrial  countries  have  rapidly  ageing  populations  and  face  growing  and  serious  fiscal 
concerns about future pension fund arrangements. Since their pension schemes are largely funded by 
taxation, a sharp rise in contributions is foreseeable over the next few decades. The reasons are large 
year-classes approaching retirement age, increased longevity and a lower birth rate. Conditions are 
quite different in Iceland, where age distribution is changing more slowly than in most countries with 
similar  economies.  Iceland’s  retirement  pension  system  is  based  on  all  working  persons  saving  a 
proportion of their wages in a fund which is then used to pay their pension. Taxes therefore does not 
need  to  be  raised  even  if  there  is  a  proportional  rise  in  the  number  of  pensioners.  In  addition  to 
pension funds, some pensions are paid through the national insurance benefit system and there are 
also voluntary supplementary pension savings schemes. Iceland’s pension system thereby fulfils what 
has been considered international best practice in this field [the three-pillar system]. 
Total assets of Icelandic pension funds were equivalent to 120% of GDP at the end of 2005. No other 
pension  system  in  the  world  is  on  such  a  strong  footing.  At  the  end  of  2004,  when  total  assets  of 
Icelandic pension funds corresponded to more than 100% of GDP, the figure for the Netherlands was 
just  over  100%  and  for  the  US  80-90%.  In  the  overwhelming  number  of  industrial  countries,  total 
assets of pension funds were equivalent to less than 20% of GDP, and the ratio was even lower than 
10%  in  many  countries,  including  Germany,  Italy,  Belgium,  Austria,  Sweden  and  Finland.  By 
comparison,  assets  of  Norway’s  Government  Pension  Fund  (Petroleum  Fund)  last  year  were 
equivalent to 60% of GDP. One consequence is that the Icelandic Treasury’s future pension payments 
burden  is  negligible  compared  to  most  other  industrial  countries.  Of  course  this  represents  an 
enormous economic and social strength for Iceland. The pension funds’ huge assets also impose a 
great responsibility  on  their  management,  who must  invest  these  resources  securely  and profitably. 
Furthermore, relative to Iceland’s economy, the pension funds are now at a size where they can have 
a massive impact on developments in the domestic financial sector.  
In  recent  years,  Icelandic  pension  funds  have  been  consistently  investing  part  of  their  disposable 
funds  in  foreign  securities.  They  have  considerable  scope  for  making  foreign  portfolio  investments, 
which by the end of March were estimated at almost 30% of their total assets. Holdings are mainly in 
foreign equity funds, but they have also invested in mixed funds and individual corporations. Pension 
funds have also been major players in the domestic equity market. At the end of March 2006, their 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 3
estimated holdings exceeded 200 b.kr. and constituted 16% of their total assets. At the end of 2004, 
pension funds owned an estimated 12% of all equities listed on Iceland Stock Exchange. Corporate 
lending by pension funds has also grown rapidly. It is vital for pension funds to exercise the utmost 
care  in  their  domestic  equity  investments,  and  to  be  cautious  about  wielding  the  power  that  these 
investments grant them. Likewise, diligence in corporate lending must be an important consideration 
for pension funds, to avoid an inordinate degree of risk. In my opinion, the pension funds’ increased 
foreign  investments,  made  strictly  with  their  own  interests  in  mind,  are  likely  to  affect  currency 
developments favourably. When the króna remains strong for a prolonged period, pension funds are 
more  likely  to  sell  holdings  denominated  in  it and  invest  those  funds  externally,  with  the effect  of a 
stabiliser. And vice versa, they are likely to buy weak krónur after profit-taking, thereby contributing to 
a recovery of the domestic currency. In such a scenario, pension funds would serve a secondary role 
as a foreign exchange reserve, even if they were acting solely in the interest of their own clients.  
The Central Bank’s Monetary Bulletin, published in December 2005, included an in-depth article on 
Pension  funds  –  Future  prospects  and  uncertainties  by  Guðmundur  Guðmundsson  and  Kristíana 
Baldursdóttir. The study found that pension fund assets could peak at more than double the value of 
GDP. However, the pension funds’ future profitability is fraught with uncertainties. The most important 
criterion is return on investment, which could change and drastically affect the level of contributions 
required to sustain the pensions that the funds are expected to pay. Changes in life expectancy and 
disability expectancy will have some effect, although these are not as crucial as the uncertainty over 
return in investment. This indicates that the most important task ahead for pension fund management 
will  be  to  optimise  their  return  on  investment,  within  the  prudential  limits  that  pension  funds  must 
respect. The foreseeable expansion of pension funds suggests that they will gradually have to step up 
their outward investment, which means that returns on foreign portfolios will be crucial for their future. 
Clear long-term strategies are needed on which to base their investments.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Earlier I mentioned the extensive international coverage of the Icelandic economy and the position of 
its banking sector. The depth of the analysis has varied. Among the best informed observers of the 
Icelandic economy are the three international rating agencies that assign Iceland’s sovereign credits 
ratings, and international organisations such as the OECD and IMF. All the rating agencies recently 
affirmed  the  sovereign  rating,  while  one  changed  the  outlook  from  stable  to  negative.  The  two 
agencies that have already assigned ratings to all the Icelandic commercial banks have also affirmed 
them, while the third agency recently awarded a first – and strong – rating to an Icelandic bank. Earlier 
this  week,  an  IMF  mission  visiting  Iceland  published  the  concluding  statement  for  its  Article  IV 
Consultation  with  the  authorities.  In  it,  the  IMF  says  that  the  medium-term  outlook  for  the  Icelandic 
economy  remains  enviable  and  institutions  and  policy  frameworks  are  strong.  However,  the  current 
conditions  require  a  tight  fiscal  and  monetary  stance  to  reduce  macroeconomic  imbalances.  The 
Central Bank of Iceland will play its role in that effort.  
4 
 BIS Review 46/2006
