Caleb M Fundanga: Bringing new levels of efficiency to the Zambian banking 
sector through technological innovation 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the launch of the Zanaco bill 
muster, Lusaka, 27 June 2006. 
 Managing Director – Zambia National Commercial Bank Plc 
Senior management staff from Zanaco present 
Members of the press 
Invited guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
It is my honour and privilege to be invited to officiate at this breakfast press briefing on the launch of 
the Zanaco bill muster product. 
I  am  informed  that  the  Zanaco  bill  muster  is  Zanaco’s  latest  product  innovation.  The  product  will 
enable the bank’s customers to pay their utility bills at any Zanaco branch and utility companies will 
receive their collection details electronically online in real time. 
I am further informed that the new product will make it possible for the bank’s customers to pay for 
their utility bills by filling in a form instructing the bank through internet banking. 
The product we are launching today is indeed a positive development as it should bring new levels of 
efficiency to the banking sector and set a precedence for other players on the market to emulate. 
At Bank of Zambia, we sincerely support this type of innovation, especially if such a product helps in 
reducing  the  cumbersome  use  of  paper  and  tedious  work  of  manual  transmission  of  payment 
instructions. 
Ladies and gentlemen, you will agree with me that automation of processes brings in some efficiency 
which should translate into effective utilisation of resources. Instead of spending time processing bulk 
payments,  employees  will  have  time  to  concentrate  on  other  more  important  assignments,  such  as 
deposit  mobilisation,  credit  portfolio  growth  and  administration,  all  of  which  are  important  for  the 
wellbeing of an institution in terms of profits, enhanced shareholder value and growth of the economy 
at large. 
The world is changing in terms of technological advancement and new methods of doing business are 
being developed every day. As a country and through innovations like the product we are launching 
today, we need to constantly keep up with these developments. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as you are aware the government continues to give tax and other incentives 
for institutions and individuals importing computers and computer parts. This is deliberate. It is aimed 
at stimulating economic growth and as such we all have no excuse for not taking advantage of this 
development. We expect all commercial banks in Zambia to take full advantage of this for the benefit 
of the Zambian people through improved service delivery. 
In this connection, I would like to take this opportunity to call on Zambia National Commercial Bank 
Plc,  as  a  national  bank,  to  take  the  lead  in  responding  to  our  call  and  indeed  government’s  call  to 
reduce lending interest rates further. 
I am mindful of the fact that Zanaco’s base rate is one of the lowest in the country but would like to 
urge Zanaco to live by its slogan, “big, strong & reliable” by being proactive and set an example of 
supporting our efforts in developing the economy. 
At the central bank, we have continued to do our best, in support of government’s effort of reducing 
inflation, stabilising the currency and implementing sound monetary policies. 
With inflation of 8.4%, the lowest in the last 30 years in the history of our country and other positive 
developments,  we  surely  would  not  be  asking  for  the  impossible  for  commercial  banks  to  respond 
favourably and reduce their lending interest rates further. 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 1
At  this  point,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  declare  the  Zanaco  bill  muster  officially 
launched. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2006
