Stefan Ingves: The Riksbank and monetary policy  
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  School  of  Business, 
Economics and Law, Göteborg University, Göteborg, 23 May 2006.  
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation. It is always a pleasure to have the opportunity to come 
and talk about monetary policy and our work at the Riksbank - but I shall refrain from commenting on 
whether it is always a pleasure for the listeners. I hope that you will in any case get a picture of our 
view of the economy and inflation prospects and of our method of how we conduct monetary policy.  
I shall begin with a rough outline of what I intend to discuss in my speech and the main conclusions:  
First,  I  shall  describe  my  view  of  the  current  monetary  policy  situation.  A  brief  summary  of  my 
conclusions is:  
•  The  upswing  in  the  international  economy  appears  to  have  been  slightly  stronger  than  we 
envisaged in the February Inflation Report.  
•  With  regard  to  Sweden,  the  statistics  received  since  the  Inflation  Report  was  published 
indicate that the economy has developed approximately in line with our assessment, although 
inflation temporarily rose more rapidly than anticipated as a result of developments in energy 
prices.  
•  Our earlier monetary policy considerations from February and April still apply to a large extent. 
Monetary policy will need to be less expansionary in future. The pace at which the interest rate 
should be increased will depend as usual on the inflation outlook and on other macroeconomic 
developments.  
Following  the  discussion  of  the  current  economic  situation,  I  will  describe  the  principles  guiding 
monetary policy and then touch on some of the practical problems we encounter. The most important 
points in this discussion are as follows:  
•  Given  our  overall  objective  to  maintain  price  stability,  we  also  endeavour  when  making 
decisions on the repo rate to contribute to the stable development of the real economy. 
•  This  is  done  by  not  aiming  to  bring  inflation  back  on  target  as  quickly  as  possible  in  every 
single  situation.  When  there  is  a  deviation  from  target,  our  ambition  is  normally  to  return 
inflation to target within two years.  
•  Our  incomplete  knowledge  of  structural  changes  and  other  developments  in  the  economy 
means that monetary policy cannot be expected to fine-tune economic conditions to any great 
extent.  
I shall now discuss the current monetary policy situation in greater detail.  
The current monetary policy situation  
Growth in the world economy has been high and stable in recent years. In the United States, GDP 
growth  remained  strong  in  2005,  despite  natural  disasters  and  high  oil  prices.  The  economic 
expansion in China has now been in progress for a number of years, and together with the recovery in 
the Japanese economy it contributed to high growth in several Asian countries last year. Growth in the 
euro  zone  has  been  relatively  weak,  but  last  year  there  were  signs  that  economic  activity  was 
beginning to improve there, too.  
At the same time as growth in demand in the world economy has been strong, price pressures have 
been  held  back.  Although  oil  and  other  commodities  have  become  significantly  more  expensive  for 
consumers, the general price increases have been relatively small on the whole. This can probably be 
partly explained by increasing international competition. The upswing in global economic activity has 
also characterised developments in the Swedish economy, which has grown strongly in recent years, 
with the exception of a slowdown at the end of 2004/beginning of 2005. Despite the good growth in 
demand, inflation has been low in Sweden. This is largely attributable to import prices excluding oil 
BIS Review 44/2006 
 1
developing weakly and to cost pressures being held back, partly by the strong productivity growth and 
low capacity utilisation.  
The development we envisaged in the February Inflation Report was that international growth would 
continue to be good. There were some question marks regarding developments in the United States 
and in the euro area, where preliminary statistics for the fourth quarter of 2005 were surprisingly weak. 
Our  assessment  was  that  this  could  largely  be  explained  by  transient  factors  and  that  the  upswing 
could nevertheless continue, although possibly at a slightly slower rate.  
Our  assessment  for  the  Swedish  economy  was  that  domestic  demand  would  be  strong  over  the 
coming years, with GDP growth peaking in 2006. The forecasts indicated that household consumption 
would rise and investment would continue to increase, but at a slightly slower rate than last year. We 
also envisaged continuing strong exports as a result of the good international activity.  
With regard to the labour market, we could observe an apparent upturn in demand for labour and that 
there were many indications that employment in terms of both persons in employment and of hours 
worked would increase further. Economic resources were expected to become increasingly strained 
and the rate of wage increase to become gradually higher. However, we assumed nonetheless that 
the increase in cost pressures would be relatively moderate as a result of continuing good productivity 
growth over the coming years. All in all, inflation was expected to rise, although at a modest rate, as a 
result of dampening effects from the developments in productivity and import prices. Our forecast was 
that  underlying  inflation  would  rise  gradually  and  approach  the  2  per  cent  target  a  couple  of  years 
ahead.  
This was the picture of developments painted in the February Inflation Report. What has happened 
since  February?  The  world  economy  appears  to  have  developed  slightly  more  strongly  than  we 
foresaw then. New and revised national accounts figures have been published for the United States, 
parts of Asia and the euro zone. With regard to the United States, the statistics show that the end of 
2005 and the beginning of 2006 were slightly stronger than we had assessed. For Asia the picture of a 
stronger development is even more evident. In the euro zone, developments during the fourth quarter 
were  roughly  as  expected,  but  the  indicators  published  since  then  point  towards  slightly  more 
favourable developments there than was expected in February.  
At the same time, the oil price has risen much more than expected and forward prices for oil have also 
risen. We can therefore assume that oil and petrol prices will remain at a high level for some time to 
come. This of course comprises an uncertainty factor for the economic assessment and it is difficult to 
ascertain  what  consequences  it  will  have.  The  experiences  so  far  indicate  that  the  international 
economic upswing has been resistant to the increasing oil prices.  
At home, a considerable amount of new statistics have been published since February, including the 
national accounts for the final quarter of 2005. GDP growth during the fourth quarter was slightly lower 
than  expected,  but  for  the  year  2005  as  a  whole  growth  was  nevertheless  in  line  with  our  forecast 
because the outcomes for earlier periods had been revised upwards. The figures show that exports 
increased  more  than  anticipated  last  year,  which  with  hindsight  is  not  surprising,  given  the  strong 
international growth.  On  the  other  hand,  both  household  consumption  and  investment  were  weaker 
during the fourth quarter than in our earlier forecast.  
Judging by the recent economic indicators, developments so far this year have been better than at the 
end of 2005. The purchasing managers index for manufacturing and the National Institute of Economic 
Research’s  quarterly  business  tendency  survey  indicate,  for  instance,  that  manufacturing  activity 
improved from the middle of 2005 and that this development continued during the first quarter of this 
year. Developments in the labour market have also been positive in recent months. Employment has 
developed  in  line  with  our  forecast,  while  the  labour  force  has  increased  more  than  expected. 
Business tendency data also indicate that the upturn in employment will continue during the second 
quarter. All in all, I believe that this indicates that the slowdown at the end of last year was temporary, 
and that economic activity in Sweden this year has developed largely in line with the assessment in 
the February Inflation Report.  
There has been turbulence in the financial markets recently, with a relatively large fall in share prices. 
Asset price changes can affect inflation indirectly in that they affect households’ wealth and thereby 
aggregate demand. Share prices can rise sharply over a long period of time and then recoil, without 
this  being  a  sign  of  a  more  lasting  decline.  At  present,  it  is  not  possible  to  draw  any  far-reaching 
conclusions  from  the  recent  stock  market  developments.  As  usual,  the  Riksbank  is  monitoring 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2006
developments  in  asset  prices  and  what  they  may  mean  for  inflation  and  other  macroeconomic 
developments.  
With regard to inflation, the outcome for both March and April was higher than we had estimated in the 
Inflation Report. In April, the upturn in the consumer price index was 1.5 per cent on an annual rate 
and underlying inflation was as high. This was half a percentage point higher than expected in both 
cases,  and  the  difference  between  our  forecasts  and  the  outcomes  can  largely  be  explained  by 
unexpected price rises on a limited number of goods, primarily petrol, heating oil and electricity. As I 
mentioned earlier, there is reason to expect high oil prices for some time to come. It is therefore also 
probable  that  inflation  will  be  above  our  earlier  forecasts.  A  reasonable  assessment  is  that  this  will 
mainly  have  consequences  for  developments  over  the  coming  year,  but  as  I  said  before,  there  is 
considerable  uncertainty  regarding,  for  instance,  the  direct  effects  of  oil  prices  on  inflation  and  the 
indirect effects on other macro variables.  
Our assessment in the Inflation Report was that inflationary pressures would increase over time as 
international  and  domestic  cost  pressures  were  pushed  up  by  the  continuing  economic  upswing. 
Monetary policy will therefore need to become less expansionary so that inflation does not exceed the 
target.  
Of  course,  one  can  discuss  the  pace  at  which  the  interest  rate  should  be  increased.  Market 
expectations  in  recent  weeks  have  assumed  a  continued  gradual  increase  in  the  interest  rate  from 
early  summer,  which  I  consider  to  be  reasonable,  given  the  developments  we  have  seen  since 
February. However, it is almost one month until I and my colleagues will meet for a new discussion of 
the monetary policy stance. At this meeting we will make a collective assessment of events since the 
previous forecasts were made.  
The monetary policy strategy  
Many may wonder why we increase the interest rate despite the fact that inflation is currently slightly 
below target and there is still spare capacity in the labour market. What must be remembered in order 
to understand why monetary policy needs to be brought gradually onto a less expansionary path is 
that it takes time for the economy to adjust to changes in the repo rate. This means, for instance, that 
we have not yet seen the full effect of the expansionary monetary policy we have conducted in recent 
years. It also means that interest rate decisions must be based on an assessment of how the economy 
will look a few years from now.  
Let me describe how we usually reason when making interest rate decisions. This is also something 
described in greater detail in the document on monetary policy that we published last week.  
The objective of monetary policy is to maintain price stability. This was established in the changes to 
the Sveriges Riksbank Act, which came into force in 1999. The Riksbank has specified this in the form 
of  an  inflation  target,  whereby  the  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  should  be  2  per cent  with a  tolerance 
interval of +/- 1 percentage point.  
Stable  prices  are  thus  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  in  Sweden,  as  in  all  other  countries  in  the 
industrialised  world.  The  fact  that  the  target  has  been  formulated  in  this  way  is  because  price 
developments  are  the  only  thing  that  monetary  policy  can  steer  in  the  longer  term.  Long-term 
developments in growth and employment are essentially unaffected by changes in the interest rate. 
They are determined by factors such as productivity and the supply of labour and capital, as well as 
the way the labour market – and the economy as a whole – functions.  
It  is  possible  to  say  that  monetary  policy  can  indirectly  create  good  conditions  for  an  efficiently-
functioning economy by maintaining inflation at a low and stable rate. The pricing and wage-setting 
systems  function  more  efficiently  if  changes  in  general  price  levels  are  small  and  predictable.  This 
makes  it  easier  for  companies  and  consumers  to  make  wise  decisions  regarding  investment, 
consumption  and  employment.  The  development  of  the  Swedish  economy  during  the  1970s  and 
1980s provides a particular indication of how failed investment and arbitrary distribution of income can 
result from high and fluctuating inflation.  
In the short term, monetary policy also affects the economy’s cyclical pattern. When we formulate our 
monetary policy we therefore try to do so in a way that contributes to the most favourable and stable 
macroeconomic development possible, without jeopardising the price stability target. In other words, 
we are not ”inflation nutters”, to use a phrase coined by my British colleague Mervyn King. This means 
BIS Review 44/2006 
 3
that we do not set interest rates merely to ensure inflation is on target as quickly as possible in all 
situations.  
It is very important to emphasise that the possibility to formulate monetary policy based not only on 
inflation prospects but also on how production and employment will develop has come about because 
the inflation target is currently firmly anchored in the economy. Everyone knows that we will adapt our 
monetary  policy  to  attain  the  inflation  target.  During  the  years  when  the  inflation  target  was  new, 
confidence in the target was too shaky for the Riksbank to dare to give consideration to anything other 
than attaining the inflation target. However, flexible application of inflation targeting is nothing new if 
one looks at the monetary policy we have conducted in recent years, once confidence in our inflation 
target had been established. In practice, as I said, we do not aim to bring inflation back on target as 
quickly as possible in every situation. The Riksbank follows the principle of normally aiming to bring 
inflation back on target within two years after a deviation has occurred.  
It  is  primarily  in  situations  where  inflation  goes  in  one  direction  and  the  real  economy,  i.e.  growth, 
employment, etc. goes in the opposite direction that there may be reason to bring inflation back on 
target at a more gradual rate. Economists usually describe these situations as the economy suffering a 
supply  shock.  A  simple  example  can  be  when  companies’  costs  suddenly  increase,  for  various 
reasons.  Companies  then  often  increase  their  prices  to  compensate  for  the  rise  in  costs,  but  they 
usually  also  reduce  the  resources  they  use  in  production.  The  result  may  then  be  that  inflation 
exceeds the target, while economic growth slows down. If, in such a situation, monetary policy aims to 
quickly bring down inflation, capacity utilisation in the economy may fall further. These problems can 
be alleviated if monetary policy aims to bring inflation back on target more gradually in such situations.  
In  practice,  of  course,  we  must  often  deal  with  much  more  complicated  situations  than  this  type  of 
textbook  scenario.  Take,  for  instance,  the  present  situation.  The  high  productivity  growth  we  have 
experienced  in  recent  years  has  led  to  a  disruption  –  a  positive  one  –  in  the  supply  side  of  the 
economy,  while  inflation  has  remained  low.  However,  we  have  not  yet  experienced  a  clear  conflict 
between  the  aims  to  attain  the  inflation  target  and  to  stabilise  the  real  economy.  The  improved 
productivity has so far enabled a high growth rate without excessive strain on capacity utilisation in the 
economy.  We  have  therefore  seen  scope  to  stimulate  the  economy  by  means  of  expansionary 
monetary policy.  
At the same time, the low interest rate has contributed to a rapid increase in house prices and to an 
expansion in credit. We have felt some concern that the credit expansion and increases in property 
prices could go too far, with the risk that demand might fall sharply if there is an adjustment further 
ahead. However, these risks are difficult to quantify and they may lie far in the future. In this way, they 
do  not  easily  fit  into  our  usual  analysis  and  forecasting  work.  We  Executive  Board  members  have 
nevertheless considered in our discussions that we should in some way take these risks into account, 
and this has been one of the pieces of the puzzle that explains our recent actions.  
In practice, it is often difficult to estimate how lasting various structural changes and other economic 
developments will be. For example, both the Riksbank and other forecasters have been uncertain as 
to  whether  the  strong  productivity  in  recent  years  has  been  temporary  or  a  more  lasting  change. 
Conducting  monetary  policy  that  has  substantial  stabilisation  policy  ambitions  could  thus  risk 
reinforcing  cyclical  fluctuations  rather  than  subduing  them.  The  conditions  for  succeeding  with  an 
active  monetary  policy  are  also  complicated  in  practice  since  it  takes  time  before  the  full  effects  of 
interest rate adjustments are visible. One therefore should not expect monetary policy to be able to 
fine tune economic activity to any great extent.  
There  are  also  other  reasons  that  limit  the  ambition  to  stabilise  the  real  economy.  The  flexible 
application of our monetary policy must not diminish confidence in the inflation target. For this reason, 
it is important that deviations from the target should not be allowed to become too prolonged. This is 
why  the  Riksbank  has  chosen  to  aim  under  normal  circumstances  to  bring  inflation  back  on  target 
within two years. One can say that this is a restriction we have placed on ourselves to create flexibility 
in an orderly manner.  
At  the  same  time,  it  is  not  appropriate  to  set  restrictions  for  monetary  policy  that  would  be  binding 
regardless  of  developments  in  the  economy.  There  may  –  exceptionally  –  be  situations  where  the 
consequences  of  bringing  inflation  back  on  target  within  two  years  may  lead  to  unacceptable 
fluctuations  in  economic  activity.  It  has  sometimes  been  claimed  that  there  is  currently  a  risk  that 
inflation could remain subdued over a long period of time, partly as a result of globalisation, and that 
this  may  mean  that  inflation  is  below  target  for  longer  than  two  years.  We  have  made  another 
assessment,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  but  this  type  of  situation  is  an  example  of  when  it  might  be 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2006
appropriate to deviate from our normal target horizon. If we were to make the assessment that this 
type of situation had arisen, we would make it quite clear in advance. We also make clear how long we 
expect inflation to deviate from the target, and why we think this will happen, in connection with our 
monetary policy decisions.  
Conclusion  
Let me conclude with a brief summary of what I have just said.  
I have given my views on the current monetary policy situation and described the principles that guide 
monetary policy. I have also mentioned some of the practical problems we face.  
When it comes to the current monetary policy situation, my assessment is that the picture we painted 
of inflation prospects in the February Inflation Report still holds true to a great extent, although it now 
looks  as  though  energy  prices  may  contribute  to  higher  inflation  in  the  short  term.  Monetary  policy 
needs to become less expansionary.  
With regard to the monetary policy strategy, one important message has been that we do not always 
aim  to  bring  inflation  back  on  target  as  quickly  as  possible;  we  also  give  consideration  to  the  real 
economy. We cannot rule out the possibility of situations arising where it may be necessary to set our 
sights further ahead than the time period normally used to guide monetary policy decisions. However, 
in this case we will make it clear in advance that we envisage such a development.  
Thank you!  
BIS Review 44/2006 
 5
