Stanley Fischer: The Israeli economy, the government’s budget policy and the 
problem of poverty  
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Israel  Democracy 
Institute Conference on Economic Policy (Caesarea Conference 2006), Jerusalem, 22 June 2006. 
 Finance Minister, president of the Israel Democracy Institute, conference chairman, Professor Barbara 
Solow, Professor Robert Solow, honored guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
The  Caesarea  Conference  always  provides  an  exceptional  opportunity  for  intensive  and  exciting 
gatherings  of  policy-makers  and  economists,  representatives  of  the  business  sector  and  the  public 
sector, and leaders of public opinion. I am delighted to be here – it's my second opportunity to appear 
here as Governor – and I thank the Israel Democracy Institute for this opportunity. 
I will begin with a description of the economy, and will then proceed to the government's budget policy 
and the problem of poverty. As you hear my address, you may feel a sense of déjà vu, as if you heard 
the  same  words  yesterday  in  the  Finance  Minister's  speech.  But  I  can  assure  you  that  the  two 
speeches were written separately and any similarity is purely coincidental. In any case, it bodes well 
for the continued cooperation between the Bank of Israel and the Treasury. 
As you well know, the Israeli economy has now enjoyed three years of strong growth. According to the 
Bank  of  Israel's  latest  forecasts  following  the  publication  of  the National  Accounts  figures,  GDP  will 
grow  this  year  by  a  rate  of  5  percent.  We  are  seeing  strong  growth,  with  increased  investments, 
growth  in  exports,  stable  prices,  interest  rates  similar  to  those  elsewhere,  a  balance  of  payments 
surplus,  a  rise  in  productivity  and  an  improvement  in  employment  figures.  With  regards  to 
employment, though the jobless rate is still high, it is on a downward path and in the first quarter of the 
year  it  stood  at  8.7  percent,  down  from  10.9  percent  in  2003.  For  comparison,  the  lowest 
unemployment rate in the past 15 years was 6.3 percent in 1995. 
The economy has opened up greatly to the global economy and to show this I will point out that, in 
2005, exports accounted for 38 percent of GDP and imports, 42 percent. On the financial side, in the 
capital account of the balance of payments, nonresidents' investment in Israel reached 8.7 percent of 
GDP last year, a similar rate to Israelis' investments abroad, which were 8.2 percent of GDP. These all 
demonstrate the fact that, following liberalization, the Israeli economy is now completely open to the 
free flow of capital. 
As for inflation, the Bank of Israel continues the policy of maintaining price stability. Looking back over 
the past 12 months, inflation has reached 3.5 percent, half a percentage point above the upper limit of 
the  government's  inflation  target  range.  However  inflation  is  expected  to  return  to  within  the  range 
soon. At the same time, forecasts and expectations of inflation from the capital market are around the 
middle of the target range – at about 2 percent – with the markets and forecasters estimating that the 
interest rate will rise by about half a percentage point by the end of the year. 
Apart from two central problems that need treatment – poverty and the burden of debt in terms of GDP 
– the economic situation is very good. This reality is the result of a number of factors: background and 
policies. 
The background factors are the global economic development and the security situation. For example, 
if  the  global  economy  slows  down  or  even  falls  into  a  recession,  this  will  affects  us.  But  the 
international economy is not dependent on us, and the security situation is not solely dependent on us. 
In  contrast,  the  policy  factors  are  dependent  on  us.  I  am  referring,  of  course,  to  the  government's 
budget policy, and the Bank of Israel's interest rate policy. 
The  combination  of  these  policy  factors  create  the  macroeconomic  framework  of  the  economy.  In 
recent  years,  this  macroeconomic  framework  has  contributed  a  great  deal  to  recovery,  then  to  the 
consolidation and now to continued strong growth. The macroeconomic framework and the structural 
reforms that the government has instigated in recent years – and which the Finance Minister told us 
yesterday, on this very podium, that he intends to continue – are very important also for sustainable 
and fast growth. 
BIS Review 65/2006 
 1
And when I say sustainable growth I do not mean permanent growth, because there is no such thing. 
There are business cycles and one assumes that sometimes, though I hope not often, we will need to 
cope with periods of low growth (a slowdown) or even a recession. So when I talk about achieving 
strong and sustainable growth, I mean policies that will support on average, high levels of growth, and 
for as long as possible. 
And in order to build this framework the right economic planning requires first of all a sensible budget 
policy. I wish to stress this point, particularly in light of several matters that we must address when 
discussing the government budget for 2007. 
Recently, with the economy growing at a decent pace and with high budget revenues, we hear calls – 
populist calls – for increasing government expenditure for one need or another. And there are always 
needs. And they are mostly justified. But these calls ignore the macroeconomic situation which is so 
important for sustainable growth and for dealing with problems of society, not just today but tomorrow 
too, not just in the short term but in the long term too. 
And what exactly is the budgetary policy that will support sustainable and strong growth? The answer 
is  simple:  it  is  a  policy  that  continues  the  government's  strategy  of  the  past  three  years.  Only  this 
week, the prime minister made a decision in this field; that the budget deficit target for 2007 will be 2 
percent of GDP. And this is in line with the government's basic policy guidelines, which, inter alia, set 
the deficit target for 2009 at 1 percent. And it is important to note that this target is actually a ceiling. 
But there's another target, no less important; that government expenditure will not grow by more than 
1.7 percent, in real terms, each year up to 2010. 
Why are these decisions so important? 
Firstly,  regarding  the  expenditure  ceiling;  This  allows  an  increase  in  government  spending,  which 
should contribute to the various needs of the economy, particularly the problem of poverty. 
We  heard  during  yesterday's  morning  session  many  recommendations  to  deal  with  poverty.  It  is 
important  that  poverty  in  Israel  is  addressed.  It  is  important  that  we  help  the  weaker  members  of 
society by giving those that can work the incentive to do so, especially through negative income tax, 
and that we help the needy who cannot work (the old, the disabled) directly through welfare payments. 
It  is  also  important  that  we  help  the  development  of  human  capital,  in  the  long  term,  through 
education. 
But  this  should  still  be  within  the  macroeconomic  framework  of  achieving  sustainable  growth.  This 
combination – a policy for sustainable growth and a policy of correct treatment of society's problems – 
contributes to creating the necessary balance between economy and society. It is important that we 
understand,  and  that  we  declare,  that  the  best  way  to  deal  with  poverty  in  the  long  run  is  through 
economic growth. This is because in this way we create more places of work and more opportunities 
to earn a higher wage and, in addition, it will provide the government with the necessary resources for 
its role in combating poverty. 
Secondly,  the  new  budget  deficit  ceiling  –  which  is  lower  than  before  –  helps  to  cope  with  another 
problem  of  the  Israeli  economy;  the  heavy  burden  of  government  debt  as  a  ratio  of  GDP.  This  is 
because a smaller deficit leads to a reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio. 
In  2005,  the  government  managed  to  continue  lowering  public  debt  by  maintaining  a  low  budget 
deficit.  So  that  at  the  end  of  2005  public  debt  (of  general  government,  that  is  government,  local 
authorities and  other  bodies)  fell  to 102  percent  of GDP, compared  to  107  percent  in  2003.  By  the 
way, the Central Bureau of Statistics plans to release its updated figures for 2005 which will show a 
debt-to-GDP ratio lower than this by some three to five percent. But we shouldn't rely on this path in 
the  future.  We  still  have  a  very  high  debt  ratio,  not  so  far  from  the  high  rates  in  Italy,  Greece  and 
Japan. For comparison, most of the OECD countries have debt-to-GDP ratios of between 30 and 70 
percent, and Australia's is near zero. 
The debt-to-GDP issue worries us, and not only us. Local and foreign analysts that follow the Israeli 
economy and the international credit rating agencies are also worried about Israel's debt ratio. If you 
read  their  reports  you  will  find  alongside  their  positive  evaluations  one  major  point  of  weakness: 
Israel's government debt burden as a proportion of GDP. 
And why is this so worrying? There are three reasons. 
First, such a high debt-to-GDP ratio does not allow the government to conduct anticyclical budgetary 
policies. What does this mean? Generally, that in times of recession, the government would want to 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2006
encourage economic activity and help the economy to recover, and so it would want to raise the deficit 
by lowering taxes or increasing spending, or both. But Israel cannot do this, just as it couldn't during 
the recession of 2002. Why? Because when debt is so high, as ours is, then increasing the budget 
deficit increases debt by such a pace and to such a level that the markets will regard it as dangerous. 
This situation could lead to a financial crisis, while in the midst of a recession, as in 2003. 
Secondly, a high debt-to-GDP ratio exposes the economy to the effects of possible external shocks. 
Lowering  the  debt  burden  will  improve  the  economy's  immunity  and  this  should  be  reflected  in  an 
improved credit rating for Israel. As a result, the government and the business sector would face lower 
interest  rates  in  the  capital  markets  when  raising  finances.  This  would  incidentally  also  make 
mortgages cheaper for homeowners, among them young couples. 
Thirdly our heavy government debt burden brings with it high government expenditure of debt interest 
payments. In 2005, for example, some NIS 33 billion – 15 percent of the total government budget – 
was to cover debt interest payments, and this is the second largest item after defense spending. The 
smaller the debt, the lower the interest payments become and the government can direct more money 
to those other needs of the economy, social problems and all. 
We  are  very  proud,  and  rightly  so,  of  the  impressive  advance  made  in  reducing  the  government 
budget deficit in recent years, but the actual budget situation is not as good as we think. And when I 
say that I refer to a problem of definition and measurement of the budget deficit. 
What exactly do I mean? 
We are currently in contact with the OECD in order to be admitted as a member and to be accepted as 
one of the world's developed countries, from an economic perspective. Joining the organization will 
oblige  us  to  meet  several  conditions  to  bring  us  up  to  the    international  standards  that  the  OECD 
demands. One of these is the measurement of government deficit. 
The definition of budget deficit in Israel is different to the international definition. This difference leads 
to an understatement of the figures, and there are two reasons for this: 
Firstly, in Israel, the deficit definition covers only central government, while in the OECD and the EU 
(according  to  the  Maastricht  rules)  the  deficit  refers  to  general  government,  which  includes  central 
government, local government and other bodies. 
And secondly, in Israel the indexation component of government expenditure for the part of the debt 
that is indexed to the CPI is not shown, while internationally this component is also included. 
To  give  us  an  idea  of  what  I  am  referring  to,  these  differences  in  definition  account  for  almost  2.5 
percent of GDP. In other words, if according to the Israeli definition, the government reported a deficit 
of 1.94 percent of GDP in 2005, then according to the international definition, this was a deficit of 4.5 
percent of GDP. These figures, according to the international definition, are published in the Bank of 
Israel's annual report. 
I am not saying that there is a definite intention to mislead. Absolutely not. But the time has come to 
start  a  process  of  change  that  will  bring  Israel  into  line  with  the  rest  of  the  world  in  this  respect, 
particularly as part of our efforts to join the OECD. In this light, I therefore intend, in the initial stages, 
to publish the OECD definition alongside the Israeli definition – both in statistics and in terms of budget 
deficit  targets  –  and  at  a  later  stage  we  will  publish  and  set  policies  solely  according  to  the 
international definition. 
Incidentally,  the  international  rating  agencies  are  aware  of  this  difference  in  definition  and  they 
regularly approach the Bank of Israel for our deficit figures according to the international definition. 
Concerning the definitions and budget targets I would like to add finally one other matter. Occasionally 
there  are  calls  to  categorize  certain  items  of  government  expenditure  as  if  they  belong  to  another 
budget (for example, "the development budget") And there are always reasonable arguments for doing 
this, but generally these do not stand up to serious analysis. I suggest we do not adopt such ideas and 
we keep the accepted definition framework, both in international and in economic terms. 
In conclusion, it is important that we stand up to the pressure – and there will always be pressure – to 
increase  government  spending  beyond  the  1.7  percent  ceiling.  There  are  always  good  reasons  for 
increasing one expenditure item or another, but if it is decided to increase a particular expenditure, the 
government should change its order of priority so that it stays within the budgetary framework. It is 
imperative that we continue to maintain the necessary budget discipline. This policy will only increase 
BIS Review 65/2006 
 3
the chances for growth to continue in the long term and that the resources for dealing with various 
problems – primarily problems of society – will continue to grow. 
Last year, the Caesarea Conference marked 20 years since the Economic Stabilization Plan. It's good 
to be reminded now and again of the great achievements of that plan and the great achievements of 
the  1990s  and  the  past  three  years.  But  looking  forward,  we  must  take  advantage  of  these 
achievements  to  keep  our  economy  on  course,  while  at  the  same  time  solving  the  problem  of 
government  debt  and  the  problem  of  poverty,  which  remains  one  of  the  central  problems  that  the 
Israeli economy and society must deal with. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2006
