Hermann Remsperger: Central banks and forecasting needs 
Concluding  remarks  by  Dr  Hermann  Remsperger, Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Eighth  Bundesbank  Spring  Conference  “New  Developments  in  Economic 
Forecasting”, Eltville, 6 May 2006.  
 At the end of this conference and after two days of intensive discussion, I am sure, dear colleagues, 
that you would like my concluding remarks to be brief. And that is why I want to raise only one specific 
question: are all central banks confronted with the same forecasting needs or are there differences – 
in particular, are there differences rooted in different strategies? 
I think, we can approach this question from two opposite angles. The first perspective takes a certain 
monetary  policy  concept  as  given  and  asks  about  the  consequences  on  forecasting.  The  second 
perspective takes our forecasting abilities as given and asks about the consequences on the choice of 
a specific monetary policy strategy. 
Let me start from this second perspective. I’d like to emphasize that the limits in forecasting do have 
an influence on the design and implementation of monetary policy. 
Take the ECB as a first example. The two-pillar strategy of the Eurosystem was designed and built in 
1998 with the expectation of a profound regime shift: The move to stage Three of European Monetary 
Union was expected to affect economic behaviour, institutional structures and statistical series in the 
euro area. 
In its first monthly report in January 1999 the ECB made the following statement: “The Eurosystem’s 
stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  is  a  new  and  distinct  strategy,  which  reflects  the  unique 
circumstances and institutional environment that will face the Eurosystem. … In particular, mechanical 
responses to a small number of indicators or forecasts at the start of Stage Three may be especially 
misguided,  given  the  inevitable  uncertainties  about  economic  relationships  prompted  by  the  regime 
shift associated with the transition to Monetary Union”.1
During this conference, Fabio Canova assured us that the Maastricht Treaty and the creation of the 
ECB  have  not  triggered  any  major  structural  changes  in  the  features  of  business  cycles  and  the 
transmission of shocks. However, it was not clear ex ante that we would come to this conclusion ex 
post. Furthermore, this result is probably not unconnected with the behaviour and strategy of the ECB. 
In this respect, it is not an argument against the ECB’s cautious behaviour. 
A  second  example  of  how  limited  forecasting  abilities  impact  on  monetary  policy  strategy  let  me 
mention the debate about the role of asset prices. Most central banks are wary of using asset prices 
as a target in their strategy. This is not because they deny that asset price bubbles can do a lot of 
harm to the economy.2
However, serious shortcomings in our forecasting ability have to be acknowledged. There are several 
aspects  to  our  limited  knowledge:  one  is  our  inability  to  identify  asset  prices  that  are  justified  by 
economic fundamentals. These reflect unknown future returns and expectations. The paper presented 
by  Professor  Pesaran  at  this  conference  also  highlighted  many  of  the  problems  involved.  Another 
issue is our limited ability to forecast how asset prices will react to policy actions. 
Up to now, I have discussed how certain limits in knowledge and forecasting ability have influenced 
the  design  of  central  banks’  strategies.  I  would  now  like  to  consider  the  other  side  of  the  matter, 
namely how does the choice of a certain strategy influence the forecasting exercises carried out at the 
respective central banks? 
It seems that the introduction of an inflation targeting strategy has spurred on the efforts which those 
central  banks  have  made  with  regard  to  formal  forecasting  procedures.  Of  course,  the  respective 
central banks were always interested in forecasting. However, inflation targeting has brought a new 
                                                      
1   See ECB, Monthly Bulletin, January 1999, P. 50. 
2   See, for example, ECB: Asset price bubbles and monetary policy, Monthly Bulletin, April 2005, pp 47-60. 
BIS Review 39/2006 
 1
challenge: how to convince the public that the central bank is really committed to meeting the inflation 
target? 
Unlike  a  central  bank  which  pursues  an  intermediate  target  with  a  contemporary  target  variable,  a 
promise  to  realise  a  specific  inflation  rate  in  the  future  has  to  be  supported  by  a  transparent 
forecasting process which shows that the central bank sets its instruments consistently. This means 
that,  at  least  in  principle,  the  public  must  be  in  a  position  to  understand  and  duplicate  the  central 
bank’s forecast. 
John  Robertson,  an  economist  from  the  Atlanta  Fed,  when  comparing  the  approaches  of  different 
central banks, therefore states that “It is perhaps not surprising that there is a great reliance on models 
at central banks that have explicit inflation objectives, such as the Bank of England and the Reserve 
Bank  of  New  Zealand.  In  those  cases  it  is  particularly  important  that  the  policymakers  ensure  that 
policy  decisions  are  consistent  with  inflation  objectives  and  are  as  transparent  to  the  public  as 
possible”.3
Of course, these central banks also have to show the limits of the accuracy of their forecasts. This has 
become a very common feature since the trumpet charts – an expression used by Rachel Lomax – 
and fan charts of the Bank of England. 
The preference for formal models was probably not only the result of inflation targeting in itself. Some 
of  these  central  banks  had  a  particularly  strong  need  for  transparency  owing  to  their  former 
unsatisfactory  stability  records  and  lack  of  independence.  It  was  therefore  of  utmost  importance  to 
them to regain their reputation through applying a transparent forecasting procedure. 
Switzerland is a different case. Through following monetary targets, the Swiss National Bank was, for 
many  decades,  one  of  the  most  stability-oriented  central  banks  in  the  world.  Since  the  year  2000 
monetary policy in Switzerland has been based mainly on inflation forecasts. 
In  the  short-run  statistical  time-series  models  play  a  role,  whereas  for  the  medium-run  forecasts, 
structural VARs and structural macromodels, amongst others, are employed. 
However, monetary aggregates, in particular M3, continue to play an important role as indicators.4 In 
particular, long-term inflation forecasts based on monetary growth are an important ingredient of the 
Swiss  National  Bank’s  strategy.5  Recent  studies  underline  the  relevance  of  (filtered)  monetary 
developments for future inflation in Switzerland.6
This brings me to the ECB’s strategy and its forecasting needs. As you know, the ECB uses a two-
pillar  concept  or,  to  put  it  in  other  words,  a  monetary  and  an  economic  analysis.  The  economic 
analysis in particular relies heavily on forecasting methods to gain an insight into future developments 
and their consequences for monetary policy. 
In this framework, the ECB also publishes projections of its staff “not only to underscore the forward-
looking  orientation  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  but  also  to  enhance  its  transparency”.7  These 
projections are based, as in other central banks, on a variety of models but also, as has often been 
underlined, on judgemental considerations. 
However, the ECB has always emphasised that, in the long run, inflation (respectively price stability) is 
a  monetary  phenomenon  and  that  it  would  be  a  severe  mistake  to  concentrate  exclusively  on 
economic analysis. “The ECB’s strategy employs both economic and monetary analyses … because 
                                                      
3   See J Robertson: Central bank forecasting: an international comparison, FED Atlanta Economic Review, 2000, p 30. 
4   See T Jordan, M Peytrignet and G Rich (2001): The role of M3 in the policy analysis of the Swiss National Bank, in: H-J 
Klöckers and C Willeke (eds), Monetary analysis: Tools and applications, ECB, pp 47-62. 
5   See Swiss National Bank: Monetary policy decisions of the Swiss National Bank for 2000, SNB Quartalsheft 4/1999, pp 19-
23. 
6   See P Gerlach-Kristensen: A two-pillar Phillips curve for Switzerland, mimeo, 2006. 
7   See O Issing: The role of macroeconomic projections within the monetary policy strategy of the ECB, Economic Modelling, 
Vol. 21, 2004, p 725. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2006
in practice it has to date proved difficult to capture statistically, in a sufficiently reliable way, the longer-
term price effects of monetary policy on the basis of available macroeconometric models.”8
In recent years, several papers have come to the conclusion that monetary and credit aggregates – or 
variables which rely heavily on money growth such as the so-called “money gap” – provide valuable 
information  for  future  inflation  in  the  euro  area.  This  is  particularly  true  for  the  longer  forecasting 
horizon, confirming the claim that monetary development is key to understanding inflation in the long 
run. In a recent Bundesbank discussion paper, Boris Hofmann shows that the relationship between 
money and prices seems to continue.9
In my view, the two-pillar approach of the ECB does not only show that there is a special relationship 
between  the  choice  of  a  strategy  and  the  need  for  forecasts.  The  use  of  a  particular  concept  for 
monetary policy also has consequences for the efforts a central bank makes to improve its forecasting 
abilities. For the ECB one possible extension might be found in a more strongly formalised combined 
assessment of the information included in both pillars for future inflation developments at various time 
horizons. 
When  I  point  to  the  fact  that  different  strategies  in  monetary  policy  require  different  forecasting 
approaches I don’t want to deny that all central banks face a lot of similar forecasting problems. They 
all want to reduce the limits of forecasting. I hope that our conference has made a contribution to this 
aim. 
                                                      
8   See  L  Papademos:  Macroeconomic  theory  and  monetary  policy:  the  contributions  of  Franco  Modigliani  and  the  ongoing 
debate, BNL Quarterly Review, Vol. LVIII, June-September 2005, pp 187-214. 
9   See B Hofmann: Do monetary indicators still predict euro area inflation?, Bundesbank discussion paper, 2006, forthcoming. 
BIS Review 39/2006 
 3
