Amando M Tetangco Jr: Outlook on the country's economic condition and the 
role of information technology to uplift economic growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines,  at  the 
Induction of Officers of the Philippines Electronics and Telecommunications Federation, Inc. (PETEF) 
and the Information Technology Association of the Philippines (ITAP), Makati, 13 March 2006. 
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. 
I am honored and pleased to be a part of tonight’s event - the joint membership meeting and induction 
of the officers of the Philippine Electronics and Telecommunications Federation, Inc. (PETEF) and the 
Information  Technology  Association  of  the  Philippines (ITAP).  Congratulations  to  all  of  you.  Special 
thanks  should  go  to  Miss  Cynthia  Mammon,  ITAP’s  indefatiguable  Director  and  Chair  for  Events, 
whose persistence in finding a suitable schedule for us has caused my being here tonight possible. 
Your two organizations, under the leadership of your presidents, Mr. Renato Garcia for PETEF and 
Ms. Dittas Formosa for ITAP, together, play a pivotal role in the fulfillment of the government’s thrust to 
harness  the  benefits  of  the  phenomenal  improvements  in  Information  and  Communications 
Technology or ICT.  
Information has always played a vital role in our history. Society has used information to gain a more 
accurate picture of any situation it is in, make better decisions for the future, and improve the quality of 
life in general. But never before has information been more accessible than it is now.  
To  illustrate,  let  me  quote  Bill  Clinton,  the  42nd  President  of  the  United  States  speaking  at  the 
announcement of their Next Generation Initiative in 1996. Mr. Clinton said, “When I took office, only 
high energy physicists had ever heard of what is called the world wide web… Now even my cat has its 
own  page!”.  That,  was  only  a  little  over  10  years  ago.  Since  then  computers  have  progressively 
become smaller, more powerful, and more affordable. We are now linked by cell phones, fiber optic 
cables,  the  internet,  and  and  satellites.  One  can  access  information  about  almost  anything  (even 
about Bill Clinton’s cat) with just the flick of a button. 
Increased  accessibility  of  information  as  we  are  now  experiencing,  however,  is  not  the  end. 
Information  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  disseminated  must  be  employed  for  useful,  productive 
purposes and attuned to economic development. 
Objective 
For tonight, I would like to begin by situating us in terms of the monetary, external and banking sectors 
of the economy. Then I would like to make a few suggestions for areas where I believe ICT can be 
most useful in the context of these sectors of the economy. 
Business outlook 
Based on the most recent business and consumer surveys of the BSP, both the business sector and 
the households continue to be positive on the economy and anticipate better times ahead for us. The 
sustained appreciation of the peso, lower interest rates and the improved fiscal position as well as the 
favorable  employment  conditions  here  and  abroad  are  reasons  cited  by  the  business  sector  for  its 
confidence and Filipino household for their heightened willingness to consume more. 
On  the  inflation  front  -  the  February  inflation  rate  of  7.6  percent,  although  higher  than  the  January 
figure,  is  within  the  BSP’s  forecast  range  for  the  month.  Thus,  the  rate  is  still  consistent  with  our 
projected path for inflation, which shows a decelerating trend beginning the second half of 2006. This 
and the prevailing conditions in the economy have provided a room for the BSP to keep its policy rates 
steady during last week’s policy rate setting meeting. 
Now moving on to an area, which I know everyone has a keen interest in – the peso. Our outlook for 
that continues to also be positive, given that the underlying sentiment prevailing in the market remains 
constructive,  arising  from  the  sustained  healthy  economic  fundamentals  and  the  successful 
implementation of key economic reforms. These improvements in the external sector have allowed us 
BIS Review 23/2006 
 1
to build up the country’s gross international reserves to over USD 20 billion for the first two months of 
the year, which is sufficient to cover 4.3 months of imports of goods and payments of services. 
On  the  banking  sector  –  we  continue  to  push  towards  the  clean  up  of  banks’  balance  sheets.  The 
latest NPL ratio of banks remains at single digit level, 8.4 percent. In addition, we continue to pursue 
the extension of the SPV Law that will enable banks to further off-load non-performing assets to the 
market. 
Role of Information Technology to uplift economic growth. Given this upbeat scenario, what role do I 
see for ICT in fostering economic growth? 
E-reportorial requirements 
Let me begin with the banking sector. Since the enactment of the e-commerce law in 1999, the BSP 
has taken to task the promotion of electronic transations. We began by simplifying bank reporting and 
providing guidelines for the electronic transmission of the same to the BSP. We have systems in place 
for the electronic transmission of reports to us not only by the big commercial banks but the thrift and 
rural banks as well. In order to better appreciate the reports and data gathered from the banks and 
utilize these to supervise them in a more proactive way, the BSP embarked on a data warehousing 
project.  To  fully  automate  the  project,  the  BSP  is  procuring  an  integrated  financial  reporting  portal 
system  that  will  allow  BSP-supervised  banks  to  send/upload  reports  to  BSP  and  retrieve/download 
processed reports from BSP using mutually acceptable secured channels of communication. 
Reaching out to the rural areas 
An  area  that  your  association  may  be  of  help  to  us  in  this  regard  is  encouraging  through  your 
education campaigns and drives the smaller thrift and rural banks to be more e-savvy. There are over 
700 rural banks scattered all over the country but only about half have email facilities and about the 
same number have in-house developed systems. You may want to consider e-enabling the regional 
areas as there is already a heavy concentration of applications in the mega-metro manila area and 
other major cities. 
For the BSP’s part we developed the “Integrated Regional Information System” (IRIS) which allows the 
branches  of  banks  in  the  countryside  to  conduct  electronic  transactions  with  BSP  such  as  cash 
deposit, withdrawal, FX purchase, peso exchange, and rediscounting of loans and payments. IRIS has 
been  implemented  in  three  BSP  regional  offices  and  5  regional  units,  and  is  expected  to  be  fully 
deployed in the remaining BSP branches by the 3rd quarter of 2006. 
IT risk management 
With  the  increasing  applications  of  technology  to  banking  services  comes  increased  exposure  of 
banks  to  technology-related  risks,  including  operational,  reputational,  and  strategic  risks.  To  help 
mitigate  these,  the  BSP  recently  put  out  guidelines  for  technology  risk  management.  The  BSP 
established  these  guidelines  to  ensure  that  the  knowledge  and  skills  necessary  to  understand  and 
effectively measure, monitor and control these risks are in place.  
Anti-money laundering efforts 
In  addition  to  risk  management,  you  may  also  partner  with  financial  institutions  in  the  anti-money 
laundering  efforts  of  the  government.  Under  the  Anti  Money  Laundering  Act,  as  amended  (AMLA), 
covered  institutions,  i.e.,  financial  institutions  that  are  supervised  by  the  BSP,  the  SEC  and  the 
Insurance Commission, are required to electronically report to the AMLC all “covered and suspicious 
transactions”. While the AMLC has established its own Monitoring and Analysis Systems (TMAS) to 
receive,  analyze  and  store  all  prescribed  e-reports  to  the  AMLC,  banks  still  hold  all  the  other 
necessary information on their clients beyond the reporting requirements of AMLC. Covered financial 
institutions  may  be  looking  for  partners  to  assist  them  in  developing  systems  that  will  create  an 
environment  which  would  institutionalize  red  flag  indicators  for  suspicious  transactions,  and  thus 
facilitate not only their reporting to AMLC, but also their own internal surveillance requirements. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2006
These are just some of the recent undertakings in the banking and financial sector where you may find 
that your collective expertise as associations could be employed. 
Business opportunities: e-marketing 
I mentioned at the beginning of my talk that the BSP’s recent surveys show optimism from both the 
consumer and  business  sides of  the  economy.  Your  associations  should  be  able  to  build  on  that.  I 
sincerely believe that the optimism in these sectors, and in the marketplace in general, is getting more 
deeply entrenched. And you should harness that. 
A  particular  advocacy  of  the  BSP  is  micro-finance.  Recently,  because  of  the  good  repayment 
experience of banks from micro-finance lending, banks have increased exposure to this segment of 
borrowers. The extension of loans for micro-finance has ceased to be the monopoly of thrift and rural 
banks, as the big commercial banks are now finding out that lending to micro-finance and SME’s is 
very profitable. 
You have a great role to play here. You can connect the artisans and cottage industries to the market 
place.  An  example  of  this  successful  use  of  the  ICT  as  cited  by  the  United  Nations  is  a  Filipino 
website, Global Echo, which sells not only quilts and blankets woven by women in the rural areas, but 
also  teaches  other  developing  countries  to  use  the  internet  to  become  more  self-sufficient  and 
eliminate middlemen in reaching their markets. There are many other similar applications where you 
could partner with financial institutions. 
Conclusion 
As I have painted a positive picture of the economy to you, I challenge you here tonight to maximize 
the benefits of Informtion and Communication Technology, by e-enabling a greater part of our nation, 
reaching out not only to the obvious and traditional markets but enlarging your scope.  
Your associations, more than any other, know that the government cannot do everything. We need 
partners  that  can  assist  us  not  only  directly  through  the  areas  that  I  have  outlined  before,  but  also 
indirectly through the crafting of enabling laws that would foster an environment that would encourage 
ICT to flourish positively.  
Let me end with a quote from noted author, Sir Arthur Clarke, “Any sufficiently advanced technology is 
indistinguishable from magic.” Ladies and gentlemen, I am excited to see that time when we would 
have fully seized the benefits of information technology, for then it would be truly “magical”. 
Once again, my warm congratulations to the officers of PETEF and ITAP. Magandang gabi po sa inyo 
at mabuhay tayong lahat. 
BIS Review 23/2006 
 3
