Durmus Yılmaz: Central bank achievements and opportunities in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Durmus Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, to members of 
the press at the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Ankara, 18 April 2006. 
 Dear Press Members, 
I  have  been  appointed  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank,  which  was  vacated  by  Former  Governor  Mr. 
Süreyya Serdengeçti due to his retirement after having completed his five-year term on 14 March 2006 
at the end of the business hours, and which has been filled temporarily by Dr. Erdem Basçı as Acting 
Governor since then. 
I have worked in various positions of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey since 1980. As you 
have been closely following, many achievements have been made since then, especially in the last 
couple of years, that will always be remembered as the turning points in our economic history. 
Distinguished members of the press, 
As a result of the legal amendments made in 2001, the greatest achievement in the area of monetary 
policy has been the attainment of the “Central Bank Independence”. Accordingly; 
“The  Bank  shall,  with  the  objective  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability,  be  authorized  to  utilize 
monetary policy instruments described in this Law and shall also be authorized to directly determine 
and implement other monetary policy instruments that it deems appropriate.” as expressed in the Law 
on the Central Bank. 
Such an authorization is called “instrument independence” in the modern economic literature. 
On  the  way  to  price  stability,  the  inflation  target  is  determined  jointly  with  the  government.  As  you 
know, these targets have been determined and announced as follows: 
5 percent for 2006, 
4 percent for 2007, 
4 percent for 2008 
Our  primary  objective  is  to  attain  these  targets.  The  Central  Bank  will  support  the  growth  and 
employment policies of the Government, unless it conflicts with this objective. 
Likewise, with the Law No: 1211, the Central Bank has been entrusted with the power of establishing 
the “exchange rate regime” jointly with the government. The floating exchange rate regime, which was 
introduced within this framework, will continue to be implemented, preserving its basic implementation 
framework. 
Turkey has grasped a golden opportunity to get rid of the damage created by inflation with which it has 
had to live more than 30 years. The period of “Declining inflation” is about to end. Our next objective 
will be to achieve and preserve the price stability. This will be the most significant contribution of the 
Central Bank in mobilizing the growth potential of our country. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 33/2006 
 1
