Paul A Acquah: Financial fraud  
Speech  by  Dr  Paul  A  Acquah,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  at  the  opening  of  a  seminar  on 
financial  fraud  investigation  for  police  and  bank  investigators,  held  at  police  headquarters,  Accra, 
18-19 May 2006. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
Honourable Minister of Justice and Attorney General, 
Inspector General of Police (IGP) and Deputy IGP, 
Director General, Criminal Investigations Department, 
Managing Directors of Banks, 
Representative of Association of Bankers, 
Senior Police Officers and Officers, 
Members of the Press Corps, 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen! 
I am grateful to the Police Administration and the organisers of this very important seminar for inviting 
me  to  deliver  a  speech  this  morning.  Given  the  importance  of  the  topic,  namely  Financial  Fraud 
Investigation, I could not resist the invitation, in spite of the short notice. The topic, the participants 
and the timing, all are of interest to the Bank of Ghana (BOG), so far as this event is concerned. It is in 
this  regard  that  I  have  to  congratulate  the  organisers  and  the  participants  for  making  this  event 
happen. 
Mr. Chairman, What can I say? I have been requested to deliver a speech without a topic. This gives 
me the opportunity to talk about anything that will be of interest in this forum. I have therefore decided 
to  make  some  general  remarks  on  the  topic.  Admittedly,  the  phenomenon  of  financial  fraud  which 
manifests  itself  in  various  ways  has  been  confronting  nations  and  the  international  community  from 
time immemorial. Unfortunately, its form and scope keep changing and expanding with time and with 
advances in technology. 
What  at  all  is  that  phenomenon  christened  “Financial  Fraud”?  What  are  its  effects?  How  can  its 
negative impact be controlled or reduced? Who should be responsible for dealing with the problem? 
Mr. Chairman, take the case of bank fraud. Bank fraud has been legally defined as  
“The criminal offence of knowingly executing, or attempting to execute a scheme or artifice to defraud 
a financial institution, or to obtain property owned by or under the control of a financial institution by 
means of false or fraudulent pretenses”. 
Bank  frauds  are  perpetrated  by  insiders  or  outsiders  to  the  bank  or  by  way  of  a  collusion  between 
them.  Their  acts  take  the  form  of  embezzlement,  misappropriation  of  funds,  aiding  and  abetting, 
making  false  entries  in  books  or  statements  making  false  statements  in  credit  applications,  money 
laundering and other fraudulent practices. 
Mr. Chairman, the effects of these nefarious activities on financial institutions and their stakeholders as 
well as on the national economy can be devastating and the vulnerability of banks to such fraud has 
been  heightened  by  technological  advancements.  Its  economic  cost  can  be  huge  in  terms  of  its 
disruption of the workings of the market, financial institutions, and the payment system. Besides, fraud 
can be a very potent force in terms of its impact on confidence in the banking system; damages to the 
integrity and stability of the economy; it can collapse banks (like BCCI and Ghana Co-operative Bank), 
undermine  the  central  bank’s  supervisory  role  and  even  create  social  unrest  and  discontent  and 
political  upheavals  for  Government.  The  Pyram  and  Resources  5  (R5)  episodes  in  the  late  1990s 
testify  to  this.  The  negative  list  of  financial  fraud  can  be  endless.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  some 
commentators have concluded that “fraud prevention is as important as prudential supervisions”. 
Mr.  Chairman,  since  Ghana’s  independence  in  1957,  the  key  organs  of  the  State,  namely  policy-
makers, law-makers and the courts as well as the financial regulators have taken various measures 
within  their  respective  spheres  of  power  to  deal  with  all  forms  of  fraudulent  activities.  Some  of  the 
measures taken include:  
BIS Review 73/2006 
 1
  the  passing  of  the  Criminal  Code,  1960  (Act  29),  as  amended,  to  deal  with  fraud,  dud 
cheques, forgery, etc.;  
the Internal Revenue Act, 2000 (Act 592) that controls tax evasion;  
Customs,  Excise  and  Preventive  Services  (Management)  Act  1993  (PNDCL.30)  which 
concerns evasion of duties;  
The Banking Act, 2004 (Act 673) that contains some provisions intended to prevent bank fraud; and 
the Serious Fraud Office Act, 1993 (Act 466) empowers SFO to monitor, investigate and prosecute 
offences involving serious financial or economic loss to the State, where the State has an interest in 
the entity. 
Within the last decade or so the nature and methods of financial fraud in Ghana and globally have 
changed,  as  a  result  of  the  advent  of  new  criminal  activities  and  new  technology  which  facilitates 
easier and faster transfer of laundered money, that could be used to finance suspicious activities. 
At  the  executive/legislative  and  the  central  bank  levels,  new  moves  have  been  taken  to  combat 
financial fraud. At the governmental level for example new laws have been passed to deal with the 
new challenges. The laws include: the Public Procurement Act, 2004 (Act 663), Internal Audit Agency 
Act, 2004 (Act 658) and the Financial Administration Act. 
To  reinforce  these  moves  in  order  to  mitigate  the  incidence  of  fraud  of  all  sorts,  other  Bills  which 
contain clauses touching on financial fraud are at various stages of becoming law. The key ones are: 
Anti-Money  Laundering  Bill,  Electronic  Transaction  Bill,  Computer  Misuse  Bill  (to  support  electronic 
banking) and Credit Reporting Bill. 
Mr. Chairman, apart from the BOG’s collaboration with Government in facilitating financial law-making 
the  BOG  has  over  the  years  initiated  a  number  of  financial  fraud  interventions  that  should  be  of 
interest to this forum. There exists a fruitful collaboration between the BOG and the Law Enforcement 
Agencies in financial crime prevention and prosecution. 
Similarly, the banks in Ghana have shown invaluable understanding and co-operation with the BOG in 
enforcing the Know Your Customer Policy guidelines, in order to weed out suspicious characters from 
the  banking  system.  Above  all,  the  BOG’s  in-house  Investigation  and  Consumer  Reporting  Office 
handles public complaints that touch on various matters including alleged financial frauds.  
I should hasten to add that the BOG co-operates with international financial institutions in fighting the 
cross-boarder aspects of financial fraud. 
Mr. Chairman, I am convinced that the most critical tool that can be used to combat financial fraud in 
our environment is collaboration within constitutional and statutory bounds among all the institutions of 
the State that have a part to play in the detection, investigation and prosecution of financial frauds in 
every aspect of our national lives. 
In  the  sphere  of  banking,  you  would  agree  with  me  that  the  supervisor  is  the  frontline  investigator, 
which solely or  in co-operation  with  the  Directors  of  banks complain  to  the police or  Serious  Fraud 
Office for further action, where necessary. By this approach, the letter and spirit of the Constitution 
which created all the investigators will be upheld. 
Mr. Chairman, I wish to end on the note that financial fraud has always been and will continue to be a 
topical issue in the financial world. While I urge investigators to continuously review their investigative 
procedures  to  cope  with  the  level  of  sophistication  associated  with  present-day  financial  fraud,  I 
recommend that the courts be made part of such seminars in order for us all to benefit from the inter-
disciplinary discussions that take place. The speedy delivery of justice and decisions of the courts are 
critical to our effectiveness in combating fraud. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2006
