Henrik Auth: Cash processing and protection against counterfeiting  
Opening  speech  by  Henrik  Auth,  Deputy  Governor  of  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  (the  central  bank  of 
Hungary), at the first currency issuance conference at Magyar Nemzeti Bank on cash processing and 
protection against counterfeiting, Budapest, 1 June 2006. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 Introduction 
Magyar Nemzeti Bank (MNB) is holding a currency issuance conference for the first time. On behalf of 
the Board of Directors of MNB, I should like to welcome the invited speakers and participants, and 
thank all the speakers called upon, and a large number of experts involved or interested in currency 
issuance for accepting our invitation. Among the speakers, I should like to warmly welcome Mr. Antti 
Heinonen,  the  Director  of  Banknotes  at  the  European  Central  Bank,  Mr.  Róbert  Juhos,  Managing 
Director of G4S Cash Services Ltd., Mr. Tibor Pataki, the Head of the National Counterfeit Centre, and 
Mr. Barnabás Ferenczi, the Head of currency circulation, while in the audience I warmly welcome the 
highly esteemed representatives from Hungarian credit institutions, cash in transit companies, Magyar 
Posta  Ltd.,  the  Hungarian  State  Treasury,  the  Hungarian  Banking  Association,  the  National  Police 
Headquarters and MNB.  
Our aim in holding this conference is to further strengthen the dialogue that has been going on for a 
number of years with market participants, and to further develop our cooperation in cash processing 
and the fight against counterfeiting by acquainting all of us with experiences and conclusions drawn as 
well as by discussing opinions.  
In my speech I wish to elaborate on two issues.  
– 
Why do we hold the conference now?  
What does MNB think about cash processing and protection against counterfeiting?  
– 
Timing 
This year we are celebrating the 60th anniversary of the introduction of the forint. After the post-
war hyperinflation, MNB issued the first series of forint banknotes on 1 August 1946. This series of 
banknotes, disregarding changing the original design at the beginning of the period, served circulation 
for over 50 years. The set of denominations altered with the passage of time but the system of security 
features barely changed.  
The second series of banknotes was issued by using modern security features between 1997 and 
2001. Since then MNB has been continually developing the range of security features, the most recent 
example of which is incorporated in the new thousand forint banknote issued less than two months 
ago on 10 April.  
Over  the  last  year  MNB  has  made  significant  progress  in  the  field  of  the  regulation  of  cash 
distribution.  
In  June  2005  and  February  2006  MNB  issued  a  total  of  three  decrees  of  the  Governor  of  MNB. 
Consultations were held on the draft of these decrees not only with Hungarian market participants but 
also with the European Central Bank. The three decrees issued by the central bank regulate, firstly, 
technical tasks and other duties related to the protection against counterfeiting Hungarian and foreign 
legal tender; secondly, the conditions for cash processing activity and cash distribution; and, thirdly, 
rules and procedures related to the reproduction of the forint and the euro.  
On  1  July  2005  MNB  amended  cash  handling  fees.  MNB  decreased  fees  for  withdrawals  and 
lodgements of banknotes by 25%, and made lodging coins free of charge, while increased fees for 
exchanging cash  to  another  denomination.  With  this  MNB  shifted  the  regulation  of  withdrawals  and 
lodgements towards that of the euro area and in the field of exchange MNB rose the fees to the level 
of costs.  
BIS Review 77/2006 
 1
Precisely today MNB’s new regulation containing business terms and conditions come into force 
with regard to transactions made in cash. In addition to withdrawals and lodgements, this regulation 
governs all activities related to exchange both for clients with an MNB account and those without such 
an  account.  An  important  change  is  that  MNB  will  only  accept  quantities  of  banknotes  or  coins  in 
excess of 100 items per denomination provided that a cash in transit company has already processed 
them.  
Due to the effect of recent changes, I and my colleagues felt that it would be timely to discuss jointly 
issues related to cash processing and the fight against counterfeiting, and to show and learn about 
issues deemed important from the viewpoint of the Hungarian central bank, market participants and 
the European Central Bank.  
Cash processing and the fight against counterfeiting 
First of all, I should like to share a few thoughts on cash processing and the fight against counterfeiting 
with you.  
After the reintroduction of the two-tier banking system in January 1987, credit institutions in Hungary 
established  their  cash  distribution  lines,  but  starting  from  the  early  1990s  they  outsourced  cash 
processing  and  transportation  to  an  ever  increasing  extent  to  cash  in  transit  companies  that  had 
emerged in the market at that time. Concerned credit institutions handed over or sold their vaults, or 
converted or use them for other purposes.  
In response to this widespread outsourcing, MNB initiated laying down the legal foundation for the 
performance of cash processing activity outside the central bank. As a result, starting in 1997 
cash  processing  activities  outside  the  central  bank  are  conducted  within  regulated  framework.  The 
legislation also covered the requirements for the authenticity and fitness of cash. MNB licenses cash 
processing activity, regularly checks the observance of preconditions required for launching the activity 
and  the  activity  itself.  Simultaneously  with  laying  down  the  legal  foundation  for  cash  processing 
outside the central bank, MNB itself moved towards the wholesale cash distribution starting from the 
second half of 1990s.  
Accordingly, it is rather common in Hungary that credit institutions and other economic actors reissue 
banknotes  and  coins  without  processing  by  the  central  bank.  The  processing  of  banknotes  by  the 
central bank compared to processing on a profit-oriented basis accounts for approximately 20%. The 
interbank market for both banknotes and coins is considerable.  
The change in Hungarian responsibilities fits in with prevailing international trends. In view of the 
envisaged introduction of the euro in Hungary, of the prevailing international trends for us the practice 
and regulation of the euro area is the most interesting.  
The  central  bank  decree  issued  in  2005  tightened  and  made  more  exact  earlier  rules  on  the 
examination  of  the  authenticity  and  fitness  of  forint  currency.  MNB  introduced  a  new  means  of 
checking the observance of requirements on fitness specified in the decree: MNB checks cash lodged 
with it by processing machine on the level set according to the specification of the decree, in its own 
premises  and  in  the  presence  of  the  organisation  that  processed  it,  be  it  either  a  cash  in  transit 
company or a credit institution.  
The spirit and depth of the new Hungarian regulation is similar to the framework to be implemented 
for euro banknotes in countries in the euro area by the end of this year. We are proud of the fact 
that  Hungarian  credit  institutions  and  cash  in  transit  companies  not  only  examine  forint  banknotes 
based on the requirements for authenticity in a more detailed manner than used to be the case but 
also  check  numerically  determined  fitness  criteria,  albeit  often  manually  or  with  the  aid  of  simple 
devices. It is necessary to draw attention to the fact that in the long term manual processing is not 
sustainable as after the introduction in Hungary of euro currency only such banknotes may be issued 
via ATMs that have been previously processed by a machine successfully tested by the Eurosystem.  
The  fight  against  counterfeiting  would  be  inconceivable  without  the  cooperation  of  the 
organisations present here. MNB, in addition to aiming at issuing forint banknotes and coins that are 
appropriately  protected  against counterfeiting,  established  the National Counterfeit  Centre using  the 
existing expert basis in January 2005. Here suspect counterfeit forint banknotes and coins as well as 
suspect counterfeit foreign currencies detected in Hungary are examined. Hungarian cash in transit 
companies and credit institutions withdraw a significant quantity of counterfeits from circulation. Under 
the  coordination  of  the  National  Central  Office  of  the  National  Police  Headquarters,  criminal 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2006
prosecution bodies conduct crime prevention and investigation. The cooperation agreement between 
MNB and the National Police Headquarters was signed in October 2005 and it made joint action in the 
fight against counterfeiting more effective.  
Closing remark 
I am confident that in the course of this conference you will learn about many valuable experiences. I 
am convinced that discussing experience and opinions promotes the realisation of our common tasks, 
and ensures the authenticity and quality of cash in circulation.  
Thank you for your attention and I wish you good work at the conference.  
BIS Review 77/2006 
 3
