Lucas Papademos: The euro area economy and Asia - current issues and 
challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Shanghai 
Head Office of the People’s Bank of China, Shanghai, 10 February 2006. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
My first words will be for the People’s Bank of China, which I would like to thank warmly for giving me 
the opportunity to be here and speak to you today. This is my second visit to China in my present 
capacity,  but  my  first  one  to  Shanghai.  And  I  must  confess  that,  when  I  return  to  Europe,  after 
spending these few days here, I shall probably not have enough time to describe “half of what I saw”. 
Now, these last words are borrowed, but I fully share the truth they convey. They were first uttered a 
long time ago, by another European visitor. He came from a city located on the coast of the Adriatic 
Sea and stayed in China for several years. You know him well. His Chinese name was Mărcō Pō-Lō. 
Like him, I have seen many things here. In Shanghai, I have seen China’s largest centre for business 
and finance; one of the world’s most active ports; a city which is developing at an impressive speed 
and  is  experiencing  urban  regeneration  on  a  massive  scale;  a  symbol,  in  many  ways,  of  the 
unprecedented economic transformation your country is going through. The list of achievements and 
remarkable developments is simply too long to tell.  
Like Mărcō Pō-Lō, though, I have not come empty-handed. I have come here, indeed, to exchange not 
goods, but information, and some ideas! I am aware that the celebrations for the Chinese New Year 
are coming to an end. The turn of the year is usually an excellent occasion to look ahead. The global 
economy is expected to continue to grow strongly and world trade is projected to accelerate further. At 
the same time, the global economy is facing certain risks and a number of challenges. And it may be 
at a crossroads. Its future course will depend on a number of factors. It will depend on the ability of all 
regions to sustain or generate a solid pace of growth of domestic demand, while benefiting from the 
stimulus of increasing trade. It will depend on the capacity of our economies to withstand the effects of 
potential shocks, both external and internal. And it will also depend on the authorities’ ability to pursue 
appropriate  policies  and  respond  to  unanticipated  disturbances,  in  a  manner  that  supports  activity, 
maintains monetary stability and safeguards financial stability. 
In my speech today, I intend to review and elaborate on some of these factors which are of particular 
relevance to the economies of the euro area and of South-East Asia. First, I will focus on the economic 
outlook for the euro area – the 12 Member States of the European Union that share the euro as their 
single  currency.  I  will  assess  the  prospects  for  a  higher  rate  of  growth  in  the  future  and  for  the 
preservation  of  price  stability,  the  likely  contribution  of  internal  and  external  factors  and  the  role  of 
monetary policy. And I will point to certain risks and uncertainties surrounding our central scenario. 
Second,  I  will  briefly  review  the  increasing  economic  and  financial  relations  between  Europe  and 
emerging Asia, especially China, the contribution of these relations to growth in both regions, and their 
impact  on  the  ongoing  transformation  of  the  European  economy.  Finally,  I  will  take  a  more  global 
perspective and share a few thoughts with you on some of the main risks and challenges ahead of us, 
namely those stemming from the large global imbalances in trade and finance. And I will highlight a 
number of policies that can help meet this challenge. 
II. The economic outlook for the euro area 
Let me begin with an assessment of the current economic situation in the euro area, the outlook for 
the medium term and the risks associated with this outlook. In 2005, real GDP picked up in line with 
our expectations. The latest available information from economic indicators and survey data suggests 
that  economic  activity  continues  to  strengthen,  signalling,  in  particular,  an  improvement  in  the 
manufacturing sector. Growth in domestic demand has increased, owing primarily to higher investment 
and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  growth  in  consumption.  Both  business  and  consumer  confidence  are 
improving. Looking ahead, most recent information confirms our assessment that economic activity will 
continue to expand and broaden as domestic demand – notably business investment – strengthens 
further, also in response to the favourable external impulse. Although quarterly growth rates will exhibit 
BIS Review 9/2006 
 1
some volatility, real GDP in the euro area is expected to grow in the coming quarters at rates close to 
potential growth. The latest ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters points to growth of 2.0% in 2006 
and 1.9% in 2007.  
Our assessment of the outlook for growth in the euro area is supported by both the broadly favourable 
prospects for the world economy and a number of internal factors. Global growth is expected to remain 
robust  and  above  its  long-term  average  over  the  short  to  medium  term  despite  high  oil  prices, 
benefiting from accommodative economic policies, improved corporate balance sheets and favourable 
financing  conditions.  The  United  States  and  Asian  countries  –  notably  China  –  will  continue  to 
constitute the main driving forces of global growth, albeit to a lesser extent than in the recent past. 
Moreover, oil-exporting countries and emerging economies in other parts of the world are providing, at 
the current juncture, a stimulus to the world economy and the euro area. In Europe, the new Member 
States of the European Union continue to experience robust growth rates. 
This favourable external stimulus to the euro area economy will not only support euro area exports but 
should, at the same time, contribute to sustaining strong investment growth, which should also benefit 
from the very favourable financing conditions, improved business balance sheets and efficiencies, and 
high profitability. On the consumer side, household expenditure is expected to grow more gradually 
and broadly in line with developments in disposable income.  
In the past few years, certain factors adversely affected private consumption growth, which remained 
rather  subdued.  In  some  euro  area  countries,  low  confidence  and  uncertainty  surrounding  ongoing 
structural, fiscal and pension reforms may have contributed to a higher level of private savings. Also, 
increased  job  insecurity,  in  an  environment  of  structural  changes  linked  to  increasing  competitive 
pressures – notably from emerging markets – may also explain the level of precautionary savings in 
the euro area. Although private consumption – on the basis of recent indicators of household spending 
–  is  estimated  to  have  grown  only  moderately  in  the  last  quarter  of  2005,  it  is  encouraging  that 
consumer  confidence  has  increased.  Moreover,  a  further  gradual  improvement  in  labour  market 
conditions in the coming years should favourably affect private consumption. 
There  is  also  positive  news  related  to  fundamentals  on  the  supply  side  of  our  economy.  Structural 
reforms in product markets, implemented in recent years, are enhancing competition and have helped 
improve  the  business  environment.  Labour  market  policies  geared  towards  greater  flexibility  and 
increased incentives to work are contributing to a reduction in structural unemployment and to higher 
participation rates. These supply-side factors will gradually result in higher potential growth and living 
standards for European citizens over the medium to longer term. Despite the progress made, there is 
much more that has to be done to enhance productivity growth and market flexibility in the euro area 
economy and thus to improve its productive capacity and resilience to shocks.  
The outlook for growth in the euro area is surrounded by risks which continue to be on the downside 
and  relate  mainly  to  external  factors.  First,  prevailing  global  imbalances  legitimately  raise  some 
concerns  about  a  potentially  disorderly  adjustment  and  underscore  the  need  to  take  appropriate 
action. I will revert to this issue in the latter part  of my remarks. A second downside risk to growth 
relates  to  high  and  volatile  oil  prices.  Surges  in  oil  prices  over  the  last  two  years  have  been  partly 
induced by the strong demand for oil emanating from major energy consumers, such as China and 
India. At the same time, the tremendous energy requirements of these countries have been associated 
with strong growth in productivity, which, in turn, exerts downward pressures on manufacturing import 
prices  in  the  euro  area.  However,  potential  future  shocks,  which  may  induce  higher  and  volatile  oil 
prices, may relate more to the supply rather than the demand side of the oil market. 
With regard to price developments, inflation in the euro area averaged 2.2% in 2005, compared with 
2.1% in the previous two years. Underlying domestic inflationary pressures have remained low in the 
recent past, as wage demands have been moderate reflecting subdued labour market developments. 
Higher  oil  prices  have  been  the  main  factor  exerting  upward  pressures  on  prices,  especially  in  the 
second half of 2005. However, there has been only limited evidence that past oil price increases have 
passed  through  to  prices  at  a  later  stage  of  the  production  chain.  In  addition,  inflation  has  been 
dampened  by  the  impact  of  strong  external  competition.  Over  the  short  term,  annual  inflation  is 
expected to remain at elevated levels mainly on account of the most recent increases in oil prices and 
some adverse base effects. 
Over the medium term, annual inflation is expected to decline gradually, but the extent and pace of its 
deceleration  to  a  level  compatible  with  price  stability  depends  on  several  factors.  Lagged  indirect 
effects, stemming from higher production costs induced by past oil price increases, could exert upward 
pressure on inflation. And previously announced increases in administered prices and indirect taxes 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2006
can  be  expected  also  to  have  an  adverse  impact.  At  the  same  time,  wage  developments  have 
remained  moderate  over  the  past  few  quarters  as  trade  unions  in  the  euro  area  have  increasingly 
focused on protecting employment, notably against the background of continued moderate economic 
growth and increased competition from the new EU Member States and non-EU emerging economies. 
Therefore, recent experience suggests that nominal wage growth can be assumed to remain moderate 
against  a  background  of  the  expected  modest  improvement  in  labour  market  conditions  and  the 
gradual expansion of economic activity. This assumption, however, cannot be taken for granted, and 
there are indications that wage pressures may be building up in some euro area countries. All in all, 
the  information  currently  available  is  in  line  with  the  scenario  embodied  in  the  Eurosystem  staff 
projections published in December 2005 for price developments over this year and the next. The latest 
ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters points to average inflation of 2% in 2006 and 1.8% in 2007.  
This outlook for price developments continues to be surrounded by a number of upside risks. Neither 
the  number  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability  nor  the  likelihood  that  they  materialise  has  diminished. 
There  are  risks  stemming  from  potential  further  rises  in  oil  prices  and  additional  increases  in 
administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes.  More  significantly,  the  potential  for  second-round  effects  on 
wage  and  price-setting  behaviour  remains.  In  addition,  strong  monetary  and  credit  growth,  in  an 
environment  of  ample  liquidity  in  the  euro  area,  also  points  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over 
medium to longer horizons that are more likely to materialise as economic activity is approaching its 
potential level. 
To sum up, the latest available information from both hard data and soft indicators overall confirms our 
central scenario of a recovery which is becoming stronger and broader. In that context, we see mainly 
two external risks – oil prices and global imbalances – and there is also some uncertainty about the 
pace of the strengthening of consumer demand, although the signs seen in confidence indicators have 
been encouraging in this respect. With regard to the prospect for price developments, several upside 
risks to price stability over the medium term remain. Consequently, the ECB, as the monetary authority 
of the euro area, has to remain vigilant so that these risks do not materialise and medium and long-
term inflation expectations are not adversely affected but remain well-anchored at levels in line with 
price stability. Such vigilance is also necessary, given the historically low levels of interest rates and 
the overall accommodative stance of monetary policy, which continues to be supportive to growth and 
employment  creation.  Market  expectations  of  a  further  tightening  of  monetary  policy  in  the  coming 
month are reasonable and in line with the ECB’s communication and its commitment to preserve price 
stability. Looking further ahead, the stance of monetary policy in the remainder of the year will depend 
on  incoming  information  that  will  shape  our  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  stability  over  the 
medium term. The ECB will act promptly and as needed to ensure that potential inflationary pressures 
are contained and inflation expectations remain anchored to price stability. 
III. Economic relations between the euro area and emerging Asia 
The economic performance of the euro area and other regions of the world has greatly benefited in 
recent  years  from  the  increasing  globalisation  of  markets,  the  pace  of  trade  expansion,  and  the 
sizeable flows of foreign direct and portfolio investment across borders. That said, globalisation also 
creates challenges, both at the micro and macro levels. Against this background of the opportunities 
and  challenges  of  global  markets,  let  me  now  concentrate  on  the  economic  and  financial  relations 
between Europe – or rather the euro area, to be more precise – and emerging Asia, specifically China, 
and on some of the challenges for policy.  
I will first focus on bilateral trade relations between China and the euro area. China’s share in the euro 
area’s total imports has increased markedly over the past ten years, from 3.6% in 1994 to 8.6% in 
2004 – a rise of five percentage points.1 By comparison, the share of goods imported from China by 
the United States rose from 6% to 13.7% over the same period. The rising share of Chinese goods in 
euro  area  imports  is  not  a  surprise  in  itself,  given  the  rapid  pace  of  development  of  the  Chinese 
economy. What is rather more surprising, however, is the fact that China’s share did not rise as quickly 
on the export side. Euro area goods exported to China in 2004 amounted to only 3.5% of total euro 
area exports in that year, which is significantly below the share of the United States (15%). From a 
Chinese perspective, the euro area is a fairly important trading partner which accounted for 13.7% of 
                                                      
1   The share of non-Japan Asia in euro area imports increased even more, from 10.5% in 1994 to 18.7% in 2004. 
BIS Review 9/2006 
 3
China’s exports in 2004 – up from around 10% in 1994. The share of euro area products in China’s 
total imports is of the same order of magnitude, but it has declined somewhat over the past ten years – 
from 13.6% in 1994 to 10.4% in 2004.2
In parallel to trade integration, capital mobility and foreign direct investment is the second vector of 
globalisation.  The  expansion  of  capital  flows  is  impressive.  A  real  surge  in  FDI  accompanied  the 
specialisation of manufacturing at the international level. Flows of FDI have risen 25 fold between the 
1970s and the 1990s. Over the last decade, 90% of world FDI outflows originated from high income 
countries  and  one-third  of  world  FDI  inflows  went  to  developing  and  transition  economies.  More 
specifically, FDI inflows to non-Japan Asia increased from less than 7% of world inflows in the 1970s 
to around 19% in the 1990s. In the 1970s, FDI inflows to China were a trickle that barely registered. 
But by the 1990s, these flows had grown significantly, representing (on average) 7.7% of all global FDI 
flows.  FDI  outflows  from  non-Japan  Asia  also  rose  substantially  over  the  same  period:  on  average 
they  represented  9%  of  world  outflows  in  the  1990s,  compared  with  less  than  0.5%  in  the  1970s. 
Overall, we can certainly conclude that the euro area and China have become key economic partners. 
Such interdependence is likely to continue to strengthen to the mutual benefit of both regions. 
The increase in trade integration and capital mobility with emerging Asia – and China in particular – 
constitutes  an  opportunity,  but  also  a  challenge,  for  the  euro  area.  Beyond  the  short  term,  the 
international  competitive  pressures  exerted  on  the  euro  area  reflect  structural  factors,  and  notably 
strong productivity growth, which are most likely to be favourable to the European economy over the 
long  term.  A  deepening  in  the  integration  processes  of  both  manufacturing  and  services  industries 
offers the prospects of significant gains at the economy-wide level. Europe should indeed benefit in 
terms of lower prices for firms and consumers, enhanced trading volumes and potentially higher levels 
of productivity and growth.  
That said, the necessary adjustments in the short term can be controversial: you are probably aware 
of the debates in Europe on the dislocation of manufacturing and pressures on labour markets. And I 
will  frankly  admit  that  Sino-European  economic  relations,  too,  have  occasionally  experienced  some 
tensions in this respect. Last year, for instance, the expiration of textile quotas under the MultiFibre 
agreement raised concerns that rapidly growing imports of Chinese textiles would put a severe strain 
on European textile manufacturers. However, China and the European Union reached an agreement 
last September, regarded by both partners as a “win-win” outcome, which that, with mutual trust and 
understanding,  tensions  can  be  overcome.  We,  at  the  ECB,  strongly  believe  that  avoiding 
protectionism is essential for global prosperity, a sentiment which we share with many other central 
banks around the world. In any event, the implications of global trade integration for European labour 
markets and competitiveness are not necessarily exclusively related to China and emerging Asia, but 
also to the dynamic economies of the new EU Member States in Central and Eastern Europe. One of 
the main policy responses to address these pressures are efforts to make the euro area economies 
more flexible and to place greater emphasis within the present domestic model on the promotion of 
innovation and the creation of a more business-oriented environment.  
More  specifically,  policies  geared  towards  better  education  and  research  subsidy  systems,  efficient 
and  flexible  product  and  labour  markets,  and  well-developed  financial  systems  will  be  beneficial  to 
long-term productivity growth and prosperity in the euro area. A number of European policy initiatives 
and  recommendations  to  promote  productivity  growth  in  the  European  Union  –  referred  to  as  the 
“Lisbon strategy” (after the city where the decision was taken) – have already been put forward. A key 
priority  identified  in  this  strategy  is  the  promotion  of  “knowledge  and  innovation  for  growth”  through 
various  means  and  objectives  aimed  at  improving  human  capital.  For  example,  the  Lisbon  strategy 
sets a target whereby research and development spending should reach 3% of GDP by 2010, two-
thirds  of  which  should  come  from  the private sector.  In  2003,  overall R&D  expenditure represented 
1.9%  of  the  euro  area’s  GDP.  By  way  of  comparison,  the  United  States  spends  2.8%  of  GDP  on 
research  and  development.  The  allocation  of additional  financial resources  to support research  and 
innovation is a step in the right direction, but it is not sufficient. Mechanisms should be put in place to 
ensure that the envisaged increase in funding is both effectively and efficiently utilised. Moreover, a 
general  educational  framework  to  strengthen  the  development  of  new  technologies  –  and  their 
diffusion in the economy – is also needed; this would also enhance the ties and interactions between 
universities, research centres and business. 
                                                      
2   The euro area’s share in exports to non-Japan Asia also declined somewhat – from 14.6% in 1994 to 13.7% in 2004. 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2006
IV. Global imbalances and policy challenges 
Let me now turn to the third and final part of my remarks on some of the policy challenges ahead. A 
major challenge, which is faced by industrial countries and emerging economies, and which has been 
on the agenda of almost all international policy meetings over the past few years, is posed by global 
current account imbalances. I am sure most of you are familiar with the general issue and the pertinent 
facts. It may be useful to recall some figures. The current account deficit of the United States grew to 
an estimated 760 billion US dollars in 2005, which corresponds to 6.1% of US GDP and to 80% of the 
total  current  account  surpluses  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  To  finance  this  external  deficit,  the  United 
States has to attract large capital inflows, which in recent years have come mainly from Asia and oil-
exporting  countries.  Taken  together,  Japan,  China,  other  Asian  economies  and  the  oil-producing 
nations are estimated to have recorded current account surpluses of around 750 billion US dollars in 
2005. In the euro area, the current account has recorded small surpluses in most recent years. In the 
period 2002-04, the current account had a surplus that did not exceed 0.5% of GDP and it is estimated 
that it was in balance (or had a small deficit) in 2005. The euro area’s external position reflects, among 
other  factors,  the  level  of  development  of  our  economy  and  can  be  seen  to  be  consistent  with 
demographic developments, which require net savings over the longer term. 
The present constellation of current account imbalances has sometimes been referred to as being the 
result of a “global savings glut”, that is, of large and excess savings relative to domestic investment in 
surplus  countries,  rather  than  of  high  consumption  and  investment  in  deficit  countries.  Clearly,  the 
financial  crises  of  the  last  decade  have  induced  many  emerging  countries,  particularly  in  Asia,  to 
switch from being borrowers to being lenders on international capital markets. This has contributed to 
the sizeable current account surpluses and the accumulation of reserves, which is seen as a cushion 
against potential future crises. These developments have been further amplified by the impact of high 
oil prices on the revenues of oil-exporting countries, which have become exceedingly large net global 
lenders.  At  the  same  time,  the  persistence  of  large  current  account  deficits  and  the  increasing  net 
external  debt  of  the  United  States  could  lead  to  a  rebalancing  of  investors’  portfolios  and  an 
adjustment of asset prices and yields. The sustainability of imbalances is the key issue. 
The  very  nature  and  underlying  determinants  of  these  imbalances  have  been  widely  debated.  For 
some,  they  merely  reflect  a  market  outcome  –  an  “equilibrium”  state  of  economic  forces  at  work, 
including  productivity  developments,  demographics and  time  preferences.  These  forces  may  induce 
significant swings in countries’ external balances over time. Interestingly, however, we have observed 
that  the  net  investment  income  balance  of  the  United  States  –  that  is,  the  difference  between  its 
receipts and payments on external financial assets and liabilities respectively – has so far remained 
positive, notwithstanding years of current account deficits. This suggests that the United States still 
earns a higher rate of return on its stock of international assets than it pays out on its larger stock of 
international liabilities. And, indeed, recent estimates point to a positive gap in returns on foreign direct 
investment: US firms operating abroad are presumably more profitable than foreign firms operating in 
the United States.3 Some economists have even argued that the positive investment income balance 
suggests that the United States would actually remain a net creditor to the rest of the world, due to 
unaccounted exports of know-how carried out by US corporations through their investments abroad – 
a phenomenon which they call “dark matter”.4 This represents a striking difference from the officially 
reported  data:  a  net  external  debt  of  more  than  2.5  trillion  US  dollars!  However,  the  point  that 
knowledge  would  be  embodied  in  US  investments  abroad  to  a  larger  extent  than  in  foreign  direct 
investments  in  the  United  States  seems  not  to  be  decisively  ascertained  by  existing  data.5  The 
“paradox” of the United States having a positive income balance requires further assessment and a 
more convincing explanation. It could be resolved if that income balance turns negative in the future, 
which is possible.6  
The fact remains that there are current account imbalances, which could persist for some time, being 
financed  without  difficulty,  but  eventually  they  would  have  to  be  corrected.  And,  indeed,  taking  a 
                                                      
3   Matthew Higgins, Thomas Klitgaard and Cédric Tille, “The income implications of rising U.S. international liabilities”, Current 
Issues in Economics and Finance, December 2005, Volume 11, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
4   Ricardo Hausmann and Frederico Sturzenegger, “US and global imbalances: can dark matter prevent a big bang?” mimeo, 
November 2005, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge MA. 
5   Willem Buiter, “Dark matter or cold fusion?” Goldman Sachs, Global economics paper, No. 136, January 2006. 
6  
Ibid. See also Higgins et al. (2005). 
BIS Review 9/2006 
 5
forward-looking  and  longer-term  perspective,  the  existing  imbalances  constitute  a  potential  risk  to 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  globally.  The  responsible  economic  authorities  and  most 
economists agree that the large US current account deficit, and the corresponding sizeable surpluses 
elsewhere in the world, will be reduced significantly at some point. The question is not whether, but 
when and how, this adjustment will take place. We cannot be sure about the precise timing or the size 
of  the  adjustment.  As  I  previously  emphasised,  external  imbalances  could  persist  for  a  fairly  long 
period,  and  the  prospect  of  a  rapid  adjustment  is  not  imminent.  The  main  concern  is  that  a  purely 
market-determined adjustment might turn out to be abrupt, with a potentially adverse impact on global 
economic growth and financial stability. 
What can be done, then, to avoid this? Global challenges require global answers. Each of us must 
play  his  part  to  ensure  an  orderly  adjustment.  Industrial  countries,  in  particular,  can  make  a  key 
contribution. In the United States, this contribution can come from higher national savings, including 
from further fiscal consolidation. Moreover, the low level of private savings in the United States is a 
concern and needs to be addressed. As regards Europe, our contribution should come from further 
structural  reforms  aimed  at  increasing  productivity  growth  and  market  efficiency  through  more 
competition  and  innovation.  Such  reforms  will  help  stimulate  economic  activity  and  raise  growth 
potential. Furthermore, such reforms, by improving the functioning of markets, can be expected also to 
increase the flexibility of the European economies through greater reliance on market mechanisms, 
and thus enhance our economies’ resilience to shocks. This would also prove beneficial when current 
account imbalances begin to unwind. 
In this joint effort to avoid a disorderly adjustment of existing current account imbalances, what role 
does  emerging  Asia  play?  The  reduction  of  global  imbalances  in  an  orderly  manner  is  a  key 
international policy priority. Emerging Asian countries – and especially China – have become, over the 
past decade, major economic players at the global level. This greater weight and influence in the world 
economy  also  entail  a  greater  responsibility  to  assess  the  global  implications  of  national  economic 
policies. As I have already stressed, this is what the euro area and the United States also need to do 
so as to facilitate a smooth adjustment of global imbalances. 
The development of the Chinese economy and its growing trade surplus have been spectacular. They 
reflect  the  international  competitiveness  and  dynamism  of  your  economy  and  the  confidence  which 
international investors have in its future. They have been accompanied by the accumulation of foreign 
exchange  reserves  at  a  pace  and  magnitude  almost  unprecedented  in  history.  But,  as  Walter 
Benjamin,  the  German  philosopher,  once  said  about  happiness,  could  this  be  “too  much  of  a  good 
thing”? This depends on the underlying causes of reserve accumulation and on the potential risks to 
the sustainability of the performance of the domestic and world economies. 
We in Europe are confident that the Chinese authorities are well aware of these risks and of the need 
to  pursue  financial  reforms  and  economic  policies  that  foster  efficient  and  sustainable  economic 
performance.  To  this  end,  exchange  rate  flexibility  is  an  essential  element  of  an  appropriate  policy 
strategy.  Exchange  rate  flexibility  is  also  desirable  in  order  to  foster  smooth,  wide-ranging 
adjustments,  based  on  market  mechanisms,  in  the  international  financial  system.  Moreover,  such 
flexibility  may  also  help  China  keep  the  pace  of  accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  under 
control. For this reason, we at the ECB welcomed China’s decision to shift to a new managed floating 
exchange  rate  regime  last  summer.  We  expect  the  operation  of  the  new  exchange  rate  regime  to 
contribute to global financial stability. However, while the size of speculative inflows appears to have 
diminished, the fact that current account surpluses are high and rising and that reserve accumulation 
is  continuing  unabated  suggests  that  more  adjustment  is  likely  to  be  needed.  Such  an  adjustment 
would have to be well prepared as in the past, so as to contribute to global financial stability. 
We  understand  that  greater  exchange  rate  adjustment  requires  more  reforms  and  that  certain 
domestic considerations and  constraints  have  to  be  taken  into  account.  At  the  same  time,  we have 
observed,  with  great  interest,  the  string  of  measures  recently  taken  by  the  Chinese  authorities  to 
prepare  the  country’s  financial  system  to  cope  adequately  with  the  new  economic  environment, 
including  bank  recapitalisation,  partial  interest-rate  liberalisation,  the  introduction  of  trading  in  non-
renminbi currency pairs and the expansion of the forward market. The progress that is being made is 
very  tangible  indeed:  only  yesterday,  for  example,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  published  rules  that 
permit  yuan  interest  rate  swaps.  Such  reforms  are  welcome  not  only  because  they  can  help  the 
financial  system  to  adapt  to  the  new  environment,  but  also  because  China’s  substantial  current 
account surpluses partly reflect the structure and features of its financial system. For instance, it has 
been argued that the saving rate in China is very high, even after the recent revisions of GDP data, 
because households need to save more for retirement and health care, but at the same time returns 
6 
 BIS Review 9/2006
on financial assets are too low. Moreover, as the availability of credit is also limited for households, 
they  need  to  accumulate  sizeable  savings  to  purchase  durable  goods  and  houses.  In  this  context, 
corporations, which account for a large part of total savings, have incentives to invest in real assets, 
including business capital, rather than to invest their cash flows in financial assets, because of the low 
returns offered by the latter. In turn, this could help to explain some domestic imbalances observed in 
the Chinese economy. It is positive that, thanks to measures concerning land acquisition, banking loan 
requirements and interest rate adjustments, the housing market has started to cool down and price 
increases began to decelerate in many regions last year. Higher returns on financial assets could help 
further relieve some of the pressure on the real estate market, by enticing economic agents to invest 
more in financial assets rather than in real assets. Seen also from that angle, reforms are not only 
useful to help China address external imbalances, but also domestic ones. 
V. Conclusion  
It is time for me to conclude.  
An important event in our common history took place seven centuries ago, when Mărcō Pō-Lō came 
from Europe to China for the first time. But Europe and China do not only have a common history, we 
have a future to share. We are key partners. Our trade and financial relations are strengthening to our 
mutual  benefit.  Policy  challenges  lie  ahead  for  both  of  us,  and  the  orderly  adjustment  of  current 
account imbalances globally is an important one.  I am convinced that the euro area and China will 
pursue the appropriate policies to address effectively the challenges we face and, in this way, make 
this common future bright. 
As a European, I feel that I cannot finish my presentation without a few words on perhaps one of the 
most  complex  challenges  ahead  for  my  continent:  its  future  constitutional  set-up.  This  is  an  issue 
about which we are often asked by our Asian friends. European integration is a unique endeavour. 
Bringing together sovereign nations with a long and rich history is a long-term process, which requires 
a sense of purpose and determination. Early on, Europeans placed emphasis on achieving economic 
integration. The single European market and the euro are two major achievements. More recently, the 
focus shifted towards further developing the Union’s institutional framework and political dimension. A 
Constitution was drafted to lay down the appropriate institutions and political processes which would 
allow the enlarged European Union to act efficiently and transparently and assume an international 
role  that  is  commensurate  with  its  economic  and  political  weight.  Fourteen  countries,  representing 
around  half  of  the  European  Union’s  population,  have  ratified  this  Constitution  or  are  very  close  to 
formal completion. In France and the Netherlands, however, where the draft Constitution was put to a 
referendum,  it  did  not  find  majority  support.  In  June  2005,  the  European  Heads  of  State  or 
Government discussed the reasons and implications. They concluded that the results did not call into 
question the citizens’ attachment to the European construction process. At the same time, they agreed 
on the need for a period of reflection. The issue will be taken up again during the first half of this year 
in an attempt to agree on a way forward. The ECB is in full support of the Constitution. The point I 
would like to stress, however, is that whatever the outcome of the ratification process, the stability of 
the  euro  will  not  be  affected.  The  ECB,  whether  it  operates  under  the  current  Treaty  or  the  new 
Constitution,  will  continue  to  fulfil  its  mandate  and  deliver  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  thus 
contributing to a macroeconomic environment conducive to growth and employment. 
During  the  several  years  he  spent  in  China,  it  is  said  that  Mărcō  Pō-Lō  learned  to  speak  fluent 
Chinese. I have been here only a few days, unfortunately. But let me still try to wish you, in Mandarin, 
a happy and prosperous new year! Xīn Níen Kăi Lè, Kōg Xí Fā Caí! Thank you. Xie xie. 
BIS Review 9/2006 
 7
