Ewart S Williams: Inflation threats, foreign exchange market and challenges in 
the stock market 
Luncheon address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Annual General Meeting of the Trinidad and Tobago Chamber of Industry and Commerce, Port of 
Spain, 29 March 2006. 
 I am pleased to be able to join you at your Annual General Meeting and to be given this opportunity to 
say a few words to this important gathering. In your letter of invitation, you indicated some areas in 
which  you  felt  it  might  be  useful  for  us  to  focus  our  attention  today.  If  I  am  to  judge  by  your 
suggestions, then it would appear that we share many of the same concerns. 
As  you  requested,  I  will  focus  on  the  current  inflation  threat,  the  increasing  pressures  in  the 
foreign exchange market, and the challenges we face in the stock market. I would, however, like 
to couch the discussion in terms of the recent evolution of the non-energy sector and its implications 
for long-term sustainability. 
First, some observations on our current economic situation. 
By  all  the  conventional  yardsticks,  the  present  state  of  and  prospects  for  the  economy  are 
exceptionally favourable: 
•  We are now into our second decade of continuous strong growth. 
•  Unemployment is at historically low levels. 
•  Oil prices are high and the projection is for them to remain so over the medium term. 
•  Our external indicators, the current account surplus, debt ratios and foreign reserve levels are 
strong. 
•  Our financial system is robust and well capitalized. 
While  this  picture  is  very  reassuring,  there  are  still  concerns.  An  ambitious  public  investment 
programme is stretching our absorptive capacity to the limit and this presents challenges for macro-
economic stability. 
A  second  area  of  concern  is  sustainability  and  the  extent  to  which  we  are  leveraging  the  present 
energy windfall to create a strong diversified economy. 
There is no doubt that we are doing an excellent job at expanding and diversifying the energy sector. 
However,  we  are  still  waiting  to  see  the  non-energy  sector  develop  a  platform  to  generate  its  own 
dynamic. Growth in this sector has averaged 4.5 percent a year over the past three to four years but 
the  main  drivers  have  been  the  construction  sector,  distribution  and  financial  services.  While  this 
growth has contributed to the expansion of employment it depends heavily on government spending 
and the foreign exchange generated by the energy sector. 
If  we  are  to  progress  towards  sustainable  diversification  of  our  economy,  we  must  continue  to 
strengthen  the  links  between  the  energy  sector  and  the  onshore  economy,  and  at  the  same  time 
develop new foreign exchange earning activities, be they in services or in the manufacturing sector. 
About a decade ago we seemed to be well on the way to creating a platform for a strong non-energy 
economy.  You  will  all  recall  that  coming  out  of  the  collapse  of  the  first  oil  boom,  successive 
governments introduced a range of macro-economic and structural reforms that set the stage for the 
current economic expansion. Specifically, trade liberalization forced several manufacturers to re-tool 
and modernize their operations to compete in a more open environment. 
The response of our manufacturing sector remains to this day a shining example of its ability to adapt 
to new challenges and opportunities, a point strikingly borne out by our dominance in the CARICOM 
market. 
Some  of  our  manufacturers  went  even  further  afield  such  that  we  can  point  to  some  international 
success stories in soft drinks, alcoholic beverages and [chocolates – perhaps there are more]. 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 1
rather than to exports – in shopping malls and in other kinds of real estate. 
(i) A couple of our large firms have made a foray in the downstream energy sector (and this  
is as it should be if more of the returns from our natural resource wealth are to accrue to  
 
 
the national economy). 
(ii) More generally, however, the increase in private investment in the non-energy sector has 
  been disproportionately in nontradeables – in services directed to the domestic market  
 
(iii) Our private sector has also developed a tremendous appetite for foreign portfolio   
 
Basically, however, the relatively small size of our regional market has limited our export expansion. 
Under these circumstances, it would have seemed a logical next step to turn in the direction of Latin 
America. But this strategy has not been pursued as vigorously as expected. The slow progress of the 
FTAA  negotiations  may  also  further  constrain  the  ability  of  our  firms  to  penetrate  extra-regional 
markets. 
We are now seeing from the private sector a rather interesting response to our current oil boom. 
What are the main elements of this response? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In short, in the midst of this current oil boom, ladies and gentlemen, our export manufacturing sector 
seems to have lost its dynamism to the non-tradeable service sector (real estate, distribution and retail 
franchising) and to increased portfolio investment. 
Ladies and gentlemen, this new phenomenon is clearly reflected in the current statistical indicators. In 
the  years  immediately  following  trade  and  financial  liberalization  (1994-1997),  annual  growth  in 
manufactured exports averaged about 16 per cent. Since 2001, this growth has leveled off markedly. 
Since 2000, employment in the manufacturing sector has stagnated at around 10 per cent in the face 
of strong employment growth in other areas of the non-energy economy such as construction (16 per 
cent) and the distributive trades (18 per cent). 
The  indicators  are  clear  –  a  slowdown  in  manufacturing  exports  and  employment,  with  growth  and 
employment gains being led by construction and distribution. 
While  we  may  be  able  to  afford  this  inward  looking  pattern  of  development  now,  because  of  the 
availability  of  foreign  exchange,  it  is  not  very  efficient  and  more  importantly,  it  is  clearly 
unsustainable and will come to a halt once the energy boom subsides as it certainly will. 
Incidentally, several reasons have been advanced for this new phenomenon: 
 investment (and I would return to this later). 
•  Some say, for instance, that having dominated the CARICOM export market, our export 
 
sector  has  had  difficulty  making  the  adaptations  (technical  and  cultural)  needed  to 
  penetrate extra-regional markets (the US, Europe, Central and South America). 
•  Some analysts suggest that given the current buoyancy of the economy, it is so easy to 
  make money in the domestic market that there is no appetite to incur additional costs and 
 
• 
 
 
  manufacturers to capture a share of the burgeoning outsourcing market?  
risks in penetrating new export markets. 
I have also heard the argument that our manufacturers lack the size to penetrate extra-
regional markets and to compete with the export push from China and India. But even if 
this  is  so,  why  haven’t  we  been  able  to  set  up  strategic  alliances  with  international 
We  could  discuss  this  sustainability  problem  at  another  time.  I  would  now  like  to  focus  on  three 
immediate  challenges:  maintaining  low  inflation;  our  foreign  exchange  market;  and  our  local 
stock market. 
During 2005, there was global concern about rising inflation. 
In  the  US,  for  instance,  headline  inflation  reached  as  high  as  4.5  per  cent  in  September  2005,  the 
highest rate in many years. 
With sluggish domestic demand and slow growth in the Eurozone, inflation has remained subdued at 
about 2.3 per cent. 
In the Caribbean, inflation in Barbados picked up from 1.6 per cent in 2003 to 3.2 per cent in 2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2006
Jamaica saw  an  increase  in  inflation  from  10.3  per cent  in  2003  to  15.3  per  cent  while  in  Guyana, 
inflation increased from 5.0 per cent in 2003 to 6.0 per cent in 2005. 
Here in Trinidad and Tobago, against a background of very robust economic growth, estimated at 7 
per cent, inflation rose from 3.8 per cent in 2003 to 7.0 per cent in 2005. 
In most of the other economies, the main driver of inflation was the substantial increase in international 
oil prices. In Trinidad and Tobago it was the sharp increase in food prices – a phenomenal 24 per cent 
increase in 2005 (year-on-year). 
Food  prices  have  always  registered  (inexplicably)  strong  increases  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  –  an 
average of 12 percent or so in the period 1995-2000. This climbed to 14 percent in 2001-2004 and to 
a whopping 24 percent in 2005. Analyzing the index shows a significant jump in the prices of fruits and 
vegetables, influenced no doubt by the severe floods in 2004 and 2005 which worsened an otherwise 
structural decline in domestic agricultural production. The continued strong increase in food prices 
at the supermarket level is perhaps more difficult to explain given trade liberalization. It may 
have to do with the oligopolistic structure of the distribution sector which facilitates high profit margins. 
From my vantage point, more than the current level of inflation, I am concerned about indications of 
growing inflationary psychology. And the signs are there. For example, (i) even before it has stopped 
raining you can bet on hearing some knowledgeable analyst predict a hefty rise in fruit and vegetable 
prices;  (ii)  similarly,  the  slightest  congestion  on  the  ports  also  brings  a  prediction  of  large  price 
increases – even though port charges may be a miniscule share of the product prices. 
Drawing  from  the  experience  of  the  last  oil  boom,  an  even  greater  concern  is  the  potential  for 
intensified  wage  pressures.  In  this  regard,  I  hope  I  am  misreading  the  current  industrial  relations 
climate.  
I would now like to make some comments on the recent developments in the foreign exchange market 
(in which the Chamber has, not unexpectedly, an intense interest). 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  adopted  a  liberalized  foreign  exchange  regime  in  1993.  At  that  time,  we 
liberalized both current and capital transactions (unlike several IMF members, who still maintain some 
controls on capital transactions). When we liberalized it was recognized that given the small market 
and  the  concentration  in  the  financial  system,  we  could  not  have  a  fully  market-determined 
system, because of the potential for exchange rate volatility and overshooting. We realized that 
while  the  system  should  provide  for  greater  flexibility,  it  needed  to  be  carefully  managed  requiring 
collaboration between all the stakeholders – Central Bank, the commercial banks and the public and 
private sectors. 
One element of this collaboration was the establishment of the “sharing mechanism” whereby foreign 
exchange sales by the energy companies were shared among the financial institutions. Another was 
agreement on the pace at which any given bank could adjust the exchange rate - the idea was to limit 
price  competition  for  foreign  exchange.  The  financial  institutions  admit  that  these  mechanisms 
have worked well, contributing to the stability of the market.  
As you know, pressures on the foreign exchange market intensified in 2005. The main factors behind 
these pressures were: 
 the rapid increase in private incomes leading to buoyant import demand; 
increases in government expenditure on capital projects, some of which have a high import 
content; and 
•  a significant increase in capital outflows for asset acquisition, purchase of securities issued by 
regional sovereigns andcorporations and a rise in portfolio outflows, including foreign currency 
denominated mutual funds.  
Some highlights of 2005 are: 
•  Out of total purchases by the commercial banks of US$2.6 billion, 60 per cent came from the 
energy sector. If we include the sales by the Central Bank, the energy sector accounts for 
closer  to  70  per  cent  of  the  foreign  exchange  intermediated  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market. 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 3
•  Of  total  foreign  exchange  sales  of  US$3.6  billion,  about  80  per  cent  were  for  current 
transactions (trade and services) and close to 20 per cent (about US$ 650 million) were for the 
capital transactions. 
In  2005,  to  meet  the  increased  foreign  exchange  demand,  the  Central  Bank  sold  US$670  million 
compared with US$386 million the previous year. 
In the first quarter of 2006, the Central Bank has sold US$370 million to meet shortfalls in the market 
(more than half of last year’s figure in one quarter). The Bank has discerned that over this period there 
has  been  a  decline  in  conversions  of  foreign  exchange  by  the  non-energy  sector,  possibly 
signaling  a  delay  in  repatriation  of  export  earnings.  Moreover,  when  we  examine  the  demands 
reported by the commercial banks, we notice a tendency for some clients to make multiple and 
repeated requests to several banks. It is clear that some clients are prepaying bills and there is 
evidence of foreign exchange hoarding. These practices worsen market imbalances. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  foreign  exchange  is  a  national  resource  coming  largely  from  our  national 
patrimony  (the  energy  sector).  For  most  developing  countries,  foreign  exchange  is  a  major 
developmental constraint. For Trinidad and Tobago, the constraint has been temporarily eased but 
it is there and it behoves us to use foreign exchange in a way that best benefits the economy 
and facilitates sustainable development.  
There is a limit to which this economy could sustain the current level of foreign investments, overseas 
land purchases and the like, and still meet our normal consumer and production needs. Of course, 
you could ration through the exchange rate but in a small market like ours with institutional 
concentration; this carries serious volatility risks. Notwithstanding liberalization, we need to carefully 
manage the foreign exchange market. 
The  best  way  of  doing  this  is  through  a  proper  balance  of  market  discipline  and  stakeholder 
collaboration. All the stakeholders need to play a part. Specifically: 
    the  fiscal  authorities  need  to  reduce  the  non-energy  fiscal  deficit  to  help  contain  excess 
liquidity; 
the Central Bank needs to intensify liquidity absorption (and this would imply higher interest 
rates); 
the Bank is committed to increasing foreign exchange sales subject to the maintenance of an 
adequate level of official reserves (between 6 and 7 months imports); and 
the  private  sector  and the  banks  need  to  play  their  part  by  recognizing  the  priority  to  be 
given  to  trade  and  smaller  foreign  exchange  transactions,  even  if  it  means  occasionally 
queuing large capital market transactions. 
It is certainly not in the country’s best interest for banks to have to put limits on foreign exchange 
sales for trade and service transactions while investors amass large sums for offshore portfolio 
investments. 
Some closing comments on the Stock Market … 
One  reason  advanced  for  the  increased  outflow  of  financial  capital  is  the  shortage  of  investment 
opportunities locally. The government securities market has been expanded and with a new auction 
system has been made more transparent. 
There is no doubt that the stock market has not expanded as envisaged, either in terms of the number 
or  range  of  offerings.  But  this  is  another  area where  collaboration  is  essential.  To  me  it  is  not 
enough simply to say that the Government should seek to privatize certain assets through the stock 
exchange, as indeed they should. The private sector can also contribute more to expanding stock 
market activity through debt issues and through new listings. I know this could mean a dilution of 
control and having to adhere to new disclosure requirements, but these are the inconveniences that 
we would need to face in order to make that next leap towards development. 
The  stock  market  displayed  robust  growth  between  2002  and  2004.  During  this  period,  market 
capitalization  increased  by  50  percent  on  average,  as  investors  switched  from  low  yielding  money 
market investments to equity investments. Although the market continued to register gains during the 
first half of 2005, it weakened considerably thereafter. Many reasons have been advanced to explain 
this reversal in the fortunes of the stock market. Among these is the rising trend in interest rates which 
has made money market instruments relatively more attractive. Many analysts also believe that given 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2006
the  earlier  rapid  increase  in  stock  prices,  many  stocks  had  perhaps  become  overvalued  and  the 
market was due for some form of a correction. There has also been some rebalancing of portfolios by 
institutional investors who have reduced holdings of equity in their portfolios. 
Another issue of interest with regard to the Stock Market … 
Although prudential guidelines require that direct investments in equities by pension funds should not 
exceed 50 per cent of their portfolios, many pension plans find themselves in excess of this limit as a 
result  of  the strong  performance  of  the  stock  market  in  recent  years. When  one  takes  into  account 
their  indirect  holdings  of  equities  through  their  investments  in  mutual  funds,  it  is  estimated  that  as 
much as 64 per cent of some pension plans’ portfolios is exposed to the volatility of the equity market. 
Such  a  high  level  of  exposure  brings  with  it  certain  inherent  risks,  especially  in  our  small 
market which could be very volatile. We have estimated for instance, that in the current scenario, a 
30 per cent reduction in the stock market could reduce the portfolio of some pension funds by about 
10  per  cent.  As  regulator,  we  have  a  responsibility  to  ensure  that  pension  funds  exercise  good 
prudential  risk  management.  Obviously,  we  need  to  consider  a  reasonable  transition  period  to 
minimize the impact on the stock market.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I have taken (perhaps too much) time to make the fundamental point that we 
have  an  excellent  opportunity  to  transform  our  economy  through  the  establishment  of  a  strong, 
exportbased non-energy sector. My thesis is that if we are to achieve this, all stakeholders need to 
work  in  close  collaboration.  In  a  small,  closely-knit  society,  as  ours,  market  mechanisms  alone  are 
unlikely to produce the desired results. The experience of the successful Asian economies has shown 
that  there  is  room  for  competition  within  an  agreed  framework  that  puts  social  before  private 
interests and long-run sustainability before short-term gains. 
We have done this before and it has proven to be successful. Let’s begin to do it again. 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 5
