European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 12 January 
2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I would first like to express to all of you our best wishes 
for the New Year and welcome you to this press conference. Let me now report on the outcome of 
today’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we have decided to keep the key ECB 
interest  rates  unchanged  following  the  increase  of  25  basis  points  on  1  December  2005.  The 
information which has become available since then supports the assessment that an adjustment of our 
very accommodative monetary policy stance was warranted. It remains essential to keep medium to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  solidly  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price 
stability.  Such  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  is  a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an 
ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area. 
Maintaining price stability over the medium term is our guiding principle, and we will consistently apply 
it when examining new information, making our judgements and taking decisions. With interest rates 
across the whole maturity spectrum remaining historically low in both nominal and real terms, and with 
our  monetary  policy  stance  remaining  accommodative,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments with respect to risks to price stability over the medium term.  
Allow  me  to  explain  our  assessment  in  greater  detail,  turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis. 
According to the information available, real GDP growth did indeed improve in the second half of 2005, 
as we expected. According to Eurostat’s first estimate, real GDP grew at a quarter-on-quarter rate of 
0.6% in the third quarter of 2005, compared with 0.4% in the second quarter. The breakdown of GDP 
data for the third quarter of 2005 confirmed a stronger contribution from domestic demand. Moreover, 
recent economic indicators and survey data support the view that the expansion of economic activity 
broadly maintained its momentum in the fourth quarter of 2005 and will continue to do so in the first 
months of 2006, notwithstanding the impact of high oil prices.  
Looking further ahead, the conditions remain in place for sustained growth of economic activity, in line 
with our staff projections and other available forecasts. On the external side, the continued strength of 
global  demand  should  support  euro  area  exports.  On  the  domestic  side,  investment  should  further 
benefit  from  continued  very  favourable  financing conditions,  robust  corporate  earnings  and  gains  in 
corporate  efficiency.  Consumption  growth  should  gradually  rise,  broadly  in  line  with  expected 
developments in disposable income.  
Risks  to  this  outlook  for  economic  growth  continue  to  lie  on  the  downside  and  relate  to  high  and 
volatile oil prices, concerns about global imbalances and the level of consumer confidence in the euro 
area, although the latter is improving.  
Turning to price developments, annual HICP inflation was 2.2% in December, according to Eurostat’s 
flash estimate, compared with 2.3% in November and 2.5% in October. This decline was the result of 
some relaxation of earlier tensions in oil and petrol markets. Nevertheless, annual HICP inflation rates 
are expected to remain at elevated levels over the short term, mainly on account of the most recent 
increases in oil prices and some adverse base effects. Beyond the short term, indirect effects of past 
oil  price  rises  on  other  components  of  the  price  index  may  gradually  materialise,  and  already 
announced  changes  to  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  can  be  expected  to  have  an  upward 
impact.  Meanwhile,  wage  increases  have  remained  moderate  over  recent  quarters.  All  in  all,  the 
information available remains consistent with the scenario for price developments as reflected in the 
December staff projections. 
Risks to this scenario remain on the upside and include further rises in oil prices, additional increases 
in administered prices and indirect taxes, as well as – more fundamentally – potential second-round 
effects in wage and price-setting behaviour. It is therefore crucial that the social partners continue to 
meet their responsibilities also in the context of a more favourable economic environment. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the annual growth rate of M3 moderated somewhat in November, 
but remained very robust, mainly owing to the stimulative impact of the prevailing low level of interest 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 1
rates. The strong growth of M3 continues to be driven by significant contributions from its most liquid 
components. The growth of loans to the private sector – and, in particular, mortgage borrowing – has 
strengthened further over recent months, from already rapid rates of growth. Against this background, 
price  dynamics  in  the  housing  markets  need  to  be  monitored  closely.  Liquidity  in  the  euro  area 
remains ample by all plausible measures. Strong monetary and credit growth in a context of already 
ample liquidity in the euro area points to upside risks to price stability over medium to longer horizons. 
To sum up, the economic analysis suggests that some upward impact on HICP inflation will result from 
the indirect effects of recent oil price rises and already announced changes to administered prices and 
indirect taxes. It also indicates that risks to price stability over the medium term remain on the upside. 
This assessment is confirmed by cross-checking the economic analysis with the monetary analysis. 
It is essential that such risks do not affect medium-term inflation expectations, which need to remain 
firmly  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability.  Monetary  policy  can  thereby  effectively 
contribute to sustainable economic growth and job creation. Accordingly, we will continue to monitor 
very closely all developments with respect to risks to price stability over the medium term.  
As  regards  fiscal  policy,  most  euro  area  countries  have  submitted  their  updated  stability 
programmes,  which  include  their  medium-term  budget  plans.  The  upcoming  assessment  of  these 
programmes by the ECOFIN Council and their subsequent implementation provide an opportunity to 
forcefully  underpin  the  commitment  to  sound  fiscal  policies  and  the  rigorous  implementation  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. This would have an important positive effect on confidence. This effect is 
likely  to  be  considerable  if  emphasis  is  given  to  well-defined  and  credible  consolidation  measures, 
restraint in expenditure commitments, and the incorporation of fiscal measures into a comprehensive 
and growth-friendly reform agenda.  
With  respect  to  structural  reforms,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  ECOFIN  Council’s 
Conclusions  of  6  December  2005  on  the  Lisbon  National  Reform  Programmes  and  the  intended 
response to the challenges of globalisation. In fact, the process of international economic and financial 
integration,  characterised  by  strong  growth  in  trade  and  capital  flows,  has  been  one  of  the  driving 
factors behind the rise in Europe’s prosperity over the past decades. The ongoing transformation of 
the  world  economy,  reflecting  technological  advances  and  the  entrance  of  new  economies  into  the 
world market, again offers great opportunities in terms of higher living standards. In order to translate 
these chances into achievements, Europe would greatly benefit from more flexible labour and product 
markets so as to speed up the necessary changeover from contracting to expanding activities and to 
minimise  adjustment  costs.  It  would  also  profit  considerably  from  a  more  stimulative  business 
environment  which  fosters  the  ability  to  innovate,  invest  and  create  new  firms.  Moreover,  a  fully 
operational EU internal market, including for services, offers great opportunities. The initiatives taken 
to relaunch the Lisbon strategy are a welcome step in the right direction.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2006
