Kevin M Warsh: Financial markets and the Federal Reserve  
Remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  M  Warsh,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the New York Stock Exchange, New York, 21 November 2006.  
 Thank you for inviting me to speak about the role of financial markets and market discipline in Federal 
Reserve  policymaking.  As  chief  financial  officers  and  business  leaders,  you  work  assiduously  to 
incorporate  real-time  information  about  your  companies  -  and  about  the  competitive  and  economic 
landscape  -  into  your  decisionmaking.  Similarly,  financial  market  participants  quickly  assimilate 
publicly available information to help judge the market clearing price for securities that you issue.  
Indeed, this process is what makes the venue for today's discussion - the New York Stock Exchange, 
home of the world's deepest equities market - so appropriate. The NYSE provides a platform for real-
time, information-rich assessments of leading global companies, incorporating both an evaluation of 
the  overall  economic  outlook  and  firm-specific  considerations.  It  is  also  fitting  to  be  speaking  today 
before  members  of  the  Securities  Industry  and  Financial  Markets  Association,  who  trade  in  these 
markets daily.  
The  Federal  Reserve,  too,  relies  on  multiple  sources  of  data  to  help  achieve  our  dual  mandate: 
ensuring price stability and achieving maximum employment. Some of the data upon which we draw - 
statistical  indicators  of  activity  and  prices  in  the  real  economy  -  tend  to  be  backward-looking  and 
subject  to  considerable  revision.  Other  information  we  use  is  drawn  from  financial  market  prices; 
although  subject  to  rapid  change  and  "noisy"  market  signals,  this  information  can  be  considerably 
more timely and forward looking.  
In its role as a bank regulator and supervisor, the Federal Reserve also often looks to market prices to 
help assess the safety and soundness of financial institutions.  
Today, I will discuss the role of financial markets in effective monetary, regulatory, and supervisory 
policy making by the Federal Reserve. In particular, I will discuss the potential for markets to inform 
the Fed's policy judgments - even as our policies also affect markets. I will also describe the important 
role of markets in disciplining private entities. Of course, the views I will express are my own and not 
necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1  
My  remarks  will  cover  three  points.  First,  financial  markets  can  inform  and,  in  some  cases, 
complement the actions of the Federal Reserve by providing timely information about the outlook for 
economic  activity,  inflation,  and  the  health  of  individual  financial  institutions.  Second,  the  Federal 
Reserve confronts many challenges when trying to extract relevant information from financial market 
prices - not least because these prices reflect the market's interpretation of our outlook as well as its 
independent  assessments.  Third,  the  market's  disciplining  of  private  entities  is  an  important 
complement to the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory functions, and the Fed can enhance 
market discipline by improving the flow of information from these regulated entities to the markets.  
I will begin with a discussion of how markets, in my judgment, inform the monetary policy process, and 
then turn to the role of markets in the supervisory and regulatory process.  
Financial markets and monetary policy 
Markets affect monetary policy predominantly through the information provided by asset prices. The 
available  menu  of  prices  is  extensive,  including  those  of  Treasury  securities  (nominal  and  real), 
corporate  debt,  equities,  and  derivatives.  These  prices  embed  investors'  expectations  of  the  future 
paths of economic growth, inflation, and financial conditions. At least as important, these prices also 
can  provide  some  insight  into  the  uncertainty  surrounding  likely  outcomes.  Monetary  policy  makers 
can use economic models and statistical techniques to extract the views of market participants about 
these key macroeconomic variables.  
                                                      
1   Nellie Liang, Wayne Passmore, Daniel Covitz, and Diana Hancock, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks. 
BIS Review 114/2006 
 1
Let me cite a few simple examples of how we interpret asset prices. Through open market operations, 
the FOMC sets the target federal funds rate, which is the overnight rate at which depositories lend to 
each other the balances they hold at the Federal Reserve. Interest rates for periods extending beyond 
that  very  short  horizon,  however,  are  established  by  market  participants  rather  than  the  FOMC, 
although  members  of  the  Committee  may  be  able  to  influence  these  longer-term  rates  somewhat 
through  what  is  affectionately  described  as  "open  mouth  operations."  In  this  way,  market-based 
interest rates reflect primarily the path investors expect for monetary policy. That expected path is of 
keen interest to us as policymakers.  
The market's view of very near term policy is reflected in futures contracts on federal funds. Futures on 
Eurodollars provide information on expectations for the period beyond the next six months or so. For 
longer  time  horizons,  investors'  views  can  be  determined  from  yields  on  medium-  and  long-term 
Treasury  securities.  This  determination  is  based  on  two  estimates  incorporated  in  the  yield  on  a 
nominal  Treasury  security,  such  as  the  ten-year  note.  The  first  estimate  is  essentially  a  weighted 
average of the current one-year rate and a sequence of forward rates that contain information about 
the one-year spot rates expected to prevail over the next nine years. The second estimate is the term 
premium at each horizon, or the compensation investors require for holding securities an additional 
period. As might be expected, imprecision about our estimates of these pieces may well increase with 
the forecast horizon.  
Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) are financial market assets that provide a judgment on 
forward-looking views about inflation. The gap between nominal Treasury yields and yields on TIPS of 
comparable  maturities  is  called  the  breakeven  inflation  rate.  The  breakeven  rate  incorporates  the 
market's expectation of inflation and the risk premium for uncertainty about these expectations. It also 
reflects liquidity differences between the two types of securities, which now are smaller than during the 
period  immediately  after  TIPS  were  introduced  in  1997.  Today,  breakeven  rates  implied  by  forward 
prices  on  TIPS  indicate  longer-run  consumer  price  index  inflation  compensation  of  about  2-1/2 
percent, in the middle of the range of the past several years. This is an example of information that 
may provide monetary policy makers with a reasonable source of market insight and may importantly 
complement  an  inflation  outlook  developed  from  economic  models,  survey  responses,  and  other 
sources. Properly measuring inflation expectations is critically important to the Fed in its formulation of 
policy.  
Markets for corporate equity and debt represent other important sources of information for the Fed. In 
addition  to  providing  expected  interest  rates  and  inflation  rates,  equity  prices  incorporate  investors' 
views  about  the  growth  of  corporate  earnings.  Corporate  bond  prices  embed  expected  default  and 
recovery risks. Moreover, derivatives prices can provide other valuable information, and we can learn 
much by understanding the linkages between primary and derivatives markets.  
Let me underscore the role of market signals by discussing monetary policy in the current economic 
environment. Recent aggregate data indicate that overall economic activity slowed noticeably during 
the  first  nine  months  of  the  year.  In  spite  of  a  series  of  shocks,  the  economy  has  proven  to  be 
remarkably resilient in recent years, and I expect it to remain so in the period ahead. A sharp pullback 
in  the  housing  markets  is  likely  to  restrain  aggregate  activity  as  we  move  into  next  year.  But  as 
housing markets stabilize, I would expect overall economic performance to strengthen from the levels 
indicated  by  preliminary  estimates  of  gross  domestic  product  in  the  third  quarter  to  a  pace  more 
consistent with the economy's long-term trend growth rate. Inflation, though down somewhat from its 
level earlier this year, remains uncomfortably elevated. Financial market prices imply that inflation will 
continue its gradual but persistent downward track during the forecast period. There remain, I believe, 
clear upside risks to that inflation outlook.  
Prices  on  federal  funds  futures  and  Eurodollar  futures  suggest  that  market  participants  expect  the 
FOMC to cut the target federal funds rate about 50 basis points during 2007, a view consistent with 
expectations of a "soft landing." At the same time, market-based options prices on these interest rate 
futures  indicate  that  implied  volatilities  are  quite  low,  suggesting  a  surprising  degree  of  certainty 
regarding  policy  expectations.  Taken  at  face  value,  market  participants  appear  to  be  reasonably 
certain of a benign outcome for both economic growth and inflation. In contrast, my own judgmental 
forecast includes a wider range of possible outcomes than is implicit in these market-based measures.  
I am a strong advocate of incorporating forward-looking information from asset prices into the Fed's 
decision process, but we should not take market readings as determinative of policy. While we should 
look to financial markets for information, just as market participants look to the Fed for its policymaking 
views, distilling conclusions from markets is an imprecise exercise.  
2 
 BIS Review 114/2006
Why can't market prices be more assuredly relied upon? Asset prices contain term premiums, credit 
risk  premiums,  and  liquidity  premiums  that  vary  over  time  and  are  themselves  related  to  market 
expectations  and  uncertainty.  Consequently,  it  can  be  difficult  to  determine  whether  movements  in 
asset prices reflect a change in expectations, in uncertainty, or in some combination of premiums.  
As  an  example,  consider  the  changes  in  Treasury  yields  since  the  FOMC  initiated  the  most  recent 
tightening cycle. From mid-2004 to today, the period during which the FOMC raised the target federal 
funds rate from 1 percent to 5-1/4 percent, the ten-year rate has scarcely changed, on net, and now 
stands not much above 4-1/2 percent. Whether this configuration is a result of changes in expected 
rates or term premiums is an important issue for policymakers. Alternative explanations have markedly 
different implications for policy. If these changes reflect increased strength in underlying demand for 
longer-term Treasury securities, including from emerging economies, the decline should be reflected in 
a  decline  in  term  premiums.  In  such  a  case,  all  else  equal,  a  tighter  monetary  policy  might  be 
preferred. On the other hand, if the decline reflects investors' views of a weaker path for the economy - 
the  more  typical  interpretation  of  a  flat  or  inverted  yield  curve  -  policymakers  might  prefer  a  more 
accommodative monetary policy.  
Given the complexity of the signal-extraction problem, we should approach our task with considerable 
humility. We recognize that financial assets prices reflect the collective views of market participants. 
They  may  reflect  not  only  changes  in  expected  paths  and  uncertainty  about  those  paths  but  also 
shifting  relationships,  changes  in  investor  risk  preferences,  and  developments  in  the  structure  of 
various  securities  markets.  Thus,  we  use  market  prices  alongside  many  other  economic  indicators, 
including statistical releases and large amounts of qualitative evidence.  
We  can  enhance  the  role  of  markets  by  improving  the  availability  of  high-quality  data  for  example, 
about  corporate  financial  conditions  and  by  working  to  improve  our  ability  to  extract  signals  from 
market data. The most significant challenge in this setting is, however, perhaps endemic to the task: 
Our own policies and actions affect market prices. As a result, when we look to financial markets for 
information, the information we seek may be shaped in part by our own views. The more that "market 
information" reflects our own actions, the less it is useful as a source of independent information to 
inform our policy judgments.  
We  need  to  be  alert  to  this  "mirror  problem,"  in  which  markets  can  cease  to  provide  independent 
information  on  current  and  prospective  financial  and  economic  developments.  In  the  extreme  case, 
financial  markets  keenly  follow  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  equally  attuned  to  the 
latest financial quotes, and fundamentals of the economy are obscured. Under such circumstances, 
asset  prices  might  teach  us  only  about  our  skills  as  communicators.  Fortunately,  the  prospect  for 
profits - the critical underpinning of all markets - mitigates this problem. Investors have strong financial 
incentives to analyze information about inflation and the macroeconomy to better predict the path of 
monetary policy. After all, Fed communications and forecasts are fallible. The anticipated dispersion of 
investors' views implies a distribution of returns with substantial rewards for those who get it right.  
Market-based  information  is  surely  important  in  determining  good  monetary  policy.  This  does  not 
mean, however, that the Fed's goal is to align its views with those of the markets or that it wants the 
markets' views to match its own. Instead, policymakers benefit greatly by listening to views expressed 
in  markets  that  are  at  least  somewhat  independent  of  FOMC  communications.  We  can  further 
enhance the role of markets by enriching our understanding of the interplay between communication 
policies of central banks and market prices. Good communication by the Fed should help members of 
the  FOMC  interpret  market  prices.  Unnecessary  market  uncertainty  or  misinterpretation  of  our 
assessments will only muddy the waters.  
Financial markets and financial supervision and regulation 
In  addition  to  making  monetary  policy  decisions,  the  Federal  Reserve  maintains  supervisory  and 
regulatory authority over a wide range of financial institutions and activities. The Fed supervises and 
regulates  banks  and  bank  holding  companies  that  together  control  about  96  percent  of  commercial 
banking assets in the United States.  
Let us consider the role of market discipline in financial supervision and regulation. First, market prices 
provide  an  independent  assessment  of  the  current  and  prospective  financial  condition  of  large 
financial  firms.  Second,  markets  can  discipline  the  behavior  of  firms  by  adjusting  the  concomitant 
funding costs of firms as risks change.  
BIS Review 114/2006 
 3
Market discipline, however, may not always be fully effective in this context. The development of the 
federal  safety  net  -  deposit  insurance,  the  discount  window,  and  access  to  Fedwire  and  daylight 
overdrafts - has inevitably impeded the workings of market discipline in the regulatory arena. That is, 
the various elements of the safety net provide depository institutions and financial market participants 
with  a  level  of  safety,  liquidity,  and  solvency  that  was  far  less  prevalent  before  the  advent  of  the 
Federal Reserve and the subsequent establishment of federal deposit insurance. By deterring liquidity 
panics, the safety net shields the overall economy from some of the worst effects of instability in the 
financial  system.  These  benefits,  however,  are  not  without  costs.  The  prospect  of  government 
intervention distorts market prices and may also engender excessive risk-taking.  
The  Federal  Reserve works  to reduce these  distortions  by  enhancing  market  discipline  and  limiting 
expectations of government intervention. Market discipline can improve financial stability by aligning 
risks and rewards more closely. When risks are both known and measured, they are reflected in asset 
prices. To this end, bank regulators must continue to strive to develop risk-based capital measures 
that better reflect underlying risks. At least as important as getting capital levels right, however, are 
new capital frameworks to provide financial markets with better information on risk-taking by banks. In 
particular, by leading the development of new capital adequacy regimes, the Fed is actively working to 
improve the flow of information about financial institutions to market participants.2 As a consequence 
of improved flows of information, market participants can better evaluate risks, price securities, and 
impose their own discipline on firms. These capital and disclosure reforms are aimed at improving the 
standardization  of  risk  metrics  and  providing  financial  markets  with  meaningful  disclosures  for  risk. 
Market forces can thus strengthen the incentives for banks to behave more as they would if there were 
no safety net at all.  
For market discipline to work optimally, securities prices for the largest financial firms should reflect 
investor evaluations of financial risks - credit, market, and operational. Securities prices informed in 
this  way  should  translate  into  higher  funding  costs  when  greater  risks  are  undertaken,  facilitate  the 
appropriate  level  of  monitoring  for  the  effective  management  of  counterparty  risk,  and  help  bank 
supervisors judge the financial condition of firms.  
Asset prices, however, will reflect risks only if uninsured creditors perceive that they are at risk of loss. 
Thus, investors should understand that the resolution procedure for bank failures does not require that 
all  uninsured  creditors  be  made  whole.  Rather,  resolution  requires  only  that  uninsured  creditors  be 
made no worse off than they would have been if the bank had been liquidated in the marketplace. The 
ten largest U.S. banking organizations fund less than half their worldwide banking assets with deposits 
-  insured,  uninsured,  and  foreign.  Thus,  the  role  for  market  discipline  is  substantial:  Uninsured 
creditors must do their own homework because protecting them is not the bank supervisor's job.  
Prices for financial firms are not "pure plays" on their expected financial conditions. Rather, the prices 
also  incorporate  the  value  of  expected  supervisory  and  regulatory  actions  should  their  financial 
condition deteriorate. These perceptions and levels of government guarantee vary substantially across 
firms.  For  example,  the  corrective  actions  used  by  bank  supervisors  to  deal  with  undercapitalized 
banks  are  intended  to  encourage  market  discipline  and  to  deter  the  expectation  of  regulatory 
forbearance.  In  addition,  encouraging  the  issuance  of  financial  market  instruments,  such  as 
subordinated debt, can provide an important antidote to conjectures of government guarantees and to 
the misperception that some institutions are "too big to fail." The threat of prohibited payments on the 
subordinated  debt  of  an  institution  that  becomes  undercapitalized  should  be  useful  in  ensuring 
vigilance by debt investors. As a result, capital adequacy becomes not the job solely of the regulator, 
but of market participants as well.  
The  Federal  Reserve  also  works  to  enhance  the  role  of  market  discipline  in  the  broader  financial 
system. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is working with dealers to improve the 
settlement and clearing practices of the credit derivatives industry. Reliable recordkeeping is crucial in 
times of stability; otherwise, it will not be available in times of distress. The Federal Reserve has also 
highlighted the systemic risks associated with the large portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The 
inherent lack of counterparty discipline is a significant problem associated with the regulation of these 
government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs).  Currently,  this  lack  of  market  discipline,  which  is  a 
consequence of conjectural federal government guarantees, is self-perpetuating: It has engendered a 
                                                      
2   The U.S. banking agencies recently asked for public comment on a notice of proposed rulemaking for implementing Basel II. 
Pillar three of Basel II is particularly intended to strengthen market discipline. 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2006
cost of capital for the GSEs that is nearly comparable to that of the federal government. It should be 
no surprise, then, that the GSE portfolios have grown dramatically since the early 1990s. Their growth 
rates have subsided more recently in light of recent accounting, regulatory, and governance problems, 
but  without  significant  improvements  in  market  discipline,  it  is  likely  that  the  rapid  growth  of  GSE 
portfolios will resume.  
Market information is not a panacea in the formulation of monetary policy and, likewise, it is not one in 
the  context  of  supervision  and  regulation.  First,  market  information  is  unavailable  for  many  banks, 
often  because  they  issue  public  debt  only  infrequently.  Second,  market  discipline  for  banks  is 
somewhat  dependent  on  the  Federal  Reserve's  policies  and  actions,  and  thus  it  has  a  "mirror 
problem"  of  its  own.  That  is,  through  a  "certification  effect,"  bank  supervision  can  potentially  create 
significant moral hazard in that investors may believe that governmental regulation supersedes their 
need to assess the firms' financial condition. Third, the objectives of financial markets and the Federal 
Reserve  are  not  perfectly  aligned.  For  example,  equity  holders  of  a  failing  institution  may  have  an 
incentive to "bet the bank" and thereby maximize the value of the put option the institution believes it 
holds from the deposit insurer.  
The  onus  continues  to  rest  with  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  financial  regulators  to  harness  the 
forces of market discipline as a necessary complement to more traditional modes of supervision and 
regulation.  
Conclusion 
In  summary,  markets  inform  and,  in  some  cases,  complement  the  monetary,  supervisory,  and 
regulatory actions of the Federal Reserve. As I hope that I have made clear, the interaction of market 
signals and policy is neither simple nor straightforward. You watch us and react to our actions, while 
simultaneously we monitor you and respond as best we can to the signals you provide about evolving 
economic  and  financial  conditions.  To  do  our  part  in  preventing  the  signals  from  getting  crossed,  I 
believe that we at the Federal Reserve should continue our efforts to make our communications and 
intentions as clear as possible. That may be a tall order, but it is one worthy of our efforts.  
BIS Review 114/2006 
 5
