Y V Reddy: Payment and settlement systems – select issues 
Valedictory  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Regional 
Payment  Systems  Workshop,  organised  jointly  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, Hyderabad, 20 October 2006. 
 Director  Shri  Sharma,  Mr.  Hollanders,  Mr.  O’Connor,  Mr.  Shigang,  Ms.  Christova,  Mr.  Beau  and 
distinguished participants and Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  with  you  this  evening  to  deliver  the  valedictory  address  at  the  Regional 
Payment and Settlement Systems Workshop organised jointly by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and 
the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). Participants from the central banks of 16 countries from 
Africa and Asia have attended this workshop and we had the privilege of having the guest speakers 
from the Bank of Canada, People’s Bank of China, BIS and Bank De France, apart from the speakers 
from the RBI. The schedule of the workshop indicates that a wide gamut of subjects relating to the 
management of payment systems has been deliberated upon in the workshop from different country 
perspectives.  The  association  of  the  BIS  in  organising  the  workshop  as  also  in  providing  faculty 
support would have certainly enriched the deliberations of the workshop. 
I am thankful to the organisers for giving me this opportunity to share my thoughts with you in regard 
to certain issues relating to the payment and settlement systems. 
A  major  challenge  for  countries  like  India  relates  to  the  need  for  achieving  efficiency  in  situations 
where  large-scale  increases  in  the  quantum  and  complexity  of  processing  of  financial  transactions 
occur. Consider the following scenario: Today’s customers are more demanding than ever before; they 
have access to the latest information and have a wide array of options to choose from. Each customer 
would yearn for the best product or service at the least possible cost. Against this backdrop, efficiency 
has  become  critical  if  the  payment  system  has  to  generate  a  high  degree  of  customer  confidence. 
Hence, ensuring safe and expeditious movement of funds at an optimal cost is the key to success of 
all payment system reforms.  
Another challenge faced by the central banks relates to the explosion of technology which has made 
deep inroads into payment and settlement systems. The integration of many hitherto distinct markets 
is  taking  place  at  an  unprecedented  pace  due  to  advancements  in  technology.  Technology 
implementation poses a myriad of issues and options, such as : the choice of optimal technology; the 
costs of its implementation; the high rate of technological obsolescence and the need for periodical 
updation; the advantages and risks of outsourcing; and the convergence of technologies.  
The relatively late adoption of technology by us and the recent initiation of reforms in payment and 
settlement systems have in some way proved to be a sort of blessing in disguise by enabling us to 
take advantage of the experience of the innovators. However, much will depend on the capability to 
leap frog to the state-of-the-art payment and settlement systems. Given the high rate of technology 
absorption  witnessed  in  the  recent  past  in  our  region,  there  is  reason  to  be  optimistic  that  the 
challenges will be met successfully.  
One  of  the  recent  technical  advances  which  has  had  a  significant  positive  impact  on  the  payment 
systems  relates  to  the  chip-based  processing.  Smart  card  chip-impregnated  cards  have  made  their 
presence  felt  everywhere.  These  devices  are  now  used  for  card-based  access  control,  identity 
documents  including  driving  licences, health  cards, phone  cards,  etc.,  but  their  real  potential  lies  in 
storing  monetary  value  for  settlement  purposes.  These  cards  can  also  be  used  for  storing  account 
details, especially for small customers where the cost of servicing them through branch-based banking 
would  be  rather  high,  as  also  for  enabling  the  stored  value  to  be  used  for  payment  for  goods  and 
services  purchased  by  the  card  holder.  One  of  the  advantages  of  these  cards  is  the  built-in 
authentication mechanism which ensures that only the authorised user is able to utilise the card or its 
contents.  These  cards  can  deliver  services  such  as  bio-metric  authorisation  and  digital  signatures 
while providing the convenience of usage to the card holders. Finally, the integration of these smart 
cards with the mobile phones, I understand, holds exciting promises for the future.  
Another related issue is that with a much deeper penetration of mobile telephony across all strata of 
the society, whether the paper-based payment system, a legacy of the past, needs to continue in the 
same manner. Perhaps, the payment and settlement chain may soon witness a sea change with the 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 1
bank account transaction being initiated through a mobile phone, followed, within a few seconds, by 
the inter-bank settlement effected in central bank money. If and when that happens, the benefits would 
accrue to all concerned. 
Closely related to the above is the need for the benchmarks not only to measure performance but also 
to provide a standard for the participants in the system. In a world of inter-operability, necessitated by 
multiple delivery offerings, the co-existence of varied systems is already a reality. This underlines the 
need  for  standards  to  be  evolved,  based  on  international  benchmarks,  but  adapted  to  the  local 
requirements. Such benchmarks could also be quite useful in securing compliance with the Know Your 
Customer  (KYC)  and  Anti  Money  Laundering  (AML)  norms,  monitoring  of  intricate  cross-country 
financial flows as also the operational efficiency of each system in a country. 
Let  me  now  dwell  a  little  on  certain  facets  of  effective  payment  and  settlement  systems.  The 
introduction  of  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  System  by  many  countries  has  not  only 
resulted  in  compliance  with  the  Core  Principles  for  Systemically  Important  Payment  Systems 
enumerated  by  the  BIS,  Basle  but  has  also  paved  the  way  for  risk-free,  credit  push-based  fund 
transfers  settled  on  a  real  time  basis  and  in  the  central  bank  money.  However,  the  liquidity 
requirements for the RTGS are relatively high. Hence, the options are being weighed as to whether 
the liquidity requirements can be tackled by the banks in a cost-effective manner without losing the 
benefits  of  the  RTGS.  A  judicious  mix  of  netting  coupled  with  the  RTGS,  or  a  guaranteed  net 
settlement  are  some  of  the  measures  which  would  obviate  the  risks  involved  in  the  Deferred  Net 
Settlement Systems (DNS). While the RTGS holds great promise, it is possible that the technological 
as well as institutional aspects may result in considerable problems during the phase of transition. 
Our experience with RTGS shows that there are immense benefits but its popularity itself can give rise 
to some operational issues when the system is stabilising. Recently, delays in closing the books by the 
end of the day have been reported. I am informed that several experts are working on the system to 
resolve the problems. We are according highest priority to tackle these operational issues that have 
cropped up in the recent past.  
I  take  this  opportunity  to  endorse  what Shri  Narayana  Murthy, Chairman  and Chief  Mentor,  Infosys 
said while speaking at this forum. He said:  
"According to the RBI, there are about 48,000 public sector bank branches in the country, of which 
over 63 per cent are in semi-urban and rural areas. Though over 70 per cent of the branches have 
attained 100 per cent computerisation, real time gross settlement (RTGS) is available only in 23,500, 
while the national electronic funds transfer covers less than 5,000 branches. Hence, integrating semi-
urban and rural areas into the electronic clearing system was critical". 
I agree that the coverage of the RTGS undoubtedly needs to be expanded over a period. This would 
require  upscaling  of  its  operations  in  terms  of  capacity  and  speed,  for  which  efficient  and  effective 
transition to the RTGS system and its stabilisation would be essential. It is necessary to explore all the 
issues in a comprehensive manner that would arise in rapid upscaling of RTGS in our country. 
Further,  several  strategic measures  may  be  necessary  to  popularise  and  encourage  the  use  of  the 
RTGS by the financial intermediaries, consistent with the efficacy and capacity of the RTGS system. 
We would, no doubt, be happy to gain from your experience and share our experience, in the days to 
come.  
We  have  formulated  a  ‘Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Vision’  document  for  the  use  of  banks, 
financial  institutions  as  well  as  the  general  public.  The  vision  document  outlines  the  short-  and 
medium-term  plans  of  the  Reserve  Bank  for  the  various  payment  and  settlement  systems  in  the 
country. The broad contours outlined in the document enable the banks to plan their initiatives in tune 
with the perspectives laid down in the Vision for the country as a whole.  
It is noted that the spread and reach of the payment services are often confined to certain sections of 
the society especially in the early stages of development. The provision of payment services by the 
banks to all and at affordable rates is an important requirement for a more balanced and equitable 
socio-economic  development.  We,  in  India,  have  been  attempting  an  active  approach  towards 
Financial Inclusion in the recent past. Hence, access to funds transfer services at economical rates to 
the vast majority of the country’s population would be essential for securing financial inclusion as also 
for reducing the dependence on non-banking channels for remittance of funds. Infact, I agree with Shri 
Narayana Murthy when he said:  
2 
 BIS Review 99/2006
"the  retail  payment  systems  need  to  be  improved  by  developing  appropriate  applications  and  user-
friendly websites with simple interfaces and local content".  
Perhaps  knowledge  of  payment  systems  could  be  an  element  of  intensive  campaign  for  financial 
education that RBI intends launching soon. 
An aspect closely related to the above is the need for providing adequate legal backing for transaction 
processing  in  a  high-technology  environment.  Most  of  the  countries  in  the  world  have  a  supporting 
legal framework in place for the purpose, while several others are in the process of enacting statutes 
to meet the requirements of a technology-driven processing environment. In view of the large-scale 
and rapid advances in technology, we are trying to ensure that the legal framework in our country is 
not lagging behind the developments in technology. While the Payment and Settlement Systems Bill, 
2006 is under consideration of the Parliament, the oversight of payment and settlement system was 
initiated under the RBI (Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems) 
Regulations,  2005,  which  have  been  framed  under  the  statutory  provisions  of  the  RBI  Act.  As  and 
when  the  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Bill  is  enacted  in  the  Parliament,  the  enactment  would 
provide a specified and dedicated legal foundation for the regulation and supervision of the payment 
and settlement systems as also legal recognition to netting procedures in the country. 
Given  the  nature  of  developments  in  payment  and  settlement  systems  and  the  role  played  by  the 
Information Technology, we would all stand to gain if we share our experiences amongst ourselves. 
While the expositions such as this seminar provide a valuable platform for exchange of views, ideas 
and information, it would be beneficial if we keep the communication channels going even after we 
return to our respective places, in the true spirit of international cooperation.  
I am confident that together we would not only successfully meet the challenges before us but also 
implement optimal payment and settlement systems for the benefit of our countrymen.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 3
