Shyamala Gopinath: Changing paradigms in risk management  
Special  address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
FICCI-IBA Conference on "Global Banking: Paradigm Shift", Mumbai, 27 September 2006. 
 The world of finance has always had an intuitive understanding of risk. The risks that emerge from the 
increased  variety  and  complexities  of  banking  business,  as well as  from  the  various  new drivers  of 
growth  has  pushed  the  contours  of  risk  management  in  banks  much  beyond  what  would  probably 
have  existed  in  the  more  traditional  forms  of  banking  activity  of  accepting  deposits  and  lending  in 
relatively stable environments. Internationally, the last two decades or so have witnessed significant 
changes in the profile of the banking sector, as well the nature of risk management in banks. What 
perhaps  has  changed  the  nature  of  risk  management,  particularly  are,  inter-alia,  advances  in 
technology  that  have  aided  quantitative  approaches  to  risk  management,  like  models  etc.,  and  the 
increasing volumes of transactions in derivatives and other structured products that are so complex 
that  they  are  often  labeled  “exotic”.  India  too  has  responded  to  this  change,  tempered  with  a 
gradualist, non disruptive approach, that has stood us in good stead over the years. 
In  my  brief  remarks  today,  I  intend  to  first,  highlight  few  of  the  broader  and  more  general  issues 
currently engaging the financial risk management fraternity and then, move to the Indian context in this 
regard.  
I.  
Some general perspectives on risk management 
Quantification  of  risk  and  model  risk:  As  mentioned  earlier,  significant  developments  in  the  area  of 
quantification  of  risk,  has  shifted  focus  to  statistical  aspects  of  risk  management,  especially  to  risk 
modeling and other computational techniques of risk measurement. During the last decade there has 
been a proliferation of academic research on the use of VaR for market risk assessment. Such models 
have  to  be  used  with  some  care  and  serious  examination  of  the  data  used,  especially  the  use  of 
historical data for forecasting future scenarios, the assumptions behind the models, estimation errors 
etc. Further, if intraday positions are not captured it would expose banks to such risks.  
Similarly  in  respect  of  Credit  Risk,  there  is  no  single  ‘‘best  practice’’  model  for  credit  risk  capital 
assessment, although the Basel 2 ‘‘Internal Rating Based’’ methodology provides a portfolio model. 
Bank  managements  will  have  to  focus  on  the  determinants  of  credit  risk  factors,  the  dependency 
between risk factors, the integration of credit risk to market risk, data integrity issues like consistency 
of data over long periods, accuracy and so on. 
Institutions  are  already  mapping  events  to  operational  loss  categories  and  building  warehouses  of 
operational  risk  data  for  implementation  of  Advanced  Measurement  Approaches.  Many  data 
availability and reliability issues still need resolving. An internal loss experience for the important (low 
frequency, high severity) operational risk types is rare and any relevant data are likely to be in the form 
of risk self-assessments and/or external loss experiences. 
Extreme events and stress testing: One of the key roles of the risk management process is to manage 
extreme  events,  such  as  those  associated  with  the  tails  of  statistical  distributions  and  could  have 
probability  of  occurrence  as  low  as  one  percent.  These  are  low  probability  but  high  loss  instances 
associated  with  extreme  operational  events  such  as  rogue  trading  or  accounting  fraud.  The 
importance  of  stress  testing  to  assess  the  impact  of  not  only  these  events  but  also  the  impact  of 
various scenarios is engaging the attention of risk management personnel, academicians and bankers 
alike 
Risk based capital and back-testing: An important reason as to why the quantitative techniques have 
received  so  much  attention,  is  not  because  of  the  intellectual  satisfaction  it  can  give  to  the 
academician but a rather mundane reason that it can be used to convince the regulator that given the 
risks as measured by these techniques the amount of capital required could be far less than that may 
be  stipulated  under  broad  brush,  standardized  techniques.  An  immediate  linkage  between  the  risk 
models, the quantum of risk that is measured by use of these models and the capital that is required to 
support these risks immediately emerge. Estimates of capital being sufficient to meet the risk can be 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 1
only as good as the models are and the credibility of the models would ultimately depend upon their 
actual  performance.  Back  testing  the  models  to  gauge  and  reduce  the  variance  between  the 
deviations  of  the  actual  numbers  from  those  projected  are  largely  relied  upon  to  give  a  degree  of 
comfort to both management of banks and supervisors alike. 
to 
b) 
with 
need 
achieve 
regulatory 
convergence 
Indian perspective 
II.  
Internationally, there has been a continuous coordinated effort under the aegis of institutions like the 
BIS  to  evolve  best  practices  in  risk  management  in  banks  and  these  have  gradually  come  to  be 
accepted as some sort of international standards for banks across the world to benchmark themselves 
to. At the regulatory and supervisory level also, there has been an effort to achieve convergence to the 
best practices set out by the BCBS after duly allowing for national characteristics and feasibility. Banks 
have responded to this initiative with varying levels of effectiveness.  
It was in October 1999, that the Reserve Bank issued guidelines on Risk Management in banks setting 
out its expectations from banks; the guidelines adopted an integrated approach to risk management. 
Even earlier, in February 1999, banks were advised to set up an asset liability management framework 
to manage liquidity and interest rate risk. In this context, I would like to make following observations: 
a) 
The need to accelerate the speed at which banks have been moving towards establishment 
of risk management systems 
The 
expectations/requirements while deciding on the sophistication of methods to be adopted. 
Developing appropriate risk management architecture, MIS and skill enhancement 
The need to integrate risk management process with capital planning strategies 
c) 
d) 
The current business environment, with its pointed emphasis on corporate governance, is making it 
critical for banks to explain their risk profiles publicly with greater clarity and detail than ever before. 
Risk  is  still  a  complex  and  technical  subject,  so  achieving  transparency  will  not  be  easy.  Internal 
constituents,  analysts,  ratings  agencies,  investors,  and  regulators  all  have  varying  levels  of 
understanding of advanced risk measurement techniques. All will require continuing education before 
the market as a whole reaches a common understanding of risk. In particulars, direct stakeholders in 
any  transaction  need  to  be  aware  of  the  risks  involved.  For  the  third  pillar  of  Basle  II  (Market 
Discipline) to be efficacious, it is important that the stakeholders are aware of the risks involved in the 
banks’ transactions and the systems in place to manage the risks. In this context, the importance of an 
appropriateness  policy  for  banks  offering  various  products  to  the  corporate  clients  can't  be  over-
emphasised.  
The  risk  management  systems  developed  by  banks  would  include  a  lot  of  attention  of  top 
management to the suitability of IT structure including issues of connectivity, designing an MIS format 
that  is  risk  focused,  setting  up  an  organization  to  manage  risk  that  ensures  segregation  of  risk 
assessment  from  operations,  frequent  review  of  risk  management  systems  to  ensure  there  is  no 
slippage and last but not the least, to develop appropriate skills within the organization. In this context, 
it  must  be  kept  in  view  that  risk  management  is  not  the  sole  concern  of  the  risk  management 
department but rather a culture that pervades the whole organization with specific support from the top 
management.  
supervisory 
and 
Recent initiatives in risk management 
III.  
In  India,  over  the  years  various  steps  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  the  Risk  Management 
Architecture, both at the bank specific level as well as a broader systemic level.  
ALM guidelines: Most banks have put in place an ALM framework. However there is lot to be done to 
internalize this framework as a part of the overall risk perceptions of the bank and the capital planning 
strategy of the bank. Issues in data infirmity still remain to some extent. In many cases, the ALCO’s 
role remains confined to deciding on interest rates of the bank. This is partly due to lack of decision 
support system available to the ALCO. Availability of impact and scenario analysis of changes in yield 
structures would be a significant enabling factor.  
2 
 BIS Review 89/2006
The Reserve Bank has recently issued draft guidelines to banks with the objective of graduating from 
the current maturity ladder approach prevalent in most banks to a duration gap approach. The later 
approach makes it possible for banks to calculate the modified duration of assets and liabilities, the 
duration gap and duration of equity. The concept of duration of equity gives banks, subject to certain 
limitations,  a  single  number  indicating  the  impact  of  a  one  per  cent  change  of  interest  rate  on  its 
capital, captures the interest rate risk and thereby helps move a step forward towards assessment of 
risk based capital/economic capital.  
Credit  risk:  Another  important  issue  is  that  bank  resources  and  supervisory  resources  have 
concentrated  on  credit  risk  modeling  of  commercial  and  industrial  portfolios,  with  relatively  fewer 
resources  devoted  to  risk  quantification  in  the  retail  credit  area1.  The  possible  reasons  could  be  (i) 
from a systemic perspective, it makes economic sense to devote more resources to evaluating the risk 
factors of larger loans (ii) there is a long history of ratings agency evaluations for publicly traded firms 
which , along with the extensive data available for publicly traded firms, provided an extremely useful 
benchmark for the development of quantification methods for commercial portfolios.  
However, despite this commercial side emphasis, retail credit is a substantial part of the risk borne by 
the  banking  industry,  and  can  not  be  ignored.  Recognizing  this,  over  the  last  decade  or  so,  the 
industry  and  academia  have  devoted  significant  resources  to  developing  more  sophisticated  credit-
scoring models for measuring this risk. Like their counterparts on the commercial side, these models 
also rely heavily on quantitative analysis. 
Derivatives: There has been a spurt of derivatives exposures in the off balance sheet exposures. The 
composition  of  derivatives  portfolio  of  the  banking  system  has  also  undergone  a  significant 
transformation.  Forward  foreign  exchange  contracts  which  accounted  for  around  80%  of  total 
derivatives in March 2002 declined steadily and stood at almost 43% in March 2006 while the share of 
interest rate contracts went up from 19% to 54% during the same period. Foreign currency options 
have  recorded  noticeable  increase  during  the  last  year.  The  share  of  single  currency  interest  rate 
swaps in total derivatives of the banking system has risen sharply from 15% in March 2002 to 53% in 
March 2006.  
The risks arising on account of OBS activities of banks are controlled through a combination of both 
banks’ internal risk management and control policies and risk mitigation mechanism imposed by the 
regulators. The board approved internal control policies covering various aspects of management of 
risks arising both on and off balance sheet exposures constitute the first line of defence to the bank. 
Holding of minimum defined regulatory capital for all OBS exposures, collection of periodic supervisory 
data and incorporating transparency and disclosure requirements in bank balance sheet are some of 
the  major  regulatory  initiatives  undertaken  to  control  and  monitor  OBS  exposures  of  the  banking 
system. 
The  rapid  proliferation  of  derivatives  exposures  inevitably  poses  a  challenge  on  account  of  the 
downside  risks  associated  with  them,  if  not  managed  properly.  There  are  issues  relating  to  use  of 
structured products, valuation, counterparty related issues, risk management and reporting issues and 
last but not the least, training and skill development. While derivatives facilitate risk hedging and risk 
transfer to institutions more willing to bear the risks, the tendency of participants to use derivatives to 
assume excessive leverage, and lack of prudential accounting guidelines are matters of concern.  
One of the features of in the Indian derivative market relates to concentration risk in respect of both 
the  market  makers  (banks)  and  the  corporates.  The  combined  share  of  top  15  banks  has  steadily 
grown from around 74% in March 2002 to 82% of total OBS exposures of the banking system in March 
2006,  of  which  62%  is  accounted  for  by  foreign  banks.  Concentration  of  knowledge  is  another  risk 
which results in the concentration of derivative activity among few players.  
RBI has been stressing on the need to carry out due diligence regarding customer appropriateness 
and suitability of products before offering derivative products to their customers. There is need to use 
risk  mitigation  techniques  such  as  collaterals  and  netting  to  reduce  systemic  risks  and  evolve 
appropriate accounting guidelines.  
                                                      
1   "Credit Risk Modeling: The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's Perspective" Anthony M. Santomero, President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 3
RBI has also issued two separate draft guidelines, one for valuation/accounting of investment portfolio 
in general and the second relating to derivatives. The proposed guidelines attempt to put in place fair 
value  accounting  norms  for  derivatives  broadly  in  line  with  IAS  39,  the  international  accounting 
standard  for  valuation  and  accounting  for  financial  instruments.  For  investments,  the  proposed 
framework  envisages  a  symmetrical  treatment  for  unrealized  gains  and  losses,  with  gains  for  HFT 
being  reflected  in  the  Profit  and  loss  account.  For  AFS,  however,  a  gain  or  loss  on  subsequent 
measurement shall be reflected in ‘Unrealised gain/ loss on AFS portfolio’. Similarly for derivatives, all 
valuation gains and losses are proposed to be routed either through the P&L (for less than 90 days) 
and  or  through  a  new  account  titled  '  Unrealised  gains/losses  on  derivatives'  (90  days  and  more), 
somewhat similar to AFS portfolio. The idea is to bring all derivative transactions 'on-balance sheet' as 
against 'off-balance sheet' as is being done currently.  
Further, in order to address all issues related to derivatives in a comprehensive manner, we are now in 
the  process  of  harmonizing  the  regulatory  prescriptions  based  on  generic  principles  rather  than 
approving specific products.  
Stress testing: The Governor in his Monetary Policy for 2006-07 had stressed the need for banks to 
have robust stress testing process for assessment of capital adequacy given various possible events 
like  economic  downturns,  industrial  downturns,  market  risk  events  and  sudden  shifts  in  liquidity 
conditions. Similarly exposures to sensitive sectors and high risk category of assets would have to be 
subjected  to  more  frequent  stress  tests  based.  Stress  tests  would  enable  banks  to  assess  the  risk 
more accurately and, thereby, facilitate planning for appropriate capital requirements.  
Subsequently RBI has issued draft guidelines on stress testing. These guidelines cover all major risk 
areas viz. market risks, credit risks, operational risks and liquidity funding risk. Banks are required to 
identify an appropriate range of realistic adverse circumstances and events in which the identified risk 
crystallises and estimate the financial resources needed by it under each of the circumstances to : a) 
meet  the  risk  as  it  arises  and  for  mitigating  the  impact  of  manifestation  of  that  risk;  b)  meet  the 
liabilities as they fall due; and c) meet the minimum CRAR requirements. It may be pertinent to note 
that  the  banks  have  been  advised  to  apply  stress  tests  at  varying  frequencies  dictated  by  their 
respective business requirements, relevance and cost.  
Financial conglomerates: There is increasingly a need to extend the framework of risk management to 
the  group  wide  level,  particularly  among  financial  conglomerates.  The  rapid  expansion  of  financial 
services, both in terms of volumes and variety have, as it is, posed a challenge for financial stability. 
This is made all the more difficult by the organisational dimension which perhaps provides scope for 
regulatory  arbitrage.  While  this  could  appear  beneficial  to  the  organisation  in  the  short  run,  it  only 
hightens systemic risk that in turn exposes the institution to externalities which have a cost. There has 
been entry of some banks into other financial segments like merchant banking, insurance and several 
new  players  have  emerged  who  have  a  diversified  presence  across  major  segments  of  financial 
sector.  Some  of  the  non-banking  institutions  in  the  financial  sector  can  acquire  proportions  large 
enough to have a systemic impact. It has, therefore, become necessary not only for the supervisor to 
have a “conglomerate” approach to regulation and supervision but also for banks themselves to put in 
place risk management systems at global levels i.e. for the whole organizational as a whole, rather 
than only the bank level. The risks associated with conglomeration may include: 
1. 
The  moral  hazard  associated  with  the  ‘Too-Big-To-Fail’  position  of  many  financial 
conglomerates; 
Contagion or reputation effects on account of the 'holding out' phenomenon; 
Concerns  about  regulatory  arbitrage,  non-arm’s  length  dealings,  etc.  arising  out  of  Intra-
group Transactions and Exposures (ITEs) both financial and non-financial 
2. 
3. 
It  is  in  this  context  that  the  issue  of  integrated  risk  management,  at  the  enterprise  wide  as  well  as 
group  wide  level,  acquires  significance.  RBI  has  put  in  place  a  framework  for  oversight  of  financial 
conglomerates, along with SEBI and IRDA. Half-yearly discussions have also been initiated with the 
Chief  Executive  Officers  of  the  designated  entities  of  the  conglomerates  to  address  outstanding 
issues/ supervisory concerns.  
IV. To conclude, at the systemic level, efforts have been made to create an enabling environment for 
all  market  participants  in  terms  of  regulation,  infrastructure  and  instruments.  In  this  context,  let  me 
mention about two recent legislative developments that may have far reaching impact on the financial 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2006
markets in India. One is the promulgation of the RBI (Amendment) Act, 2006. A major issue of concern 
in  the  OTC  derivatives  market  in  India  was  the  issue  of  legality.  While  the  Securities  Contract 
Regulation Act, 1956 gave specific legal recognition to derivative instruments traded in the exchanges, 
there  was  no  explicit  legal  recognition  of  OTC  derivatives  in  India.  As  legal  clarity  is  a  basic 
requirement for the healthy development of any market, legality of OTC derivatives was provided by 
an  appropriate  amendment  to  the  RBI  Act,  with  retrospective  effect.  RBI  has  also  been  now 
empowered  to  regulate  the  interest  rate  and  forex  OTC  derivatives  market.  The  second  legislative 
development  pertains  to  the  enactment  of  Government  Securities  Bill.  The  substantive  changes 
brought about in the Government Securities Act are that it provides for hypothecation, pledge and lien 
of  government  securities,  maintenance  of  records  in  electronic  form  and  most  importantly,  enables 
STRIPing of Government securities.  
Further,  during  the  last  few  months,  few  liberalization  measures  have  been  introduced  in  securities 
market, that would surely have a bearing on the risk management practices in the market, the most 
important being introduction of 'when issued' trading and short selling in the G-Sec markets in a limited 
way. Currently the when issued trading is limited to reissuances only. We are examining extending this 
to new issuances also, as requested by market participants.  
What has developed incrementally over the years is now being consolidated and once the regulations, 
infrastructure  and  appropriate  accounting  standards  stabilize,  several  other  initiatives  like  credit 
derivatives could be considered.  
BIS Review 89/2006 
 5
