Seong-Tae Lee: Korea’s experience in relation to macro-prudential supervision 
Luncheon  speech  by  Mr  Seong-Tae  Lee,  Governor  and  Chairman  of  The  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the 
IMF-FSC/FSS International Conference, Seoul, 7 November 2006. 
 Greetings 
I am delighted to see eminent figures from central banks and financial supervisory agencies, together 
with noted scholars from around the world, gathered here at this conference. 
Korea's experience of financial crisis and the importance of macro-prudential supervision 
Today  I  would  like  to  tell you  about  Korea's experience  in  relation  to  the  theme  of  this conference, 
macro-prudential supervision. Over the past ten years, we in Korea have suffered two major episodes 
of financial instability. Let me brief you on what lessons we have drawn from these difficulties. 
When the financial crisis, which took the form of banking and currency crisis, broke out toward the end 
of 1997, financial intermediation contracted abruptly. The economy was plunged into recession with 
the collapse of a large number of companies and financial institutions. The underlying causes of the 
financial  crisis  included  poor  risk  management  of  financial  institutions,  macroeconomic  disequilibria, 
and the lack of a crisis management capacity on the part of the policy authorities. 
Renewed  financial  turmoil  broke  out  in  2003  when  credit  card  companies  were  hit  by  huge  losses. 
Stock  and  bond  prices  tumbled  and  investors  rushed  to  pull  out  of  money-market  funds  that  were 
heavily overweight in bonds issued by credit card companies. 
While  the  1997  crisis  had  been  brought  about  by  the  inability  of  financial  institutions  to  manage 
corporate  sector  risk  adequately,  the  primary  reason  for  the  credit  card  crisis  was  a  failure  of  their 
household-sector  risk  management.  The  instability  was  compounded  by  their  herd  behaviour  in 
expanding their share of the household credit market. 
In fact, these two financial disturbances were overcome within a fairly short space of time thanks to the 
bold and decisive restructuring of financial institutions and companies, and the supply of liquidity by 
the central bank to deal with the credit crunch. 
The  aftershocks  of  these  crises,  though,  rumbled  on  for  a  long  time  and  they  still  weigh  down  the 
dynamism of the Korean economy. 
In the course of the crises, the labour market worsened and household credit delinquencies increased. 
This resulted in a prolonged contraction in consumer spending. Firms became extremely risk averse in 
their investment behaviour, and this has weakened the growth potential of the economy. 
Considering that the objective of macro-prudential surveillance is to support the stable growth of the 
economy by ensuring the stability of the financial system, I think that Korea's experience over the last 
ten years underlines just how important macro-prudential surveillance really is. 
The importance of a micro-prudential perspective 
It  goes  without  saying  that  the  soundness  of  individual  financial  institutions,  in  other  words  the 
micro-prudential perspective, plays a key part in ensuring financial stability. Given banks' crucial role in 
financial intermediation, their soundness, above all, is essential to financial stability. 
I think that the example I mentioned earlier of the troubles of Korea's credit card companies shows the 
vital  importance  of  banks'  soundness.  Even  though  most  credit  card  companies  faced  a  serious 
weakening of their balance sheets, we were able to avoid a severe credit crunch thanks to the fact that 
banks' profitability and capital adequacy were, by then, much higher than in 1997. 
From  the  brink  of  failure  in  1997,  Korean  banks  had  improved  their  balance  sheets  and  capital 
adequacy to a favourable level within a few years. This owed much both to the thoroughgoing financial 
reforms and to the financial supervisory agencies' drive to impose stricter standards of supervision. It 
BIS Review 114/2006 
 1
is now well known how we overcame the financial crisis, so let us now leave it behind us and move on 
to what lies ahead. 
Tasks ahead 
The soundness of individual Korean financial institutions has made such great strides over the past 
ten  years  and  there  is  now  a  much  greater  recognition  of  the  importance  of  macro-prudential 
surveillance. Having said that, we face new challenges in maintaining financial stability. 
In contrast to the real sector, the financial sector is intrinsically unstable. What is more, the progress in 
information technology, together with the advances in financial liberalisation and globalisation, have 
brought us increasingly sophisticated financial tools. Financial linkages running between markets and 
between  countries  have  also  deepened  greatly.  This  means  that  risk  factors  we  have  never  faced 
before continue to rise up. 
In such circumstances, financial stability is not easily attained. It is, however, absolutely essential for 
the sustained growth of the economy together with price stability. 
As I draw close to the end of my remarks, let me touch on some directions for further development in 
Korea to heighten the stability of the financial system, which is the common goal of both micro- and 
macro-prudential surveillance. 
Firstly, a broad and diverse range of factors may affect financial markets and institutions. If we are to 
maintain financial stability, we have to consolidate our efforts to build up a framework of cooperation 
and an appropriate division of roles between the authorities involved. These include the central bank, 
the finance ministry and the financial supervisory agencies. 
Secondly, information asymmetry is one of the major factors working to increase financial instability so 
we  must  strengthen  our  efforts  to  heighten  the  transparency  of  the  accounting  and  management 
information of financial institutions. 
Lastly, financial market players tend strongly toward herd behaviour, which fosters the accumulation of 
risk factors and the spread of crises. In order to calm this galloping herd, the policy authorities should 
provide appropriate information on market conditions, so that players can decide upon the level of risk 
they wish to accept from a long-term and system-wide perspective. 
Concluding remarks 
So  far,  I've  briefly  dealt  with  our  experience  of  financial  crises  and  the  importance  of  macro-  and 
micro-prudential surveillance, together with the tasks ahead. I am sure that this conference will provide 
a great opportunity to build up an effective framework for financial stability. 
Thank you for listening so attentively. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2006
