Ben S Bernanke: The Chinese economy – progress and challenges  
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, 15 December 2006.  
 The emergence of China as a global economic power is one of the most important developments of 
recent  decades.  For  the  past  twenty  years,  the  Chinese  economy  has  achieved  a  growth  rate 
averaging nearly 10 percent per year, resulting in a quintupling of output per person. In overall size, 
China's  economy  today  ranks  as  the  fourth  largest  in  the  world  in  terms  of  gross  domestic  product 
(GDP)  at  current  exchange  rates  and  the  second  largest  when  adjustments  are  made  for  the 
differences  in  the  domestic  purchasing  power  of  national  currencies.  This  strong  economic 
performance has resulted in improved living standards for the Chinese people. By some estimates, 
about  200  million  Chinese  have  been  brought  out  of  poverty  since  the  reforms  began  in  1978.1 
Moreover,  by  2004  life  expectancy  at  birth  in  China  had  reached  seventy-one  years,  the  infant 
mortality rate had fallen to 26 per 1,000 live births, and the literacy rate of those aged fifteen or above 
had reached 90 percent.2 These are remarkable accomplishments. 
Nonetheless,  by  most  measures  China  remains  a  developing  nation.3  In  particular,  although  life  in 
some  urban  centers  is  typical  of  a  modern,  affluent  society,  average  household  incomes  and 
consumption remain quite low in rural and inland areas. Thus, China faces the double challenge of 
sustaining a high and stable overall rate of economic growth while stimulating economic development 
in parts of the country that have shared less fully in the economic boom. In my remarks today, I would 
like to offer a few thoughts on how China can continue to prosper and promote the economic welfare 
of its people. 
Economic progress: markets and productivity 
Economists agree that the most important determinant of living standards in a country is the average 
level of productivity, or output per worker. On this score as well, China's record in recent decades is 
excellent. Between 1978, when the Open Door policy reforms began, and 1989, output per employed 
person  in  China  grew  vigorously,  at  an  estimated  average  rate  of  about  6-1/2  percent  per  year. 
However,  from  1990  to  2005,  productivity  grew  at  an  even  more  impressive  rate  of  9  percent  per 
year.4  
Many factors have contributed to this strong productivity performance, including high rates of capital 
investment, increasing openness to trade, and a strengthening of the educational system.5 However, 
in my view, the single most important cause of the ongoing expansion in productivity is that China has 
moved, gradually but steadily, away from central planning and toward a greater reliance on markets. In 
1978, almost no prices in China were determined by the market, and most production was controlled 
or directed by the state. Since then, the government has reduced its direct intervention in the economy 
and scaled back state-owned enterprises, in the process allowing more scope for market forces. By 
1999,  according  to  one  estimate,  about  95  percent  of  retail  business,  together  with  more  than  80 
percent of trade in agricultural commodities and producer goods, was conducted at market-determined 
prices.6  
                                                      
1   Bergsten and others ( 2006), p. 3. 
2   World Bank (2006). 
3   For example, according to 2005 data from the International Monetary Fund's World Economic Outlook database, China's 
per capita GDP is about one-sixth of that of the United States on a purchasing-power-parity basis and about one twenty-fifth 
that of the United States at current exchange rates. 
4   Productivity  growth  rates  are  calculated  by  Federal  Reserve  Board  staff  using  Chinese  data  on  output  and  employment. 
Productivity can be difficult to measure, and so these figures should be treated as approximate. A new method for surveying 
employment was introduced in 1990, resulting in a break in the series in that year. 
5   See, for example, chapter 2 of Bergsten and others (2006) for a discussion of why China has grown so rapidly. 
6   Lardy (2002), p. 25. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 1
Substantial  experience  has  shown  that  modern  economies,  including  those  in  early  stages  of 
development, are too complex to be managed effectively on a centralized basis. Prices set in free and 
competitive  markets  serve  several  critical  functions,  among  them  aggregating  disparate  information 
about  supply  and  demand  conditions  and  the  relative  scarcities  of  specific  goods  and  services; 
directing resources to their most productive uses; and providing incentives to engage in cost reduction, 
innovation, and entrepreneurial activities.  
A free market for labor is particularly critical for sustained economic development. China has made 
substantial progress in this area over the past few decades, most notably by reducing barriers to the 
movement  of  workers  among  regions,  sectors,  and  firms  and  by  allowing  greater  flexibility  in  the 
determination of employment and wages.7 Indeed, the ongoing movement of workers from relatively 
low-productivity, low-wage jobs in agriculture to higher-productivity, higher-wage jobs in manufacturing 
and services has been a significant source of Chinese economic growth. The decline in the share of 
the  population  in  rural  areas,  from  more  than  80  percent  in  1970  to  less  than  60  percent  in  2005, 
indicates the scale of the movement of labor out of agriculture in recent decades. 
Despite  these  shifts,  differences  in  labor  productivity  among  sectors  remain  large.  For  example,  in 
2005,  estimated  output  per  worker  in  agriculture  and  related  sectors  was  about  $800,  whereas  in 
industries such as manufacturing, utilities, and mining, output per worker was about $5,900, more than 
seven  times  as  much.8  Moreover,  a  considerable  portion  of  China's  labor  force  (specifically,  in 
agriculture  and  in  inefficient  state-owned  enterprises)  remains  underutilized.  Thus,  substantial 
additional  gains  in  productivity  for  the  economy  as  a  whole  might  be  realized  through  the  further 
reallocation  of  the  labor  force  to  more  productive  and  growing  sectors.  In  particular,  small-  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  are  emerging  as  an  engine  of  job  creation  in  China  -  as  they  are  in  the 
United States - even as they promote innovation and help to create a more dynamic and diversified 
economy. The government can support the process of reallocating labor to more productive uses by 
continuing to reduce barriers to labor mobility, helping workers obtain the education and training they 
need  to  be  productive  in  new  occupations,  and  encouraging  entrepreneurship  and  small-business 
development. 
As  significant  as  the  reallocation  of  labor  among  sectors  has  been,  more  of  the  improvement  in 
productivity in recent years has resulted from increasing efficiencies within the major sectors rather 
than from the reallocation of resources between sectors. Here again, markets and competition have 
played  a  vital  role.  In  particular,  the  opening  of  the  economy  to  international  trade  and  investment, 
which has accelerated since China's accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001, has done 
much  to  harness  market  forces  in  the  service  of  the  country's  development.  Exposure  to  the 
competition  of  the  global  marketplace  has  forced  Chinese  producers  -  alone  or  in  partnership  with 
foreign  firms  -  to  increase  their  efficiency  and  improve  the  quality  of  their  output.  Notably, 
globally-engaged firms (or their affiliates) operating in China have helped to foster productivity growth 
in the country by introducing new technologies and managerial techniques, as well as by enhancing 
domestic competition. 
Although the expansion of the market-based portion of the economy has yielded impressive results, 
further gains could be achieved by allowing still greater scope for market forces. The energy sector 
presents one such opportunity. As you know, China's appetite for energy has grown rapidly: China's 
consumption  of  oil  has  risen  by  more  than  50  percent  since  2000,  and  the  International  Energy 
Agency  estimates  that Chinese  oil  usage  has  increased  by  about  400,000  barrels  per day  in  2006, 
representing nearly half of this year's growth in world oil demand. This rapid expansion in energy use 
reflects  both  overall  economic  growth  and  a  relatively  energy-intensive  pattern  of  development. 
Greater use of market pricing in the energy sector, including the elimination of remaining price controls 
on fuels and the liberalization of electricity prices, would support cleaner, sustainable economic growth 
by  promoting  more-efficient  use  of  energy  by  households  and  firms  and  by  encouraging  the 
development of new energy supplies.9 
                                                      
7   Brooks (2004) provides details of some of the labor market developments in China in recent years.  
8   Calculations  use  current  exchange  rates  and  are  based  on  output  and  employment  data  from  the  National  Bureau  of 
Statistics of China and the Chinese State Statistical Office; most data from Chinese national sources are obtained from the 
CEIC database. 
9   The adverse effects on poor households of eliminating price controls on fuels would best be dealt with through direct cash 
grants. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2006
Significant  benefits  could  also  be  obtained  by  allowing  a  larger  role  for  market  forces  in  guiding 
investment decisions. China's economic growth owes much to the extraordinary share of GDP that is 
devoted to investment in new capital, such as factories, equipment, and office buildings, which is partly 
financed by a very large amount of business saving.10 However, the rapid pace of investment growth 
raises  concerns  about  whether  new  capital  is  being  deployed  in  the  most  productive  ways.  In 
particular,  some  analysts  have  questioned  whether  China  is  getting  an  adequate  return  on  its 
investment. For example, from 1990 to 2001, fixed investment as a share of GDP in China averaged 
about 33 percent, and the economy grew at an annual rate of 10 percent. Between 2001 and 2005, 
fixed  investment's  share  of  GDP  rose  to  about  40  percent,  but  the  economy's  average  growth  rate 
remained about the same, suggesting a lower return to the more recent investment. Comparisons can 
also be drawn to the rapid development phases of other Asian countries, such as South Korea and 
Japan.  Average  annual  growth  was  between  9  and  10  percent  in  South  Korea  during  the  1982-91 
period  and  in  Japan  during  the  1955-70  period;  but  for  both  countries  during  the  relevant  years 
investment's share of GDP was about 30 percent, lower than it is in China today. In a few Chinese 
industries, heavy investments have continued even as signs of excess capacity have begun to appear 
- another possible indication of capital misallocation. An example is the steel industry, in which excess 
capacity appears to have tripled between 2002 and 2005 to reach more than 115 million metric tons.11 
Allowing  competitive  financial  markets  to  play  a  larger  role  in  the  allocation  of  capital  would  likely 
increase the returns to investment and reduce the risk that uneconomic investments could exacerbate 
the  problem  of  nonperforming  loans  and  contribute  to  future  financial  instability.  Basing  investment 
decisions on market signals also takes better account of the costs of inputs complementary to capital, 
such as labor (relatively abundant in China) and energy (relatively scarce).12  
China  has  taken  initial  steps  toward  a  greater  reliance  on  markets  for  determining  the  allocation  of 
investment - for example, by authorizing and beginning to liberalize the stock market. China has also 
strengthened  its  banking  system  by  improving  supervision,  confronting  the  enormous  problem  of 
nonperforming loans, allowing domestic institutions to partner with foreign banks, and increasing the 
use of market-based criteria in bank lending. These trends are positive; however, a great deal more 
remains to be done, including broadening the range of financial instruments available to savers and 
borrowers;  taking  further  steps  to  ensure  that  credit  evaluation  and  extension  are  based  on  sound 
economic  criteria;  increasing  competition  in  banking  and  finance;  improving  credit  availability  for 
consumers and smaller firms; removing the remaining controls on interest rates; and eliminating the 
use of quantitative and administrative measures to influence the amount and composition of capital 
investment.  Finally,  capital  markets  require  an  appropriate  institutional  foundation  to  function 
effectively: Well-defined property rights (including intellectual property rights), transparent accounting 
standards,  good  corporate  governance,  effective  supervisory  oversight  of  banks  and  markets,  the 
consistent  enforcement  of  contracts,  and  rules  that  allow  for  orderly  bankruptcy  proceedings  for 
unprofitable  firms  all  help  to  support  efficient  investment.  China  has  made  progress  in  developing 
these critical institutions, but continued focus on these areas would provide large economic benefits in 
the long run. 
Macroeconomic policy 
Moving from microeconomics to macroeconomics, I believe that China could benefit by improving its 
tools  for  managing  the  economy  -  notably,  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  Effective  use  of 
macroeconomic policy tools can help achieve low and stable inflation and increase economic stability 
by moderating the effects on growth of temporary fluctuations in global or domestic demand. Stable 
economic  conditions  reduce  an  important  source  of  risk  and  consequently  promote  innovation  and 
growth. As a central banker, I will focus my remarks on the development of monetary policy.13  
                                                      
10   World Bank researchers have concluded that business saving now finances the majority of business investment in China 
(Kuijs, 2005). Some have questioned this (Shan, 2006). For a discussion of the issues involved in the debate, see Hoffman 
and Kuijs (2006). 
11   Based on production and capacity data provided by the National Bureau of Statistics. 
12   Market-based  allocations  of  capital  do  not  take  into  account  environmental  and  other  external  effects,  unless  additional 
mechanisms such as tradable pollution permits are employed. 
13   Goodfriend and  Prasad (2006) provides a good  description of  the banking and financial systems  of China and of  issues 
regarding the implementation of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 3
The People's Bank of China (PBOC), the nation's central bank, is capable and well-respected around 
the  world.  However,  monetary  policy  can  work  well  only  to  the  extent  that  financial  markets  are 
sufficiently  developed  to  allow  the  monetary  authorities'  interest-rate  decisions  to  affect  economic 
activity  in  a  reasonably  predictable  way.  The  development  of  a  reliable  "monetary  transmission 
mechanism"  is  thus  another  reason  to  reform  and  strengthen  China's  banks  and  financial  markets. 
The  more  interest-sensitive  that  borrowing  and  investment  decisions  are,  the  more  monetary  policy 
can  affect  investment  and  aggregate  demand  without  the  need  for  quantitative  controls.  Moreover, 
when  funds  are  allocated  on  market  principles,  only  those  projects  with  an  expected  risk-adjusted 
return that is higher than the relevant market rate of interest will be undertaken. Thus, for example, if 
the central bank raises interest rates, the market will ensure that the resulting slowing of investment 
will be borne by the least promising projects, without the need for officials to make such judgments. 
The  effectiveness  of monetary  policy would  also be  enhanced by  greater  flexibility  in  the  exchange 
rate. To maintain the current close link of the renminbi (RMB) to the dollar in the presence of capital 
inflows  (arising  from  China's  trade  surplus  or  from foreign  purchases  of  RMB-denominated  assets), 
the PBOC must intervene in the exchange market to buy dollars with RMB. Increases in the domestic 
money supply will result unless the central bank offsets the effects of these purchases on the money 
supply by selling bonds to investors, primarily commercial banks, in exchange for RMB - a procedure 
commonly  referred  to  as  "sterilization."  If  dollar  purchases  by  the  central  bank  were  not  routinely 
sterilized, the money supply might increase more than desired, possibly leading to an overheating of 
the economy and inflation.  
To date the PBOC has been largely successful in its sterilization operations, but if it continues to use 
this strategy it will eventually encounter problems. If the exchange rate and the domestic interest rate 
are  maintained  near  their  current  levels,  the  incentives  for  capital  inflows  -  and  thus  the  need  for 
continued  intervention  and  sterilization  -  will  remain  undiminished.  Accordingly,  the  value  of 
outstanding  sterilization  bonds  will  continue  to  grow  rapidly.  These  bonds  could  substitute  for  other 
assets that might be held by banks and private investors, potentially interfering with the growth and 
development of private financial markets. Further, the perception that the RMB is undervalued (a point 
to which I will return) has fueled additional capital inflows, as investors expect to earn capital gains 
when the RMB ultimately appreciates. However, these speculative inflows only increase the need for 
exchange-market intervention and sterilization. 
In  the  longer  term,  the  continued  growth  and  modernization  of  the  Chinese  economy  will  require  a 
substantial loosening of current restrictions on the flow of financial capital into and out of the country. 
However,  if  fluctuations  in  the  value  of  the  RMB  remain  limited  within  a  narrow  range,  permitting 
substantial capital mobility would almost entirely eliminate the PBOC's capacity to use monetary policy 
to stabilize the domestic economy, as any excess of Chinese over dollar interest rates, for example, 
would  trigger  large  capital  inflows.  Further  appreciation  of  the  RMB,  combined  with  a  wider  trading 
band and with the ultimate goal of a market-determined exchange rate, would allow an effective and 
independent monetary policy and thereby help to enhance China's future growth and stability.  
From  an  institutional  perspective,  China  may  find  -  as  many  countries  have  done  -  that  granting 
greater autonomy to the central bank, by insulating it to a degree from short-term political concerns, 
increases its ability to ensure price stability and support stable growth. Of course, central banks must 
remain accountable to governments over the longer term. 
Trade, capital flows, and the transition to domestically-led growth 
A  central  component  of  China's  development  strategy  has  been  its  openness  to  trade  and  capital 
inflows.  For  example,  the  value  of  goods  exports  and  imports  currently  equals  about  two-thirds  of 
China's GDP, a high level for a country of China's geographic size. China's accession to the World 
Trade Organization (WTO) has been particularly effective in stimulating trade: Since joining the WTO 
in 2001, China has seen the dollar value of its exports grow at an average rate of about 30 percent per 
year, compared with annual growth of about 12-1/2 percent over the five years before gaining WTO 
membership. China currently accounts for about 7-1/2 percent of world exports, up from 1-1/2 percent 
in 1985. About half of China's trade is so-called processing trade; that is, components and materials 
are imported (mostly from other Asian countries), processing or assembly is done in China, and the 
finished product is re-exported. Much economic research has shown that openness to trade promotes 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2006
growth.14 Trade supports growth not only through the classical principle of comparative advantage, but 
also through the effects of trade on the intensity of market competition, transfers of technology and 
knowledge, and other factors. 
China  has  also  proved  successful  in  attracting  capital  inflows,  particularly  foreign  direct  investment 
(FDI). The flow of FDI into China increased from about $2 billion in 1986 to $72 billion in 2005, making 
the  country  the  third  largest  recipient  of  FDI  in  the  world,  after  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United 
States.15  FDI  benefits  China's  development  by  bringing  with  it  new  technologies,  products,  and 
business  methods.16  The  flow  of  foreign  investments  in  Chinese  securities  has  also  increased 
significantly, reaching $22 billion in 2005. 
As you know, China today is running substantial trade and current account surpluses. These external 
surpluses  are  caused  in  part  by  China's  remarkably  high  saving  rate.17  Because  China's  national 
saving rate is even higher than its rate of domestic investment, the country has excess funds to lend in 
the global capital market; it follows from the balance-of-payments accounts that China's net lending 
abroad  (or  its  acquisition  of  foreign  assets)  equals  the  country's  current  account  surplus.  A  large 
portion of this lending finances foreigners' purchases of Chinese net exports (the trade surplus). High 
household  saving  and  the  corresponding  low  level  of  consumption  in  China  contribute  to  the  trade 
surplus  by  depressing  the  demand  for  imports  and  by  forcing  domestic  firms  to  look  abroad  for 
markets.  
Together with the large trade and current account deficits of the United States, the Chinese external 
surpluses  are  contributing  to  the  current  pattern  of  global  imbalances,  which  many  economists  and 
policymakers have argued are unsustainable in the long run. The Chinese leadership has recognized 
the importance of encouraging imports and achieving greater balance in China's international trade, 
having recently included these objectives in the Five-Year Plan for 2006-2010. In my view, not only 
would China's achieving smaller external balances contribute to global financial stability, it would also 
be in China's economic interest. 
Although  China's  extensive  participation  in  the  global  trading  and  financial  systems  has  been 
invaluable for the country's development, the ultimate purpose of economic growth is to improve living 
standards at home. Today, about half of China's GDP is devoted to investment and to producing net 
exports  for  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  thus  only  the  remaining  half  is  available  for  consumption, 
including government consumption. In particular, household consumption in China last year was only 
38 percent of GDP, down from 45 percent in 2001. In comparison, household consumption was about 
60 percent of GDP in India in 2004, according to the most recent available data. China's low share of 
consumption in GDP is, of course, the counterpart of its high national saving rate.  
Policies aimed at increasing household consumption would clearly benefit the Chinese people, notably 
by improving standards of living and allowing the fruits of economic development to be shared more 
widely. Such policies, by reducing saving and increasing imports, would also serve to reduce China's 
current account and trade surpluses.18 Putting greater reliance on domestic demand rather than net 
exports to drive growth would also decrease China's vulnerability to fluctuations in global demand. 
How  can  China  direct  a  greater  share  of  its  output  to  domestic  consumption?  Again,  increased 
flexibility in the exchange rate could help. As the Chinese trade surplus has continued to widen, many 
analysts  have  concluded  that  the  RMB  is  undervalued.19  Indeed,  the  situation  has  likely  worsened 
recently; because of the RMB's link to the dollar, its trade-weighted effective real exchange rate has 
                                                      
14   See, for example, Sachs and Warner (1995), Frankel and Romer (1999), and Wacziarg (2001). 
15   In 2005, the United Kingdom surpassed both China and the United States as the largest recipient of FDI in the world. In 
2004, China ranked second after the United States. 
16   For a discussion of the relationship between FDI and economic growth in China, see Zebregs (2002). 
17   China's national saving rate was 41 percent in 2003 and 47 percent in 2005, according to IMF figures. As of 2003, the latest 
date for which detailed data are available, households accounted for 42 percent of domestic saving, with firms (including 
state-owned  enterprises)  and  government  accounting  for  36  percent  and  22  percent  of  domestic  saving,  respectively 
(National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2006). 
18   See Lardy (2006), for example, for a careful discussion of the need for reorientation of Chinese growth toward consumption. 
19   See,  for  example,  Goldstein  (2004)  and  Anderson  (2006).  Dunaway  and  others  (2006)  provide  a  useful  analysis  of  the 
sensitivity of the Chinese equilibrium real exchange rate to alternative approaches and assumptions commonly used. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 5
fallen about 10 percent over the past five years.20 Allowing the RMB to strengthen would make imports 
of  consumer goods  (as well  as  capital  goods)  into China  less  expensive.  Greater scope  for  market 
forces to determine the value of the RMB would also reduce an important distortion in the Chinese 
economy, namely, the effective subsidy that an undervalued currency provides for Chinese firms that 
focus on exporting rather than producing for the domestic market. A decrease in this effective subsidy 
would induce more firms to gear production toward the home market, benefiting domestic consumers 
and firms. Reducing the implicit subsidy to exports could increase long-term financial stability as well: 
If China invests too heavily in export industries whose economic viability depends on undervaluation of 
the exchange rate, a future appreciation of the RMB could lead to excess capacity in those industries, 
resulting in low returns and an increase in nonperforming loans.  
Although more flexibility in the exchange rate would be helpful, the most direct and probably the most 
effective way to reduce the external surpluses and increase the welfare of Chinese households is to 
take measures to reduce domestic saving relative to domestic investment.21 Why is domestic saving 
so high at present? The high saving rate of households, even very poor households, likely reflects the 
relatively  thin  "social  safety  net"  in  China.  For  example,  only  about  14  percent  of  the  population  is 
covered by health insurance, and pension plans (which, in any case, replace only about 20 percent of 
pre-retirement  earnings)  apply  to  only  about  16  percent  of  the  economically  active  population.22 
Combined  expenditures  by  the  central  government  and  local  governments  on  education,  health, 
pensions and relief, and social security amount to only about 4 percent of GDP, lower than most other 
countries at similar income levels. In the absence of a stronger social safety net, Chinese households 
save  at  high  rates  to  protect  themselves  against  risks  such  as  unexpected  medical  expenses  and 
poverty in old age. 
A sustained program of expanding social services has the potential for reducing saving and raising 
living standards in China and, at the same time, moderating China's external surpluses. In particular, 
increased government spending on health, education, and other types of social services would raise 
both household consumption and government consumption, and thus reduce national saving. As one 
means  of  helping  to  fund  the  increase  in  social  expenditures,  state-owned  enterprises  could  be 
required  to  pay  larger  dividends  to  the  government,  a  measure  which  I  understand  to  be  currently 
under consideration. Financial reforms that increase the access of households to mortgages, private 
insurance, and other forms of consumer finance would also support higher rates of consumption.  
As I have noted, the Chinese leadership has made reducing the trade and current account surpluses 
an  important  policy  objective.  Further,  recognizing  that  achieving  these  goals  would  be  greatly 
facilitated by increases in consumption and in the social safety net, the government has instituted or 
proposed  various  reductions  in  taxes  and  increases  in  social  spending.  The  government  has  also 
announced  an  effort  to  raise  living  standards  in  rural  and  inland  areas.  Obviously,  it  is  too  early  to 
judge  the  success  of  these  initiatives.  However,  these  efforts  are  constructive  and  deserving  of 
support. 
Conclusion 
As I have discussed today, China has made remarkable economic progress since the reforms began 
in  1978.  Greater  use  of  markets,  together  with  expanding  trade  and  capital  flows,  has  helped  to 
increase growth in output and productivity, which in turn has increased living standards significantly. A 
still-greater  reliance  on  markets,  particularly  for  allocating  capital  investment,  would  contribute  to  a 
continuation  of  strong  economic  growth.  Further  development  of  macroeconomic  policy  tools  would 
also support healthy growth by keeping inflation low and by increasing economic stability. 
China also faces some significant risks and imbalances. The principal risk arises from the likelihood 
that capital is not being allocated as efficiently as possible, the result of an undervalued exchange rate 
and of capital markets that, despite positive steps, remain distorted and underdeveloped. Misallocated 
capital  will  not  pay  the  highest  possible  returns,  leading  potentially  to  slower  growth  and  future 
financial  stress.  In  addition,  monetary policy  may  be  constrained  by  the  lack  of  a  reliable  monetary 
                                                      
20   The estimate is by Federal Reserve Board staff for the period from November 2001 to November 2006. 
21   Kuijs (2006) documents the sources and composition of saving and investment in China. 
22   Bergsten and others (2006), p.28. 
6 
 BIS Review 124/2006
transmission mechanism and by the relative inflexibility of the exchange rate, which inhibit the central 
bank's ability to keep inflation low and to stabilize the economy. 
The  principal  imbalance  lies  in  the  composition  of  Chinese  GDP,  which  is  heavily  tilted  toward 
investment and net exports and away from domestic consumption and government provision of social 
services.  A  better  balance  would  improve  the  welfare  of  the  Chinese  people  (by  increasing 
consumption  and  social  services)  and  would  increase  global  financial  stability  (by  reducing  China's 
current  account  and  trade  surpluses).  The  Chinese  government  has  undertaken  to  reduce  this 
imbalance by taking measures to expand domestic demand, especially household consumption, and I 
hope that these efforts will be successful. 
China's development and its opening up to the global economy have also benefited the United States 
in many ways. China is now the second-largest source of U.S. imports; these imports boost U.S. real 
incomes  by  allowing  U.S.  households  to  purchase  consumption  goods  and  U.S.  firms  to  purchase 
intermediate inputs at lower cost. China is also a growing market for investment and exports by U.S. 
firms. Since China joined the WTO, U.S. exports to China have more than doubled. As China develops 
further,  its  households  and  firms  will  demand  a  greater  variety  of  goods  and  services,  enhancing 
opportunities for producers in industrial countries, including the United States. At the same time, trade 
-  with  all  its  benefits  -  does  displace  some  workers  and  firms  as  patterns  of  production  and 
consumption change. The policy challenge for the United States is to help those who are adversely 
affected by trade while preserving the broad gains that openness to trade provides for the economy as 
a whole. 
The economic relationship between China and the United States is of extraordinary importance, and 
both countries have much to gain from interactions with each other. Serious challenges exist as well, 
requiring both countries to address such areas as energy, the environment, intellectual property rights, 
and global imbalances. Regarding global imbalances, I have discussed means by which China can 
reduce its contribution to the imbalances while encouraging domestic consumption. The United States 
must  also  do  its  part,  in  particular  by  increasing  its  own  rate  of  national  saving  and  by  avoiding 
protectionism.  With  greater  integration  come  greater  interdependence  and  greater  responsibility.  I 
hope  that  our  countries  will  work  together  in  a  spirit  of  cooperation  to  address  these  shared 
challenges.  
References 
Anderson,  Jonathan  (2006).  "The  Complete  RMB  Handbook,"  4th  ed.,  UBS  Investment  Research, 
Asian Economic Perspectives, September. 
Bergsten,  Fred  C.,  Bates  Gill,  Nicholas  R.  Lardy,  and  Derek  Mitchell  (2006).  China,  The  Balance 
Sheet: What the World Needs to Know Now about the Emerging Superpower. New York: PublicAffairs.  
Brooks,  Ray  (2004).  "Labor  Market  Performance  and  Prospects,"  in  Eswar  Prasad,  ed.,  China's 
Growth and Integration into the World Economy: Prospects and Challenges. Washington: International 
Monetary Fund, pp. 51-61.  
Dunaway, Steven, Lamin Leigh, and Xiangming Li (2006). "How Robust are Estimates of Equilibrium 
Real  Exchange  Rates:  The  Case  of  China,"  IMF  Working  Paper  06/220.  Washington:  International 
Monetary Fund, October.  
Frankel,  Jeffrey  A.,  and  David  Romer  (1999).  "Does  Trade  Cause  Growth?"  American  Economic 
Review, vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99.  
Goldstein,  Morris  (2004).  "Adjusting  China's  Exchange  Rate  Policies,"  paper  presented  at  the 
International Monetary Fund's Seminar on China's Foreign Exchange System, held in Dalian, China, 
May 26-27.  
Goodfriend,  Marvin,  and  Eswar  Prasad  (2006).  "A  Framework  for  Independent  Monetary  Policy  in 
China," IMF Working Paper, 06/111. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May.  
Hoffman, Bert, and Louis Kuijs (2006). "Profits Drive China's Boom," Far Eastern Economic Review, 
vol. 169 (October), pp. 39-43.  
Kuijs,  Louis  (2005).  "Investment  and  Saving  in  China,"  World  Bank  Policy  Research  Paper  3633. 
Washington: World Bank, June.  
BIS Review 124/2006 
 7
__________  (2006).  "How  Will  China's  Saving-Investment  Balance  Evolve?"  World  Bank  Policy 
Research Paper 3958. Washington: World Bank, July.  
Lardy,  Nicholas  R.  (2002).  Integrating  China  into  the  Global  Economy.  Washington:  Brookings 
Institution Press.  
___________  (2006).  "China:  Toward  a  Consumption-Driven  Growth  Path,"  Policy  Briefs  in 
International Economics, P806-6. Washington: Institute for International Economics, October.  
National Bureau of Statistics of China (2006).  China Statistical Yearbook, 25th ed., China Statistics 
Press.  
Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner (1995). "Economic Convergence and Economic Policies," 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1, pp.1-95.  
Shan, Weijian (2006). "The World Bank's China Delusions," Far Eastern Economic Review, vol. 169 
(September), pp.29-32.  
Wacziarg,  Romain  (2001).  "Measuring  the  Dynamic  Gains  from  Trade,"  World  Bank  Economic 
Review, vol. 15 (September), pp.393-429.  
World  Bank 
www.devdata.worldbank.org/wdi2006/contents/home.htm. 
Zebregs, Harm (2002). "Foreign Direct Investment and Output Growth," in Wanda Tseng and Markus 
Rodlauer, eds., China: Competing in the Global Economy. Washington: International Monetary Fund, 
pp. 89-100.  
"On-Line  China  Country  Profile,"  World  Development 
Indicators, 
(2006). 
8 
 BIS Review 124/2006
