Mario Draghi: Education and economic growth 
Lectio  Magistralis  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  inauguration  of  the 
100th academic year, University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Economic Faculty, Rome, 9 November 2006. 
 Education and development 
1. 
Italy set out on a path of rapid development after the Second World War and kept on it for more than a 
quarter-century.  A  substantial  part  of  the  country’s  disadvantage  with  respect  to  those  with  higher 
levels  of  economic  welfare  was  made  good.  Although  it  was  marked  by  sometimes  acute  social 
tensions  and  distributive  conflicts,  growth  benefited  from  several  domestic  and  external  factors  that 
made  for  extremely  large  productivity  gains.  Increasing  resources,  which  had  been  largely 
underutilized in the agricultural sector, were employed in the sectors with higher output per worker, 
completing  the  transition  to  an  industrial  economy.  This  unprecedented  rapid  and  sustained  growth 
was accompanied by a progressive rise in the educational level of the population that fitted nicely with 
the state of technological knowledge. 
Since the 1990s the inrush of the emerging economies on the international markets and the advent of 
the new information and communications technologies, biotechnologies and thin material technologies 
have  radically  altered  the  characteristics  of  global  economic  development.  They  have  created  new 
hierarchies, revolutionized production processes and, especially in the advanced countries, thoroughly 
modified  the  characteristics  of  the  labour  input  demanded  by  firms.  The  ample  strand  of  economic 
literature  that  investigates  the  connection  between  education  and  development  has  gained  new 
vigour. 
Broadly speaking, the level of education carries decisive weight in explaining processes of economic 
growth from two fundamental angles. 
One  concerns  the  improvement  of  knowledge  applied  to  production:  human  capital  formation  fuels 
efficiency in production and drives up the remuneration of labour and the other factors of production. 
This  engine  of  growth  becomes  still  more  important  in  phases  characterized  by  rapid  technical 
progress. In the 1960s Edmund Phelps observed that the acquisition of advanced knowledge was an 
essential  condition  for  innovation  and  for  adapting  to  new  technologies.  The  endowment  of  human 
capital  assumes  a  crucial  value  that  transcends  those  who  benefit  from  it  in  the  first  instance:  it 
promotes  the  generation  and  diffusion  of  new  ideas  that  impart  impetus  to  technical  progress;  it 
improves  earnings  prospects  and,  closing  the  virtuous  circle,  increases  the  incentive  for  further 
investment in human capital. 
As a primary source of accumulation of this type of capital, the educational system produces major 
externalities  that  help  raise  the  growth  prospects  of  the  entire  economy.  This  is  one  of  the  most 
interesting  insights  of  the  “new”  theories  of  endogenous  growth.  According  to  some  estimates,  the 
social returns to education are higher than the private returns; that is, they exceed the extra benefits 
enjoyed by the individual who has more and better education. 
But  the  externalities  -  and  we  come  here  to  the  second  angle  -  are  not  limited  to  the  sphere  of 
production in the narrow sense; they also affect the social context and contribute to economic growth 
in this way as well. This aspect has been analyzed mainly in connection with the developing countries, 
but of course it applies to the advanced societies too. For some time economic thought - and not it 
alone  -  has  underscored  that  the  properties  of  efficiency  of  the  markets  in  an  economy  cannot  be 
considered  ignoring  “social  capital”,  defined  as  the  body  of  institutions,  social  norms  and  trust  and 
reciprocity in formal and informal networks of relations that foster collective action and are a resource 
for creating welfare. At aggregate level social capital, as distinct from human capital, with which it is 
nevertheless  connected,  is  a  factor  of  human,  social  and  economic  development.  It  is  a  system  of 
shared  values  that  guarantees  the  sense  of  responsibility  for  the  commitments  entered  into  by  the 
parties in concluding a contract. These values constitute a trait of the national identity that is set in the 
long run through custom and principles handed down from generation to generation. The educational 
system can enrich this inheritance, enhancing opportunities and attenuating negative aspects. 
Social  capital  is  an  especially  important  factor  for  the  development  of  the  financial  markets:  the 
relationship of reciprocal trust between borrowers and creditors underpins the stability and correctness 
of business activity. The lack of it is, among other things, a barrier to the market entry of newly created 
BIS Review 125/2006 
 1
firms.  A  high  degree  of  schooling  facilitates  critical  access  to  useful  information  for  evaluating  the 
advisability and risk of a financial contract; this results in lower costs for learning about and managing 
an investment and a greater incentive to participate in the financial markets. 
Education  helps  to  relax  the  economic  and  cultural  constraints  that  bind  individuals  to  their 
environment  of  origin.  It  increases  the  probability  that  the  most  capable  and  deserving  will  rise  to 
functions  of  command  in  the  organization  of  productive  factors.  In  this  way  too  it  exerts  a  positive 
influence on economic growth: good education boosts the efficiency of firms, creates the conditions for 
the  competitive  selection  of  the  most  innovative  entrepreneurs  -  those  most  apt  to  drive  economic 
growth - to unfold without being fettered by rights of caste and positions of rent. 
The  thrust  of  these  remarks  on  the  link  between  education  and  development  can  also  extend  to 
demographic aspects. All else being equal, the diffusion of high levels of education is associated with 
better conditions of health and an increase in life expectancy, since it can lead to less risky behaviour 
and a greater ability to assimilate and act on information serving to prevent illness and gain access to 
available therapies. 
Education and the Italian economy’s potential for growth 
2.  
Since the mid-1990s, the annual increase in labour productivity in Italy has been one percentage point 
less  than  the  average  for  the  OECD  countries.  This  is  the  underlying  cause  of  the  present  crisis 
affecting the country’s growth and competitiveness. 
The rapid rise in employment fostered in recent years by wage moderation, the regularization of many 
immigrant workers and labour market reforms has produced a natural, and expected, slowdown in the 
rate  of  productivity  growth.  On  top  of  this,  however,  the  overall  efficiency  of  the  economy  has 
deteriorated, as evidenced by the recent decline in total factor productivity, the only instance in the 
industrialized world. The situation is rendered even more worrying by the demographic scenario for the 
next decades. According to current projections, and despite taking account of large migratory flows, 
the working-age population is set to decrease dramatically, and this will act as a further brake on the 
potential growth of the Italian economy. Only a substantial increase in labour market participation and 
a  return  to  productivity  growth  can  reverse  these  trends.  Raising  the  population’s  average  level  of 
education and improving its quality are prerequisites for the achievement of both objectives. 
Although significant progress has been made in the past decade, the labour market participation rate 
in  Italy  is  still  well  below  the  European  average,  particularly  among  women,  young  people  and  the 
older age groups. A higher level of education tends to narrow these gaps. In the OECD countries, the 
average rate of employment for university-educated men aged 25 to 64 is 15 percentage points higher 
than that of their peers with only a lower-secondary-school qualification; for women, the difference is 
30 points. The fact that people with higher levels of education are more likely to be in work reflects 
their increased propensity to participate in the labour market and, in the case of adults, the smaller risk 
of unemployment. The Bank of Italy’s Economic Research Department estimates that, all other things 
being equal, in Italy the probability of participating in the labour market increases by 2.4 percentage 
points with every year of school attendance. In the South, the figure rises to 3.2 points, reflecting a 
greater  relative  scarcity  of  skilled  workers.  All  this  highlights  the  important  contribution  towards 
overcoming  the  country’s  geographical  dualism  that  could  be  made  by  policies  to  raise  educational 
levels in the South. 
A high level of education is also the best way to minimize the risks of fragmented career paths and of 
job loss, which have become more pressing than in the past with the spread of fixed-term employment 
contracts.  The  higher  the  professional  qualification,  the  greater  the  incentive  for  firms  to  invest  in 
stable and lasting employment and the greater the likelihood of workers finding another job quickly if 
the present one is unsatisfactory or threatened by adverse events. 
Higher levels of education bring gains in productivity. The relationship can be gauged roughly from the 
link between educational qualification and earnings, that is from the personal return on education. In 
the  majority  of  OECD  countries,  people  with  a  qualification  equivalent  to  our  specialist  university 
degree  earn  at  least  50  per  cent  more  than  workers  with  a  secondary  school  diploma.  The  wage 
differentials  between  workers  with  a  diploma  and  workers  with  only  a  lower  secondary  school 
certificate  range  from  15  to  30  per  cent.  In  Italy  individuals’  return  on  education  is  lower  than  the 
OECD  average;  nonetheless,  the  return  on  a  given  investment  in  education,  even  taking  the 
associated costs fully into account, is much higher than for alternative investments. 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2006
A  poor  level  of  education  can  affect  the  evolution  of  productivity  through  the  inability  to  exploit  the 
opportunities offered by rapid technical progress. It is only recently, and later in Italy than elsewhere, 
that the organization of production has begun to benefit from extensive use of information technology, 
for  which  better  training  is  essential.  Among  the  highly  developed  countries,  Italy  stands  out  for  its 
anomalous and static model of specialization, in which the predominant industries are marked by a 
medium to low level of human-capital. It is a model that is consistent with a relatively small endowment 
of  highly  skilled  manpower.  In  the  new  technological  and  competitive  environment  it  drags  our 
economy  down,  preventing  it  from  penetrating  today’s  more  dynamic  innovative  branches  and 
exposing it to the fiercer competition from emerging countries. 
Another crucial condition for overcoming this static model is the presence of managerial skills capable 
of  reshaping  production  processes,  exploiting  technologies,  and  reallocating  resources.  The 
widespread availability of these skills can be achieved through higher levels of education; inevitably 
this will be accompanied by greater contestability of firms’ ownership. 
What kind of education? 
3.  
In the course of the twentieth century Italy’s schools and universities sustained the nation’s economic 
growth and civil progress. They became less elite and progressively opened themselves to the society 
at large. Giving an education to millions of previously excluded citizens reduced inequalities but at the 
same time made it more difficult to attain high standards of achievement. Over the decades, national 
school  and  university  reform  measures  responded  only  partially  to  the  emerging  need  to  bring  a 
growing  student  population  up  to  higher  levels  of  education,  all  the  more  essential  today  given  the 
transformation of the labour market in the advanced countries. 
The education deficit remains worrisome, because of Italy’s lateness in commencing mass education 
and its more unfavourable demographic dynamics. Notwithstanding significant gains in young people’s 
level  of  educational  attainment,  in  2005  only  37.5  per  cent  of  Italians  aged  25  to  64  had  upper 
secondary diplomas, nearly 8 percentage points below the OECD average. And the gap in the share 
of university graduates was wider still: scarcely 12 per cent in Italy, half the OECD average. Because 
of the faster aging of the Italian population, the share of young people is one of the lowest anywhere in 
the  world.  The  consequence  is  that  the  gains  made  by  the  younger  generations  have  only  limited 
impact on the average level of educational attainment. 
Too many adolescents still abandon their studies, and those who stay in school have a harder time 
learning  than  their  peers  in  the  rest  of  Europe.  In  2004  only  76  out  of  every  100  young  people  of 
graduation  age  got  their  upper  secondary  diplomas,  one  of  the  lowest  percentages  among  the 
advanced countries. The OECD’s periodic surveys have found that at the end of compulsory schooling 
Italian  youngsters  rank  near  the  bottom  in  mathematical  achievement,  having  fallen  about  a  year 
behind students elsewhere. Perhaps this should come as no surprise, considering the decline in the 
number  of  mathematics  and  physics  students  in  universities.  Nor  do  the  results  in  other  disciplines 
provide much consolation. The share of Italian students whose reading comprehension is inadequate 
is significantly higher than the European average. 
These  unsatisfactory  average  results  are  compounded  by  significant  regional  disparities,  to  the 
disadvantage  of  students  in  the  South  of  Italy,  and  by  great  variability  from  school  to  school.  The 
dispersion  of  the  achievement  test  results  for  15-year-olds  is  among  the  highest  in  the  OECD 
countries. 
Even in the context of an overwhelmingly public school system, the level of education and income of 
the  student’s  family  remain  decisive.  If  the  quality  of  schools  is  differentiated  and  informational 
transparency is lacking, only “educated” parents will be able to guide their children to the best classes 
and the most capable teachers. 
Our problems do not stem from a shortage of public resources allocated to the school system. Indeed, 
Italy’s spending on primary and secondary education is higher per student than the OECD average, 
not because of higher teacher salaries but due to higher teacher/student ratios. Italy has 9.4 teachers 
for every 100 students in secondary schools and 9.2 in elementary schools, against OECD averages 
of  7.4  and  6.1  and  European  averages  of  8.5  and 6.8.  The  higher  ratio  in  Italy  depends  in  part  on 
social policy choices, such as the widespread use of tutors for special students and the local provision 
of educational services in small and geographically scattered communities. Even taking these factors 
into  account,  however,  the  disparity  with  the  other  countries  remains  substantial,  reflecting  among 
BIS Review 125/2006 
 3
other things the fragmentation of the subjects studied, and the difference does not translate into better 
academic results. Organizational shortcomings and poor motivation of staff are significant factors. 
The  magnitude  of  the  effect  that  is  produced  on  economic  growth  by  an  increase  in  the  average 
educational level varies with the type of instruction that is promoted. The most effective are those that 
enhance the occupational mobility of workers and, above all, the spread of new ideas. 
In  the  United  States  the  broader  diffusion  of  basic  knowledge  has  fit  well  with  the  acceleration  in 
technical  progress,  helping  to  increase  America’s  lead  in  growth  over  the  countries  of  continental 
Europe. 
Technical and vocational schools with highly specialized courses have long-established roots, notably 
in  Germany,  where  they  have  sustained  economic  and  social  development  since  the  turn  of  the 
twentieth  century.  They  arose  in  an  age  in  which  the  definition  of  skills  was  much  more  narrowly 
circumscribed and more stable than it is now, based as it was on relatively fixed working procedures 
and standards of knowledge. Today there is a widely perceived need for an extensive revision of the 
mission  of  these  schools,  because  there  is  a  greater  need  for  knowledge  that  can  adapt  to 
technological  contexts  whose  boundaries  are  a  good  deal  less  well  defined  and  constantly  shifting. 
Without  denying  the  important  role  that  technical  and  vocational  schools  still  play  in  our  economic 
system, schooling could be oriented more to the learning of general skills and aptitudes, which also 
encourage students to proceed to higher levels of education. 
This leads us to a brief discussion of universities. In Italy the proportion of people aged between 25 
and  34  who  have  a  university  degree  is  still  below  the  average  for  the  main  industrial  countries, 
despite the significant increase in recent years following the university reform of 2002. The university 
drop-out  rate  is  60  per  cent,  nearly  twice  the  average  for  the  leading  countries.  The  proportion  of 
graduates who go on to earn a postgraduate qualification is very small, so that Italy is fourth from the 
bottom in the ranking of OECD countries. The bulk of the recent increase in the number of graduates 
has consisted of students doing a shorter course. In the last two years matriculants have converged 
above all on law and the political and social sciences. 
More  generally,  by  international  standards  the  study  courses  of  Italian  university  students  appear 
biased towards the humanities and social sciences and away from technical and scientific subjects. 
Part of the difference is due to the fact that, in contrast with Italy, shorter-course university degrees in 
other countries are mainly in technical subjects. But another part of the explanation is to be found in 
the high rents enjoyed by some professions, which distort families’ choices, and in firms’ insufficient 
demand for high technical and scientific qualifications. 
Fewer  public  resources  are  allocated  to  higher  education  in  Italy  than  in  many  other  advanced 
countries. This is the flip side of the larger volume of resources allocated to primary and secondary 
education. The basic political choice was to privilege early education to the detriment of investment in 
advanced  knowledge.  This  is  not  a  far-sighted  choice  in  a  world  in  which  innovation  is  the  key  to 
growth. 
The public resources allocated to higher education in Italy appear even smaller when compared with 
those made available to Anglo-Saxon university systems, despite their having a great many private 
institutions.  The  manner  of  intervening is  different,  however:  in  the  United  States,  for  example,  it  is 
mainly in the form of direct financing of deserving students and their families through scholarships and 
personal  loans;  in  Italy,  as  in  the  rest of  continental  Europe,  the  bulk  of  funds  serve  to  finance  the 
universities. 
Looking ahead 
4.  
By now nobody in Italy should have any doubts about the urgent need to revive economic growth. The 
present lively cyclical upturn is certainly not sufficient to trigger a rapid solution to the structural defects 
of Italy’s productive system. 
For the reasons that I have tried to set out here, education is one of the most important aspects of a 
reform strategy aimed at altering the context in which that system operates. 
In a modern economy the public sector organizes and regulates the market, produces public goods 
and corrects externalities. In the case of education, these principles need to be applied taking account 
of the sector’s specific features and complexity. 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2006
An effective education policy must reconcile excellence with a fair distribution of the opportunities to go 
on learning up to the desired level. These two objectives are not in conflict, provided the public sphere 
seeks to create equal opportunities and chooses operational options that allow the market to play a 
part in selecting excellence. 
Scholastic success depends significantly on the conditions of pupils’ families. From this point of view 
Italy  appears  to  be  socially  almost  immobile.  The  probability  of  earning  a  degree  depends  on  the 
quality of the preceding education, but if this is sometimes inadequate, as in Italy today, the family’s 
socio-economic background plays a major role. Too little has changed in this respect since Don Milani 
raised the same question forty years ago, albeit in another context, in the light of his experience with 
the children of the school at Barbiana. 
Giving all young people the same opportunity to succeed in learning, provided they apply themselves, 
is the key to increasing efficiency and fairness in the field of education. Both these objectives can be 
pursued in a variety of complementary ways. 
In primary and secondary education it may be worth increasing the competition between schools, both 
public  and  private,  through  methods  of  financing  that  both  reward  the  best  schools  and  transfer 
resources directly to families in order to give them more choice. 
The information that guides families in their choice of schools appears insufficient. In addition to the 
prospect of obtaining a diploma that has the same value for everybody, they should be offered uniform 
assessment criteria that permit informed choices. It is necessary to eliminate the perverse incentive for 
families  and  schools  to  collude  in  lowering  teaching  standards,  especially  if  financing  continues  to 
depend  exclusively  on  the  number  of  students  enrolled.  The  first  steps  towards  developing  a 
comprehensive assessment system that have already been incorporated in Italian legislation deserve 
to be followed by others, not least so as to permit better informed guidance of public action to govern 
and reform the school system. 
Somewhat  similar  considerations  apply  to  universities,  essential  institutions  for  an  economy  that 
wishes  to  retain  its  place  among  the  advanced  countries.  In  recent  years  important  changes  have 
been made to the Italian university system. For the first time an assessment has been made of the 
quality of research. Notwithstanding all the measurement problems involved, this could shortly be used 
to guide the public financing of individual universities. It is important that the work done should not turn 
into a missed opportunity. 
Transparency and public access to the assessment process help to improve the comparison between 
universities and permit better informed choices by students, especially those with less access to the 
channels providing a greater wealth of information. It is to be hoped that this will be the first of a series 
of  measures  to  stimulate  competition  among  universities,  by  increasing  the  incentives  to  raise 
standards in research and instruction and in the selection of university teachers. 
In schools and in higher education, more explicit recognition of merit avoids the mortification of the 
most talented, provided it is accompanied by measures to support deserving poor students. 
The recognition of merit is not a guarantee of equity but its absence undoubtedly means society is less 
fair because it accentuates the discrimination caused by differences in starting conditions; at the same 
time society is poorer because it wastes its resources. 
I  am  convinced  we  will  succeed  in  renewing  the  unity  of  intent  that  alone  can  bring  an  advance  in 
Italian  education,  the  unity  that  has  provided  the  foundation  for  the  development  of  the  educational 
system since the Second World War. 
BIS Review 125/2006 
 5
