Mervyn King: Through the looking glass – reform of the international 
institutions  
Text of the Inaugural International Distinguished Lecture by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of 
England, to the Melbourne Centre for Financial Studies, Melbourne, 21 December 2006. 
 What does globalisation mean? 
1.  
Humpty Dumpty said to Alice, “When I use a word, it means just what I choose it to mean – neither 
more  nor  less”.  So  let  me  explain  first  what  I  mean  by  “globalisation”.  In  his  excellent  book  Why 
Globalization  Works,  Martin  Wolf  remarks,  “Globalization  is  a  hideous  word  of  obscure  meaning, 
coined  in  the  1960s,  that  came  into  ever-greater  vogue  in  the  1990s”.  I  think  of  globalisation  as  a 
process of increasing international economic integration accompanied by political agreement on the 
rules  of  the  game  which  govern  that  process.  The  rise  of  China  and  India  as  trading  powers  is  an 
example of increasing integration. And the accession of China into the World Trade Organisation is an 
example of the application of the rules of the game. 
Globalisation is the driving force of many of the most significant changes in our economies. But it is far 
from a new phenomenon – it is as old as the human race itself. The European settlement of Australia 
represented the globalising forces of migration and capital flows over several centuries. To me one of 
the  most  poignant  symbols  of  globalisation  is  the  Australian  War  Memorial  at  Hyde  Park  Corner  in 
London.  In  the  first  half  of  the  twentieth  century  –  described  by  Isaiah  Berlin  as  “the  worst  century 
there has ever been” – thousands of Australians went to fight on the other side of the globe and to 
give their lives to a cause that transcended national interests. 
One of the consequences of globalisation is that the impact of change in one part of the world on the 
lives of people in other parts is growing. In areas as diverse as trade, energy, combating terrorism, 
climate change, and the economic consequences of massive global imbalances with capital flowing 
from poor to rich countries, there are now growing spillovers from decisions in one country to the lives 
of people in others. In contrast to the horrors of two World Wars and the Great Depression, the strains 
and  stresses  of  today’s  world  do  not  seem  insurmountable.  How  can  we  best  deal  with  these 
challenges? 
When  the  movement  of  people  in  Manchuria  from  subsistence  rural  agriculture  to  industrial 
employment influences which industries flourish in Manchester and Melbourne, and when changes in 
attitudes  to  asset  management  in  Beijing  affect  currency  values  and  hence  living  standards  from 
Birmingham  to  Brisbane,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  all  nation  states,  recognising  their  growing 
interdependence,  to  make  commitments  to  each  other  about  what  they  will  and  won’t  do.  Such 
commitments are embodied in international institutions – they are the rules of the game. Impressive 
offices and grand meetings are not the test of whether our international institutions are successful. The 
test is whether member countries are ready to make genuine commitments to each other. Without that 
the  institutions  lack  any  real  purpose.  So  the  subject  of  my  talk  today  is  why  we  need  rules  of  the 
game to govern globalisation, and the institutions that are necessary to oversee those rules. 
Is the post-war settlement still relevant today? 
2.  
At the end of the Second World War, a new global order was put in place by the United States, Britain 
and their allies. One of those primarily responsible, US Secretary of State Dean Acheson, described 
his  time  as  being  “present  at  the  creation”  of  a  new  global  order.  A  range  of  new  international 
institutions was created – the United Nations, the two Bretton Woods institutions (the IMF and World 
Bank),  the  OEEC  that  implemented  the  Marshall  Plan  (and  later  became  the  OECD)  ,  NATO,  and 
GATT (which has subsequently been succeeded by the World Trade Organisation). 
Those institutions are now, for the most part, past their 60th birthdays. And there has been much heart-
searching  over  the  past  few  years  as  to  their  role  and  governance.  Unless  the  spirit  of  the  original 
founders is rekindled, there is a real danger that the present institutions will wither on the vine leaving 
us  with  a  more  unstable  and  fragile  international  environment.  As  Martin  Wolf  pointedly  wrote,  “To 
defend a liberal world economy is not to defend the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the 
World  Trade  Organisation  or  any  specific  institution.  These  must  be  judged  –  and  reformed  or 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 1
discarded – on their merits”. My argument is simple. Existing institutions were designed for a world 
radically different from that of today. The cost of closing them down and building new institutions is 
high. So we must work with our existing institutions and make them more relevant to today’s problems. 
Unless we do so it will be harder to defend an open and liberal international economic order which has 
brought benefits to hundreds of millions of people around the globe. 
The  generic  challenge  facing  all  the  post-war  institutions  is  to  find  a  role  relevant  to  present 
circumstances, and to decide on the operational capabilities and instruments which that role requires. 
Holding meetings and issuing communiqués is not enough. As a central banker, I naturally focus more 
on the IMF, and I shall do that today. But the lessons are general. It is worth noting the scale of the 
challenge.  The  specific  commitments  made  at  the  end  of  the  Second  World  War  are  no  longer 
relevant.  The  shared  experience  of  the  Great  Depression,  protectionism  and  two  World  Wars  has 
faded. And the majority of current nation states were not “present at the creation”. 
The world has certainly changed since 1945, and it is the nature of those changes which underpins 
the case for reform. The world today is different from that at the creation of the post-war settlement in 
two important respects. 
First, despite the increasing integration of the world economy, which might appear to reduce the effect 
of national policies, the nation state has in fact flourished since 1945. The collapse of ideology and 
empire,  and  the  triumph  of  the  ideas  of  a  liberal  market  economy,  have  been  accompanied  by  an 
extraordinary  expansion  in  the  number  of  countries  in  the  world.  In  1946  there  were  fewer  than  80 
countries. Now there are 192 members of the UN. Much of that increase represents the division of 
empires, such as the former Soviet Union, into new states, as well as growing ethnic separation. Most 
of  these  new  countries  were  not  “present  at  the  creation”  and  see  no  reason  why  they  should 
acquiesce in governance arrangements made in their absence. And the economic weight of countries 
has changed greatly since the post-war international institutions were set up. In 1950, Asian countries 
accounted for a sixth of world GDP measured at purchasing power parity. Now they account for more 
than a third. 
Second, the world economy is very different today than when the IMF, the World Bank, and the other 
international economic institutions were set up. At the end of the Second World War, the international 
monetary system was built around fixed exchange rates and controls on capital flows. The rules of the 
game  were  simple.  Countries  were  supposed  to  balance  their  current  account.  When  “imbalances” 
arose, they were under an obligation to correct them. In practice, however, the obligations on creditor 
and  debtor  countries  did  not  prove  to  be  symmetric.  Over  time  the  advantages  of  capital  flows, 
particularly in the private sector, became apparent, and in a world without capital controls, it is possible 
to  maintain  independent  monetary  policies  only  by  allowing  exchange  rates  to  float.  So  the  Bretton 
Woods system eventually proved unsustainable, and today most advanced industrial countries have 
floating exchange rates and free movement of capital. Private capital flows now dwarf official flows. 
And  “imbalances”  can  apparently  persist  almost  indefinitely.  The  US  current  account  deficit,  now 
almost 7% of GDP, has been over 3% ever since 1999. Australia has run a persistent current account 
deficit  since 1973.  Accordingly,  the  international  institutions  have  shifted  the  focus  of  their  attention 
from current to capital account flows and to the fragility of national balance sheets. 
Those changes have meant that, over time, the post-war settlement has become less relevant. But the 
need for international institutions has increased. Our own standards of living are now, more than ever, 
affected by decisions elsewhere. And many people already feel they are losers from globalisation. The 
number of workers in the world trading system has more than doubled in a short period, with inevitable 
consequences for real wages of the unskilled in the industrialised world. Governments are having to 
work  harder  to  explain  what  the  principle  of  comparative  advantage  means  to  people  in  their  daily 
lives. 
In  fact,  most  people  are  winners  from  globalisation.  China  is  now  the  second  largest  buyer  of 
Australian  exports.  And  the  Australian  terms  of  trade  have  risen  by  40%  since  2000,  providing  a 
substantial boost to the growth rate of real incomes. Nothing could be more damaging to the prospects 
of developing and developed countries alike than the abandonment of further trade liberalisation. But 
protectionist  sentiments  are  abroad  again,  even  with  high  employment  rates  around  the  world.  In 
Europe  they  are  concealed  as  cries  for  “national  champions”;  in  Latin  America  as  populism;  in  the 
United States as complaints about unfair competition. But the damage that protectionism can wreak is 
clear – the experience of the Great Depression should be enough to ring alarm bells. 
If that is to be avoided and we are to maintain widespread support for an open international trading 
system, it is in all our interests to establish clear rules for what we will and won’t do in areas where our 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2006
decisions  affect  stability  elsewhere.  And  if  those  commitments  are  to  be  upheld,  we  will  need 
international institutions. 
The role of international institutions was thrown into sharp relief last week by the visit to Beijing of the 
new  US  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  Hank  Paulson,  and  a  high-level  team  for  a  “strategic  economic 
dialogue” with the Chinese Government. The issues discussed – the Chinese strategy for economic 
development  and  its  implications  for  the  pace  of  the  shift  of  labour  from  rural  agriculture  to  urban 
industry, saving rates in the United States, financial reform in China, and certainly the dollar-renminbi 
exchange rate – are all in the purview of several multilateral bodies, such as the new IMF multilateral 
consultation, the bi-annual IMFC meetings, the BIS, the G7, the G20, and so on. Progress at bilateral 
meetings is to be welcomed. Indeed, the existing multilateral forums may simply be too cumbersome 
or  inefficient  for  any  useful  dialogue  to  occur.  But  many  of  the  most  pressing  economic  concerns 
cannot  easily  be  handled  in  a  bilateral  setting.  For  example,  even  the  infamous  international 
“imbalances” can no longer be seen as a bilateral phenomenon: a large US trade deficit matched by a 
large Chinese trade surplus. Following the rise in oil prices over the past two years, the largest current 
account  imbalances  are  to  be  found  in  the  oil-producing  countries.  The  combined  trade  surplus  of 
OPEC in 2006 is likely to be around $400 billion, compared with a surplus in China of $150 billion. The 
pattern of trade imbalances and exchange rate movements is inherently a multilateral one, and real 
progress requires dialogue in a multilateral setting. 
What are the principles of institutional design? 
3.  
Changes to the number of nation states and the way they interact mean that reform of our multilateral 
institutions is needed. But piecemeal reforms are unlikely to work. In my view, there are five principles 
that should be followed. 
First,  create  international  institutions  only  when  there  is  a  need  to  do  so.  International  institutions 
should focus on those areas of global governance where we need to tackle problems collectively – 
whether on trade, the environment, or large spillover effects of changes in macroeconomic policy. 
Second,  ensure  that  the  commitments  countries  enter  into  are  clear.  The  job  of  institutions  is  to 
support those commitments. In many cases, like an umpire, their job will be to uphold them. That will 
only be possible if the players – countries – are very clear about the agreed rules of the game. Without 
that, any further design is pointless. 
Third, provide institutions with the necessary tools to umpire the commitments of nation states. But, 
just  as  umpires  are  accountable  for  their  performance  to  the  whole  community  of  cricket-playing 
nations  through  the  International  Cricket  Council,  the  staff  and  management  of  the  international 
institution  should  be  accountable  to  the  whole  community  of  nation  states  for  their  performance  in 
upholding the rules. 
Fourth, recognise that we do not start with a blank sheet of paper. We must accept the constraints of 
history. Existing institutions have an institutional memory, talented staff and much of the infrastructure 
that will be needed in the future. But that is not to say reform will be easy – there are far too many 
vested interests for that to be the case. 
Fifth, avoid unnecessary duplication. Because the cost of abolishing institutions is high, the number of 
international groupings and institutions has proliferated in recent years. Many of them tread on each 
others toes. As a result, the IMF, World Bank and OECD, have all been bruised. Duplication of roles is 
wasteful of time, money and focus. Each institution should have one very clear remit, and focus on it. 
Of course, countries which play a role in one institution but not in another will have an incentive to 
build up the role of the former at the expense of the latter. So it is up to the member countries to limit 
the battle for turf. 
There are few examples where all these principles appear to have been followed. The World Trade 
Organisation  has  been  an  effective  umpire  of  countries’  commitments  about  trade  restrictions  and 
comes  close.  But  the  example  of  the  WTO  highlights  the  importance,  above  all  else,  of  clear 
commitments from nation states themselves. The failure of countries to conclude a multilateral trade 
round since the WTO was formed more than a decade ago is worrying. The Doha round has continued 
past  its  expected completion  date  and only  a  brave commentator  would  forecast  eventual success. 
The fault does not lie with the WTO. Instead, it reflects the fact that national governments have not 
been willing to make the necessary commitments. 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 3
What do those principles mean for the IMF? 
4.  
With those principles in mind, I want to consider the challenge of reforming the IMF. 
Do we need an IMF? 
(a) 
The  apparent  success  of  central  banks  has  led  some  economists  to  argue  that  the  widespread 
adoption of inflation targets and floating exchange rates is sufficient to ensure the smooth running of 
the international monetary system – a regime which Professor Andrew Rose calls the ‘reverse Bretton 
Woods system’. There is no need for an international institution such as the IMF to watch over the 
system. 
It is certainly true that the most important thing any nation state can do to minimise the spillover effects 
it has on others is to maintain domestic economic stability. And that is exactly what Australia, Britain, 
and other countries have done during the recent period of economic success, known as the “Great 
Stability”. 
But  domestic  stability  is  not  sufficient  to  eliminate  spillover  effects.  The  impact  of  national 
macroeconomic policy decisions is transmitted to other countries through important prices in the world 
economy:  real  exchange  rates;  real  interest  rates,  and  prices  of  important  commodities  like  oil. 
Changes in spending by US households affect export demand in the rest of the world, both directly 
and  indirectly  through  movements  in  the  dollar.  Changes  in  saving  by  governments  in  Asia  affect 
spending in the rest of the world through movements in real interest rates. Changes in the supply of oil 
from the Middle East affect incomes and spending elsewhere through movements in oil prices. 
Moreover, not everyone has a floating exchange rate and an inflation target, and countries that try to 
prevent adjustment of their real exchange rates have exacerbated the problem of spillover effects. 
Businesses  in  every  country  are  conscious  of  how  quickly  their  plans  can  be  disrupted  by 
unpredictable  swings  in  exchange rates,  asset  prices  and commodity  prices. When  those spillovers 
are sufficiently large and widespread, countries will want to engage with each other in a multilateral 
setting to discuss how they should be resolved. 
What commitments are needed? 
(b) 
Before  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system,  the  specific  commitments  made  by  countries  to 
each other were very clear: fixed exchange rates and capital controls. In the wake of the collapse of 
Bretton Woods, the members of the IMF attempted to re-define their commitments. But the exercise of 
defining  what  practical  commitments  were  needed  focussed  primarily  on  exchange  rates  and  had 
rather little effect in practice. 
Two broad commitments are particularly important. First, countries should make public commitments 
about  their  targets  for  macroeconomic  policies  –  fiscal,  monetary  and  financial.  That  still  allows 
countries considerable discretion in their choice of policy framework – for example, whether to adopt a 
fixed  or  floating  exchange  rate.  Second,  policy  frameworks  must  be  consistent  across  countries. 
Policies which try to prevent changes in real exchange rates in response to changes in fundamentals, 
or  lead  to  an  unsustainable  build-up  of  external  debt,  are  properly  the  concern  of  the  international 
community. 
What tools are needed? 
(c)  
The  main  tool  to  monitor  those  commitments  is  surveillance.  The  surveillance  activities  of  the  IMF 
have been criticised because they pay insufficient attention to spillover effects and instead examine in 
unnecessary detail microeconomic issues. For example, the sharp rise in oil prices over the past two 
years has posed a risk to economic stability in many countries. But there is no reference in the IMF’s 
Article IV report on China to the role that Chinese demand may have played in pushing up world oil 
prices. And the report on the United States this year singled out the electricity sector and competition 
among auto manufacturers and airlines as areas warranting special examination by IMF staff. It would 
be  better  if  those  microeconomic  issues  were  examined  within  the  OECD,  and,  in  turn,  issues  of 
macroeconomic  spillovers  and  global  “imbalances”  were  left  to  the  IMF.  But  even  when  IMF 
surveillance has been well-focussed, as in the analysis of Thailand’s exchange rate policies in 1996, it 
has not always carried sufficient weight to influence countries’ policies. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2006
These short-comings must be remedied in two ways. First, the focus of IMF surveillance should be on 
spillover effects and the consistency of macroeconomic policy frameworks. By the Spring Meetings of 
the IMF in Washington in April, we shall know whether this is likely when we see the results of the 
current review of the 1977 decision on exchange rate surveillance. 
Second,  IMF  surveillance  should  be  more  independent  of  member  countries.  That  will  allow  clear 
messages to be delivered about whether countries are living up to their commitments. A remit should 
be  set  annually.  It  will  play  two  roles:  it  will  give  the  IMF  a  clear  mandate  to  guide  its  surveillance 
activities and it will give the shareholders a yardstick against which to hold the IMF staff accountable. 
Greater independence for staff should be accompanied by greater accountability. 
What are the constraints of history? 
(d)  
The Bretton Woods conference at which the IMF was established was attended by the governments of 
just 44 countries. Yet even that was fraught. It would be vastly more difficult to agree a complete new 
treaty with 184 countries. The IMF has much of the infrastructure and expertise that will be needed to 
do the job I have described – and an annual budget of $1 billion to do it. That is why it makes sense to 
attempt to reform the IMF that we have inherited rather than to build a new institution. 
But  the  inherited  governance  structure  of  the  IMF  and  other  institutions  complicates  matters.  The 
founders  of  the  post-war  settlement  encumbered  several  of  the  new  international  institutions  with 
unwieldy full-time resident boards. And the distribution of voting rights no longer reflects the economic 
and political weight of member countries. The task of agreeing on a new system will be enormously 
difficult. But if we fail, the influence of the institutions will diminish further, possibly irreparably. 
Reform  of  IMF  surveillance  and  voting  rights  of  member  countries  complement  each  other.  Voting 
rights are an area where hard work and many hours of persuasion will be needed if countries are to be 
convinced to see the bigger picture and relinquish some degree of direct control over the IMF in return 
for  the  creation  of  a  more  effective  institution.  Hard  work,  perseverance  and  dogged  determination 
have  been  characteristics  of  this  year’s  Australian  presidency  of  the  G20  under  Peter  Costello,  Ian 
MacFarlane and Glenn Stevens. Their efforts have been crucial to the progress that has been made 
towards quota reform over the past year. It is important that the Australian legacy be carried forward if 
the process of quota reform is to be completed. 
Are there overlaps with other institutions? 
(e)  
Unnecessary  duplication  is  a  waste  of  both  time  and  money.  I  have  already  spoken  about  the 
respective  comparative  advantages  of  the  IMF  and  OECD.  There  has  also  been  some  discussion 
about the roles of the IMF and the G7 in respect of exchange rate issues. Over the past three years – 
especially since the Boca Raton G7 summit of February 2004 – the inability of the G7 to deal with the 
major  spillover  effects  in  the  world  economy  has  become  more  and  more  evident.  Adding  new 
members, even if they were willing to join, is not the answer. More productive would be to use the IMF 
as flexible forum to bring the relevant group of countries together to handle issues as and when they 
arise. 
Conclusions 
5.  
The meetings of the IMF in Washington and Singapore this year marked the beginning of an attempt 
to define more clearly the role of the Fund in the world economy. Whether that will prove successful is 
too early to tell. But the challenge is clear. Globalisation increases our dependence on each other. It is 
no longer sufficient to rely on the commitments made sixty years ago – the world has changed too 
much since then. 
It is up to the member countries to make a multilateral trading system work. As Joseph Conrad wrote a 
century ago in his great novel Nostromo, “Action is consolatory. It is the enemy of thought and the 
friend of flattering illusions”. The frenetic activity of international meetings and the flattering illusions of 
a stream of communiqués do not add up to a coherent set of commitments. 
Failure to reform the international institutions will condemn them to irrelevance and obscurity. We are 
at that point. If this generation fails, then the work of those who were “present at the creation” will have 
been undone. It is our duty to re-create the institutional framework that we inherited. 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 5
It will not be easy. But in case like Alice you are tempted to think that, “There’s no use trying; one can’t 
believe impossible things”, remember the Queen’s reply: “Why, sometimes I’ve believed as many as 
six impossible things before breakfast”. 
6 
 BIS Review 126/2006
