Bandid Nijathaworn: Financial sector surveillance – what have we learned? 
Speech by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the IEO Seminar on 
“Strengthening  IMF  Surveillance:  What  have  we  learned  from  Independent  Evaluation?”  IMF  –  WB 
Program of Seminars, Singapore, 18 September 2006.  
 First,  let  me  thank  the  Independent  Evaluation  Office  of  the  IMF  for  inviting  me  to  speak  today  on 
strengthening  IMF  surveillance.  We,  at  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  have  been  a  keen  supporter  of  the 
Independent  Evaluation  Office  ever  since  its  inception  in  2000.  In  particular,  efforts  on  the  Fund’s 
advice on capital flows management as well as its recent review of FSAP, have been useful for us in 
shaping our own policies. I wanted to mention this at the outset, as a way of registering our support 
and appreciation. 
My task today is to speak on the financial sector dimension of surveillance. Given time limitations, I 
want to cover just two issues. The first is to comment on the new direction of Fund surveillance on 
financial sector, as embedded in its medium-term strategy, particularly on the issue whether the new 
direction  is  adequate  vis-à-vis  what  remains  to  be  done  in  crisis  prevention.  And  the  second  is  to 
comment  on  a  few  additional  areas  that  should  be  emphasized  going  forward  in  the  context  of 
surveillance for emerging markets. 
But before doing that, let me start first with the key issue of this seminar - that is the lessons learned. 
The Asian financial crisis of the 1990’s has been described by some as being the most severe in its 
depth and regional coverage. Looking back, I think three important lessons clearly stand out. 
The first is the risk associated with liberalizing capital flows without adequate safeguards and proper 
policy framework. Important in this context is the need for greater policy and economic flexibilities to 
help  manage  the  effects  on  macroeconomic  stability  from  persistent  capital  inflows  and  possible 
subsequent  reversals.  Also  important  is  the  need  to  have  in  place  a  credible  crisis  prevention 
mechanism that will allow timely liquidity support to be mobilized. 
As for the financial sector, the lesson learned is that a resilient and robust financial sector is key to 
avoiding crisis. The foundations for a resilient and robust financial sector are in the strong framework 
for  prudential  regulation  and  supervision,  greater  transparency  and  good  governance,  as  well  as  a 
balanced financial sector. This last point applies particularly to well developed capital markets that can 
allow financial risks in the economy to be spread out, shared, and more efficiently managed. 
And the third lesson is the need to have in place an effective mechanism of economic and financial 
surveillance  to  identify  potential  risks,  especially  those  relating  to  financial  sector  and  capital  flows 
issues, which are the two most important risks for emerging markets. 
All three lessons are now well known. And we have seen conscious efforts by national governments 
and IFI’s such as the IMF to take heed of these lessons.  
In Asia, at the national level, we see a region-wide move toward a more flexible exchange rate regime, 
with a disciplined framework in the conduct of monetary and fiscal policies. As for the financial sector, 
after the initial restructuring and consolidation, the framework of policy has moved towards risk-based 
supervision,  to  an  adherence  to  international  standards,  and  to  the  undertakings  of  formal  financial 
sector  assessments  either  under  FSAP  or  within  the  country’s  own  financial  stability  evaluation 
framework. 
At the international level, the IMF has also come up with many new and important initiatives. As for the 
financial sector, its financial surveillance process has been deepened with the introduction of FSAP 
and  the  surveillance  of  international  capital  markets  under  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  and  the 
publication of the Global Financial Stability Report. 
More importantly, the recent initiatives on the new direction of financial sector surveillance is another 
important  step  in  understanding  the  linkages  between  macroeconomic  stability  and  financial 
vulnerabilities. The new direction aims to integrate financial sector analysis and issues with the Article 
IV process, and then to link the bilateral surveillance with multilateral surveillance. In our view, this is 
an ambitious undertaking, but is a move in the right direction.  
BIS Review 95/2006 
 1
The challenge, as we see it, will  come from the implementation process, especially on the issue of 
what  should  be  the  adequate  scope  in  terms  of  issues  to  be  covered,  choice  of  countries,  and  the 
analytical approach to be used. These are important questions that will need to be worked out, taking 
into account resources at the Fund. Our view is that the initial move on the new direction should not be 
overly  ambitious.  It  is  better  for  the  process  to  move  forward  gradually,  focusing  first  on  the  most 
systemically important economies. 
But  as  far  as  emerging  markets  economies  are  concerned,  if  surveillance  is  to  be  effective  in  pre-
empting crisis, then I think one question that can be asked is whether the improvements that we are 
now seeing, as well as the new direction to be taken, are adequate or credible as a mechanism of 
crisis prevention. 
This is an important question for policy and I have given this question a lot of thought. My view is that 
the new direction does fill important gaps in the current surveillance process. And if the new direction 
is  meaningfully  implemented,  it  will  go  a  long way  in  strengthening  surveillance  and  contribute  to  a 
resilient and robust financial sector. 
Nonetheless, one must not lose sight of the fact that a resilient and robust financial sector is only a 
necessary  condition  for  avoiding  crisis,  not  a  sufficient  one.  As  recent  research  has  shown,  key 
pressure  points  that  can  lead  to  difficulties  for  emerging  markets  are  more  likely  to  be  externally-
induced. A case in point is the difficult environment associated with sudden changes in global financial 
conditions  that  result  in  a  rise  in  global  real  interest  rates  and  more  volatile  capital  flows.  Such 
developments  can  create  difficulties  for  emerging  markets  through  spillover  effects,  large  and 
persistent capital inflows, and the risk of sudden stop and capital reversals. So, it is in this context that 
IMF  surveillance  on  emerging  markets,  in  addition  to  the  new  directions  that  we  have  discussed, 
should  pay  attention  to  the  sources  of  the  externally-induced  risk  and  vulnerabilities,  and  to  assist 
members, through Fund policy advice, on how best to prepare. 
To help emerging market members become better prepared for these risks, I have a few suggestions 
to make on the Fund’s current efforts. 
First,  for  the  new  direction  on  financial  sector  surveillance  to  be  relevant  for  crisis  prevention,  it  is 
important that the key systemically important economies participate. As with FSAP, this is an area that 
is  likely  to  be  a  challenge.  Ideally,  most  systemically  important  economies  and  those  with  potential 
financial vulnerabilities should participate if the new direction were to have a strong relevance to the 
global surveillance objectives.  
The second suggestion is in financial markets surveillance. Again, if surveillance is to have a strong 
relevance for emerging markets, we will need to have a more policy-oriented surveillance of the global 
financial markets, focusing on the key financial flows, and on keeping members informed of what the 
Fund sees as the current trends and risks in the global financial markets. Also, it would be useful if the 
Fund could develop its own in-house view of a benchmark risk scenario which then can be used, or 
shared with members, in stress-testing the vulnerabilities of their economies and financial sectors. 
I probably have used up my allocated time. I hope my remarks have been useful. Again, I would like to 
thank the Independent Evaluation Office for the invitation. Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 95/2006
