  Klaus Liebscher: The changing landscape of FDI in Europe 
Opening remarks by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the CEEI 2006 
“The Changing Landscape of FDI in Europe”, Vienna, 20 November 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen! 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all to Vienna and to our annual Conference on European 
Economic  Integration  (CEEI).  Looking  at  the  list  of  participants,  I  am  glad  that  we  have  once  more 
attracted a sizeable number of key experts from national and international institutions, academia and 
the private sector – both among our distinguished speakers and in the audience. 
In the past, it has proven very fruitful to organize this conference in cooperation with other institutions. 
I am especially happy that this year we have been able to win the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (EBRD) as a partner again. The EBRD is an institution with a long-standing tradition 
in supporting investment projects in Central and Eastern Europe. For this reason the EBRD is an ideal 
partner  in  our  attempt  to  cover  the  interesting  topic  of  this  year’s  conference:  “The  Changing 
Landscape of FDI in Europe.” 
Thus, it is a special pleasure for me to welcome among us Mr. Schepers, Vice President of the EBRD, 
who is also going to share some opening remarks with us in a few minutes. 
Let me at this point extend a special welcome also to several other distinguished speakers of the first 
conference  day:  EU  Commissioner  László Kovács,  the  Vice-President  of  the  European  Investment 
Bank Ivan Pilip, Robert Lipsey, Director at the National Bureau of Economic Research, who will deliver 
the  first  keynote  lecture  and  ECB  Executive  Board  Member  Jürgen Stark,  who  will  give  the  dinner 
speech this evening. A very warm welcome to all of you and many thanks for your participation. 
I ask for your understanding that it is impossible at this point to list all other distinguished experts who 
will contribute to this conference with their views and expertise, but I am very much looking forward to 
all of your interesting presentations and many stimulating discussions. So let me thank all speakers for 
their contributions and the staff of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank and the EBRD for making this 
event possible. 
As  in  recent  years,  the  Conference  on  European  Economic  Integration  of  the  Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank  once  more  covers  a  topic  that  ranks  high  on  the  policy  agenda.  At  first  sight,  foreign 
direct  investment  may  appear  to  be  a  rather  narrow  topic.  However,  a  closer  look  at  the  issues 
covered in the conference program quickly reveals how complex and controversial this topic really is. 
Robert C. Feenstra, a first-rate expert on FDI, expressed it the following way: “FDI combines aspects 
of  both  international  trade  in  goods  and  international  financial  flows,  and  it  is  a  phenomenon  more 
complex then either of these.” 
For  individual businesses,  FDI  raises  questions  of  ownership  and  location  considerations.  For 
the public, FDI very often raises fears of unemployment and loss of independence. For policymakers, 
FDI and the internationalization of business are accompanied by the challenging task of increasing the 
attractiveness of their country as a business location and providing the ground for positive spillovers, 
while at the same time responding to the fears of the public. 
And for international institutions there is a sheer endless list of tasks, from publishing comprehensive 
data  on  FDI  and  providing  funds  and  investment  insurance,  to  promoting  an  ongoing  dialogue 
between  the  major  nations  in  order  to  avoid  the  revival  of  protectionist  and  beggar-thy-neighbor 
policies. 
International institutions such as the WTO, the UNCTAD, the OECD, the IMF, the EBRD or the EIB 
have  – each in  their respective  fields  –  contributed substantially to  providing satisfactory  data,  best 
practice  catalogues  and  a  growing  body  of  scientific  research,  which  has  laid  the  ground  for  a 
discussion  that  is  based  on  facts  instead  of  sentiment  and  prejudices.  It  is  our  hope  that  this 
conference  will  contribute  to  this  ongoing  discussion  by  highlighting  the  most  recent  trends  and 
research findings and bringing together experts from various backgrounds. 
In  our  conference  title,  we  refer  to  a  changing  landscape,  as  we  have  seen  over  the  years  that 
regional  FDI  links  have  indeed  changed  dramatically.  Investors  have  extended  and  shifted  their 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 1
investment radius, entering new territory both in a geographical and a sectoral sense. Competition has 
increased both among investor countries and FDI host countries. At the same time, FDI has displayed 
its power to connect regions. Countries that appeared distant a decade ago are now perceived to be 
within easy reach, owing to close business relations and FDI links. In this sense, FDI is a connecting 
force which influences the entire business landscape. 
To illustrate the complexity and the importance of foreign direct investments for the current political 
debate,  I  would  like  to  present  the  topic  from  two  perspectives:  the  European  perspective  and  the 
Austrian perspective. 
Let  me  start  with  the European  perspective:  At  the  very  origin  of  the  European  integration  project 
stood  the  hypothesis  that  economic  integration  –  and  at  a  later  stage  also  monetary  integration  – 
would lead to intensified trade and FDI flows, which would mutually reinforce one another. 
Furthermore,  the  more  closely  countries  are  linked  through  trade  and  FDI,  the  more  the 
synchronization  of  their  business  cycles  will  progress.  This  in  turn  reduces  the  costs  of  a  loss  of 
customs  and  monetary  autonomy.  All  these  factors  will  ultimately  lead  to  higher  growth,  promote 
development and stimulate the catching-up process. This line of argument is therefore essential for the 
assessment of the costs and benefits of removed trade barriers and monetary union. 
Have  these  hypotheses  been  substantiated  so  far?  Has  the  European  integration  process  indeed 
stimulated  trade  and  investment  flows?  And,  if  so:  Have  intensified  trade  and  investment  helped  to 
accelerate  growth  and  the  catching-up  process?  Empirical  evidence  suggests  that  European 
integration has indeed stimulated trade and FDI. In 2005, in- and outflows of foreign direct investment 
funds  from  and  to  the  EU  reached  a  level  that  was  only  topped  by  the  record  year  2000.  The 
European Union could attract almost half of all funds invested worldwide. We will hear more on the 
current trends and patterns of FDI in Session 1 this morning. 
This leads me to the second question: Have trade and investment had the desired effect of stimulating 
productivity  and  growth  through  knowledge and  technology spillovers? How can  economic policy at 
the  national  and  at  the  EU  level  contribute  to  generating  a  “win-win  situation”  in  which  both  the 
investors and the FDI host countries profit from capital flows? We will hear more about the benefits 
and costs of FDI for the home and the host countries in Session 3 this afternoon and in Session 4 
tomorrow morning, so I do not want to address these topics prematurely. 
Let me at this stage just emphasize two important aspects: First, the European stability architecture 
provides the ideal environment for trade and FDI activities. 
The design and the interaction of a stability-oriented common monetary policy at the euro area level, 
sound public finances and ambitious structural policies at the national level are all essential elements 
of  a  healthy  business  environment,  which  is  conducive  to  FDI  development.  This  ensures  that  the 
freedom of movement for persons, goods, services and capital, can fully materialize and bring about 
flexible and dynamic economies. 
Second, the ten new EU Member States are the best example of how the FDI landscape has changed 
in the course of the European integration process. They have experienced trade intensification and a 
wave of FDI inflows, not just since May 2004 but already in the years preceding their membership. 
In 2005, FDI inflows into all ten countries rose by 19%, reaching new record levels. Let me at this point 
express  how  pleased  I  am  that Bulgaria  and Romania will  join  the  EU  as new  members  in  January 
2007. Several essential reforms are still pending in these two countries, but once they establish a legal 
and institutional framework in line with EU regulations, I have no doubt that both countries will increase 
their attractiveness as FDI locations even further. 
With the eventual adoption of the euro, the countries in Central and Eastern Europe will experience 
another impetus for trade and investment, just as the current euro area countries did. I would like to 
emphasize, however, that this next level of integration can only be successfully reached in line with the 
stipulations  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  Before  adopting  the  common  currency,  countries  have  to 
show sufficient and sustainable stability in their monetary and fiscal policies. The two-year minimum 
period within ERM II ensures that the fixed exchange rate regime is supported by the fundamentals. I 
am happy that Slovenia has managed to fulfill all these requirements and thus will join the euro area in 
January, 2007, as the first country among the new EU Member States. This will enable Slovenia, to 
reap all the benefits of the single currency. 
Against  the  background  of  its  stability  architecture, Europe  has  no  reason  to  fear  the  effects  of 
globalization. Quite the contrary. Europe is well-prepared to meet the new challenges and to reap the 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2006
the 
implementation  of 
the  reform  agenda  and 
benefits  of  global  integration.  The  interaction  of  stability-oriented  monetary,  fiscal  and  dynamic 
structural  policies  in  the  European  context  provides  the  optimal  response  to  the  challenges  ahead 
within  a  changing  business  landscape.  If  we  want  to  take  advantage  of  open  markets  we  have  to 
continue 
to  advance  both  dimensions  of 
integration: deepening and enlargement. 
What we have achieved in Europe is today seen as giving direction to the discussions at the global 
level.  International  institutions  such  as  the  WTO,  the  IMF  or  the  OECD  are  trying  to  advance 
worldwide trade liberalization and economic cooperation in ways that became reality at the European 
level years ago. At the G-7 summit in Singapore, the participant countries stressed the importance of 
advancing multilateral trade liberalization as an essential contribution to enhancing global growth and 
reducing poverty. We can therefore be confident that we are pursuing the right strategies to respond to 
the challenges of globalization. 
At  the  same  time  I  am  worried  about  the  recent  protectionist  tendencies  in  some  of  the  new  EU 
Member  States.  We  have  seen  cases  where  attractive  business  sector  reforms  are  now  being 
reversed and privatization plans interrupted. Such moves raise uncertainty and are not conducive to 
promoting  investor  confidence.  In  the  short  run  such  defensive  strategies  may  appear  a  tempting 
reaction to budgetary shortages and public concerns. But in the long term only proactive policies have 
the potential to sustain and support a countries’ role within the context of globalization. 
Let me now come to the Austrian perspective. It is actually not a surprise that the topic of changing 
FDI patterns in Europe is taken up in our country. Austria can indeed be seen as a good example of a 
country that has for decades profited from outward and inward FDI flows. 
On the one hand, Austria is a typical FDI host country. Starting from a relatively low stock of foreign 
direct  investment, Austria  has  caught  up  substantially  in  recent  years.  In  2005, Austria’s  FDI  stocks 
already  reached 20% of GDP, which  is close  to  the  average  of  the developed  economies.  German 
companies are the most important source of funds, followed by British and American investors with a 
focus on business and financial services, retail and the chemical industries. 
On the other hand, Austria is known to play an increasingly active role as an investor. In 2005, the FDI 
funds of Austrian companies reached a new peak. Almost half of those funds are invested in Central, 
Eastern  and Southeastern  Europe.  In  the  first  half  of  2006, Austria  was  the  top  investor  country 
in Slovenia, Bulgaria, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
Today, Austria  is a  gateway  to  the  new  and  to  future  EU  Member  States.  If  you  pass  through 
the Vienna  airport,  this  role  as  a  gateway  becomes  evident.  The  flight  destinations  and  the 
accumulation of top managers from companies worldwide, who use Austria as a stopover on their way 
toward  the  East  and  Southeast,  all  underline Austria’s  central  position.  But Austria  is  not  only  a 
stopover  location.  Many  multinational  companies  today  choose Austria  as  their  operating  base  for 
expanding into eastern markets. In my view there is no doubt that Austria has profited substantially 
from the opening of the former Eastern bloc and from EU enlargement. 
Austrian companies’ investments came in subsequent waves, both in terms of targeted regions and 
sectors.  Starting  with  our  neighboring  countries Hungary, 
the Czech Republic  and Slovakia, 
companies later on enlarged their investment radius. Investors initially focused on manufacturing and 
trade  industries.  In  a  second  stage,  banks  and  insurance  companies  entered  the  markets  and 
prepared the ground for subsequent investment waves. 
More recently, investment projects have shifted from labor-intensive, low-skill industries to more skill-
intensive industries and the service sector. This may indicate that the new EU Member States have 
reached a new level of development. In this sense, Austria is not only confronted with a changing FDI 
landscape in Europe, but is actively participating in shaping it. The profitability of Austrian investment 
projects in Central and Eastern Europe is much higher than in other regions. As most projects are still 
young, profitability can be expected to remain above average for the years to come. 
By turning to the East, Austrian companies have not only succeeded in reaping benefits for their own 
operational  business;  they  have  also  contributed  substantially  to  European  integration  and  the 
realization of welfare gains. However, I do not want to finish my elaborations on Austria’s FDI situation 
without adding some words on the challenges ahead. 
Based on the excellent experience with investing into Austria’s neighbouring countries and the wish to 
maintain their pioneer role, companies have begun to move farther east- and southeastward searching 
for new investment opportunities. 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 3
This  regional  shift  does  not  come  without  additional  risks:  Austrian  companies  are  approaching 
markets that are more distant both in a geographical sense as well as in their traditions and business 
culture. This makes a comprehensive judgement of the associated risks more difficult. At  the same 
time, Austria increasingly faces competition from what used to be typical FDI host countries, which are 
now emerging as active investors in their neighboring countries, often sharing with them a common 
language and a common history. 
The  changing  FDI  landscape  in  Europe  is  thus  a  challenge  for  investor  countries  like Austria. 
But Austria  will  also  be  challenged  as  an  FDI  host  country.  Investors  constantly  update  their 
investment strategies in geographical and sectoral terms. 
I  appeal  to  the future  Austrian  government  to  continue  the  stability-oriented  fiscal  and  dynamic 
structural  policies  in  order  to  preserve Austria’s  attractiveness  as  a  business  location.  Besides  an 
appealing  tax  system  and  investment  incentives  this  also  requires  a  highly  trained  workforce  and 
continued  wage  moderation  in  combination  with  flexibility  and  social  peace. Reform  deadlock  or 
“defense  play”  would  be  a  short-sighted  and  risky  strategy  that  will  neither  bring  growth  nor 
employment. 
The focus of this conference lies on the countries of Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe. But 
over the next two days we will also hear about experiences in western European countries or the U.S. 
After  all,  FDI  trends  worldwide  are  dominated  by  the  richest  countries.  About  three-quarters  of  the 
global FDI stock is currently located in developed countries and the vast majority of FDI funds invested 
worldwide comes from developed countries. 
At  the  same  time,  FDI  patterns  are  changing  most  rapidly  for  developing  and  transition  countries, 
where funds are concentrated in a handful of countries such as China or India. This is why we will also 
hear about the Asian experience. 
Interestingly  enough,  some  of  the  motivations  for  investors’  location  decisions  are  not  so  different 
between  developed  and  developing  countries.  Factors  such  as  access  to  large  and  fast-growing 
markets or the circumvention of trade barriers are equally relevant to the U.S. as they are to China 
or India. 
Other factors are more specific to single regions. Overall, I am confident that there will be a lot to learn 
for us – across countries and across regions – during the next two days. I wish all of us an interesting 
and successful conference.  
4 
 BIS Review 113/2006
