Glenn Stevens: Finance and economic development in Australia 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Committee  for 
Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) Annual Dinner, Melbourne, 12 December 2006. 
 It is a great pleasure to be invited to address the Annual General Meeting of CEDA, continuing a long 
tradition of such addresses by Governors of the Reserve Bank of Australia. 
CEDA –  the  Committee  for  Economic  Development  of  Australia –  began  in  1960,  an  initiative  of 
D.B. Copland. Copland, one of Australia’s most remarkable economists of the Depression era, was a 
member of ‘Giblin’s Platoon’, whose history is recorded so nicely in the recent book of that name.1 
CEDA has over the years made a substantial contribution to debate in a number of fields, from trade 
policy to taxation policy, from indigenous affairs to infrastructure. 
Interestingly enough, the list of publications on CEDA’s website does not include any which are overtly 
financial in their focus. I do not say this as a criticism – perhaps the reason you have invited central 
bank governors to speak so regularly is to cover that very set of issues! 
But  it  seems  appropriate,  given  CEDA’s  core  focus  on  economic  development,  to  address  the 
questions: what is the role of finance in economic development and growth? How does the financial 
system  contribute?  How  can  financial  events  sometimes  be  detrimental  to  economic  growth?  What 
can be done to ameliorate those risks? What risks do we face at present? 
History 
The growth we take for granted in the modern world is actually a fairly recent phenomenon in human 
history. Prior to the industrial revolution in western Europe, living standards rose, if at all, very slowly. 
According to Angus Maddison’s data, the real per capita GDP of the United Kingdom rose between 
1500 and 1820 at an average rate of only 0.27 per cent per annum.2 At that pace, living standards 
doubled about every 250 years. In other words, a person would not live all that much better than their 
grandparents – assuming they could discern any difference. 
From 1820 to 1913, the rate of increase rose to 1.15 per cent. That’s a very big change. At that pace, 
living standards doubled in about 60 years. In the 20th century – despite wars, the Great Depression, 
the Great Inflation and various other problems – growth per head rose further. Australia’s per capita 
growth was 1.70 per cent in the 20th century, according to the same data set, for a doubling in living 
standards  about  every  40 years.  The  difference  between  my  living  standards  and  those  of  my 
grandparents in the mid 1940s when they were as old as I am now – a trebling – is remarkable. 
There  is  a  vast  literature  on  what  accounts  for  this  growth,  and  there  has  been  a  long  debate  in 
economics  about  whether  the  development  of  financial  institutions  and  markets  followed  or  led  the 
developments  in  the  real  economy.  Some,  such  as  Joseph Schumpeter,  Sir John Hicks  and 
Walter Bagehot argued that financial development actively fostered innovation and entrepreneurship. 
Others,  including  Joan Robinson,  argued  that  finance  passively  followed  in  the  wake  of  real-side 
development.3  
Surely both components were necessary, and neither alone would have been sufficient. Technological 
advance  provided  the  potential  for  a  marked  acceleration  in  productivity.  In  the  early  age  of 
industrialisation,  the  steam  engine  and  electricity  were  two  obvious  examples.  Without  those 
opportunities, such financial capital as was available for deployment would probably have struggled to 
find a useful outlet. 
                                                      
1   Coleman, W., S. Cornish and A. Hagger (2006), Giblin’s Platoon: The Trials and Triumph of the Economist in Australian 
Public Life, ANU E Press, Canberra. 
2   Maddison, A. (2003), The World Economy: Historical Statistics, OECD, Paris. 
3   For a treatment of these issues, see Levine, R. (1996), ‘Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda’, 
The World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 1678. 
BIS Review 122/2006 
 1
But equally, the potential technological advance would have remained just that – potential, rather than 
actual –  had  there  not  been  a  capacity  to  mobilise  the  financial  resources  needed  to  invest  in  the 
equipment embodying the new technology. The capital required for an economy based on agriculture 
and  artisan-based  manufacturing  had  been  in  the  form  of  land,  seed,  basic  tooling  and  the  like. 
Traders needed working capital in order to purchase goods in one place and move them to another for 
sale, and various financial devices arose to assist this. The need to sink very big sums into large-scale 
machinery,  however,  called  for  capital  on  a  different  scale,  and  financial  development  was  key  to 
providing it.  
The economic historians suggest that a number of innovations were important. The development of 
the limited liability corporate structure allowed proprietors to take risk without facing complete personal 
ruin if the venture failed. Banking corporations efficiently pooled the resources of a large number of 
savers,  the  more  so  as  they  developed  into  joint-stock  ownership  structures,  as  opposed  to  purely 
private  ones.  These  organisations  also  provided,  before  central  banks  developed  fully,  circulating 
monetary  assets  for  the  community,  which  facilitated  exchange.  Markets  for  the  trading  of  claims 
against future income flows – what today we know as stock and bond markets – allowed the providers 
of capital to retain their wealth in a more liquid form, thus encouraging them to commit more capital to 
long-term  ventures.  In  other  words,  the  development  of  financial  markets  and  institutions  was  an 
integral part of the industrial revolution. It remains a key facilitator of the growth we enjoy today. 
Yet  such  progress  was  not  without  its  occasional  problems,  in  the  form  of  periodic  panics. 
Commodities  markets  had  a  certain  tendency  towards  occasional  instability.  Optimism  and  greed 
could push prices to extreme levels, following which a loss of confidence typically precipitated a crash. 
The Dutch tulip bubble of the 1630s occurred without the aid of the highly developed set of financial 
intermediaries that came later, though it did achieve considerable added fizz via a futures market for 
tulip bulbs – derivatives allow leverage, which is almost always a key element of the latter stages of 
speculative manias.4  
But the growth of a modern banking system in England by the late 18th century, whose liabilities were 
effectively financial claims against assets that could not be quickly realised if suddenly called, brought 
heightened risks. Banking is, after all, a business that involves leverage and liquidity and credit risks. 
There was always the possibility of a financial panic that could, if  unchecked, threaten not only the 
financial institutions but also the course of the real economy. The question facing public policy, then, 
was  how  to  find  a  set  of  arrangements  that  would  allow  the  necessary  credit  extension  to  support 
capital  investment  in  pursuit  of  new  technological  opportunities,  yet  provide  a  stable  monetary 
standard and a financial system in which the public could have confidence. 
We should record that in the same era, questions of a qualitatively similar nature arose in the fledgling 
colonies  of  the  Antipodes,  even  if  they  were,  to  begin  with,  at  a  lower  level  of  sophistication.  The 
Colonies  needed  both  a  system  of  mobilising  capital  and  a  means  of  making  payments  other  than 
circulating  paper  claims  over  goods –  be  it  rum  or  something  else.  We  are  all  aware  of 
Governor Macquarie’s  ingenious  attempt  in  1813  at  keeping  metallic  money  in  the  colony  of  New 
South  Wales,  by  making  two  coins  out  of  each  Spanish  dollar,  thus  rendering  them  at  once  more 
useful in New South Wales and much less useful elsewhere. 
But Macquarie’s initiatives in granting a charter to the Bank of New South Wales in 1817, and those of 
Governor Darling in rescuing it from disaster in 1826, were perhaps more important milestones in the 
early financial development in this country. According to Trevor Sykes’ account,5 both of these actions 
were contrary to the policy of the British Government. These appear to have been occasions when the 
lags in implementation of official policy – measured by the time taken for a request for instructions to 
reach London by sailing ship, be considered and then answered by return ship, too late to influence 
the decision – helped to produce a superior outcome! 
Around the world, governments groped towards a sustainable solution for combining the benefits of 
financial  intermediation  with  stability.  Progress  was  not  necessarily  always  steadily  in  the  right 
direction,6 but one of the key developments was the gradual evolution of the institution we would today 
                                                      
4   See Sykes, T. (2003), ‘Tulips from Amsterdam’, in T. Richards and T. Robinson (eds), Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, 
Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, pp. 194–202. 
5   See Chapter 1 of Sykes, T. (1988), Two Centuries of Panic, Allen & Unwin, Sydney. 
6   Rondo Cameron, for example, in claiming that the British financial system contributed to the industrial revolution between 
the mid-18th and mid-19th centuries, argues that this contribution was in spite of, rather than as a result of, policy actions of 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2006
the  1930s  occasioned  new 
recognise as the central bank. In a number of countries, these institutions had begun life as a means 
to finance military expeditions by governments of not altogether unquestioned creditworthiness,7 but 
they gradually became central players in the efforts to foster stability in normal times, and to restore it 
after something went wrong. Bagehot’s classic, Lombard Street,8 remains one of the best accounts of 
this in the case of the Bank of England. The notion of the lender of last resort, and the idea that the 
central bank should look to the interests of the system rather than any commercial interest of its own, 
were slowly developing. 
It was, of course, to be some time before the central bank had fully evolved into the current form, even 
in  the  most  advanced  economies.  In  our  own  case,  the  central  bank  did  not  really  have  a  fully 
developed public policy mandate until after the 1930s, and arguably was not a purely policy institution 
until the separation of the Reserve Bank from the Commonwealth Bank in 1960. 
Through  the  20th century,  of  course,  views  about  the  appropriate  role  of  a  central  bank  changed  a 
good deal, as did views about the appropriate extent of official intervention in financial markets and 
institutions  generally.  The  Great  Depression  of 
ideas  about 
macroeconomic  policy,  which  envisaged  more  official  intervention  in  economic  matters.  This  was 
followed by a very large increase in the government sector’s command over economic and financial 
resources,  of  necessity,  to  conduct  the  Second  World  War.  Hence  by  the  end  of  the  1940s,  the 
landscape  had  changed  a  great  deal  in  comparison  with  1930.  The  financial  systems  of  many 
countries found themselves subject to much more regulation, and central banks with more regulatory 
powers  and  more  explicit  mandates  for  macroeconomic  stabilisation,  than  had  previously  been  the 
case. 
Initially,  this  arrangement  held  great  promise.  The  instability  of  the  1930s  had  apparently  been 
banished. But as time went by, other problems emerged. As explained eloquently by Ian Macfarlane’s 
recent  Boyer  Lectures,  macroeconomic  policies  became  overly  ambitious,  and  neither  the  policy 
frameworks  nor  the  governance  arrangements  under  which  they  were  implemented  were  up  to  the 
challenges posed by the shocks of the 1970s. 
Nor,  we  might  add,  was  the  structure  of  financial  regulation,  with  its  emphasis  on  governments  or 
central  banks  setting  most  financial  prices  and  even  seeking  to  decide  who  should  and  should  not 
receive credit. Many of us here will recall the debates at the time of the Campbell Inquiry in the late 
1970s.  By  then,  the  problems  of  the  extensive  regulatory  regime  had  become  all  too  clear.  It  was 
ineffective (or even counterproductive) at a macroeconomic level, it distorted resource allocation at a 
microeconomic  level  and  it  fostered  the  rapid  development  of  a  more  dynamic  financial  sector 
operating beyond the regulatory net. 
This  wasn’t  sustainable,  and  something  had  to  give.  There  was  large-scale  liberalisation  of  the 
financial  sector  through  the  1980s,  winding  back  many  of  the  post-Depression,  World  War II  era 
restrictions. Efforts at prudential supervision were beefed up, but these progressively became focused 
on ensuring adequate risk management in individual financial institutions rather than the more direct 
controls of the earlier era. 
In  more  recent  times,  financial  system  stability –  as  distinct  from  the  solvency  of  individual 
institutions – has become more prominent as an explicit focus of central banks, many of which publish 
regular detailed assessments of system stability.9 This is a natural response to the circumstances, but 
it is really a refocusing on one of the key original purposes of the central bank. 
All of that history is a backdrop to the financial trends of the past decade, to which I now turn. 
                                                                                                                                                                      
the British governments of the day. He writes: ‘At almost every point at which banking and monetary policy might have been 
used constructively to promote economic growth, the authorities either made the wrong decision or took no action at all.’ 
See Cameron, R. (1967), (ed.) Banking in the Early Stages of Industrialization: A Study in Comparative Economic History, 
Oxford University Press, New York, p. 58. 
7   For example, the Bank of England was granted its charter – establishing it as Britain’s first limited liability banking entity – in 
1694 after raising £1.2 million for the Government to fund expenditure in the war with France. 
8   Bagehot, W. (1873), Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market, Henry S. King and Co., London. 
9  
It is not mere coincidence, by the way, that this came at the same time as the macroeconomic instability concerns of the 
1960s, 1970s and 1980s receded. Better macroeconomic stability has coincided with, and in all probability encouraged, a 
dramatic increase in the size and complexity of financial activity. 
BIS Review 122/2006 
 3
Financial and economic trends in Australia in the past decade  
The most prominent financial development of the past decade has, of course, been the change in the 
structure of the balance sheets of households. Much has been said about this and so any description 
here can be brief. 
The  essence  of  the  story  is  that  in  the  early  1990s,  two  decades  of  chronically  high  inflation  in 
Australia  ended.  Interest  rates  declined  as  a  result.  In  fact,  they  returned  to  levels  last  seen  in  the 
low-inflation  period  in  the  1960s.  But  in  the  intervening  period,  of  course,  the  Australian  financial 
system had changed out of all recognition, a result of liberalisation, competition and innovation. No 
longer  was  the  potential borrower  for housing  on bended  knee  to  a  stern-faced  bank  manager,  the 
way they had been in earlier periods of low rates. Now, lenders were under more competitive pressure 
to grow their balance sheets. Having pursued the corporate borrowers in the 1980s, with rather mixed 
success,  they  were  now  looking  to  households  as  a  source  of  growth.  We  can  all  recall  the 
advertisement for one major bank in which the formerly stern manager practises saying ‘yes’ in the 
mirror each morning. 
So by the mid 1990s, we had a household sector more able and more inclined to demand housing 
finance,  and  financial  institutions  more  willing  to  supply  it.  It  is  hardly  surprising  that  this  should 
ultimately result in households carrying much more debt, as well as higher levels of assets, than they 
had before. It might have happened earlier had the course of inflation and interest rates been different. 
Nor is it surprising that such an expansion in finance over a relatively short period of years should be 
associated with higher prices for dwellings. I find persuasive the arguments that changes to planning 
and development regulations have raised the cost of new building – that is, the cost of adding to the 
dwelling stock. It is plausible that this, in turn, adds to the price of those existing dwellings that could 
reasonably be substitutes for new dwellings. But if we are seeking an explanation for why the prices of 
the 8 million existing dwellings across the country have increased so much, we surely have to give a 
very prominent role to the halving of the cost of debt and its easier availability. 
These  trends  also  added  to  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy,  via  additional  construction  and 
renovation  spending,  and  the  generally  expansionary  impact  of  rising  asset  values  on  broader 
household spending. Whereas dwelling investment averaged around 5 per cent of GDP through the 
1970s and 80s, it reached a peak of nearly 7 per cent of GDP in 2003/04. Households also expanded 
their  consumption  faster  than  their  income.  For  a  time,  these  trends  were  helpful  in  periods  when 
adverse shocks from abroad were having their impact. Over the past two or three years, these effects 
gently  faded.  We  have  seen  some  decline  in  spending  on  housing,  and  a  slowing  in  the  growth  of 
household  borrowing  and  consumption  spending,  but  these  changes  have  been  fairly  modest 
compared with earlier episodes, partly because there are regions of the country where the resources 
boom has continued to boost house prices and household demand.  
The run-up in household borrowing has also raised, on occasion, and quite naturally, questions about 
how sustainable all this was, and whether there was a build-up of exposures in the household sector 
and the financial system that could impair financial or macroeconomic stability at some future time. 
Considerable attention has been given over recent years to this set of questions, both in the Reserve 
Bank and elsewhere. 
We did not believe that the rise in debt was, in itself, likely to trigger an economic downturn. That said, 
higher leverage would, in the event of an economic downturn that occurred for some other reason, 
probably make at least some households’ spending behaviour more responsive to declines in income 
than it would have been in the past. 
Precisely  this  set  of  issues  has  recently  been  addressed  as  part  of  the  IMF’s  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Program (FSAP). That program was a very wide-ranging exercise, as all FSAPs are, but 
from our point of view a key component of it was a macroeconomic stress test. The Reserve Bank, 
through  our  Financial  Stability  Department  headed  by  Keith Hall,  co-ordinated  this  exercise,  which 
involved  the  IMF  team,  APRA,  the  Australian  Treasury  and  the  risk-management  areas  of  the  five 
largest banks – for whose co-operation we express our thanks. 
The results were included in our September Financial Stability Review, and also released by the IMF 
as part of the FSAP report in October. In brief, the test involved a scenario featuring: a very large fall in 
house prices, a recession, a big rise in unemployment, a sharp depreciation of the exchange rate and 
a rise in the funding costs of financial institutions. This was designed specifically to test the resilience 
of the financial system when several of the key elements underpinning business strategies over the 
past decade were removed. 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2006
In such a scenario, only some of the adverse effects would come directly through mortgage portfolios; 
a  good  deal  of  it  would  come  through  business  portfolios.  Faced  with  a  loss  of  income,  indebted 
households  would  be  likely  to  cut  back  consumption  sharply  in  order  to  keep  up  their  mortgage 
payments.  Hence,  businesses  supplying  into  discretionary  consumer  markets  would  feel  the  effect 
quite quickly. 
In  the  tests  conducted,  the  result  was  an  estimated  decline  of  around  40 per  cent  in  the  banks’ 
aggregate  profits  after  around  18 months,  and  by  the  end  of  the  three-year  scenario,  profitability 
remained 25 per cent lower than its starting point. That said, the institutions remained not only well 
and truly solvent but with capital positions above regulatory minima. In part, this reflected the strength 
of business balance sheets. As the banks worked through the scenario, this strength meant that the 
significant  cutback  in  household  spending  did  not  cause  widespread  loan  defaults  in  the  business 
sector. 
Overall, the results are, within the limitations of this type of exercise, reassuring. Before we take too 
much comfort from them, however, we need to enter a few caveats. For a start, while the scenario 
seems a demanding one at first blush, it is predicated on a recession in Australia but not in the rest of 
the world. That would be, if not unprecedented, at least very unusual, and a more realistic scenario in 
which Australia suffered a downturn simultaneously with, and largely as a result of, an international 
downturn could well be a more challenging environment than the one assumed for the tests. 
A  second  factor  is  that  everyone  taking  part  in  the  simulation  knew  that  the  scenario  involved  an 
economic recovery, by assumption. They could factor that into their modelling. But in a real recession, 
there always comes a point at which many people are not confident of recovery, and that affects their 
behaviour. It is not unknown for lenders to be sufficiently lacking in confidence that they are reluctant 
to take on the risk of new borrowers. That would feed back to the economy, deepening the decline and 
slowing the recovery. 
Thirdly,  there  were  quite  large  differences  in  results  across  banks.  While  these  differences  may  be 
partly explained by variations in the structure of individual bank balance sheets, they also appear to 
reflect different approaches used by the banks to model their outcomes. There is nothing wrong with 
that –  it  is  not  that  one  approach  is  definitely  right  and  another  wrong.  But  the  fact  that  varying 
techniques can produce significantly different results means that there must be a fair bit of uncertainty 
around any individual estimate. 
Hence, while the results provide some comfort, we can have only limited confidence that they would 
be replicated in a real-world downturn. We are, however, confident that the exercise was worthwhile, 
and would be worth doing again at some point. The Council of Financial Regulators, a body that brings 
together  APRA,  ASIC,  the  Treasury  and  the  Reserve  Bank  under  the  chairmanship  of  the  RBA 
Governor,  is  of  the  view  that  system-wide  stress  testing  should  be  conducted  on  a  regular  basis, 
though of course the scenario would need to change through time. This was also the view of the IMF 
in its FSAP report. We have indicated to the CEOs of the participating banks that we would look to do 
this type of stress test roughly once every two years, and I look forward to their support for this.  
Looking  ahead,  the  increasing  prominence  of  private  equity  and  leveraged  buyout  activity  will  be  a 
point  of  interest.  To  date,  this  trend  has  probably  caused  a  bit  more  excitement  than  the  straight 
numbers  would  suggest  is  warranted,  since  LBOs  accounted  for  a  relatively  small  proportion  of 
corporate mergers and acquisitions of Australian companies in 2006. 
But perhaps the reason for the attention is the feeling that the trend could continue for some time. In 
essence, many of these transactions are based on two fundamental premises: the return on equity is 
high, and has in recent years been unusually stable as well; and the cost of debt is low. Those offering 
high prices for businesses are essentially betting that, over the next several years, they can enhance 
returns  by  increasing  leverage.  To  some  extent,  they  may  also  feel  that  in  a  private-ownership 
structure  they  can  do  some  things  to  improve  long-run  performance  of  the  company  that  current 
shareholders  would  not  tolerate  because  of  short-term  damage  to  earnings  and  share  prices.  But 
mainly,  the  strategy  is  one  of  leverage.  If  this  analysis  is  correct,  then  corporate  leverage,  and  the 
associated exposures around the financial system, could be rather more prominent as an issue over 
the next five years or so than it has been for a couple of decades. Going back to the FSAP stress tests 
for  a  moment,  it  is  likely  that  the  results  would  have  been  more  worrying  had  the  leverage  of  the 
corporate sector been considerably higher. 
But we shall have to leave a more detailed discussion of such issues to another occasion. For now, it 
is time to conclude. 
BIS Review 122/2006 
 5
Conclusion 
Finance and growth go together. It was no accident that the acceleration in growth in the industrial 
revolution was associated with the development of modern banking and capital markets. 
By the same token, disruption to the financial sector is costly to the real economy, as is only too clear 
in history. The role of public policy is to respond to these disruptions forcefully if and when they occur 
to  preserve  the  stability  of  the  system,  but  in  the  good  times  to work  hard  at  fostering  a  climate  of 
careful risk assessment in the relevant institutions and markets. 
For the past 15 years or so, the financial system in Australia has worked remarkably smoothly to assist 
the economy. A very large change in the household sector’s balance sheets has made households 
more sensitive to changes in their circumstances, but financial institutions have continued to perform 
strongly. 
The challenge remains for these institutions, and all of us, to understand how risk is changing in this 
new environment, and to remain aware that we may at some stage face less forgiving circumstances 
than we have enjoyed over the past decade. We need also to be alert to the shift in the wind in the 
area of corporate leverage that seems to be occurring. I suspect we will be talking about that for some 
time to come.  
In the interim, I wish all of you a merry Christmas and a happy, prosperous – and stable – new year. 
6 
 BIS Review 122/2006
