Caleb M Fundanga: A brief look at corporate governance in Zambia 
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  launch  of  corporate 
governance guidelines for banks and non-bank financial institutions, Lusaka, 28 November 2006. 
 ♦ The Chairperson of the Bankers Association of Zambia; 
♦ The Chairperson of the Institute of Directors; 
♦ The Chief Executive Officers of banks and non-bank financial institutions; 
♦ Deputy Governors, Bank of Zambia; 
♦ Representatives of Professional Bodies; Media Colleagues; 
♦ Distinguished Invited Guests; 
♦ Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I wish to welcome you all to the launch of the corporate governance guidelines for banks and non-
bank financial institutions, in particular, deposit taking non-bank financial institutions. 
As you all may be aware, the recent debacle of corporate scandals has resulted in the resurgence of 
interest in good corporate governance. These scandals have not been restricted to large businesses 
in  the  US  or  Europe,  but  have  surfaced  in  emerging  economies  as  well,  with  equally  devastating 
effects. This, together with concern about our environment and globalisation, has played an important 
role in this resurgence of interest in how companies are managed, directed and controlled. 
Here in Zambia, the collapse of a number of banks in the mid-1990’s has largely been attributed to 
poor  corporate  governance.  Some  characteristics  of  this  included  dominant  key  shareholders,  poor 
transparency  and  inadequate  disclosure.  Consequently,  the  IMF/World  Bank  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Program (FSAP) undertaken in 2002 revealed the need to enhance financial stability in 
Zambia  by  ensuring  that  the  financial  sector  was  adequately  guided  by  corporate  governance 
practices which conformed to international best practices. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in order to guide this process, among other things, in 2004 the Government 
approved a comprehensive five-year Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) that positioned good 
corporate governance as one of the pillars for promoting financial system stability. 
Today’s launch, therefore, is a culmination of an extensive consultative process during which the Bank 
of Zambia engaged the banks and non-bank financial institutions, and other key stakeholders in round 
table discussions. Local auditing firms, the World Bank, IFC and the IMF also contributed immensely 
to the production of these guidelines. 
In  addition,  the  development  of  the  guidelines  took  into  account  the  standards  set  by  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  unique  characteristics  of  the  Zambian  business 
environment within which institutions operate and the many valuable lessons we have learnt along the 
way. 
The  above  notwithstanding,  these  guidelines  only  define  the  minimum  standards  that  the  Bank  of 
Zambia  expects  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions  to  adhere  to.  Therefore,  banks  and  non-
bank financial institutions alike are expected to strive for the highest standards possible at all times. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it should also be stressed that these guidelines are to be treated as a living 
document and thus subject to review to incorporate new developments as they emerge. To this end, 
the Bank of Zambia will ensure that the Committee that has been spearheading the development of 
these guidelines become a permanent one and meet every so often to make the necessary changes 
in an inclusive manner. Accordingly, you are all urged to forward any contributions you wish to make 
on an ongoing basis. 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me now to welcome and thank Mr Mervin King for graciously agreeing 
to  officially  launch  the  guidelines.  Mr.  King  is  internationally  renowned  for  his  work  on  corporate 
governance, and in particular for his work on the King Committee of South Africa which issued its first 
report  in  1994.  The  King  Report,  along  with  the  Cadbury  Report  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of the United States have become key references on the subject and it is for this 
reason that we feel both proud and honoured to have Mr. King with us today. 
BIS Review 119/2006 
 1
It  is  now  my  honour  and  privilege  to  call  upon  Mr.  King  to  launch  the  Corporate  Governance 
Guidelines. 
Mr. King! 
