Savenaca Narube: Personal remittances – an important source of foreign 
exchange 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  MH 
Supermarket and Westpac Bank Launch of MoneyGram® Worldwide Money Transfer Service, Suva, 
16 October 2006. 
 Mr. David Evans, Chief Manager Westpac Fiji 
Mr. Roger Powell, Managing Director Carpenters Fiji  
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Thank you for inviting me to the joint launch of MoneyGram® Worldwide Money Transfer Service by 
MH Supermarket and Westpac. I congratulate you on this initiative and wish you all the best with this 
new international money transfer service. 
I have been informed that MoneyGram International Incorporated is a leading global payment services 
company. The company is listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Its major products and services 
include  global  money  transfers,  money  orders  and  payment  processing  solutions  for  financial 
institutions  and  retail  customers.  There  are  about  100,000  global  money  transfer  locations  in  170 
countries and territories. 
With  such  international  outreach,  it  is  encouraging  to  see  MoneyGram  expand  its  business 
connections  into  Fiji.  MoneyGram  services  will  be  available  through  twelve  MH  Supermarkets  and 
every  Westpac  branch  Fiji  wide.  Westpac  has  14  branches  all  over  Fiji  so  access  to  services  will 
increase significantly. We also know that MH Supermarkets open for extended hours - most of MH 
stores open from lam to 7pm daily, inclusive of weekends so customers have access to MoneyGram 
services as well as MH's extended shopping hours. I have been told that you can send and receive 
money  worldwide  in  as  little  as  10  minutes  -  subject  to  agent  operating  hours  and  availability,  of 
course. An added advantage is that customers do not need a bank account or credit card to use this 
service. This is therefore an excellent development for Fiji. 
Personal remittances are becoming an important source of foreign exchange reaching $311 million in 
2005  from  a  level  of  $43  million  in  1995.  This  MoneyGram  service  will  definitely  make  it  more 
accessible, convenient, efficient and simpler to receive remittances from friends and families abroad. 
We in the Reserve Bank are in the process of learning more about remittances. Two things that we 
would like to know are the sources and recipients of these flows and we look forward to the assistance 
of the commercial banks and money changers on this exercise. Some of the other issues we would 
also like to know are how this money is spent and if this level of remittances will be maintained for a 
long  time  and  we  may  be  commissioning  a  national  survey  to  help  us  collect  this  information.  One 
thing that we would definitely like to see is these funds being channelled to investment projects. It is 
always good for our future generation if these funds are spent on productive purposes. 
There  has  been a  lot discussed about  the  Fiji  economy  recently  at  the  National  Economic  Summit. 
Economic growth has averaged around 2.4 percent over the past 5 years and is expected to average 
around  2.7  percent  in  the  next  3  years.  But  we  know  that  we  can  do  better  especially  when  we 
benchmark Fiji's performance against the Pacific and some Asian economies. Investment is growing 
with momentum coming from the private sector. Tourism is doing well. Inflation remains low. 
We also have challenges ahead of us. These challenges can be resolved in the short term if we do the 
necessary things now. Let me mention five of them: 
• 
First, the resource based sectors like gold, fisheries and forestry are underperforming. But 
there is potential with greater private public partnership, incentives offered by Government, 
improved market access and value-adding initiatives. 
The second is sugar - there are long standing issues with production, land leases and the 
withdrawal of preferential prices. However, there are projects that are now in place to revive 
the industry with reforms underway with support from the Indian Government, the European 
Union and the Asian Development Bank. These reforms will assist those who will displaced 
by the reforms and address the land tenure issue and raise farm productivity. 
 BIS Review 114/2006 
 1
   The third is our rising debt level - the Strategic Development Plan for 2007 to 2011 has a 
strong commitment to lower the fiscal deficit to around 2 percent of GDP and this is expected 
to help bring the level of Government debt down to 45 percent of GDP by 2011. 
The  fourth  is  reforms.  We  have  been  slow  in  implementing  the  necessary  reforms  in  the 
public sectors and other sectors. 
The  last  but  not  least  is  the  Balance  of  Payments.  Exports  must  now  drive  growth.  The 
mitigating factors are actions taken by the Reserve Bank to dampen consumption demand, 
Government's  fiscal  consolidation  plans  in  the  SDP,  development  of  a  National  Exports 
Strategy  to  increase  Fiji's  exports  and  consideration  of  alternative  sources  of  energy  and 
import substitution for relevant and viable areas. 
We are aware of what we need to do. The greatest challenge is for us to now just do them. If we do 
them, I am confident that we can lift our economic performance for the benefit of everyone. 
Once  again,  my  sincere  thanks  for  inviting  me  here  today.  I  congratulate  you  -  both  Westpac  and 
Carpenters Fiji - for this joint initiative and I wish your project every success. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2006
