William A Ryback: Macro prudential policy – a new name for some old ways of 
thinking? 
Speech by Mr William A Ryback, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
Macro  Prudential  Supervision  Conference:  Challenges  for  Financial  Supervisors,  organised  by  the 
Korea  Financial  Supervisory  Commission  /  Financial  Supervisory  Service  and  the  International 
Monetary Fund, Seoul, 7 November 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am pleased to be here today to add my thoughts to this important discussion on emerging insights 
into the macro prudential end of the supervision business. I also am pleased to be back in Seoul one 
of  the  most  dynamic cities  in  Asia  and  to  be  hosted  by  my  friends  in  the  Korean  Bank supervisory 
community - many of whom I have known for a number of years. 
It is almost ten years from the financial crises that affected many parts of Asia. This conference then is 
being  held  at  an  opportune  time  to  allow  us  to  reflect  on  the  lessons  learned.  There  has  been 
considerable change over the last decade. Risk management in the regions banking systems’ have 
become more robust. There has also been a step-change in the standards of supervision. Risk-based 
supervision  has  replaced  compliance  checking.  There  are  also  now  moves  under  way  to  improve 
regional cooperation on issues like Basel II implementation, in which EMEAP will continue to play a 
leading role. 
Clearly, no financial system can be considered stable unless the individual institutions that comprise 
its whole are themselves healthy. Thus risk-based supervision and proper risk assessment by banks 
are  essential  measures  to  bring  about  financial  stability.  In  this  regard  Basel  II  will  no  doubt  help 
strengthen our collective financial systems by encouraging banks to adopt stronger risk management 
mechanisms. Pillar 2 of Basel II will add to the stability of the financial system by providing a deeper 
and  richer  mechanism  to  evaluate  a  broader  range  of  risks  -  including  risks  that  will  impact  on  the 
system more broadly - such as credit concentration risk. Encouraging greater transparency by banks 
under  Pillar  3  also  contributes  to  making  financial  systems  more  resilient  by  providing  a  consistent 
framework across national boundaries for analysts to do their job in identifying weak or risky banks. 
Ensuring  the  soundness  of  individual  banks  –  what  some  people  now  call  the  "micro  prudential" 
perspective  –  is,  however,  only  part  of  ensuring  a  sound  financial  system.  Bank  supervisors  these 
days now talk about "pillars" and in addition to the three pillars of Basel II I believe that there are also 
two pillars of financial stability. One of these is the micro prudential perspective. The other one is the 
macro  prudential  perspective.  They  are  mutually  reinforcing  and  both  are  essential  for  ensuring 
financial stability. An important movement in the last decade has been a much more explicit emphasis 
being  given  to  the  macro  prudential  aspects  of  banking  supervision  by  central  banks  as  well  as 
academics and other market observers. 
What do we mean by macro prudential aspects? I think it has the following four features: 
• 
First, its aims to limit the distress to entire financial systems rather than distress to individual 
institutions. 
Second,  its  chief  aim  is  to  avoid  large  and  burdensome  costs  to  the  economy  –  such  as 
expensive bank bailouts – rather than aiming to protect more narrowly the depositors of an 
individual bank. 
Third,  it  is  based  largely  on  the  assumption  that  at  least  some  of  the  risks  faced  by  the 
banking system collectively differ from those faced by individual banks. In other words, the 
risk to the system is not simply the sum of risks to individual banks. 
And,  fourth,  it  aims  to  examine  risks  that  arise  from  the  interaction  of  banks  as  part  of  a 
financial system rather than on a bank-by-bank basis. 
   While  having  sound  and  sturdy  building  blocks  of  the  system  is  essential,  it  is  also  essential  to 
understand how they all fit together in a framework and this is where the macro prudential perspective 
becomes  critical.  In  short,  the  difference  between  the  two  pillars  of  micro  and  macro  prudential 
surveillance is between a system-wide health check and ensuring that individual banks are inoculated 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 1
properly from disease. The macro prudential pillar takes account of those risks that may affect all, part, 
or most banks in the system - and not just individual banks. 
Like most other bank supervisors I’ve spent most of my career looking at banking system soundness 
mainly from an individual bank perspective. However, as a career central banker, I also have had to 
spend a good deal of time looking at financial stability from the macro prudential perspective as well. 
For much of my career we didn’t call it macro surveillance but it was very much in our minds when, for 
example, in the late 1980’s the U.S. banking system suffered from the collapse of a number of sectors 
of the economy episodically resulting in a very unhealthy and unstable banking system as a whole. 
Over 1,500 banks failed and public confidence in the industry was understandably threatened. In fact, 
on  two  occasions  during  that  period  the  system  was  so  close  to  collapse  that  major  banks  were 
unwilling to settle transactions unless the physical documents were in hand. At that time public policy 
was  being directed  toward  eliminating  weak and  unstable  banks so  that  trust  and confidence  could 
return – a necessary precursor to turning around a weak economy. That’s why – to use the title of my 
speech – I wonder whether the trend toward macro prudential surveillance isn’t just a new name for 
something we, as supervisors, have been doing all along. 
An interest in macro prudential policy is part of what Tomasso Padoa-Schioppa has called the “genetic 
code”  of  central  banks.  Throughout  their  history  central  banks  have  aimed  to  ensure  the  overall 
soundness  of  the  financial  system  and  this  followed  naturally  from  their  basic  functions.  Three 
historical developments were the key to this. In the beginning central banks were first and foremost 
banks – and like any bank they needed to consider the soundness and creditworthiness of their clients 
as well as factors in the general trading environment that might cause them losses. Second, over time, 
central banks developed a monopoly over ultimate liquidity, the means of final settlement, and they 
facilitated the settlement of inter bank payments through the rediscounting of commercial bank assets 
and  the  collection  of  reserves  in  the  form  of  bank  deposits.  Third,  as  commercial  bank  money 
progressively  developed  into  a  larger  share  of  the  money  stock,  the  value  of  money  became 
dependent  on  the  soundness  of  commercial  banks.  In  this  environment  the  concern  of  the  central 
bank for the orderly functioning and stability of the banking system arose from the need to maintain the 
public goods of a stable means of payment, a unit of account and a store of value. This included last 
resort lending when commercial banks suffered from liquidity strains. 
This historical development meant that by the end of the nineteenth century, or by the early years of 
the twentieth at the latest, central banks’ concern for financial stability was an already well-established 
part of their function. However, the second half of the twentieth century saw many central banks also 
taking on the responsibility for statute-based micro prudential supervision. In many parts of the world 
banking laws were passed for the first time and the central bank often became the bank supervisor. In 
this process the distinction between the micro- and macro- perspectives became blurred. 
What has changed in the past ten to fifteen years is that central banks have started to give much more 
explicit emphasis than in the past on their macro prudential responsibilities and have distinguished it 
more  clearly  from  the  micro-supervision  perspective.  This  renewed  emphasis  has  several  different 
sources. 
One of them was undoubtedly the financial crises that hit Asia in 1997. This experience showed that 
even  if  the  individual  banks  in  a  financial  system appear  to  be sound,  the system  itself  can  still  be 
overwhelmed by financial shocks. For example, the system can be exposed to a common risk that isn’t 
obvious from looking at each bank individually. In the Asian crisis countries the exposures of banks to 
foreign exchange risks didn’t show up on bank balance sheets. The risks were instead in the balance 
sheets of their major borrowers, who had borrowed heavily in foreign currencies even though they had 
domestic currency cash-flows. And this also points to another feature of macro prudential concern – it 
cannot stop at the traditional boundary of the banking system, but must look at the risks in the non-
bank financial sector and at the structure of household and corporate balance sheets. 
There are also two other factors worth mentioning. 
The first is that central banks have become increasingly aware that monetary stability and financial 
stability are closely linked. It used to be said that the reason why central banks were concerned about 
banking system soundness was that the banks were the main transmission mechanism for monetary 
policy. This still remains largely true, but central bankers have come to recognise that other aspects of 
financial stability also matter from the point of view of being able to meet monetary policy goals. For 
example, as the bond market has become an increasingly important as a transmission mechanism for 
monetary  policy,  market  conditions,  the  soundness  of  intermediaries,  and  the  transparency  and 
integrity of pricing have all become relevant issues for the central bank to consider. The debate that 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2006
took place a few years back on whether central banks should also target asset price inflation as well 
as consumer price inflation is another example. 
A third factor has been the changing responsibilities of central banks. The recent emphasis given to 
macro  prudential  policy  has  coincided  with  the  move,  in  some  countries,  to  establish  regulatory 
agencies separate from the central bank. The statutory responsibility for ensuring bank soundness has 
moved  to  these  agencies,  but  the  central  bank  has  kept  its  traditional  concern  for  the  overall 
soundness of the financial system. This has led to a clearer distinction between the micro- and macro- 
perspectives that had become blurred in the second half of the last century. In Britain the creation of 
the Financial Services Authority led the Bank of England to build up its resources in financial stability 
analysis. This was a result of the Bank’s efforts to ensure that oversight of the financial system did not 
fall between the gaps in the new institutional structure of supervision. Since then other central banks 
have followed the Bank of England’s lead. Financial stability units – small teams with backgrounds in 
economics and banking supervision whose job it is to monitor wider trends in the financial system – 
are now increasingly a feature of the organisational charts of many central banks. 
These factors have led to a redefinition in the way in which central banks have begun to approach 
their traditional macro prudential remit. I would like to mention four of these in particular: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The formalisation of payments and settlement system oversight; 
The publication of financial stability reports; 
Stress testing and scenario analysis; and 
Concern with financial condition of non-bank financial intermediaries and health of corporate 
and household balance sheets. 
Let me now briefly talk about each of these in turn. 
Payment system oversight has been part of the core functions of central banks almost from the very 
beginning. However, once the formal responsibility for banking supervision was split away from central 
banks  like  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  these  central  banks  began  to 
formalise their role in payment system oversight. In Australia, for example, the 1998 Payment Systems 
(Regulation)  Act  gives  the  RBA  powers  to  regulate  the  payments  system  and  purchased  payment 
facilities  (such  as  travellers’  cheques  and  stored  value  cards).  It  also  allows  the  RBA  to  obtain 
information from payment system participants and to set access regimes and determine risk control 
and  efficiency  standards  for  designated  payment  systems.  The  RBA’s  responsibilities  in  this  regard 
are discharged by a Payments System Board. 
The adoption of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) has been another key risk reduction initiative on 
the part of many central banks in the past decade and a half. These systems eliminate the build up of 
settlement  exposure  and  Herstatt  risk  between  financial  institutions  as  a  result  of  the  exchange  of 
high-value  payments  and  debt  securities  settlements.  Instead,  individual  transactions  are  settled  in 
real time across accounts at the central bank. The availability of RTGS is also an important step in 
dealing effectively with foreign exchange settlement risk. 
Finally, no discussion of payments system oversight would be complete without some mention of Anti-
Money Laundering initiatives. AML is important for the integrity of payments systems, and thus also 
has important macroprudential implications. 
The publication of a Financial Stability Report is the second way in which central banks have given 
more prominence to their macro prudential responsibilities. The Bank of England was among the first 
movers and its Financial Stability Report is now a decade old. The report recently underwent a revamp 
reflecting how rapidly this type of analysis has evolved in that time. Many other central banks have 
since followed the Bank of England’s lead, and in the HKMA we have published our own Monetary 
and  Financial  Stability  Report  for  several  years  now.  More  recently  we  began  an  internal  Banking 
Stability Report which aims to provide a macro prudential perspective on trends in the banking system 
that we can then use to target our on-site bank examinations more effectively. The eventual goal is to 
try to draw these two reports more closely together and to bring a more forward-looking perspective to 
our banking supervision work. 
When  central  banks  make  their  financial  stability  analysis  public  it  provides  financial  system 
participants  with  an  insight  into  the  central  bank’s  perception  of  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  system.  It 
enables  policymakers  to  be  transparent  in  their  views  of  where  they  perceive  the  risks  and 
vulnerabilities to be. Hopefully, by raising warning flags at a sufficiently early stage – for example if we 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 3
perceive risks in a build up of credit to a particular sector – we can encourage banks to review the 
risks that they are running and, if necessary, to take action to mitigate those risks. But it is important to 
be careful how the risks and vulnerabilities are presented. The last thing we want to happen is for the 
predicted  problems  to  surface  because  everyone  has  rushed  for  the  exit  at  the  same  time.  So  the 
message has to be not one like "we think it’s too risky to extend more credit to this sector” but instead 
more like “have you thought about the entire range of relevant risks in extending more credit and are 
your underwriting criteria in line with the riskier environment?" It’s important in publishing a financial 
stability report to present its findings as a range of possible outcomes which the private sector can 
then be encouraged to factor into its own risk management practices. 
Stress  tests  and  scenario  analysis  provide  the  intellectual  backbone  for  financial  stability  reports. 
Stress testing, in particular, has come a long way in recent years. The HKMA’s requirements on stress 
testing by banks have been in place for some time. Our Supervisory Policy Manual Module on Stress 
Testing,  issued  in  early  2003,  requires  banks  to  have  in  place  a  stress-testing  programme  and  to 
integrate stress testing into their risk management processes. For our own internal purposes we also 
conduct  stress  tests  by  applying  a  range  of  shocks  to  the  supervisory  data  that  is  reported  to  us. 
These  shocks  take  into  account  various  adverse  movements  in  banks’  liquidity,  interest  rate  and 
market risk positions. 
However,  the  techniques of  stress  testing  are  rapidly  evolving  and  are  becoming  increasingly  more 
sophisticated. The first generation of stress tests simply took a variable and subjected it to a shock. It 
was basically just a matter of saying "let’s see what happens to capital if NPL’s go to 20 percent." This 
type of crude stress test is quite helpful for a sense of how solid the system’s capital buffer might be, 
but it doesn’t allow you to take into account second and third round effects. If NPLs have risen to 20 
percent of total assets, then there are likely to be a lot of other things happening in the economy at the 
same time, all of which could have additional implications for banks’ financial soundness. As a result, 
stress  testing  is  moving  increasingly  in  the  direction  of  scenario  analysis.  This  involves  economists 
constructing scenarios for the outlook on GDP, interest rates etc. and tracing through these changes in 
terms  of  their  impact  on  the  key  measures  of  banking  system  soundness  including  profitability  and 
capital adequacy. This approach involves some quite advanced economic modelling techniques and is 
still in its early days. However, the recent revamp of the Bank of England’s financial stability report that 
I mentioned earlier was designed to give a larger role to this type of analysis. 
A  final  issue  that  I’d  like  to  discuss  is  that  macro  prudential  analysis  cannot  stop  with  the  banking 
system or at the borders of a particular jurisdiction. 
In the past it might have been reasonable to think that systemic risk was something that began and 
ended with the banking system. As long as the banking system was – or at least appeared to be – 
sound, as central bankers we did not need to worry too much about what happened elsewhere in the 
financial system or the condition of the corporate sector or the structure of household balance sheets. 
But this is no longer true, if it ever was. 
I have already mentioned the role of the corporate sector in the Asian financial crises of a decade ago. 
The  fact  that  it  was  the  corporate  sector  rather  than  the  banking  sector  that  had  assumed  foreign 
exchange risk ultimately didn’t matter from the point of financial system stability. The effects were the 
same – or possibly were greater as the corporate sector was less well able to handle the risks than the 
banking sector might have been. From a macro prudential policy perspective this means that we must 
pay  attention  to  conditions  in  the corporate sector and  the  soundness  of  corporate  balance sheets. 
And given that so many banks in Asia have followed those in the rest of the world in looking to develop 
their consumer credit business, the condition of household finances is also important to understand 
from a financial system stability perspective. 
In addition, the experience of the last decade has also taught us that non-bank financial intermediaries 
matter for the soundness of financial systems. For example, there is plenty of evidence that insurance 
companies  have  been  major  sellers  of  credit  derivatives.  This  passes  credit  risk  from  the  banking 
system to the insurance sector. How well can the insurance sector manage such risk? And if bank-
insurance linkages are strong (e.g. through financial conglomerate groups) can we be sure that the 
risk  has  really  passed  out  of  the  banking  system?  Similarly,  the  role  of  hedge  funds  in  financial 
systems has recently begun to receive a good deal of attention from central banks and regulators. The 
extent to which they increase the volatility of financial markets has long been the subject of debate. 
But  increasingly  this  largely  unregulated  sector  has  become  a  major  provider  of  credit  –  thus 
transferring risks out of the regulated banking sector and into a part of the financial system that is far 
from transparent. Macro prudential policy cannot afford to ignore these innovations. 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2006
Finally,  as  the  debate  on  hedge  funds  has  also  shown,  financial  stability  analysis  cannot  stop  at 
national  borders  or  in  particular  jurisdictions.  A  hedge  fund  based  in  the  Caribbean  is  capable  of 
moving markets half way round the globe. In these circumstances, macro prudential policy must take 
into  account  the  possibility  of  shocks  originating  outside  our  domestic  financial  systems  in  today’s 
global,  integrated  financial  marketplace.  It  also  requires  central  banks  and  regulatory  agencies  to 
cooperate to develop policies to mitigate these risks. 
In conclusion I come back to the question with which I started: is macro prudential policy simply a new 
name for some old ways of thinking? By now it should be clear that my answer is that it both is and it 
isn’t. There is nothing new in central banks’ concern with the stability of the financial system. It is part 
of their genetic code. What is new, however, is the explicitness with which the financial stability goal 
has been articulated, the broader range of intermediaries and institutions that form the focus of macro 
prudential  policy,  and  the  range  and  sophistication  of  the  tools  of  macro  prudential  analysis.  All  of 
these are of a completely different order to those of twenty – or even ten – years ago. Thank you. 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 5
