Mervyn King: Trusting in money – from Kirkcaldy to the MPC 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  delivering  the  Adam  Smith  Lecture 
2006, St Bryce Kirk, Kirkcaldy, Scotland, 29 October 2006.  
I  am  indebted  to  Alex  Brazier,  Chris  Salmon,  Morten  Spange  and  Tony  Yates  who  have  worked  closely  with  me  and  are 
effectively co-authors. I am also grateful to Charlie Bean, Tim Besley, Iain McLean, Mark Cornelius, Andrew Hauser, James 
Proudman and Peter Rodgers for their helpful comments and to Kath Begley for valuable research assistance. 
 My Lord Lieutenant, Chancellor, My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In June 1767, Adam Smith wrote from Kirkcaldy to his dear friend David Hume: 
“My Business here is Study in which I have been very deeply engaged for about a Month past. My 
Amusements  are  long,  solitary  walks  by  the  Sea  side.  You  may  judge  how  I  spend  my  time.  I  feel 
myself, however, extremely happy, comfortable and contented. I never was, perhaps, more so in all 
my life”.1 There is more wisdom in that remark than most busy people would ever care to admit, and it 
was perhaps that contentment which allowed his mind to wander far and wide – across the sea by 
which he walked – to imagine a society and an economy very different from the one in which he lived. 
Last year I was in the audience when Alan Greenspan delivered the Adam Smith Lecture. Now I too 
share the privilege of speaking in the Kirk where Gordon Brown’s father used to preach to the people 
of  Kirkcaldy.  Double  trouble,  you  might  think.  I  am  particularly  mindful  of  the  controversy  which 
Greenspan’s lecture stirred in the world of Smith scholars: “an unseemly battle is being fought over the 
soul of Adam Smith”, as one remarked. It is a sign of the resurgence of interest in Adam Smith that at 
almost every point on the political spectrum one can find people who claim Smith as their own. But, in 
a lecture in 1926 to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the publication of The Wealth of Nations, 
the economist Jacob Viner wrote, “Traces of every conceivable sort of doctrine are to be found in that 
most catholic book, and an economist must have peculiar theories indeed who cannot quote from the 
Wealth of Nations to support his special purposes”.2
My  intention  today  is  certainly  not  to  propose  “peculiar  theories”,  but  to  examine  the  importance  of 
social institutions in a market economy. Self-interest explains many economic decisions. But a market 
economy  also  requires  social  institutions.3  They  represent  collective  agreements  about  how  to 
constrain our actions. Some social institutions constrain our individual actions. For example, a market 
economy cannot flourish in a world of anarchy in which we suspect that everyone else will cheat. If I 
lend you money it is in both our interests that there be some mechanism by which repayment can be 
enforced.  So  property  rights,  and  courts  to  enforce  contracts  and  adjudicate  competing  claims  are 
examples of some of the social institutions required to support a market economy. 
But  there  are  other,  and  for  my  purposes  more  interesting,  social  institutions  which  constrain  our 
collective actions, both now and in the future. In particular, it is on the need to constrain our future 
collective decisions on which I shall focus this evening. Such constraints are necessary to support the 
willingness to make transactions. For example, if people believe that there is a high probability that 
investment made today will be confiscated by the government in the future, they are not likely to make 
that  investment.  It  would  be  beneficial  if  we  could  constrain  ourselves  not  to  confiscate  in  future. 
Constitutions  can  be  rewritten,  property  rights  revoked,  and  revolutions  have  been  known  to  occur, 
illustrating the point that, as a society, we can never commit future generations – or even our future 
selves – to collective decisions. There is no way of enforcing that commitment. But we can try to find 
ways of making it more or less credible that we will, collectively, act in a way that is conducive to our 
long-run prosperity. So one of the most important ingredients of a successful market economy is the 
set  of  institutions  that  constrain  our  future  collective  behaviour.  Such  institutions  have  cultural  and 
political roots, but they have economic effects. My focus tonight will be on money: money as a social 
                                                      
1   Letter to David Hume, 7 June 1767, in The Correspondence of Adam Smith, Glasgow Edition of the Works of Adam Smith, 
2nd Edition, p.125. 
2   Viner, J (1927), “Adam Smith and Laissez Faire”, Journal of Political Economy, 35 No.2, p207. 
3   There are, of course, many private institutions, such as companies, charities and universities. But in this lecture I shall be 
concerned only with social institutions that relate to collective decisions. 
BIS Review 102/2006 
 1
institution that, in the words of Joel Gray in the 1972 film of Cabaret, makes the world go round. And I 
shall  try  to  relate  the  origins  of  money  as  a  social  institution  to  the  role  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee today. 
Let  me  begin,  though,  with  Adam  Smith  himself.  Despite  a  rather  solitary  life,  much  of  it  here  in 
Kirkcaldy, and shunning invitations to join friends in Edinburgh, let alone London, he wrote two great 
works – The Theory of Moral Sentiments and An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of 
Nations – that owe much to careful observation of the world and contain numerous practical examples 
of  how  industry  and  society  worked.  They  are  no  dry  academic  treatises  but  commentaries  on  the 
world  around  him.  They  contain  many  insights,  two  of  which  are  particularly  relevant  to  my  theme. 
First, to reap the benefits of the division of labour requires social institutions that give confidence to 
people to take up specialised employment. Social institutions and market economies go hand in hand. 
Second, people who, for the most part, pursue their own self-interest, are also prepared to stand back 
and ask how their actions should be constrained by social institutions. Such institutions arise because 
we build them. 
On the first, The Wealth of Nations begins with the most famous example of Smith’s commentary. He 
explains the idea of the division of labour by looking at a “very trifling manufacture”, namely “the trade 
of the pin-maker”: 
“a workman not educated to this business … could scarce, perhaps, with his utmost industry, make 
one pin in a day, and certainly could not make twenty. But in the way in which this business is now 
carried  on,  …  it  is  divided  into  a  number  of  branches  …  One  man  draws  out  the  wire,  another 
straightens it, a third cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head; … the 
business of making a pin is, in this manner, divided into about eighteen distinct operations”.4
Smith describes seeing a small factory of this kind in which the daily output of pins was almost 5,000 
for each person employed. Specialisation increases productivity. The division of labour permits “this 
great increase of the quantity of work”.5 But the higher living standards which the division of labour 
permits require institutions that allow us to exchange what we each produce. Smith described how “in 
a nation of hunters, if any one has a talent for making bows and arrows better than his neighbours he 
will at first make presents of them, and in return get presents of their game”.6 But a man who spends 
all day making arrows to swap them for meat gives up the chance of hunting himself for the chance of 
sharing in a larger catch. For the group to specialise, the hunter who turns arrow-maker has to be sure 
that his partner in trade will deliver the “present” of meat. When the timing of these exchanges is not 
coincident, there is a need for social institutions to prevent one party reneging on the transaction, and, 
in particular, for money – an issue that I will return to later. 
Smith’s second insight was that the social institutions necessary to exploit the full potential of a market 
economy were not derived from the relentless pursuit of selfinterest, but from the recognition that we 
all benefit from what he described in  Theory of Moral Sentiments as the exercise of “sympathy”. In 
other words, we step back from our immediate situation and ask: how do my actions affect others? 
Answering that requires an ability to imagine ourselves in others’ shoes – “sympathy”. That sympathy 
in the hunter, for example, might mean feeling the pain of a starving arrow-maker. 
Smith argued that we “are endowed with not only a desire of being approved of, but with a desire of 
being what ought to be approved of…”.7 He talked about an “impartial spectator” whose judgment we 
imagined  and  imposed  as  a  constraint  on  our  behaviour.  Smith  thought  the  “impartial  spectator” 
fundamental  to  an  orderly  and  prosperous  society.  It  is  what  stops  the  hunter  from  breaking  his 
                                                      
4   Wealth of Nations, I.i. p14. 
5   Did Adam Smith ever visit a pin-factory? He was certainly a careful observer of the world around him. As Buchan (2006, 
p.12) wrote, “He had visited dye-works, pin-makers, brewers and distilleries”. His description in the Wealth of Nations of “a 
small manufactory … where ten men only were employed” makes clear that Smith did, at some point, visit a pin factory, but 
there is little evidence as to where that was. And most scholars believe, with good reason, that Smith took the example of a 
pin-factory from the Encyclopédie, edited by Diderot and d’Alembert and published in France in 1755 – the article on épingle 
describes in some detail the eighteen operations identified by Smith. I am indebted to Professor Iain McLean of Nuffield 
College, Oxford, for drawing this entry to my attention. But his example of nailmaking a few pages further on did come from 
personal  experience,  since  the  manufacture  of  nails  took  place  in  the  villages  of  Pathhead  and  Gallatown  which  Smith 
visited on his regular long walks. 
6   Lectures on Jurisprudence, B, Report dated 1766, p493. 
7   Theory of Moral Sentiments, III,ii,7,p117. 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2006
promise to share his meat and, knowing that, it is what gives the arrow-maker the confidence to stop 
hunting. It was the “main pillar that upholds the whole edifice. If it is removed, the great, the immense 
fabric of human society… must in a moment crumble to atoms”.8
But  Smith  recognised  our  own  frailty.  The  temptation  to  follow  our  immediate  selfinterest  could 
sometimes be overwhelming, and our own ‘selfish passions’ would take precedence over the judgment 
of the “impartial spectator”. As commercial society evolves, and we exchange with those much more 
remote  from  us,  our  human  frailties  matter  more.  We  need  a  mechanism  to  help  us  exhibit  the 
“sympathy” that is both desirable and necessary. 
We need social institutions to bolster our often erratic ability to see things from the perspective of the 
impartial spectator. These social institutions are not just given to us. We choose to build them as a 
framework for collective decisions that constrain individual behaviour. We make them, and sometimes 
we break them. 
These  two  points  from  Smith’s  commentary  –  the  importance  of  institutions  and  our  desire  to  build 
them – are closely related to the role of trust in a modern economy.9 How could we drive, eat or even 
buy or sell unless we trusted other people? It is surely trust not money that makes the world go round. 
Indeed, we shall see that money works only when it is trusted. But human frailty implies that trust can 
be placed more easily when it is supported by institutions. Those institutions may well require trust, but 
equally trust requires institutions. 
Many  economists  –  including  Viner  in  the  essay  I  have  already  quoted  –  have  regarded  Smith’s 
analysis of self-interest in The Wealth of Nations as inconsistent with his discussion of “sympathy” in 
his  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments.  In  one  of  the  best-known  sentences  from  The  Wealth  of  Nations, 
Smith  points  out  “It  is  not  from  the  benevolence  of  the  butcher,  the  brewer,  or  the  baker,  that  we 
expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest”.10 Smith, so the critics argue, failed to 
integrate the thinking in his two great works.11 It would not, to coin a phrase, be a sensible division of 
labour  for  me  to  enter  the  debate  about  whether  his  two  great  works  form  a  consistent  whole  or 
represent two different and inconsistent viewpoints. Smith was a cautious and often obscure author. 
What we know of his theory of law and government is through the notes of two students who attended 
his lectures on jurisprudence. His failure to produce the projected third great work means that we do 
not know what institutions he thought would best support a market economy. But irrespective of what 
Smith  thought,  two  things  are  clear.  History  is  littered  with  failed  attempts  to  order  society  without 
reference to individual incentives. And we understand the need for social institutions to constrain our 
actions. 
Since Smith, economists have underplayed the importance of institutions, although there have been 
notable  exceptions  such  as  Douglas  North  and  Ronald  Coase.  Over  the  centuries,  theories  of  a 
competitive market economy have been refined. From these theories flows the remarkable result that, 
under certain conditions, the pursuit by each person of their individual self interest leads to a more 
efficient  outcome  for  society  as  a  whole.  That  work  reached  its  apogee  in  the  post-war  work  by 
Kenneth Arrow and Gerard Debreu. Those economic models are, however, silent about many of the 
institutions  that  are  fundamental  to  the  results.12  But  without  the  appropriate  institutions  we  tend  to 
anarchy not prosperity. The challenge facing us is to design and maintain the right set of institutions or 
                                                      
8   Theory of Moral Sentiments, II,ii,3.3,p86. 
9  
In  her  2002  Reith  lectures  “A  Question  of  Trust”,  Onora  O’Neill  argued  that  in  order  to  interact  with  others,  both  as 
individuals and institutions, trust plays a crucial role. 
10   Wealth of Nations, I,11,2,p26. 
11   Rothschild (2001) puts Smith’s writings in the context of the Enlightenment and, while pointing to the complexity of Smith’s 
views and his caution in expressing them in public, paints an overall picture of a man who is not best described as a split 
personality. 
12   Economists have grappled with the challenge of understanding worlds in which there are not markets for everything. Coase 
understood the existence of firms to be a manifestation of how market based exchange between employers and employees 
was not efficient (see his 1991 Nobel lecture, for example). More recently, economists like Kiyotaki and Moore (an example 
is their 2002 paper) and many others have built models in which debt markets are incomplete because it is costly to enforce 
contracts, and which constrain the amount individuals can credibly borrow and pay back. These models can also be used to 
explain  how  money  comes  to  exist,  as  I  discuss  below.  Another  body  of  work  that  seeks  to  study  the  institutions  that 
underpin market exchange is the subject that has come to be known as 'law and economics'. Scholars in this field study the 
economic origins and consequences of the legal system. See, for example, many works by Gary Becker, Ronald Coase and 
Richard Posner. 
BIS Review 102/2006 
 3
laws, and to abolish the unhelpful ones. And it is that challenge of institutional design to which I now 
want to turn. 
As Governor of the Bank of England, you will not be surprised to learn that money is a social institution 
close to my heart. It is crucial in facilitating exchange and therefore, in allowing the division of labour. 
Smith explained that “when the division of labour first began to take place, this power of exchanging 
must frequently have been very much clogged and embarrassed in its operations.”13 He was referring 
to the absence of what economists call a ‘double coincidence of wants’: the hunter wants arrows and 
the  arrowmaker  wants  meat.  Without  that  double  coincidence  exchange  cannot  take  place  through 
barter. 
Promissory notes, or ‘IOUs’, can act as promises to deliver in the future. And they could, in principle, 
circulate – we could then exchange with people whose own produce we don’t actually want. Imagine 
Smith’s primitive arrow-maker doesn’t want meat. He can still exchange his arrows for a promise of 
meat from the hunter. But he will do so only if he is sure that others, whose output he does want, will 
accept the hunter’s IOU. And that depends on whether the arrow-maker believes that others will trust 
the hunter’s promise to pay. Once future delivery is part of the exchange, trust is essential. 
So we need to be able to trust in the promises of others to pay. In large commercial societies, where 
the ‘I’ is remote from the ‘U’, relying on our own human “sympathy” is unreliable – debtors would be 
tempted to default with those they have never met. We recognise that we need a social institution. 
One  such  is  a  legal  system  that  can  be  used  to  enforce  IOUs.  But  enforcement  is  costly.  These 
problems  encouraged  us  to  build  another  institution  –  money.  This  recognition  that  money  is 
necessary because of our own frailty in honouring IOUs suggests that “evil is the root of all money”.14
Smith had seen how commodities like “dried cod at Newfoundland; tobacco in Virginia; sugar in some 
of our West India colonies” had been used as money and how there was even “a village in Scotland 
where it is not uncommon,…, for a workman to carry nails instead of money to the baker’s shop or the 
alehouse.”15 These commodities guaranteed a double coincidence of wants - most people smoked, 
needed to preserve meat with salt, and ate fish. And because these commodities have intrinsic value, 
the trustworthiness of our trading partners was not an issue. Salt is salt whether offered by an honest 
trader or not. 
But it is costly to produce and hold large stocks of these commodities. Salt kept to one side for use as 
money has to be mined, and cannot be used to preserve meat. And the quality and quantity of the 
commodity is not easily verifiable. In fact, this was a pressing concern for Smith as a university lecturer 
because he would have been paid in person, in coin or specie, by his students before the lectures 
began, something which I regret I forgot to do this evening. Smith’s close friend, the chemist Joseph 
Black,  said  that  he  was  “obliged  to  weigh  when  strange  students  come,  there  being  a  very  large 
number who bring light guineas, so that I should be defrauded of many pounds every year if I did not 
act in self-defence against this class of students."16
And so we reach paper money. I have here a £20 note. What is it? Money you say. Surely it is just a 
piece of paper. What is the difference between a piece of paper and money? You can “buy stuff with 
it”.17
Why can we get anything in exchange for these intrinsically worthless pieces of paper? It is because 
those to whom we give the paper expect that they will, in turn, be able to get something for it. That 
rests on the expectation that whoever they pass the paper to will in their turn be able to get something 
for it, and so on, ad infinitum. In short, the value of money depends on trust. 
But it is not easy to trust paper money unless we trust the issuer. Much of the financial history of the 
past 150 years is the story of our collective attempts to manage paper money. In a democracy, we 
                                                      
13   Wealth of Nations ,I, iv,p38. 
14   See Kiyotaki and Moore (2002). 
15   Wealth of Nations ,I, iv,p38. 
16   Rae (1895), p 49. 
17   Smith recognised this too: “though the wages of the workman are commonly paid to him in money, his real revenue, like that 
of all other men, consists, not in money, but in the money’s worth; not in the metal pieces, but in what can be got for them” 
Wealth of Nations, I,ii,p295. 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2006
can’t force people to use paper money, although after the French Revolution the Jacobins had a try. 
They made it a capital offence to use commodities as money! This was a desperate and unsustainable 
action resulting from the Jacobin policy of debasing their paper money – the Assignat – to make up for 
a collapse in tax revenues and to finance a war against Prussia. 
A more sensible solution is to create institutions in which we can have trust. On the front of this Bank 
of England £20 note is written “I promise to pay the bearer on demand the sum of Twenty Pounds”. In 
essence, the promise is that the “stuff” that you can buy with this note does not change much from one 
year to the next. In other words, the general purchasing power of the note is broadly stable – we have 
price stability. Our ability to maintain price stability depends upon an institutional framework which is 
expected to persist. That depends on all of us acting collectively – the value of a nation’s money is 
inherently a political choice. Inflation arises when the collective political commitment to maintain price 
stability weakens. 
When high rates of inflation are anticipated, people wisely avoid holding paper money. As I said in my 
Ely  lecture  in  2004,  “the  demand  for  money  today  depends  upon  expectations  of  our  collective 
decisions about the supply of money tomorrow.” In the twentieth century Germans saw their savings 
wiped  out  by  hyperinflation.  And  as  recently  as  1990,  Argentina  experienced  hyperinflation.  I  have 
been  told  that  when  people  gave  up  using  paper  money  in  Argentina,  they  resorted  to  IOUs which 
were taken to the local Catholic priest for endorsement. Those IOUs were trusted because to renege 
on a promise endorsed by the priest would have very serious consequences, whether in this life or the 
next. 
It  is  sometimes  tempting  –  as  the  examples  of  the  Jacobins,  Germany  and  Argentina  show  –  for 
issuers of money to issue too much of it: cheap money and plenty of it, as the saying goes.18 A public 
monopoly  of  paper  money  raises  the question  of  how  can  we  prevent  the  institution  managing  that 
money from abusing its issuing power. We cannot commit future generations – or even ourselves – to 
a  particular  policy.  So  how  can  we  design  an  institution  to  create  the  reasonable  expectation  that 
money will retain its value? 
In 1997 a new institution – the Monetary Policy Committee of an independent Bank of England – was 
set up. And for the past decade inflation has been low and stable and economic growth more stable 
than  at  any  time  in  living  memory.  Just  as  importantly,  yields  on  government  bonds  indicate  that 
inflation is expected to remain low over the next fifty years. Gordon Brown deserves great credit for 
taking  the  time  to  design  the  institutional  arrangements  so  carefully  in  advance.  This  was  not  a 
traditional “make it up as you go along” approach to British economic policy. 
In fact, the design is a good example of how to overcome the fundamental constraint faced by social 
institutions.  That  constraint  is  that  it  is  both  impossible  and  undesirable  to  enforce  binding 
commitments on the collective decisions of our successors. It is impossible because there can be no 
outside  enforcer.  It  is  undesirable  because  we  cannot  imagine  or  articulate  every  possible  future 
development. 
As such, institutions must have, and be likely always to have, widespread support. Their design must 
meet three principles. First, in order to maximise the breadth and permanency of support, the objective 
should  be  as  clear  as  possible.  Second,  the  institution  must  have  the  appropriate  tools  and 
competence to meet those objectives and be held accountable for doing so. Third, for the institution to 
command widespread support, the design must reflect history and experience. 
How do our current monetary arrangements meet these requirements? 
First, the objective – the inflation target – is clear. It is 2% for CPI inflation. 
Second,  responsibility  for  setting  interest  rates  has  been  delegated  to  a  group  of  people  –  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  –  with  the  appropriate  technical  competence  and  who  face  incentives 
focussed on meeting the target. Expert judgment is needed because changes in the way the world 
                                                      
18   Hayek (1976) thought this temptation might be overcome by allowing competitive private banks to issue their own paper 
monies – the threat of competition would stop them over-issuing. But the costs of using several different monies, and the 
need to monitor the change in their relative values, reduce the benefits from using paper money as a means of payment. 
Competitive monies have arisen only rarely and usually in situations where government money is either absent or very badly 
managed. 
BIS Review 102/2006 
 5
works mean that monetary policy cannot be run on autopilot.19 The members of the MPC are able to 
exercise their own discretion over how to meet the target. Members of the Committee are held publicly 
accountable for their individual votes. 
Third, these arrangements reflect both our experience of previous monetary failures and the nature of 
accountability in our political system. The separation between the elected government which sets the 
target and the Monetary Policy Committee which makes the month-to-month decisions on the level of 
interest rates necessary to meet the target is natural in our Parliamentary system. Since countries vary 
in their political constitutions it is not surprising that their monetary constitutions also differ. 
The apparent success of the MPC has led many to ask whether aspects of its design could be carried 
over to other areas of public policy. The principles of widespread support for the objective of policy, the 
incorporation  of  the  lessons  of  history,  and  the  need  to  ensure  technical  expertise  have  general 
applicability. In the case of monetary policy, there is widespread agreement on the objective of low 
inflation, the design has taken on board the lessons from our post-war experience about the difficulty 
of  targeting  monetary  aggregates  or  the  exchange  rate,  and  the  MPC  has  been  set  up  to  include 
appropriate expertise. Moreover, the MPC has to set only a single instrument – Bank Rate. 
It may not be easy to find other areas of policy to which the MPC example can be immediately applied. 
But it is certainly worth thinking imaginatively about the possibilities for in other areas in which trust in 
future collective decisions is necessary. Pensions policy, for example, has for years been bedevilled 
by a combination of extraordinary technical complexity, which means that decisions take a long time to 
reach, and the reversal of policies adopted by earlier generations. This is very much an area where we 
have been unable to constrain future collective decisions. And it is one that would benefit from greater 
stability of policy. 
At the international level, the importance of constraining future behaviour can be seen in such diverse 
areas as trade policy and climate change. The difference in the degree of agreement on the objectives 
of  policy  can  be  seen  in  the  difference  between  the  institutions  that  have  been  set  up  to  deal  with 
those  issues.  But  even  the  World  Trade  Organisation,  despite  the  critical  importance  to  the  world 
economy,  and  especially  its  poorer  citizens,  of  opening  up  trade,  has  found  it  difficult  to  arouse 
sufficient “sympathy”, to use Smith’s word, to get agreement on constraints on our future behaviour. 
But  let  us  not  be  pessimistic.  The  three  principles  of  institutional  design  may  be  helpful  in  thinking 
about future collective decisions in areas as diverse as health, education, pensions and taxation, just 
as they were in constructing a new monetary policy framework. But that is for others to take forward. 
Conclusions 
I recognise that the success of central banks in keeping inflation low and stable over the past decade 
may owe something to good fortune as well as to good policy. But, as the legendary football manager 
Bill Shankly used to say, “it’s strange, but the better we play, the luckier we get”. What really matters, 
however,  is  that  we  as  central  bankers  acknowledge  that  we  owe  everything  to  the  design  of  the 
institutional  framework.  As  I  have  argued  this evening,  a  central  part  of  Adam  Smith’s  legacy  is  an 
appreciation of the essential role played by social institutions. So it is appropriate that it was another 
son of Kirkcaldy who, over two hundred years later, created the new institutional framework for the 
Bank of England in 1997. As Niccolo Machiavelli wrote in The Prince, “Nothing brings a man greater 
honour  than  the  new  laws  and  new  institutions  he  establishes”.  A  Scotsman  founded  the  Bank  of 
England, and it took another to reform it. Next year we celebrate the tercentenary of the Act of Union, 
an  Act  strongly  supported  by  Adam  Smith.  And  we  now  have  a  successful  and  prosperous  union 
between our two countries with a common monetary institution which embodies the ideas not only of 
Adam  Smith  and  his  great  friend  David  Hume,  but  also  of  the  key  principles  that  should  govern 
institutional design. 
From the division of labour in the pin factory to the need for our mutual “sympathy” to be embodied in 
carefully  designed  institutions,  Smith’s  writing  is  remarkable  by  its  comprehensive  and  eclectic 
examination of ideas and facts. So it is appropriate that tonight here in Kirkcaldy, where Adam Smith 
found  contentment  in  study  and  reflection,  I  can  announce  that  tomorrow  the  Bank  of  England  will 
                                                      
19   There is some evidence that committees make, on average, better decisions than individuals. See King (2002), Blinder and 
Morgan (2000) and Lombardelli, Proudman and Talbot (2005). 
6 
 BIS Review 102/2006
reveal its new £20 note. And the figure celebrated on the new note will, of course, be Adam Smith - 
the first economist and the first Scotsman to appear on a Bank of England note. From next spring, 
when visitors to our country look carefully at their new £20 notes, they will be able to see an engraving 
showing  the  division  of  labour  in  pin  manufacturing  with  the  words  “and  the  great  increase  in  the 
quantity of work that results”. I hope they will absorb the lesson that specialisation in production and 
trade across the world are the way to improve living standards in all countries – rich and poor alike. 
And perhaps when they return home they will press their own politicians to support the opening up of 
trade which has been at the heart of the British Government’s efforts to reform the world economy. 
So you should be proud of your famous son who, despite being “an absent-minded professor” who led 
a  “quiet,  uneventful  life”,  influenced  the  way  the  whole  world  thinks  about  the  route  to  economic 
prosperity.20
Let me conclude by returning to the words of Jacob Viner: 
“In these days of contending schools, each of them with the deep, if momentary, conviction that it, and 
it alone, knows the one and only path to economic truth, how refreshing it is to return to the Wealth of 
Nations with its eclecticism, its good temper, its common sense, and its willingness to grant that those 
who saw things differently from itself were only partly wrong”.21
Truly, Adam Smith was a man of the Scottish Enlightenment, and I am delighted that from next year 
his face will look out at us from our banknotes. 
References 
Blinder,  A  and  Morgan,  R  (2000),  'Are  two  heads  better  than  one?  An  experimental  analysis  of  group  vs  individual  decision 
making', NBER working paper no 7909, September. 
Buchan, J (2006) Adam Smith and the pursuit of perfect liberty, London: Profile Books. 
Coase, R (1991), ‘The institutional structure of production’, Nobel lecture. 
Hayek, F (1976) Denationalization of money, London: Institute of Economic Affairs. 
King, M (2002), ‘The monetary policy committee: five years on’, Speech delivered to the society of business economists. 
King, M (2004), ‘The institutions of monetary policy’, Ely Lecture, American Economic Association annual meeting, San Diego. 
Kiyotaki, N and Moore, J (2002) ‘Evil is the root of all money’, American Economic Review, 92,2,p62-66. 
Lombardelli, C Proudman, J and Talbot, J (2005), 'Committees versus Individuals: An experimental analysis of monetary policy 
decision making', International Journal of Central Banking, 1, 5. 
Machiavelli, N (1515), The Prince. 
McLean,  I  (2006),  Adam  Smith:  Radical  and  Egalitarian,  an  interpretation  for  the  21st  century,  Edinburgh  University  Press, 
Edinburgh. 
O’Neill, O (2002), ‘A question of trust’, The Reith lectures. 
North, D (1993), ‘Economic performance through time’, Nobel lecture. 
Rae, J (1895), A life of Adam Smith, Kelley, New York. 
Rothschild,  E  (2001),  Economic  Sentiments:  Adam  Smith,  Condorcet,  and  the  Enlightenment,  Harvard  University  Press, 
London. 
Smith, A (1762), The theory of moral sentiments, in The Glasgow edition of the works and correspondence of Adam Smith, vol 
1. 
Smith, A (1766), Lectures on Jurisprudence in The Glasgow edition of the works and correspondence of Adam Smith vol 6: 
manuscript B, ‘Report dated 1766’. 
Smith,  A  (1776),  An  inquiry  into  the  nature  and  causes  of  the  wealth  of  nations,  in  The  Glasgow  edition  of  the  works  and 
correspondence of Adam Smith, vol 2. 
Viner, J (1927), “Adam Smith and Laissez Faire”, Journal of Political Economy, 35 No.2, 198-232. 
                                                      
20   McLean (2006). 
21   Viner, J. 1927, p232. 
BIS Review 102/2006 
 7
