Alan Bollard: Kiwis like buying houses more than buying businesses  
Talk by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to PricewaterhouseCoopers 
Annual Tax Conference, Auckland, 9 November 2006.  
 Introduction 
This talk looks at a very Kiwi phenomenon: householder investors who prefer to put their savings into 
houses rather than a broad range of financial investments, especially equities. Apart from having all 
their eggs in one basket, this also has implications for the level of gearing taken on by the household 
sector and the manner in which New Zealand’s debt is funded. It has also meant that not much local 
equity is available for New Zealand business. The gap has been filled by foreign equity, which brings 
many development advantages for large businesses, but which is less conducive to supporting start-
ups and other small businesses. It has also left the economy more vulnerable.  
The  Reserve  Bank  has  the  dual  roles  of  promoting  stability  in  prices  and  promoting  stability  in  the 
financial system, to enhance economic performance. Both these concerns drive this talk.1 The bigger 
picture around financial stability will be updated when we release our latest Financial Stability Report 
on 15 November 2006.  
Household balance sheets 
In  comparison  with  other  comparable  OECD  countries,  New  Zealand  households  hold  a  very  large 
part of their assets in housing. The rates of owner-occupied housing are not particularly high in New 
Zealand. Rather what marks us out are a number of features:  
We  hold  relatively  large  holdings  of  second  homes  (and  associated  durables  like  cars  and  boats), 
usually under-utilised, and delivering low returns. In addition, over the last few years we have spent 
heavily  on  investor  housing  (houses  and  apartments),  investments  stimulated  by  expectations  of 
exciting capital gains rather than exciting rental yields.  
                                                      
1   This talk does not represent investment advice for the household sector. Householders’ needs and options differ and they 
should get professional advice for this.  
Declaration of interest: My wife Jenny Morel runs a venture capital business, No 8 Ventures Limited.  
Readers should  note that there are limitations on the quality of data in this paper. The comparative statistics have been 
assembled from a range of sources and may be subject to inconsistencies. Reserve Bank estimates have been used where 
data have been unavailable from other sources. 
 BIS Review 108/2006 
 1
This exposure to housing is being financed by increased mortgage debt from the banking system. The 
average New Zealand household’s debt has risen from around 100 percent of disposable income to 
around 170 percent over the last five years. This imposes a heavier mortgage-servicing burden, which 
has been justified by the big increases in house values. The typical household now commits about 13 
percent of its disposable income to service debt. This makes these households much more vulnerable 
than they used to be to adverse events, such as increases in unemployment and rising interest rates. 
These debt servicing rates are significantly higher than in other OECD countries.  
 
 2 
 BIS Review 108/2006
Despite  this  vulnerability,  the  increases  in  house  values  have  stimulated  a  strong  wealth  effect. 
Households feel richer (and provided house values hold up, they are richer), and have been spending 
with  confidence.  Their  confidence  is  such  that  they  have  been  prepared  to  dissave  at  an 
unprecedented rate.  
The  preoccupation  with  housing  assets  has  been  at  the  expense  of  other  assets  that  one  might 
normally  expect  to  find  in  balanced  household  portfolios,  namely  financial  assets,  such  as  equities. 
This speech highlights the unusually small holdings of equities by New Zealanders and some of its 
financial and economic implications.  
 BIS Review 108/2006 
 3
  
Most  of  our  housing  stock  is  owner-occupied,  and  our  behaviour  here  is  not  unusual  by  OECD 
standards. In this talk I focus on those households with sufficient resources to consider investments 
beyond  their  own  occupied  houses.  Many  New  Zealand  households  are  not  sufficiently  well  off  to 
consider much in the way of equity investment. For those that are, a financial advisor would look at a 
particular set of household circumstances and, depending on these, advise an appropriate balance of 
holdings split between:  
• 
• 
• 
These  holdings  would  differ  largely  depending  on  variations  in  income,  wealth,  household  size, 
composition, and age. The situation is further complicated by the ability to hold assets directly or via 
managed funds; by quite different tax treatments; by decisions to invest in New Zealand or overseas; 
by commitments in directly held family firms, farms and forests; and by decisions by the Government 
to hold certain assets jointly on behalf of New Zealanders.  
Land and buildings in both residential and commercial sectors.  
Cash and financial debt instruments that might vary by duration and risk.  
Equity holdings, both direct and portfolio ownership, in private and public firms.  
Sources of equity in New Zealand 
It  appears  that  holdings  of  equity  by  New  Zealand  households  are  particularly  low  by  OECD 
standards, with direct holdings of both domestic and foreign equities making up no more than about 4 
percent  of  total  assets.  A  frequent  reason  cited  is  the  severity  of  the  October  1987  stock  market 
collapse, an event that passed by 20 years ago. In the US, despite similar pressures in 1987, troughs 
in  the  1990s,  the  “dotcom  bubble”,  and  the  “tech  wreck”,  direct  equity  holdings  are  now  around  17 
percent of assets. New Zealanders’ indirect holdings of equities via superannuation funds, unit trusts 
and other long-term investment products managed professionally by large funds also appear to be low 
by international comparison.  
4 
 BIS Review 108/2006
  
Data  on  our  holdings  of  equity  is  not  conclusive.  As  at  December  2005,  the  household  sector  held 
around $14 billion of domestic equities and around $6 billion of overseas equities. Indirect holdings of 
domestic  equities  on  behalf  of  households  via  superannuation  schemes,  managed  funds  and  unit 
trusts  accounted  for  another  $8  billion.  The  overseas  equity  holdings  of  such  funds  are  likely  to 
account for perhaps another $15 billion given their overall exposure to international assets. 
How much equity do individual households typically own? The picture built up by the Reserve Bank of 
household balance sheets from various surveys confirms that equity holdings rise sharply with income, 
implying  that  the  distribution  of  holdings  is  highly  skewed.  Based  on  the  2001  Household  Savings 
Survey  we  estimate  that  the  median  value  of  direct  equity  holdings  for  those  households  that  own 
shares  is  around  $6,000.  However,  the  same  survey  showed  that  a  very  significant  proportion  of 
households (around 70 percent) had no direct holdings of shares at all.  
BIS Review 108/2006 
 5
 The listed public company investment opportunities available through the NZX are limited, given the 
slow growth of large New Zealand corporates, and the advantages some have seen in listing offshore. 
Some  of  the  better-known  names  have  delivered  poorly  to  shareholders,  or  disappeared  off  the 
exchange. Despite this, the index returns have not been poor over the medium-term, and over certain 
periods have even out-performed housing investment in pre-tax terms.  
New Zealanders invest about twice as much in equities directly compared with managed funds. This 
may  reflect  our  DIY  investment  culture,  also  a  disdain  for  advisers,  fund  managers  and  their  fees. 
Many see equities as a shorter term, more speculative investment rather than a longer term hold. New 
Zealanders in general do not have a high level of financial literacy about such investments and how to 
manage them. Aversion to equity may also reflect some psychological traits, particularly the desire to 
hold and control a physical asset over a financial one, or one where the investor can contain costs by 
utilising their own skills in construction, house maintenance or tenant management.  
6 
 BIS Review 108/2006
  
Tax  treatment  will  often  prove  a  deciding  factor  in  decisions  about  housing  versus  equities,  direct 
versus portfolio approaches, and onshore versus offshore investments. From this individual point of 
view, housing-heavy investors may look to be acting rationally. In particular, capital gains on housing 
assets are usually tax exempt, while those on financial assets are often not. In addition, households 
can negatively gear investment properties so a loss is created, which can be deducted from income for 
tax purposes. 
But  it  is  not  the  purpose  of  this  speech  to  examine  the  implications  of  tax  policy  for  household 
decision-making. I focus here on the wider concerns - the implications of holding too many eggs in one 
basket, the exposures generated by gearing decisions, and the lack of ready access to local equity by 
New Zealand firms.  
There are specific difficulties interpreting the data on equities. In particular, New Zealand is a country 
of small firms and farms, almost all privately owned, most of them through families. An important form 
of debt is mortgage financing on the owners’ house(s). This raises the statistical complication that the 
household sector holds more equity than is initially apparent. An additional complication comes from 
the inconsistent treatment of family trusts, and the assets held by them. We estimate that about 15 
percent of households now hold assets through family trusts.  
Furthermore,  globalisation  is  complicating  things  considerably.  Our  official  data  on  offshore  equity 
holdings  by  New  Zealanders  probably  under-estimates  the  real  situation.  Statistics  New  Zealand 
surveys  New  Zealand  resident  institutions  as  to  their  offshore  holdings  and  bases  their  measure  of 
direct holdings on IRD returns. As a result, offshore holdings of private equity and equity paying low 
dividends are unlikely to be fully captured. Migrants into New Zealand pose particular measurement 
challenges, especially when they retain ownership interests in offshore operations where they continue 
to have family or corporate ties.  
BIS Review 108/2006 
 7
Of  course  the  Government  itself  has  significant  holdings  of  equity  and  it  would  be  rational  for 
householders to take these into account in their savings decisions. Through various Crown Financial 
Institutions,  and  in  particular  the  New  Zealand  Super  Fund,  the  Government  indirectly  holds  about 
$600 million of  New  Zealand  equities onshore  and about  $1,800  million  offshore.  Through  its  State 
Owned  Enterprises  and  holdings  in  Air  New  Zealand,  it  holds  another  $10  billion  directly.  Local 
Government also holds significant equity positions.  
There  are  three  particular types  of  corporate  in New  Zealand  that  have  been  untouched  by  foreign 
ownership  because  their  form  and  modus  operandi  prevents  this.  They  include  State  Owned 
Enterprises,  and  other  Government  companies  and  holdings.  In  particular,  there  are  some  very  big 
infrastructure players among the State Owned Enterprises, with each of the top four firms having total 
assets in excess of $2 billion. The second corporate form of interest is the iwi or trust-owned Maori 
corporation, often with fragmented ownership. These are estimated to total about $4 billion. Finally, 
there are some large and powerful producer co-ops (especially in primary production) and retail co-ops 
with member ownership. These now constitute a high proportion of the New Zealand-owned corporate 
sector.  
Equity for the corporate sector 
Let us turn attention to the corporate sector in New Zealand, their organisational forms, where they 
invest, 
owned. 
ultimately 
financed, 
they 
they 
how 
how 
and 
are 
are 
The corporate sector, in contrast to the household sector in New Zealand, has over recent years been 
saving  strongly;  savings  that  ultimately  are  reinvested,  returned  to  shareholders,  or  used  for  equity 
 8 
 BIS Review 108/2006
investment in other operations. The very low levels of household savings need to be viewed against 
this stronger corporate savings performance.  
Where do New Zealand corporates get their financing from? As noted above, the family-owned firms, 
farms  and  forests  turn  to  the  household  sector.  New  Zealand  corporates  raise  most  debt  finance 
directly from banks, either from the New Zealand subsidiary or, if they are big enough, directly from the 
offshore  parent  bank.  These  debt  markets  appear  to  work  well,  although  borrowing  locally  means 
paying  rates  that  have  traditionally  been  higher  than  in  other  OECD  countries,  even  Australia.  The 
New Zealand rates contain a premium that reflects exchange risk and the liquidity risk that is inherent 
in a small remote market such as New Zealand.  
Compared  with  other  comparable  countries,  the  corporate  bond  market  is  a  very  thin  one  in  New 
Zealand. (There are, of course, a very large number of global bonds denominated in $NZ, but most of 
these are Eurokiwis or Uridashis, whereby foreigners effectively provide finance for lending into the 
New Zealand household market.) The corporate bond market is thin because it is effectively restricted 
to  those  corporates  large  enough  to  be  recognised  internationally.  In  addition,  there  is  a  significant 
compliance  cost  to  issuing  bonds/notes  domestically,  and  direct  bank  debt  often  looks  an  easier 
option. (The lack of a corporate bond market in turn means a less mature yield curve and lower quality 
pricing information.) For most small to medium sized businesses, the banking system is a more cost 
effective  conduit  for  accessing  offshore  investors  funds.  The  effect  of  this  is  to  limit  the  onshore 
funding options available, and to limit the onshore financial instruments New Zealanders can easily 
invest in. 
BIS Review 108/2006 
 9
  
Turning to the stock market, it appears that domestic corporates and New Zealand individuals have an 
ownership stake in publicly listed companies of around 53 percent. The remainder (47 percent) of the 
stock market is owned mainly by interests from the US, Australia, and the UK. This differs slightly from 
the international investment position, which suggests foreign interests own only around 28 percent of 
New Zealand assets. The lower proportion suggested by the international investment statistics reflects 
the fact that ownership of non-listed and unincorporated businesses tends to be rather lower than in 
publicly  listed  companies.  (Australia  is  the  largest  inward  investor  with  around  30  percent  of  total 
foreign investment.)  
This is shown in the figure: due to small scale firms and private equity, the size of the stock market in 
New Zealand is very small, both absolutely and as a proportion of GDP. Of course some New Zealand 
firms list singly or jointly on the Australian exchange. Despite enjoying some good returns, the small 
size of this exchange limits options for both New Zealand firms and New Zealand investors. 
10 
 BIS Review 108/2006
We are currently seeing a phenomenon where considerable private equity is roving the world looking 
for  investment  opportunities.  Close  to  home,  one  source  of  this  is  the  Australian  pension schemes, 
which are filling limited investment opportunities onshore and are increasingly looking at markets like 
New Zealand. Some of this involves publicly listed New Zealand companies, while a less transparent 
part has been private offshore funds buying private New Zealand companies.  
Offshore some of these funds have helped develop more sophisticated segments of capital markets, 
such  as  venture  capital.  But  in  New  Zealand  the  relatively  small  scale  and  low  risk  appetite  of 
institutional funds means that this market has had to rely on a small number of high wealth individuals 
and has developed much less as a result. This limits high growth, high risk firms’ access to growth 
capital, particularly important in a market where home bias is strong due to the inevitable uncertainties 
in assessing start-up / growth firms. 
 Some consequences of our equity short-fall  
What are the consequences of New Zealand’s households’ preference for investment in housing over 
investment in businesses?  
At the micro level it appears that small-medium firms have been less able to access New Zealand-
based specialised capital market instruments, for example, in the area of private equity, and venture 
capital. It is hard to judge how much of a disadvantage this has been, but if it drives New Zealand 
corporates towards foreign financial markets and eventually towards foreign relocation, then that could 
be activity lost to New Zealand.  
BIS Review 108/2006 
 11
New  Zealanders’  unwillingness  to  provide  equity  capital  has  been  an  incentive  for  increased  direct 
foreign ownership. In many cases this has been desirable, even inevitable, for expanding companies. 
One  can  see  a  natural  progression  whereby  some  New  Zealand  companies  gradually  outgrow  the 
technical and market limitations of this country, and as they expand into bigger markets, take on more 
of  the  ownership  attributes  of  international  firms.  But  if  that  happens  “prematurely”,  there  is  an 
opportunity benefit foregone for New Zealand.  
New Zealand’s liberal attitude to foreign ownership has brought us many important advantages. We 
have enjoyed access to the world’s capital, to best practice international technologies, to specialised 
business  skills,  and  to  marketing  networks.  These  have  brought  higher  productivity,  employment 
opportunities, and have contributed to our higher growth rates.  
This also has to do with the much discussed cultural tendency of some New Zealand entrepreneurs to 
grow their business to sales levels of some tens of millions, then exit for the “bach, boat and BMW” 
semi-retirement subculture, leaving overseas investors to expand the business further and develop its 
full value internationally.  
GDP  is  a  measure  of  what  is  produced  in  New  Zealand,  while  National  Income  (which  used  to  be 
called GNP) measures the fruits of production that actually accrue to New Zealand residents. In 2005, 
National Income was around $10 billion lower than GDP, as a significant part of GDP accrued to the 
overseas owners of New Zealand-based companies. Ultimately, it is National Income that matters for 
the overall economic wellbeing of New Zealanders. The wedge between GDP and National Income 
has  some  quite  complex  welfare  implications  for  government,  which  has  to  balance  how  much  its 
policies  aim  to  promote  activity  in  New  Zealand,  or  activity  owned  by  New  Zealanders,  whoever  or 
wherever they may be.  
One particular consequence is seen in our current account deficit, a measure of the external financing 
required  by  the  country’s  investment-savings  imbalance.  In  recent  years  about  half  the  deficit  has 
been represented by the trade imbalance. The other half has mainly been the imbalance of income 
earned  by  foreigners  in  New  Zealand  compared  with  that  earned  by  New  Zealanders  abroad. 
Measurement  problems  apart,  this  appears  to  have  been  growing  as  a  result  of  recent  investment 
 12 
 BIS Review 108/2006
trends. A further decline in the ownership share of New Zealand business will worsen this deficit and 
put the balance of payments under continued pressure.  
Interestingly,  our  net  international  investment  position  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  has  not  worsened 
substantially in recent years. However it will be difficult for New Zealand to substantially improve the 
investment income component of the current account deficit in the short to medium-term because the 
stock of foreign ownership is already so large. If the $NZ were to weaken in the medium-term in line 
with many economists’ predictions, then we would expect to see a further pick-up in foreign investment 
attracted by cheaper New Zealand assets.  
Such  a  large  debtor  position,  arising  out  of  New  Zealand’s  poor  savings  performance,  makes  the 
country  more  vulnerable  to  adverse  shocks.  We  are  inevitably  more  exposed  to  changes  in  global 
interest rates or sudden shifts in the investment preferences of overseas investors. At times, this can 
make it more challenging to maintain price stability and avoid unwanted swings in economic activity. 
This pattern of household investment also impacts economic performance. If New Zealanders fail to 
identify  and  invest  in  higher  yielding  equity  then  we  condemn  ourselves  and  the  country  to  lower 
returns, and economic growth will be lower. 
BIS Review 108/2006 
 13
