Randall S Kroszner: What drives productivity growth? Implications for the 
economy and prospects for the future  
Remarks by Mr Randall S Kroszner, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, at The Forecasters Club of New York, New York, 27 September 2006. 
 I am delighted to be able to speak before the Forecasters Club of New York. One of the things I’ve 
enjoyed  most  during  the  past  five  years  in  both  public  service  and  in  academia  has  been  the 
opportunity to engage actively in economic forecasting. I chaired the so-called Troika-2 process when I 
was  a  member  of  the  Council  of  Economic  Advisers  in  2001  to  2003  through  which  the  economic 
forecast that is the basis for Administration’s budget is formulated. When I returned to the University of 
Chicago,  I  presented  the  annual  economic  forecast  for  the  Graduate  School  of  Business  in  both 
Chicago and New York, and I believe I see some people here who had attended those events. Since 
becoming a Governor in March, I have had the privilege of working on the forecasting with the superb 
staff at the Federal Reserve. In a sense, forecasting is where the "rubber" of economic theory meets 
the "road" of the real world. As such, it is intellectually exciting and challenging. 
One  of  the  foremost  challenges  has  been  forecasting  productivity  developments  and  their 
macroeconomic  implications.  As  you  know,  productivity  growth  is  the  key  source  of  higher  living 
standards  in  the  long  run.  But,  of  course,  it  also  is  an  important  influence  shaping  shorter-run 
economic  developments  as  well  as  monetary  policy  decisions.  Today  I  will  talk  about  some  of  the 
forces  that  drive  productivity  growth,  the  macroeconomic  implications  of  changes  in  the  longer-run 
trend of productivity, and the prospects for productivity growth. My views on these topics are my own 
and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of  my  colleagues  on  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  or  the 
Federal Open Market Committee. 
The  revolution  in  information  technology  (IT)  is  commonly  taken  as  the  initiating  force  behind  the 
acceleration  in  productivity  seen  since  1995.  Although  I  believe  that  IT  is  a  necessary  ingredient,  I 
don’t believe it is sufficient. In particular, the interaction of IT advances with the flexible markets in the 
United States continues to be a crucial ingredient. The IT revolution has not simply allowed a worker to 
turn the crank faster on an improved machine (the traditional way we think of technological innovation) 
but opened the possibility of fundamentally altering the way production (or provision of a service) takes 
place;  hence,  the  crucial  role  for  flexible  labor,  product,  and  financial  markets.  As  I  will  describe  in 
more  detail,  this  interaction  effect  of  IT  with  a  flexible  economy  can  help  to  explain  why  the  IT 
revolution  has  produced  higher  productivity  growth  in  the  United  States  but  not  in  many  other 
industrialized economies.  
While it is important for policymakers to understand the sources of the productivity resurgence, it is 
also important for us to understand the macroeconomic implications. An often overlooked implication 
is that, all else equal, an increase in the growth rate of productivity will tend to put upward pressure on 
real interest rates. But in fact we have not seen the predicted rise in real rates. Of course, we do not 
live in the world of simple economic models so all other things are not equal. In particular, I believe 
one reason is that sound economic policies have created a more stable economic environment, and 
with that has come low and stable inflation and an ongoing desire by foreigners to invest in the United 
States to reap higher returns associated with higher productivity growth than may be available in their 
economies.  
At bottom, I expect that the flexibility of U.S. markets will continue to provide a nourishing environment 
for technological and process advances, and that very flexibility, along with sound monetary policy, will 
also  allow  the  U.S.  economy  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  the  evolving  macroeconomic  dynamics  that 
accelerating productivity sets in motion. 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 1
A framework for analyzing the growth of labor productivity 
A great success story for the American economy has been the resurgence of productivity growth that 
began around 1995.1 From 1973 to 1995, labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector increased 
at an annual rate of 1-1/2 percent. (Labor productivity is defined in terms of output per hour of work in 
the  economy.)  In  contrast,  from  1995  to  2000,  productivity  accelerated  to  a  2-1/2  percent  rate. 
Perhaps  even  more  remarkably,  despite  a  recession,  the  fall  of  the  dot-com  market,  a  broad  stock 
market correction, terrorism, and corporate governance scandals, productivity has accelerated even 
further  since  2000.  Despite  some  slowing  in  the  past  few  quarters,  productivity  in  the  nonfarm 
business sector has risen at an average annual rate of about 3 percent over the past 5-1/2 years.  
Many economists, including myself, use growth accounting as a framework for analyzing productivity 
developments.  In  its  simplest  terms,  growth  accounting  decomposes  the  growth  rate  of  labor 
productivity into two major components. One is the contribution to productivity growth that comes from 
giving workers more capital to work with, such as equipment or software; the standard term for this 
component is "capital deepening." The other major contribution comes from the growth of multifactor 
productivity  -  that  is,  the  efficiency  with  which  labor  and  capital  are  combined  to  create  output.2 
Multifactor  productivity  growth  reflects  such  things  as  business  process  innovations  -  for  example, 
enhanced supply-chain management techniques or more-effective retail store layouts; advancements 
in technology, such as the development of new-generation computer chips; or most any other type of 
improvement  in  the  efficiency  of  a  firm’s  operations.  This  aggregate  growth-accounting  framework 
forms the economic underpinning of key comprehensive productivity statistics produced by the Bureau 
of Labor Statistics. 
Work  done  over  the  past  decade  takes  a  somewhat  more  disaggregated  approach  to  growth 
accounting in order to get inside the aggregate numbers and try to get a better handle on the sources 
of our remarkable productivity performance since 1995.3 But all of this is just accounting - albeit, in 
some  research,  very  elaborate  and  painstakingly  constructed  accounting.  The  deeper  analytical 
questions are, What are the forces driving capital deepening and the growth of multifactor productivity, 
especially  since  1995,  and  Why  does  the  United  States  seem  to  have  experienced  increased 
productivity  growth,  since  the  mid-1990s,  that  has  not  been  shared  by  many  other  industrial 
economies? 
The forces driving the growth of labor productivity 
In  broad  terms,  the  story  for  the  post-1995  productivity  resurgence  that  comes  out  of  the  various 
studies  that  take  a  disaggregated  approach,  as  well  as  case  studies  such  as  those  conducted  by 
McKinsey  (2002),  is  well  known.  Technological  advances  in  the  IT-producing  sector  -  that  is, 
multifactor productivity - and associated investments in more and better production equipment (capital 
deepening)  started  things  off.  These  developments  were  bolstered  by  investments  in  IT  equipment 
and software by firms outside of the IT-producing sector, improvements in the knowledge and skills 
needed to use effectively the equipment and software, and innovations in business processes. 
An unexplained puzzle, however, remains in that story. If productivity growth were simply a matter of 
installing  ever-more-powerful  computers  or  reading  ever-more-advanced  technical  manuals,  then  all 
countries  with  access  to  the  breakthroughs  in  information  technology  from  the  past  two  decades 
should have enjoyed the same productivity revival as the United States. But that hasn’t been the case. 
Since 1995, productivity in the United States has grown substantially faster than in other advanced 
industrial countries. For example, a recent study by van Ark and Inklaar (2005) indicates that while 
productivity  in  the  United  States  accelerated  after  1995,  average  productivity  in  Europe  actually 
decelerated - indeed, they estimate that the trend in the fifteen countries that made up the European 
                                                      
1   One  of  the  earlier  papers  that  was  used  by  many  observers  to  suggest  the  possibility  of  a  mid-1990s  inflection  point  in 
productivity growth was Corrado and Slifman (1999). 
2   A  third  contribution  comes  from  the  change  in  labor  composition,  which  some  analysts  include  as  part  of  multifactor 
productivity. According to estimates produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), this component has played little role 
in the productivity resurgence. The estimates come from the BLS program on multifactor productivity. The data are available 
at www.bls.gov. 
3   Some of the important papers include Oliner and Sichel (2000), Jorgenson and Stiroh (2000), and Corrado, Lengermann, 
Bartelsman, and Beaulieu (2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2006
Union  before  2004  has  been  decelerating  since  the  mid-1980s.  According  to  van  Ark  and  Inklaar, 
some of the differential reflects faster capital deepening in the United States, but much of it reflects a 
surge in multifactor productivity growth in the United States outside of the IT sector since 2000.4  
Innovations in information technology, however, cannot be the whole story - flexibility at the firm level 
and  in  labor  markets,  and  competitive  pressure  throughout  the  economy,  also  play  their  roles.5 
Businesses must be flexible enough to adopt new technologies and then to transform themselves in 
ways  that  allow  technology-intensive  investment  to  have  the  highest  possible  effect  on  productivity 
growth.  Similarly,  labor  markets  must  be  flexible  enough  to  allow  for  the  prompt  re-allocation  of 
resources in response to changes in demand. The economy also must be competitive enough to allow 
useful innovations at some firms to be transmitted throughout the industry by market pressure. 
At  the  firm  level,  an  important  characteristic  of  the  American  economy  is  that  we  have  a  business 
culture that rewards nimbleness, innovation, and entrepreneurship. As an example, consider the case 
of U.S. retail trade. To be sure, firms in this industry invested heavily in information technology in the 
1990s. Yet they did not become more productive simply by buying faster computers and returning to 
business as usual. As discussed in a recent in-depth study by McKinsey & Co., IT investments were 
combined with a host of changes in business practices to raise productivity. Perhaps the best example 
is the use of IT to improve the links in the supply chain from vendor to retailer, to create a so-called 
glass pipeline through which retailers’ orders can be monitored as they progress (McKinsey 2002). 
Flexibility also has been evident in other industries. Consider, for example, a study done of a medical 
products company that made a large investment in computer-integrated manufacturing (Brynjolfsson 
and  Hitt  2000).  The  flexibility  gained  by  this  investment  necessitated  a  host  of  other  changes  in 
business practice, such as the elimination of piece rates, the encouragement of workers to stop the 
production  line  if  it  is  not  running  at  full  speed,  and  a  reduction  in  management  layers.  Eventually, 
productivity rose so much that the firm painted the windows of this site black so that competitors could 
not see how the new system worked! 
There  is  an  important  historical  parallel  in  the  United  States  to  the  interaction  of  technological 
innovation  and  flexibility  in  producing  higher  productivity  growth.  In  the  early  twentieth  century,  the 
electrification of production operations and the electric motor did not substantially raise manufacturing 
productivity  until  firms  realized  that  electricity  allowed  them  to  rethink  the  layout  of  their  factories. 
Rather  than  build  a  many-storied  factory  around  a  centralized  power  source,  a  firm  could  disperse 
electric motors around a single-story plant and thereby create the modern assembly line. Workers then 
could  use  specialized  tools  to  undertake  new  activities.  This  redesign  allowed  the  firm  to  optimize 
material  handling,  change  production  lines  more  easily,  and  perform  maintenance  on  individual 
sections of the plant without idling production throughout the facility (David, 1990). 
More broadly, the increasing competitiveness of the American economy over the past quarter century 
or so has brought with it a market imperative for creativity, innovation, and efficiency. In 1977, Fred 
Kahn, the Cornell University economist, came to Washington as the chairman of the now-defunct Civil 
Aeronautics Board and as an adviser to President Carter on deregulation. With Professor Kahn as the 
prime mover, the Airline Deregulation Act was passed in 1978. This act started the ball rolling, and in 
fairly short order the Congress passed legislation that deregulated the rail, trucking, and interstate bus 
industries. Deregulation removed barriers to entry and made it possible for a multitude of new firms to 
enter the transportation industry. 
Freely  allowing  the  entry  of  new  firms  generates  competitive  pressures  that  have  a  ripple  effect 
throughout the economy. For example, it’s difficult to imagine that online retailers could have become 
so successful without access to inexpensive, interstate (and international) package delivery services. 
But the proliferation of these delivery services would not have been possible without the deregulation 
of the transportation industry in the late 1970s and early 1980s. 
The converse also may be true. Regulatory barriers to entry in the retail sector in Japan and Europe - 
for example, restrictions on land use and shopping hours - appear to have impeded the development 
of  more-innovative,  and  presumably  more-productive,  types  of  retailing  (Gordon,  2004).  More 
generally,  research  conducted  at  the  Federal  Reserve  suggests  that  regulatory  environments  in  a 
                                                      
4   A study by the OECD (2002), which reports cross-country estimates of multifactor productivity (MFP) growth from 1990 to 
1999, also shows that U.S. MFP growth picked up after 1995, while MFP growth fell in most other OECD countries. 
5   This point is developed more extensively in Kroszner (2003) 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 3
number  of  industrial  countries  have  impeded  the  adoption  of  information  technologies  and  slowed 
productivity growth (Gust and Marquez, 2004). 
Increased trade liberalization, which lowers barriers to the international flow of goods, financial capital, 
and direct investment, also spurs innovation and creativity. An interesting illustration of the connection 
is  the  productivity  of  multinational  corporations.  Research  conducted  by  Federal  Reserve  System 
economists and others has found that, in the United States, multinational firms are more productive 
than  domestically  oriented  firms,  and  the  difference  holds  regardless  of  whether  the  parent  firm  is 
headquartered in the United States or abroad.6 Perhaps even more remarkable is a finding that, in the 
United  Kingdom,  multinational  firms  owned  by  U.S.  parents  are  more  productive  than  multinational 
firms owned by British parents (Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen, 2006).  
I draw two conclusions from this work. First, trade liberalization appears to have made it possible for 
multinational firms to institute highly efficient cross-border supply chains within their firms that seem to 
have  allowed  them  to  boost  significantly  the  efficiency  of  their  worldwide  operations.  Second,  U.S. 
firms,  on  average,  have  more  flexible  and  innovative  business  practices,  sometimes  called 
organizational capital, that a liberalized trade regime apparently allows them to transfer to their foreign 
operations. 
Taking account of productivity in a macro forecast 
Let me switch gears now from the sources of our remarkable productivity performance to some of its 
macroeconomic implications. A good deal of research, including the Board’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy (FRB/US), suggests that what is called Say’s law still holds.7  
That  is,  in  the  model,  an  increase  in  the  level  of  productivity  (reflecting,  for  example,  some 
technological advance) causes businesses and financial markets to revise upward their views about 
the level of expected profits, and it causes households to revise upward their views about the level of 
permanent income. The higher level of expected profits and returns to capital, in turn, lead to a rise in 
business  investment.  Similarly,  personal  consumption  expenditures  are  boosted  in  response  to  the 
rise in permanent income. The initial increases in spending are then followed by multiplier effects. A 
dynamic feedback also occurs on the supply side as the higher level of investment spending increases 
the capital stock (relative to the supply of worker hours), which gives a small fillip to productivity and 
potential output. Ultimately, the increases in aggregate supply are matched by an equivalent increase 
in aggregate demand.8 This is, of course, Say’s law. 
What I’ve just described is a sketch of what happens after a one-time rise in the level of productivity. In 
the case of an ongoing rise in the growth rate of productivity, the dynamics and macro consequences 
are more complicated. In particular, all else equal, a positive shock to the growth rate of productivity 
will tend to put upward pressure on real interest rates.9 The upward pressure on real interest occurs, 
in part, because investment must rise to keep the growth of the capital stock in line with the faster 
growth  of  gross  domestic  product.  In  addition,  a  shock  to  the  growth  rate  of  productivity  boosts 
household’s  assessments  of  the  growth  rate  of  their  permanent  income,  while  increases  in  the 
expected  growth  rate  of  profits  and  dividends  raise  asset  values,  including  the  value  of  equities, 
relative to current income. The combination of faster expected growth of permanent income and higher 
stock market wealth tends to raise consumption relative to income and, concomitantly, lower personal 
saving. Thus, all else equal, the increase in demand for financing relative to domestic saving will tend 
to boost real interest rates.10  
                                                      
6   For example, Doms and Jensen (1998); Corrado, Lengermann, and Slifman (2005); and Kurz (2006). 
7   Descriptions of FRB/US are in Brayton and Tinsley (1996) and Reifschneider, Tetlow, and Williams (1999). 
8   Simulations of FRB/US suggest that a 1 percent positive shock to the growth rate of productivity ultimately leads to both 
aggregate supply and aggregate demand increasing about 1.1 percent faster than they would have in the absence of the 
shock. 
9   This point is emphasized in Kohn (2003). 
10  Two possible partial offsets to this process should be noted. First, if all of the spending increases are confined to the private 
sector,  then  the  government  budget  deficit  will  shrink,  as  it  did  in  the  late  1990s,  which  would  help  narrow  the  potential 
saving shortfall. Second, if foreign economies do not share in the productivity boom, their demand for our exports will not 
expand in line with the increase in domestic demand. 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2006
The dynamics of this process, and how long they take to play out, depend on several factors. One 
factor  is  how  quickly  the  productivity  change  is  incorporated  into  household  and  business 
expectations.  The  change  in  expectations  can  be  drawn  out  if  households  and  firms  are  slow  to 
recognize an inflection point in the productivity growth trend or are highly uncertain about how long 
any  observed  change  in  the  data  might  last.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  case  in  the  mid-1990s, 
when it took some time for that recognition to begin to sink in to the mind-set of most households and 
businesses.  To  his  credit,  Chairman  Greenspan  was  one  of  the  first  to  call  the  sea  change  in  our 
productivity performance to public attention.11  
Another  factor  influencing  the  dynamics  of  the  process  the  degree  to  which  businesses,  financial 
markets  and  consumers  are  forward-looking  in  their  economic  behavior.  If  they  are  myopic  in  their 
behavior or tend to discount the future very heavily, then the dynamic response of the economy to a 
change in the growth rate of productivity will be drawn out. 
At this point, you might be saying to yourself, "Hold on; if an increase in the productivity growth trend is 
supposed to boost real interest rates, why have real rates been falling since around mid-2004 and are 
low by historical standards?" The answer involves that favorite safety net of economists, the "all else 
equal" caveat. In fact, all else has not been equal. Importantly, the term premium embedded in interest 
rates has been falling. The term premium reflects the extent of uncertainty about future prospects for 
inflation and for real economic activity. The reduction in the term premia appears to be associated, in 
part, with the greater economic stability we have been enjoying. Real activity has become less volatile; 
moreover, inflation is lower and, as long as we at the Federal Reserve do our job, more predictable.12  
The huge inflow of foreign saving into the United States, undoubtedly, also has been important. As 
then-Governor  Bernanke  observed  in  2005,  differential  demographic  trends  and  rates  of  return  on 
investment  between  the  United  States  and  many  of  the  world’s  other  rich  countries  is  part  of  the 
explanation  for  that  inflow  (Bernanke,  2005).  Rich  countries,  with  populations  that  are  aging  faster 
than ours, have a strong motive to save to provide for an impending sharp increase in the number of 
retirees relative to the number of workers. Moreover, many advanced economies outside the United 
States  also  have  a  paucity  of  domestic  investment  opportunities  relative  to  the  United  States.  As  a 
consequence of high desired saving and low prospective returns to domestic investment, the mature 
industrial  economies  outside  of  the  United  States,  as  a  group,  seek  to  lend  abroad.  The  higher 
prospective returns in the United States may be due in part to the higher productivity growth that the 
United States has been experiencing relative to many other industrialized countries resulting from the 
interaction  effect  of  IT  innovations  and  the  flexibility  of  the  United  States  economy  relative  to  other 
countries. 
What about the effects of a productivity shock on inflation? Ultimately inflation is determined by the 
policy  actions  of  the  central  bank.  In  the  short  run,  however,  a  change  in  the  trend  growth  rate  of 
productivity  can  influence  inflation  dynamics.  A  one-time  change  in  the  level  of  productivity,  or 
transitory volatility in productivity growth rates, are unlikely to have lasting effects on business pricing 
behavior. Economic theory and econometric evidence suggest that only a persistent shock to the rate 
of change of productivity has persistent consequences for rate of change of prices - that is, inflation.  
If we lived in a world with no impediments to competition in labor and product markets, with prices and 
wages that freely and quickly moved up and down in response to shifts in economic conditions, then a 
change  in  productivity  growth  would  be  promptly  matched  by  a  corresponding  change  in  nominal 
compensation per hour. As a consequence, unit labor costs would be unchanged, and all else equal, 
so would inflation.  
But, we don’t live in such a perfectly competitive, frictionless world. Nominal compensation per hour 
initially seems to respond sluggishly to changes in the economy, including productivity shocks. As a 
result,  an  increase  in  productivity  growth,  for  example,  initially  slows  the growth  of  unit  labor  costs, 
which  firms  -  under  competitive  pressure  -  then  pass  on  to  their  customers,  thereby  slowing  price 
inflation. As price inflation slows and as, with a lag, nominal compensation per hour accelerates, the 
growth rate of real compensation per hour increases so that over time workers share in the benefits of 
faster productivity growth. Indeed, in the past, any rise in the level of productivity has eventually been 
                                                      
11   Kroszner (2006a) discusses the need for better data to help identify emerging economic developments more accurately and 
promptly. 
12   This point is explored in Kroszner (2006b). 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 5
fully translated into a rise in the level of real compensation per hour. How quickly the re-equilibration 
takes  place  depends  in  part  on  the  extent  of  competition  in  product  markets  and  the  nature  of  the 
wage-bargaining process. Up until now, the process in our economy has taken at least a few years, 
but it has always occurred. 
Productivity and real compensation per hour 
What I have dubbed the re-equilibration of productivity and real compensation per hour is just another 
manifestation of one of the great stylized facts of macroeconomics: In the past, deviations in the labor 
share of income from its mean value of roughly two-thirds have eventually been reversed. But the two-
thirds  share  is  an  empirical  observation  about  the  U.S.  economy;  it  is  not  an  immutable  number 
derived from the first principles of economic theory. As it turns out - I’ll leave the proof to you as a 
homework assignment - mean reversion in the labor share is equivalent to the observation that over 
time  labor  productivity  and  real  compensation  per  hour  have  moved  together;  in  the  jargon  of 
econometrics, they are co-integrated. (See chart.) 
 
As I just mentioned, when the labor share deviates from its long-run average or, equivalently, a gap 
opens between productivity and real compensation per hour, the reversion to the mean (that is, the 
closing  of  the  gap)  can  take  quite  a  while.  In  recent  years,  the  labor  share  has  moved  down  as 
increases in real compensation per hour have, for the most part, lagged behind productivity growth, 
but the timing and extent of the change in the labor share depends in part on the particular statistical 
measure chosen.13  
                                                      
13   Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector is reported to have increased at an annual rate of 13.7 percent in 
the first quarter of 2006. As a result, real gross domestic income, or GDI (that is, the real value of the goods and services 
produced in the United States as measured from the income side of the national accounts) increased at a 10.2 percent rate, 
compared with a 5.6 percent pace for real GDP. In the past, such large differences between the growth rates of GDI and 
GDP were narrowed by the periodic revisions to the national accounts. However, history offers no sound guidance on which 
series is likely to be revised most. 
6 
 BIS Review 90/2006
A challenge for forecasters is deciphering whether this latest drop in the labor share is transitory, as 
such drops have been in the past, or whether some structural aspect of the economy, such as the 
wage-bargaining process, has changed to make the drop in the labor share permanent. More likely, 
the  adjustment  process  is  taking  a  long  time  to  play  out,  as  it  did  in  the  1990s,  and  some  recent 
evidence may suggest that the gap is beginning to close. Assuming that the drop is transitory, another 
challenge for forecasters is predicting whether the adjustment to real compensation per hour will be 
driven by a pickup in the growth of nominal compensation per hour or by a reduction in inflation. 
Prospects for productivity 
Let me close with some comments on the outlook for productivity. Recent estimates by a number of 
economists suggest that the underlying trend in productivity in the nonfarm business sector is about 2-
1/2 percent per year, close to the rate of productivity growth achieved during the period from 1995 to 
2000.14 I think a good case can be made for the view that the strong productivity growth of the post-
1995 era will persist for some time. The rate of technology growth appears to be proceeding apace, 
and  further  diffusion  of  already  existing  technologies  and  applications  to  more  firms  and  industries 
should continue to boost productivity. 
Conclusion 
An important lesson of the U.S. productivity resurgence is that an open economy with flexible labor, 
capital, and product markets is critical for a nation to enjoy the full benefits of recent IT innovation and, 
thus,  to  enhance  a  nation’s  productivity  performance  going  forward.  In  my  opinion,  the  productivity 
developments  that  we  are  likely  to  see  in  coming  years  will  be  fostered  by  a  U.S.  economy  that 
remains  very  flexible,  highly  competitive,  and  open  -  if  anything,  it  is  becoming  even  more  flexible, 
competitive,  and  open.  If  this  assessment  is  reasonably  close  to  the  mark,  the  prospects  for  future 
improvements  in  our  nation’s  longer-run  living  standards  should  be  quite  favorable,  and  this 
underscores  the  importance  of  maintaining  an  open,  flexible,  and  stable  economy.  Even  small 
increases  in  productivity  growth  have  tremendous  cumulative  effects  over  time  on  production  and 
income.  Let  me  close  by  quoting  the  Nobel  laureate  Robert  Lucas  who  once  said  that  when  one 
contemplates  the  effect  that  sustained  economic  growth  has  on  human  welfare,  it  is  hard  to  think 
about anything else. 
References 
Baily, Martin (2003). "The U.S. Economic Outlook: Investment, Productivity, Deflation," (72 KB PDF) 
slide presentation. Washington: Institute for International Economics, April.  
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2005).  "The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit,"  speech 
delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, April 14. 
Bloom, Nick, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2006). "It Ain’t What You Do, It’s the Way You 
Do  I.T.:  Investigating  the  Productivity  Miracle  Using  the  Overseas  Activities  of  U.S.  Multinationals," 
working paper. London: Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics, May. 
Brayton, Flint, and Peter Tinsley (eds.) (1996). "A Guide to FRB/US: A Macroeconomic Model of the 
United States," Finance and Economic Discussion Series 1996-42. Washington: Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System, October. 
Brynjolfsson,  Erik,  and  Lorin  M.  Hitt  (2000).  "Beyond  Computation:  Information  Technology, 
Organizational Transformation and Business Performance," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 
(Fall), pp. 23–48. 
Corrado,  Carol,  and  Lawrence  Slifman  (1999).  "Decomposition  of  Productivity  and  Unit  Costs," 
American Economic Review, vol. 89 (May), pp. 328–32. 
                                                      
14   For example, Baily (2003); Gordon (2003); and Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2004).  
BIS Review 90/2006 
 7
Corrado,  Carol,  Paul  Lengermann,  and  Larry  Slifman  (2005).  "The  Contribution  of  MNCs  to  U.S. 
Productivity  Growth,  1977–2000,"  unpublished  paper,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, Division of Research and Statistics, July. 
Corrado,  Carol,  Paul  Lengermann,  Eric  Bartelsman,  and  J.  Joseph  Beaulieu  (2006).  "Modeling 
Aggregate Productivity at a Disaggregate Level: New Results for U.S. Sectors and Industries," (510 
KB  PDF)  paper  presented  at  the  2006  Summer  Institute  sponsored  by  the  National  Bureau  of 
Economic  Research  and  the  Conference  on  Research  in  Income  and  Wealth,  held  in  Cambridge, 
Mass., July 17. 
David,  Paul  A.  (1990).  "The  Dynamo  and  the  Computer:  An  Historical  Perspective  on  the  Modern 
Productivity Paradox," American Economic Review, vol. 80 (May), pp. 355–61. 
Doms, Mark E., and J. Bradford Jensen (1998). "Comparing Wages, Skills, and Productivity between 
Domestically  and  Foreign-Owned  Manufacturing  Establishments  in  the  United  States,"  in  R.E. 
Baldwin,  R.E.  Lipsey,  and  J.  David  Richardson,  eds.,  Geography  and  Ownership  as  Bases  for 
Economic Accounting, National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 59. 
Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, pp. 235–58. 
Gordon, Robert J. (2003). "Exploding Productivity Growth: Context, Causes, and Implications," (349 
KB PDF) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003:2, pp. 207–98. 
Gordon,  Robert  J.  (2004).  "Why  Was  Europe  Left  at  the  Station  When  America’s  Productivity 
Locomotive Departed?" NBER Working Paper Series 10661. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of 
Economic Research, August. 
Gust, Christopher, and Jaime Marquez (2004). "International Comparisons of Productivity Growth: The 
Role of Information Technology and Regulatory Practices," Labour Economics, vol. 11 (February), pp. 
33-58. 
Jorgenson,  Dale  W.,  Kevin  J.  Stiroh,  Robert  G.  Gordon,  and  Daniel  E.  Sichel  (2000).  "Raising  the 
Speed  Limit:  U.S.  Economic  Growth  in  the  Information  Age"  (458  KB  PDF)  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity, 2000:1, pp. 125–235. 
Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2004). "Will the U.S. Productivity Resurgence 
Continue?" Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 10 (December), pp. 1–7. 
Kohn, Donald L. (2003). "Productivity and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia Monetary Seminar, Philadelphia, Pa., September 24. 
Kroszner,  Randall  S.  (2003).  "Promoting  Global  Economic  Growth:  The  Productivity  Challenge," 
working paper. Chicago: University of Chicago, July. 
Kroszner, Randall S. (2006a). "Innovative Statistics for a Dynamic Economy," speech delivered at the 
National  Association  for  Business  Economics  Professional  Development  Seminar  for  Journalists, 
Washington, D.C., May 24. 
Kroszner,  Randall  S.  (2006b).  "Why  Are  Yield  Curves  So  Flat  and  Long  Rates  So  Low  Globally?" 
speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers, New York, New York, June 15. 
Kurz, Christopher (2006). "Outstanding Outsourcers: A Firm- and Plant-Level Analysis of Production 
Sharing," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-04. Washington: Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, March. 
McKinsey  &  Co.  (2002).  Perspective:  How  IT  Enables  Productivity  Growth:  The  U.S.  Experience 
across Three Sectors in the 1990s. Washington: McKinsey Global Institute, November. 
OECD (2002). "Productivity and Innovation: The Impact of Product and Labor Market Policies," OECD 
Economic Outlook, vol. 2002/1 (no. 71, June), pp. 171–84. 
Oliner,  Stephen  D.,  and  Daniel  Sichel  (2000).  "The  Resurgence  of  Growth  in  the  Late  1990s:  Is 
Information Technology the Story?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 (Autumn), pp. 3–22. 
Reifschneider, David, Robert Tetlow, and John Williams (1999). "Aggregate Disturbances, Monetary 
Policy,  and  the  Macroeconomy:  The  FRB/US  Perspective,"  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin,  vol.  85 
(January), pp. 1–19. 
8 
 BIS Review 90/2006
van Ark, Bart, and Robert Inklaar (2005). "Catching up or Getting Stuck? Europe’s Trouble to Exploit 
ICT’s Productivity Potential," Research Memorandum GD-79. Groningen, The Netherlands: Groningen 
Growth and Development Centre, September. 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 9
