Philipp Hildebrand: Money and monetary policy – the ECB experience  
1999-2006  
Comments by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Fourth ECB Central Banking Conference: The role of money: money and monetary policy in the 
twenty-first century, Frankfurt/Main, 9 November 2006. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Dear colleagues and friends. It is a pleasure to be here today. I am honored to have the opportunity to 
discuss Money and monetary policy: The ECB experience 1999-2006 by B. Fischer, M. Lenza, H. Pill 
and  L.  Reichlin  in  front  of  such  a  distinguished  audience.  The  paper  presents  an  overview  of  the 
monetary  analysis  at  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  since  its  inception.  It  provides  market 
participants with detailed information on how the monetary analysis has been deployed by the ECB 
and how it has evolved over time. 
A  newly  created  currency  presents  formidable  challenges  to  monetary  policy.  Arguably,  this  is 
particularly true for the monetary analysis. Two challenges strike me as being paramount: first, policy 
makers face a fundamentally rearranged financial environment and second, empirical estimates are 
difficult to come by due to the invariably short sample period. A new financial regime implies potentially 
unstable money demand equations; a short sample induces imprecise estimates. The presented paper 
makes  a  valuable  contribution  in  documenting  extensively  how  the  ECB  has  been  conducting  its 
monetary analysis in such an environment.  
It should be noted at the outset that the challenges addressed in the paper do not solely apply to a 
new currency area. A case in point is my own institution, the Swiss National Bank (SNB). The SNB will 
celebrate  its  100th  anniversary  next  year.  The  Swiss  franc  can  therefore  hardly  be  seen  as  a  new 
currency. Nonetheless, in the late 1990s, the SNB encountered very similar challenges to those faced 
by the ECB and described in the paper. It had to cope with increasing instability in the demand for its 
targeted money aggregates. In light of these parallels, allow me to complement my comments on the 
presented paper by drawing on the SNB’s experience with money and monetary policy. But before I do 
so, let me briefly highlight the two aspects of the paper that strike me as particularly relevant. 
Money and monetary policy: the ECB experience 1999-2006 
2.  
First,  and  arguably  most  importantly,  the  empirical  results  presented  in  the  paper  suggest  that  the 
information  content  of  monetary  aggregates  improve  the  quality  of  inflation  forecasts  derived  from 
other  models.  In  light  of  these  results,  research  efforts  directed  at  combining  forecasts  based  on 
different models and accounting for the additional information provided by monetary aggregates are 
clearly worth pursuing. 
Second, the paper documents the thorough analysis done at the ECB to take money demand shifts 
into  account  when  tracking  M3.  The  result  of  this  work  is  M3  adjusted  by  portfolio  shifts,  a  new 
monetary  aggregate.  It  accounts  for  changes  in  financial  market  conditions.  At  times,  this  new 
measure differs significantly from the traditional M3 measure. The paper shows that this new variable 
has valuable information content in inflation forecasting exercises. 
In many ways, the empirical work presented in the paper speaks for itself. Nonetheless, it seems to 
me, there are at least two factors which limit the extent to which we can draw far-reaching conclusions 
from the work presented in the Fischer et al. paper. 
First, the analysis covers the years from 1999 to 2006. This period is characterized by remarkably low 
and stable inflation. For a central banker, this is good news. Such prolonged periods of low and stable 
inflation can, however, give rise to distortions in econometric analyses. An accurate evaluation of the 
information content of a particular variable for future inflation becomes difficult when the volatility of 
inflation  is  low.  In  such  a  setting  it  comes  as  no  surprise  that  the  random  walk  is  a  hard  to  beat 
benchmark.  Therefore,  when  inflation  is  low  and  stable  for  a  protracted  period,  a  low  correlation 
between  money  and  inflation  should  not  automatically  lead  us  to  conclude  that  money  no  longer 
matters.  
BIS Review 107/2006 
 1
Second,  the  evaluation  of  the  additional  value  of  money  in  the  paper  is  undertaken  based  on  a 
forecast horizon of six quarters. As the authors recognize themselves and as I will point out later on, 
money appears to be particularly valuable to inflation dynamics of medium and long-term frequencies. 
A mere six quarters could therefore simply be too short a time horizon to allow for money to begin 
transmitting in any significant way its impact on inflation.  
The  Fischer  et  al.  paper  will  prove  to  be  particularly  valuable  if  it  encourages  further  research  to 
investigate  the  relevance  and  stability  of  its  findings  under  different  inflation  regimes,  in  different 
economies  and  over  longer  time  horizons.  In  this  context,  let  me  now  briefly  turn  to  the  Swiss 
experience with money and monetary policy. 
SNB experience using information from monetary aggregates  
3.  
With the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, the SNB had to search for a new policy framework.1 
From  1974  until  the  end  of  the  1990s  the  SNB  announced  monetary  targets;  first  for  M1,  and 
eventually for the monetary base. In 1978, the SNB abandoned its monetary target for a short period 
in favor of a nominal exchange rate target.2 During the second half of the 1990s, the monetary base 
became  instable.  The  SNB  faced  increasing  difficulty  using  a  money  target  for  MO,  let  alone  to 
communicate through them. Finally, the SNB decided to adopt an altogether new monetary framework 
in an effort to increase the clarity, transparency, and flexibility of the conduct of its monetary policy.  
The  new  concept,  introduced  in  January  2000,  is  based  on  three  elements:  an  explicit  definition  of 
price  stability,  an  inflation  forecast  as  the  main  indicator  for  policy  decisions,  and  a  range  for  the 
3-month LIBOR as the operative target. In contrast to the ECB’s two-pillar strategy, the SNB decided 
at  the  time  to  adopt  an  integrated  approach.  For  the  purpose  of  today's  discussion,  I  would  like  to 
highlight two important elements of the SNB’s monetary framework. 
First, communication considerations were an important element in the design of the new framework. 
Clearly inspired by the early inflation targeters, a definition of price stability and a quarterly inflation 
forecast  became  the  primary  communication  tools  with  regard  to  monetary  policy.  These  were 
considered to be clearer than the alternative of attributing a specific role to monetary aggregates. In 
other words, the two pillar model of the ECB was rejected primarily on the grounds of communication 
considerations. 
Second, the new monetary framework was deliberately designed to allow sufficient room for judgment 
and flexibility in the conduct of policy. The inflation forecast as the main indicator for policy decisions is 
derived  from  a  "portfolio"  of  models  and  indicators.  Some  of  these  models  contain  monetary 
aggregates; others don’t. The weights assigned to different models and indicators are allowed to vary 
over  time  as  their  reliability  and  applicability  may  also  vary  across  different  economic  situations. 
Empirical studies backed the "portfolio of models" approach. Empirical evidence drawing on six years 
of  Swiss  data  suggests  strongly  that  combining  inflation  forecasts  from  different  models  and 
specifications improve the forecasting accuracy of the SNB’s inflation forecasts.3  
Of course, the SNB does not claim to have solved the fundamental problem of linking monetary and 
non-monetary  analyses.  The  Governing  Board  feels  strongly,  however,  that  there  are  significant 
advantages  in  aggregating  the  information  from  our  different  models  and  indicators  in  an  internal 
process  and  subsequently  publish  a  single  SNB  inflation  forecast.  Let  me  simply  mention  the  most 
obvious  one.  In  the  SNB’s  integrated  approach,  the  Governing  Board  avoids  the  potential 
communication problem of conveying the impression that fixed weights are attached to the monetary 
and  non-monetary  analysis  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  biggest  challenge  the  SNB 
Governing  Board  has  so  far  faced  with  regard  to  the  integration  of  both  the  monetary  and  non-
monetary  views  was  in  2003.  While  monetary  aggregates  rose  significantly,  negative  output  gap 
                                                      
1   As extensively documented in Nelson (2006), "the competition between monetary and non-monetary views of inflation" was 
"resolved earlier and more decisively in favor of the monetary view" in Switzerland than in other countries, with the close 
observed  relationship  between  money  growth  and  inflation  playing  a  determinant  role  in  shaping  monetary  policy  since 
1973. 
2   The new regime was announced on October 1, 1978 and lasted until the end of 1979. It can be seen as an illustration of the 
fact that the SNB had traditionally employed money targets in a flexible way. 
3   Jordan and Savioz (2003) 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2006
measures suggested a disinflationary risk. Similarly to what is described in the Fischer et al. paper, the 
monetary and non-monetary signals were reconciled through an analysis of portfolio shifts driven by 
the near-zero interest rate policy at that time.  
Understandably,  some  of  you  might  be  concerned  that  not  giving  a  prominent  and  distinct  role  to 
monetary  aggregates  could  lead  to  relegating money  to  an  insignificant  role  in  the decision  making 
process. This is not the case. To the contrary, I would argue that the SNB’s "plurality of approaches" 
concept  guarantees  that  money  will  retain  an  important  role  in  policymaking,  as  long  as  money 
provides  useful  information  for  subsequent  inflation  fluctuations.  There  are  theoretical  as  well  as 
empirical  studies  which  indeed  suggest  that  money  provides  useful  additional  information  for 
subsequent price developments.4 Using Swiss data, empirical work conducted at the SNB show that 
money  growth  rates  and  deviations  from  an  estimated  money  demand  equilibrium  contain  useful 
information  for  both  short-  and  long-term  Swiss  inflation  developments.5  Similarly,  a  more  recent 
study, again drawing on Swiss data, finds that money growth adjusted for changes in the equilibrium 
interest rate has a significant and proportional influence on subsequent inflation developments relative 
to information in output and interest rates.6  
Money and long-term financial imbalances  
4.  
Let  me  conclude  by  stressing  a  final  point,  which  strikes  me  as  being  worth  emphasizing  more 
prominently in the Fischer et al. paper: the role of money beyond a medium-term inflation forecast. 
Clearly,  the  relevance  of  money  extends  beyond  the  medium-term.  Several  recent  studies  have 
discussed  the  relationship  between  monetary  aggregates  and  asset  prices.7  Today’s  economic 
models are unable to produce reliable inflation forecasts with a horizon beyond at most three years. I 
doubt this will change going forward. Nonetheless, developments in monetary aggregates can play a 
useful  role  in  helping  to  identify  potential  imbalances  in  financial  markets  which  could,  in  time, 
undermine economic and price stability.  
According to a recent study, since 1980, the value of global financial assets excluding real estate has 
grown from an amount roughly equaling the global GDP to more than three times its size.8 In light of 
the growing importance of financial assets, central bankers have an incentive to consider longer-term 
price  risks  more  thoroughly.  In  a  global  economy  increasingly  affected  by  the  effects  of  rising  and 
falling asset prices, it seems to me that the role of money and credit aggregates in signaling potential 
long-term financial imbalances will become more important. Here I would like to refer to Mervyn King 
who recently said: "Monetary policy will, therefore, need to be alert to the information contained in a 
wide range of asset prices, to be forward-looking in its aim of maintaining low and stable inflation, and 
to be ready to respond to changes in the signposts."9
In practice, it is often difficult to consider money in the conduct of policy. Nonetheless, it allows us to 
address some of these important issues at least at first approximation. In that context, both the ECB 
and the SNB conduct a careful analysis of monetary aggregates partly in an effort to assess the risks 
of long-term financial imbalances. Moreover, acknowledging the monetary source of long-term inflation 
helps avoid the build-up of excess liquidity in the first place. In closing, let me therefore repeat that the 
Fischer  et  al.  paper  could  benefit  from  focusing  more  extensively  on  the  admittedly  complex  but 
nonetheless important link between money, asset prices and long-term inflation perspectives. In the 
                                                      
4   For example, Nelson (2003) argues that movements in monetary aggregates provide useful indications regarding different 
yields usually not incorporated in economic models 
5   Baltensperger, Jordan and Savioz (2001), Jordan, Peytrignet and Rich (2001) 
6   Reynard (2006) 
7   For example, Issing (2002) provides evidence of a close relationship between excess money growth and real asset prices, a 
relationship that does not appear by looking at a standard Taylor rule as a measure of monetary policy stance. Similarly, 
Friedman (2005) showed that pre- and post-financial market crash evolutions of stock prices and gross domestic products 
were  strongly  related  to  the  pre-  and  post-market  crash  evolutions  of  monetary  aggregates.  White  (2006)  pointed  to  the 
need  of  pushing  further  the  frontiers  of  economic  research  in  the  direction  of  incorporating  financial  variables  to  assess 
longer-term macroeconomic developments. 
8   McKinsey (2005, 2006) 
9   King (2006) 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 3
case of the SNB, the flexible nature of the policy framework and the importance attached to money 
and  credit  variables  means  that  in  an  effort  to  avoid  potential  long-term  financial  distortions  from 
emerging, the Governing Board could conceivably tighten monetary policy even if our inflation forecast 
signals no imminent inflation threat.  
References 
5.  
Baltensperger, Ernst, Thomas J. Jordan and Marcel Savioz, 2001. The Demand for M3 and Inflation 
Forecasts: an Empirical Analysis for Switzerland. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, vol.137 n.2, pp.244-272. 
Fischer B., M. Lenza, H. Pill and L. Reichlin (2006). Money and monetary policy: The ECB experience 
1999-2006.  
Friedman, Milton, 2005. A natural experiment in monetary policy covering three episodes of growth 
and  decline  in  the  economy  and  the  stock  market.  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives,  vol.19  n.4, 
pp.145-150. 
Issing, Ottmar, 2002. Monetary Policy in a Changing Environment. Contribution to the Jackson Hole 
Symposium on "Rethinking Stabilization Policy", Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Jordan, Thomas J., Michel Peytrignet, and Georg Rich, 2001. The role of M3 in the policy analysis of 
the  Swiss  National  Bank.  In:  Klöckers,  H.-J.,  and  C.  Willeke,  eds.,  Monetary  Analysis:  Tools  and 
Applications, European Central Bank, pp.47-62. 
Jordan, Thomas, und Marcel Savioz, 2003. Sind Kombinationen von Prognosen aus VAR-Modellen 
sinnvoll? Eine empirische Analyse mit Inflationsprognosen für die Schweiz. Quartalsheft der SNB, 4, 
Dezember 2003. 
King,  Mervyn,  2006.  Speech  at  the  Dinner  for  Kent  Business  Contacts,  Ashford,  Kent,  United 
Kingdom. 
McKinsey  &  Company.  118  Trillion  and  Counting:  Taking  Stock  of  the  World's  Capital  Markets, 
February 2005, and Mapping the Global Capital Market 2006, Second Annual Report, January 2006. 
Nelson,  Edward,  2003.  The  future  of  monetary  aggregates  in  monetary  policy  analysis.  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics 50, pp.1029-1059. 
Nelson,  Edward,  2006.  Ireland  and  Switzerland:  The  jagged  edges  of  the  great  inflation.  Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper Series 2006-016A, May revision. 
Reynard, Samuel, 2006. Money and the great disinflation. Swiss National Bank Working Paper Series, 
2006-7. 
White, William R., 2006. Is price stability enough? Bank for International Settlements Working Papers 
n.205. 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2006
