Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi: The extended importance of the euro  
Speech by His Excellency Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi, Governor of the Central Bank of the United 
Arab Emirates, at the Frankfurt European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 17 November 2006. 
 Distinguished Guests and Speakers, 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  and  honor  to  be  here  today,  to  speak  at  this  important  forum.  Thanks  to  the 
organizers, for their kind invitation.  
I will start by the Euro Area's GDP, which had grown continuously over the past five years, especially if 
we look at the figures as expressed in current prices and in US Dollars. Looking at the Euro Area's 
GDP would then prove that the Euro had gained extended importance at a GDP figure of US Dollars 
9.9 trillion at the end of 2005.  
Also, if we look at what the Euro Area represents in world trade, we would find-out that it makes about 
30% of it, and the Euro Area is the largest single player in world trade, so Europe / Euro Area is the 
"Trade Centre of the World".  
Having said this, let us look at the Euro and the Euro Area from an outsider's point of view.  
In the GCC Countries, we see the Euro as the second currency in the world after the US Dollar. This 
maybe  explained,  in  part,  if  we  look  at  the  import  figures  and  the  currency  of  settlement  for  trade 
imports.  
If we study the figures of imports into the GCC Countries, we will see that imports from the Euro Area 
have stayed almost static at about 20-21% over the past five years. As an outsider to the Euro, the 
GCC Countries must have economic reasons to hold Euros, one of these reasons is to pay for the 
import  bill.  In  the  case  of  GCC  Countries  the  import  bill  from  the  Euro  Area  has  not  increased  in 
percentage terms, which means that trade needs for the Euro within the GCC Countries did not grow, 
as a matter of fact it declined slightly from 21.84% of all imports in 2001 to 20.34% in 2005. This is 
then the trade related needs for the Euro in the GCC Countries.  
The next question then; which currency or currencies make-up the other 80% of the GCC Countries' 
trade related needs. It will be easy to predict if we know that 34% of GCC imports come from Asia, 
11% from USA and 35% from all other countries.  
This  means  that  at  least  80%  of  the  80%  of  non-Euro  Area  imports  of  the  GCC  Countries  are 
denominated in US Dollars.  
On the other hand, if we look at UAE imports' picture, the situation is more so not in favour of imports 
from the Euro Area, due to the fact that UAE imports from the Euro Area went down from 24% of all 
UAE imports in 2001 to only 15.28% in 2005. Interestingly the picture to the Europeans is misleading if 
we look at it from absolute figures of imports. These have grown from US Dollars 7.21 billion in 2001 
to US Dollars 15.12 billion in 2005, also the UAE gives the Euro Area about US Dollars 9 billion of 
trade surplus.  
The next point I want to tackle is the issue of flow of foreign investment funds into the Euro Area, also 
from a GCC Countries' perspective.  
There are two questions here;  
• 
Can the Euro Area absorb large amounts of investment funds from the GCC Countries 
in a short period of time?  
Can  the  Euro  Area  provide  a  competitive  environment  to  attract  investment  funds 
from  the  GCC  Countries,  to  make  it  worthwhile  to  convert  part  of  their  oil  revenue 
maintained in Dollar at the moment?  
 The answer to the first question is obviously, "NO", probably because Euro Area Countries do not try 
to attract large foreign investments, in general, one reason maybe because they do not want to see a 
lot of liquidity go into their local markets and cause inflationary pressures and the other maybe they do 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 1
not want to create increased demand for foreign labor force. However, there seems to be no uniform 
stand on this issue within the Euro Area Countries.  
The answer to the second question is also "NO", but in this case may be due to the Euro Area have 
not yet harmonized its labor, tax and financial services laws, which also explain the no common stand 
regarding the issue of whether the Euro Area is really interested in attracting large investment funds.  
The Euro Area Countries have choice at the moment in terms of interpretation of their dominant local 
laws, but once laws get harmonized or unified their choice will be reduced or eliminated all together, 
and the Euro will witness an upward demand through foreign investment flows.  
The  last  point  I  will  consider  is  tourism  and  the  influence  tourism  has  on  demand  for  a  certain 
currency.  
Europe is, and has been the most popular tourist destination for people of the UAE and other GCC 
Countries. Hundreds of thousands from GCC Countries visit one or more of Euro Area Countries every 
year.  If  we  consider  the  demand  for  Euros  created  by  tourists  from  many  countries  of  the  world 
including of the GCC Countries, we would realize that more Euros will need to be issued and some 
would be held in cash for ever by all those who travel to Europe.  
The  Euro  is  the  currency  of  international  tourism  at  the  moment,  because  Europe  attracts  more 
tourists than any other region in the world, and it is expanding in this respect. 
Conclusion  
With this I come to the conclusion of my short speech. Finally I would say that the Euro will definitely 
grow to dominate trade outside the Euro Area.  
The Euro Area will harmonize further its labor, tax and financial services laws, i.e. will become more 
competitive in attracting investments, which will help the Euro to become the currency of international 
investments.  
I expect the Euro to become the currency of international trade and investments in ten years. If we add 
to that tourism, the Euro will surpass the US Dollar, as the first currency in the world by 2015.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2006
