Stanley Fischer: The openness of Israel’s economy to the global economy and  
the importance of Israel’s joining the OECD  
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Globes  Business 
Conference 2006, Tel-Aviv, 11 December 2006. 
 The subject of my address to you today is the openness of Israel’s economy to the global economy, 
and I will focus on the importance of Israel’s joining the OECD. 
The state of the economy 
A.  
First, I would like briefly to review the state of the economy, and that picture is quite a rosy one. 
The  economy  is  recovering  rapidly  after  the  war  in  the  north,  even  faster  than  we  thought  at  first. 
National Accounts data indicate a 1.4 percent decline (in annual terms) in GDP in the third quarter. 
The impact of the hostilities on GDP was weaker than we had assessed previously, and it appears that 
the rate of growth in 2006 will be 4.8 percent, slightly higher than our initial post-war forecast. 
Our forecast for 2007 still indicates healthy growth of 4 percent. This was our assessment immediately 
after the hostilities, and I will not be surprised if it is revised upwards in the future. Furthermore, the 
most recent unemployment data point to a reduction in the rate of unemployment in the third quarter to 
8.3  percent,  compared  with  8.9  percent  in  the  third  quarter  of  2005,  alongside  a  rise  in  the  rate  of 
participation in the labor force during 2006. 
The  nominal-financial  side  completes  the  picture  of  a  strong  economy.  Inflation  is  low,  the  financial 
markets  are  functioning  well,  including  the  foreign  currency  market,  which  reflects  not  only  global 
developments but also the large inflow of foreign investment to Israel and the impressive surplus in the 
balance of payments current account (expected to reach 4.7 percent of GDP in 2007). 
At this point I would like to refer to the fact that currently inflation is below the lower limit of the target 
range. At the outset I must state the obvious: external shocks have a significant impact on inflation, 
and the effects can be strong and immediate. Why do I say this? You will remember that in the first 
half of the year the rate of inflation over the previous twelve months was above the upper limit of the 
range, about 3.5 percent. Now, after a cumulative drop of 1.5 percent in September and October, the 
rate has fallen to below the lower limit. The Bank of Israel’s approach is to try to bring the rate back 
gradually  within  the  range,  and  if  possible  to  the  midpoint  of  the  range,  with  a  one  year  forward 
horizon.  The  underlying  reason  for  this  approach  is  to  avoid  causing  inflation  volatility  by  sharp 
changes in the interest rate. Take the following situation as a hypothetical example: the Bank of Israel 
is acting to keep inflation in the next twelve months close to the midpoint of the target, i.e., 2 percent a 
year. But let us say that in the next ten months the rolling twelve-month inflation rate is below the lower 
limit of the range because of the drop in the index of 1.5 percent in September and October mentioned 
above. We may only see the twelve-month retrospective inflation rate within the target when those two 
months have dropped out of the calculation. We could have acted differently and reduced the interest 
rate  drastically  to  bring  inflation  back  within  the  target  much  more  quickly,  but  then  we  could  have 
created  an  unstable  process  of  overshooting  in  the  opposite  direction,  with  inflation  exceeding  the 
target. It is therefore not worthwhile reacting to every shock as it occurs, but it is preferable to persist 
with the policy of gradually reverting to the inflation target within a year. 
The openness of the economy 
B.  
Now to my main topic for today, the openness of Israel’s economy to the global economy. 
This is an important issue because economic openness is a new reality that affects all of us, but we 
may not have internalized it in all areas. This conference, and others like it, take pride in the many and 
important participants from abroad, and this provides one indication of the new reality in which we live. 
Israel was one of the first countries to realize that a small economy cannot grow without being open to 
and participating in the global economy. As early as the 1960s we set out on the path of liberalization 
of international trade. But the program of exposing the economy to abroad in the mid-1980s and the 
BIS Review 121/2006 
 1
liberalization  of  the  foreign  currency  market  and  capital  flows  initiated  by  the  Bank  of  Israel  in  the 
1990s were the most significant aspects of this process. It was not just that they opened the economy 
to  the  global  economy,  but  they  created  a  framework  for  macroeconomic  policy  that  operates 
according to the norms accepted in the advanced economies, based on budget and inflation targeting. 
This provides the infrastructure that enables the economy to achieve sustained growth, provided that 
the policymakers know how to face the challenges that it places before them. This is even more the 
case when there is no general consensus on the matter of fiscal discipline. 
We  sometimes  speak  of  changes  in  economic  policy,  and  such  changes  were  essential  to 
developments in the last fifteen years. We must however recognize one important fact: growth derives 
from  the  increase  in  the  private  sector,  and  in  Israel  we  have  a  private  sector  that  in  the  main  is 
successful, innovative and creative. It is a private sector that day after day proves its ability to compete 
in the world. 
Israel’s economy is very open to the world, and this is reflected in various ways: 
1. 
In  the  current  decade (2000–06)  the  share  of  exports  in  GDP  has reached  an  average of 
about 40 percent. 
In  the  same  period  the  share  of  imports  in  GDP  has  reached  an  average  of  about  41 
percent. 
Foreign  investments  in  Israel  reached  about  $  17  billion  in  January–October  2006,  an 
all-time peak. 
Israelis’ investments abroad in January–November 2006 reached about $ 21 billion, of which 
some $ 12 billion were direct investments. 
Israel is in second place (after the US) in terms of the number of companies listed for trading 
on the Nasdaq. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
What  is  required  of  an  economy  that  is  open  to  competition  from  around  the  world?  There  are  still 
areas in which we ought to improve, and here I will refer to aspects in the microeconomic sphere. In 
this  context  I  would  like  to  mention  the  Doing  Business  Report  of  the  World  Bank,  which  grades 
countries according to the ease of doing business in them. Israel is listed 26 out of 175, not bad at all. 
But if we look at the different components that go into this grading, we will see that we were good in 
certain  aspects  (investor  protection,  obtaining  credit,  international  trade,  opening  and  closing  a 
business), but we scored very badly in others (obtaining licenses, enforcing contracts and registering 
assets). It is very important that we take steps to improve in these areas in order to contribute to a 
better business environment. We generally relate to these areas as if they are important for foreign 
investors.  But  they  are  important  for  all  investors  in  Israel’s  economy,  domestic  and  foreign.  Every 
Israeli investor has the choice of investing abroad. If we do not improve the atmosphere surrounding 
investment in Israel, we are likely to lose some domestic investments of Israeli investors’. 
The OECD 
C. 
The  subject  of  the  openness  of  Israel’s  economy  brings  me  to  the  question  of  Israel’s  joining  the 
OECD. 
What  is  the  OECD?  It  is  an  organization  of  30  countries  that  are  committed  to  democracy  and  a 
market economy, most of them among the most advanced economies. Among the members are the 
US, Japan, Canada, Australia, and European countries. The OECD cooperates with about 70 other 
countries,  and  its  activities  encompass  a  wide  range  of  fields,  such  as  macroeconomics,  finance, 
foreign  trade,  investments  and  capital  flows,  taxation,  education,  the  quality  of  the  environment, 
science  and  innovation,  the  energy  market,  social  policy,  market  structure  (with  the  emphasis  on 
competition), companies’ organizational structure, and transparency. 
The OECD deals with the creation of rules of conduct in these spheres with the objective of promoting 
international  agreements  necessary  for  the  global  economy.  Most  of  the  work  of  the  OECD  is 
performed by intergovernmental teams, and thus its reports are based on the information provided by 
member governments. In the OECD forums countries exchange information and knowledge, devise 
methods for confronting economic problems, identify and formulate standards of appropriate conduct 
in  all  the  relevant  economic  areas,  and  develop  ways  of  improving  coordination  and  cooperation 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2006
2. 
between  them.  Representatives  of  member  countries  operate  within  a  framework  of  some  200 
specialist committees in the various policy areas. 
Why is it important for Israel to join the OECD? 
Membership would offer the following advantages: 
1. 
It  would  promote  Israel’s  position  in  the  important  world  economic  forums,  and  would 
strengthen its economic ties. 
It  would  enable  us  to  be  “in  the  know”  at  a  relatively  early  stage  of  the  formulation  of 
standards in the sphere of economic policy, to adapt policy to those standards, and even to 
contribute from our own experience. 
It would help us to promote economic reforms. 
It would also help improve Israel’s rating in the international financial markets. 
3. 
4. 
What is Israel’s current position vis-à-vis the OECD? Israel’s economy is open, per capita GDP is high, 
and the degree of economic openness is good, and even excellent in certain fields, such as R&D. All 
these  give  Israel  a  standing  as  a  potential  member  of  the  OECD.  Moreover,  since  1996  Israel  has 
participated in various formats and committees of the OECD, mainly in the role of observer. 
The OECD is currently in the process of making decisions about the number of new members to be 
accepted  into  the  organization,  how  the  expansion  will  be  implemented,  and  the  standards  to  be 
required  from  the  new  members.  These  decisions  are  expected  to  be  taken  shortly  before  the 
Conference  of  Ministers  in  May  2007.  Acceptance  of  a  new  member  country  requires  a  consensus 
among the member countries. Professionals and specialists in the government, the Bank of Israel and 
other  relevant  bodies  are  in  contact  with  the  OECD  with  regard  to  Israel’s  acceptance  as  a  full 
member,  and  we  hope  there  will  be  a  consensus  among  existing  members  on  the  question  of  our 
membership. 
It is important that Israel’s membership of the OECD remain high on the agenda of the various entities 
involved in this matter, and that progress is made in the areas that need special attention. This is a 
significant stage in the integration of Israel as an open, modern economy into the global economy. I 
hope we make it. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 121/2006 
 3
