Savenaca Narube: Brief look at the commercial banking sector in Fiji 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  official 
opening of Bank of South Pacific Limited, Suva, 18 December 2006. 
 Your Excellency, Mr. Peter Eafeare 
Mr. Noreo Beangke, Chairman Bank of South Pacific 
Mr. Garth Mcllwain, Managing Director Bank of South Pacific 
Mr. Kevin McCarthy, General Manager, Papua New Guinea 
Mr. Greg Watson, General Manager, Fiji 
Mr. Irfan Rabbani, Habib Bank Limited 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am glad to be here this morning and thank you for the invitation to the official opening of the Bank of 
South Pacific branch in Fiji. It is always pleasing to see a new bank join the financial sector in Fiji. 
Over the years we have seen several banks come and go. This of course is a commercial reality. I am 
particularly glad that the new entrant that we are welcoming today is a strong regional bank. It is also 
encouraging that, in our current political climate, the Bank of South Pacific has decided to go ahead 
with  its  plans  to  enter  Fiji.  I  warmly  congratulate  you  on  this  new  venture  and  wish  Bank  of  South 
Pacific Limited all the best in your operations in Fiji. 
Fiji  is  going  through  some  turbulent  times.  We  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  have  moved  quickly  to 
safeguard  financial  stability.  We  have  asked  the  commercial  banks  to  freeze  their  loan  books.  We 
have  tightened  exchange  controls.  But  let  me  explain  here  that  we  have  not  stopped  any  foreign 
transactions. We have just asked the commercial banks that they seek our approval first before they 
make  these  deals.  I  must  thank  the  commercial  banks  for  their  support  and  cooperation  for  the 
measures that we have put in place. 
Bank of South Pacific Limited has a long history of banking in Papua New Guinea going back as far as 
1957. BSP is listed on the Port Moresby Stock Exchange and has 54 percent market share of the total 
assets of the Papua New Guinea banking system making it the largest bank in the country. It operates 
a network of 39 branches across Papua New Guinea and one branch in Niue. BSP is increasing its 
overseas presence – here in Fiji today and in the Solomon Islands. 
BSP has satisfied all the licensing requirements of  the Reserve Bank of Fiji and we are pleased to 
issue the Bank with a licence. With the commencement of Bank of South Pacific Limited’s operations 
today, we envisage many benefits to both countries. Trade relationships between Papua New Guinea 
and Fiji will be strengthened. We will see increased  competition for banking services and products. 
There will also be an opportunity for capacity building as Fiji staff work in other BSP branches and vice 
versa. 
We at the Reserve Bank of Fiji look forward to working closely with Bank of South Pacific Limited to 
ensure  that  Fiji’s  financial  system  is  dynamic  and  sound.  I  look  forward  to  your  contribution  to  the 
economy and the financial system. 
Once again, I congratulate you on the official opening of Bank of South Pacific Limited and wish you 
every success in your operations. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 1
