Zeti Akhtar Aziz: New opportunities for growth and development in Islamic 
financial markets 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the official ceremony for 
the  completion  of  the  Share  Subscription  Agreement  between  BIMB  Holdings  Berhad,  Bank  Islam 
Malaysia Berhad, Dubai Financial LLC & Lembaga Tabung Haji, Kuala Lumpur, 16 October 2006. 
 This occasion marks the successful completion of the share subscription agreement between BIMB 
Holdings Berhad, Bank Islam Malaysia Berhad, Dubai Financial Limited Liability Company (LLC) and 
Lembaga Tabung Haji. It also sets a new chapter in Bank Islam's drive to chart its future direction in 
meeting  new  challenges  and  in  exploiting  the  new opportunities  for  growth  and  development  in  the 
Islamic financial markets, both in the domestic and global market place. The participation of such key 
foreign and local institutions in the new share issuance by Bank Islam Malaysia Berhad signifies an 
important  turning  point  in  the  history  of  Bank  Islam  which  has  been  the  pioneer  Islamic  bank  in 
Malaysia.  
The partnership between BIMB Holdings Berhad, Dubai Financial LLC and Lembaga Tabung Haji is 
significant in several important ways. Firstly, it reflects the confidence and trust that international and 
domestic  investors  have  in  the  investment  and  business  climate  in  Malaysia,  and  in  the  Malaysian 
Islamic  financial  sector  in  particular.  Indeed,  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  in  Malaysia  has 
experienced  robust  growth  in  addition  to  being  reinforced  by  enhanced  market  discipline  and 
transparency, and the vibrancy of the Islamic financial market developments in Malaysia. The latest 
financial indicators show that the Islamic banking industry remains well-capitalised with a risk-weighted 
capital ratio of 14.8% as at end-August 2006, while the net non-performing financing ratio has declined 
to  4.2%.  Clearly,  therefore,  the  industry  is  strong,  resilient  and  well-positioned  to  meet  emerging 
challenges and to capitalise on new opportunities for the mutual return of its stakeholders. 
Secondly,  this  partnership  comes  at  a  significant  juncture  when  Malaysia  is  enhancing  the 
international dimension of its Islamic banking and financial market, with the introduction of increased 
foreign participation. In line with the aspiration to position Malaysia as an international Islamic financial 
centre (MIFC), new licences and business divisions to conduct international currency Islamic banking 
business, tax and other incentives have been introduced to attract global Islamic financial institutions 
to make Malaysia the hub for their regional business operations. These measures and incentives are 
also  expected  to  attract  international  investors,  including  from  the  Middle  East,  to  leverage  on 
Malaysia  as  an  investment  gateway  to  tap  the  rapidly  growing  investment  opportunities  in  the  East 
Asian region. 
Thirdly, this partnership also serves to enhance Malaysia as a centre of product innovation in Islamic 
finance. Indeed, conscious efforts have been made to ensure a conducive environment for innovation 
in  Malaysia,  including  the  development  of  the  necessary  pool  of  expertise  and  talent  to  drive  such 
innovation. Within Bank Islam itself, there is a track record and brand name for innovation, with the 
development of new business models and product offerings. This partnership would thus contribute 
towards accelerating this process and towards serving as a bridge to strengthen the relationship of the 
Islamic financial markets as well as the investment and trade ties between the West Asian and North 
African regions, with East Asia. 
Strengthening the capital of a financial institution, however, is not the only factor that will determine its 
capacity and potential to perform. Equally important is the quality of its talent, the systems that it has in 
place, in particular, its risk management and ICT systems and its governance structure, its leadership 
and  its  corporate  culture.  Thus,  while  this  capitalisation  exercise  will  put  Bank  Islam  in  a  stronger 
position  to  tap  new  opportunities,  all  the  other  elements  also  need  to  be  in  place  to  enable  the 
institution to realise its true potential.  
Sound corporate governance and effective management of banking institutions are vital to ensure their 
effective and sound functioning. In particular, significant shareholders are expected to play an active 
role to ensure that capable individuals are appointed on the Board and senior management of banking 
institutions.  
Bank Negara Malaysia had as early as 2001 required the Board and management of Bank Islam to 
undertake  remedial  actions  on  several  operational  and  control  weaknesses.  When  the  weaknesses 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 1
were  not  adequately  addressed,  the  process  of  reconstituting  the  Board  and  management  of  Bank 
Islam  was  initiated  in  2003.  In  such  an  exercise,  key  shareholders  are  expected  to  be  proactive  in 
making  prudent  and  responsible  action  to  remove  any  member  or  employee  that  is  found  to  be 
unsuitable or not having the required calibre so as to avoid a prolonged process in the reconstruction 
of the Board and management of the bank. It needs to be recognized that the responsibility for the 
safety and soundness at the institutional level rests primarily with the Board and the management of 
each  banking  institution  and  the  key  stakeholders  such  as  the  significant  shareholders.  Institutional 
investors  should  also  have  an  active  role  and  make  swift  and  bold  decisions  in  ensuring  that  only 
capable  individuals  are  appointed  and  remain  on  the  Board  and  senior  management  of  banking 
institutions.  
Currently, virtually all the directors and key executives of Bank Islam are new, with diverse banking 
experience.  In  accelerating  the  provisions  and  in  instituting  the  measures  to  address  the  bank's 
system, processes and business culture, it has now paved the way for drawing in new shareholders. It 
can now offer a valued proposition. And indeed, the participation of a new strategic investor will in fact 
further strengthen the bank. This has allowed the existing and new shareholders to focus taking the 
bank to the next level and to capitalize on the new opportunities the environment offers.  
Indeed, the bank can gainfully advance to venture abroad to explore new business opportunities in the 
regional markets. The growth prospects will also be further strengthened by the overall performance of 
the industry and the sound and mutually reinforcing inter-linkages of the various market components in 
the Islamic financial system.  
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  BIMB  Holdings  Berhad,  Bank  Islam 
Malaysia  Berhad,  Dubai  Financial  LLC  and  Lembaga  Tabung  Haji  for  their  contributions  in  the 
successful completion of the share subscription agreement for Bank Islam. I wish Bank Islam and its 
shareholders every success in taking the Bank to greater heights in its future endeavours.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2006
