Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Financial integration and stability in Europe  
Opening remarks by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Conference 
on  "Financial  Integration  and  Stability  in  Europe",  organised  by  the  Bank  of  Spain,  the  European 
Central Bank and the Center for Financial Studies, Madrid, 30 November 2006. 
 Good morning ladies and gentleman. First of all, allow me to welcome you. We are really delighted to 
host this conference at the Banco de España in Madrid. 
Some  of  you  are  perhaps  too  young  to  remember,  but  it  was  here  in  Madrid,  in  1989,  that  the 
European  Council  decided  to  embark  on  the  first  stage  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  as 
envisaged in the Delors Report which was the catalyst for the EMU process. I would like to start my 
intervention  today  with  a  quote  from  the  Delors  Report;  a  quote  that  refers  to  financial  integration. 
Simplifying, it said the following: 
The  objective  of  a  single  financial  area,  in  which  all  monetary  and  financial 
instruments  circulate  freely,  and  banking,  securities  and  insurance  services  are 
offered  uniformly  throughout  the  area,  would  be  fully  implemented  through  the 
approval and enforcement of the necessary Community directives. 
You  can  appreciate  the  appealing  simplicity  of  its  definition  of  an  integrated  financial  market:  one 
where  all  monetary  and  financial  instruments  circulate  freely,  and  where  banking,  securities  and 
insurance services are offered uniformly. 
Nevertheless, the word “uniform” might sound a little strange to us today, when we prefer to use softer 
terms  such  as  “convergence”.  But  of  course  Mr  Delors  was  not  thinking  about  uniformity  of  the 
services themselves, but rather about the need to ensure that they could be offered and accessed on 
an equal basis across the EU. 
But what it is remarkable is that Mr Delors was referring to the steps that should be taken in Stage 
One of EMU. He expected the integrated financial market to be in place at the beginning of the EMU 
process, before going to the subsequent stages. Almost seventeen years have passed since Stage 
One was launched. And we entered Stage Three almost eight years ago. EMU has proved to be a 
successful reality, but the single financial area as defined in the Delors Report has not yet been fully 
achieved. 
Of  course,  there  has  been  impressive  progress  in  some  areas,  for  instance,  the  European  money 
markets. And there has been good progress in others, like corporate bond markets and Government 
bond markets. 
In some fields, however, we are a long way from Mr Delors’ vision of integration. 
Looking at stock exchanges, for instance, we have certainly witnessed a decrease in the home country 
bias in investor portfolios. But the overall level of home country bias remains high, indicating that a 
significant degree of fragmentation remains. 
And  progress  has  been  very  limited  in  the  retail  financial  services  sector,  where  the  cross-border 
provision of services is still almost symbolic. 
Also, while we have continued to see domestic consolidation of financial intermediaries, merger and 
acquisition activity across borders has not been as high as we might have expected, as the European 
Commission has pointed out. There are exceptions, of course - a notable one being on our doorstep, 
with Banco Santander’s acquisition of Abbey in the UK. 
But  what  is  the  interest  of  central  banks  in  all  this?  Should  we  worry  about  the  lack  of  progress? 
Should  we  actively  promote  greater  financial  integration?  My  earlier  quote  from  the  Delors  report 
would seem to indicate that the answer should be yes. Indeed, from the perspective of EMU it is very 
clear that greater integration is desirable. 
Why is this? Because in general terms, the higher the degree of financial integration in EMU, the more 
homogeneously monetary policy decisions will be transmitted across the Member Countries. 
BIS Review 118/2006 
 1
The integration of money markets is an important achievement in this respect. It is at this level of the 
financial  system  that  central  bank  liquidity  is  distributed  and  that  monetary  policy  decisions  are 
transmitted to short-term interest rates. 
By the same token, the lack of integration in retail markets is an important concern. This is because 
the European financial structure is mainly bank-based. Therefore, retail banking plays a central role in 
the  transmission  of  the single  monetary  policy  impulses  in  EMU  to  the  interest  rates which actually 
influence the expenditure decisions of households and firms. 
But apart from our interest in the effective transmission of monetary policy, there is a broader reason 
why central banks wish to see greater integration. 
At  the  end  of  the  day,  the  ultimate  objective  of  a central  bank,  as  of  any  public  policy  maker,  is  to 
enhance citizen welfare. A number of pieces of empirical evidence reveal that financial integration has 
a positive effect on economic growth and, therefore, on welfare. The European Commission, London 
Economics and several researchers have provided us with interesting studies which estimate that a 
total removal of national barriers in European financial markets would imply a long-term increase in 
GDP growth of up to one percentage point. 
There is also evidence for the US, based on analysis of the effects of the removal of restrictions on 
cross-state bank branching and ownership, which points in the same direction. 
These two aspects – monetary policy transmission and promoting citizen welfare - explain the efforts 
that central banks have made to contribute to the integration process, although the leading roles and 
initiatives rightly correspond to the European Commission and to market forces. 
Maybe  the  most  telling  example  of  the  central  bank  contribution  is  the  establishment  of  TARGET, 
promoted  by  the  Eurosystem  and  introduced  at  the  beginning  of  Stage  Three  with  the  aim  of 
integrating the system of large value payments across the euro area. It is widely recognised that its 
success has played a crucial role in the integration of interbank markets in Europe. 
However, the mandates of most central banks, including indeed both the Eurosystem and the Banco 
de  España,  also  cover  other  objectives.  There  is,  in  particular,  an  area  which  deserves  special 
attention in this context. I am referring, of course, to the function of promoting financial stability. 
It  is  precisely  in  this  area  where  the  impact  of  financial  integration  is  less  clear.  Does  financial 
integration promote financial stability? Or does financial integration put financial stability in danger? 
As a matter of fact, while the effects of higher integration on per-capita income and on the efficiency of 
monetary policy transmission have received a lot of attention by researchers, the impact of financial 
integration on financial stability is under-researched. That is why we are holding this conference. 
Despite  the  lack  of  research,  it  seems  clear  that  there  are  some  areas  where  financial  integration 
favours financial stability. 
Firstly,  a  more  integrated  financial  system  enlarges  the  opportunities  available  to  investors,  lenders 
and borrowers to diversify the different risks associated with their financial decisions. Through such 
diversification,  they  should  become  less  exposed  to  idiosyncratic  shocks,  asset  prices  and  financial 
flows  should  behave  in  a  smoother  way  and  as  a  result,  the  risk  of  financial  distress  should  be 
reduced. 
Secondly, in a more integrated system, financial intermediaries would find it easier to grow and at the 
same  time  would  find  the  incentive  to  do  so  in  the  enlargement  of  their  potential  markets.  Larger 
institutions would therefore be in a better position to reap the benefits of greater economies of scale, 
and would also increase their financial muscle to withstand potential shocks.  
Unfortunately,  however,  there  are  no  free  lunches  in  the  economy  and  it  seems  that  financial 
integration can also have negative effects on financial stability. 
Therefore, fully integrated financial markets pave the way for shocks to propagate more quickly among 
market participants, thereby affecting a wider range and number of them. Contagion becomes more 
likely. 
In  the  same way,  the  larger  an  institution,  the  higher  is  the  probability  that  it  becomes systemically 
relevant,  which  would  clearly  have  implications  for  financial  stability  in  the  event  that  it  runs  into 
problems. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2006
And, the more institutions operate across borders, the more the risks associated with their business 
extends across these borders. 
Despite these challenges for financial stability of an increasingly integrated financial system, let me 
stress that, so far, the experience both for Spain and the Global Economy seems reassuring, but these 
aspects clearly need further investigation. And the immediate and obvious question that arises is the 
following: can we mitigate the potentially negative effects of integration on financial stability in order to 
take full benefit of the advantages that I mentioned earlier in my intervention? 
It is the supervisory authorities who are responsible for dealing with the risks I have identified. But this 
is not an easy task. Despite the existence of common EU legislation in many key areas, supervision is 
still organised on a national basis. This raises two key challenges. 
First, it means that it is not easy for supervisors to capture all the relevant risks – within and across 
borders - faced by the financial institutions for which they are responsible. 
Secondly, institutions operating on a cross-border basis face duplications and inconsistencies in the 
supervision applied to them by the different national authorities with which they are required to deal. 
This increases their costs of doing business, and can therefore act as a barrier to integration. 
In  summary,  supervisors  face  a  double  challenge  in  the  face  of  increased  EU  integration:  how  to 
ensure that their actions are effective, and thereby contribute to preserving financial stability; and how 
to  ensure  that  their  actions  are efficient.  Their response  has been  to  enhance  cooperation.  Indeed, 
cooperation between supervisors has increased exponentially over the years. 
More recently, the Lamfalussy approach has been implemented, and has set this cooperation in a new 
structure  that  aims  to  promote  a  more  efficient  and  effective  approach  to  both  supervision  and 
regulation  in  the  EU  financial  services  sector.  The  supervisory  committees  that  form  part  of  the 
Lamfalussy structure have a major role to play in this respect. 
And  I  think  everyone  would  agree  that  the  efforts  being  made  by  these  committees  are  extremely 
impressive. But we need to give these efforts time to bear fruit – the Lamfalussy approach is still rather 
new,  especially  in  the  banking  and  insurance  sectors.  In  addition,  there  are  a  number  of  initiatives 
currently underway to exploit more fully the possibilities of cooperation and convergence provided by 
this approach, and I think the results will be positive. 
Now it may be that over the longer term, the current structure is judged to be insufficient to meet the 
needs of a more integrated market, and that a more fundamental re-think of the organisation of EU 
supervisory responsibilities  is  necessary.  I  personally  think  that  this  debate will  intensify  in the  next 
decade.  But  we  would  certainly  need  to  proceed  with  great  caution  in  this  debate.  I  am  a  firm 
supporter of the idea that changes should only be made if clear problems are identified. 
But  whatever  happens,  I  think  the  solutions  we  have  to  look  for  should  be  cooperative  in  nature, 
embracing the needs of all EU member states. This would, in my view, be preferable to an approach 
which  would  tend  to  concentrate  responsibilities  in  the  hands  of  a  few  Member  States  while  the 
implications of their actions would extend far beyond their borders. Taking a more inclusive approach 
is the way that we have found solutions in the past to European challenges, and I think it is the best 
way forward. EU-wide financial stability is of interest to all of us. 
Against the background that I have portrayed in my previous comments, it is clear that central banks 
have a genuine interest in improving their understanding of how the objectives of financial integration 
and financial stability, or even macroeconomic stability, interact with each other. 
I already mentioned that this is an area which is under-researched. Two years ago, the Network on 
Capital  Markets  and  Financial  Integration  in  Europe  identified  this  gap  and  decided  to  include  the 
relationship between financial integration and financial stability in a list of the network’s priority areas, 
posing a series of stimulating questions aimed at providing some guidance for researchers’ efforts. 
I think it is useful to recall the five questions posed by the Network: 
- 
First, how can financial regulations be designed so as to be conducive to integration while 
still ensuring financial stability? 
Secondly, what are the main links between financial integration and contagion? 
Thirdly, what are the mechanisms that can trigger contagion and financial fragility? 
 BIS Review 118/2006 
 3
 Fourth,  how  does  competition  in  the  financial  services  industry  affect  the  ability  of  the 
financial system to withstand shocks? 
And finally, how and to what extent do financial crises affect economic activity? 
- 
As you will have realised, there is an almost perfect correlation between these questions and the main 
topics  of  the  different  papers  that  make  up  the  excellent  and  well-balanced  programme  that  the 
organisers have put together for this Conference. 
This is important because it shows that there is another less-explored way in which central banks can 
effectively contribute to fostering financial integration: identifying the policy issues where the input from 
research is welcome and providing researchers with a forum where they can debate their ideas among 
themselves and with policy makers who, if convinced, will be in charge of carrying them forward. 
I  am  sure  that  the  presentations  and  discussions  during  the  course  of  this  conference  will  provide 
central  bankers  with  fresh  and  high-quality  material  which  will  be  useful  to  us  in  finding  the  most 
efficient  way  to  foster  financial  integration  without  jeopardising  our  objective  of  promoting  financial 
stability. 
I sincerely hope too that this conference will encourage researchers to go on working on these and 
other  related  areas  in  the  coming  years,  thereby  rapidly  filling  the  current  gap  between  the  policy 
relevance of the questions posed and the availability of profound analytical and empirical research to 
substantiate the possible answers. 
I  would  like  to  end  my  intervention  by  thanking  the  organisers  for  gathering  together  such  an 
impressive  group  of  researchers  and  policy  makers,  thanking  the  audience  for  their  attention  and 
wishing you all a fruitful exchange of ideas and a pleasant stay in Madrid. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2006
