Rakesh Mohan: Avian influenza pandemic – preparedness within the financial 
sector 
Introductory remarks by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the IMF 
seminar  on  “Preparedness  within  the  Financial  Sector  for  an  Avian  Influenza  Pandemic”,  Mumbai, 
24 July 2006.  
The assistance of Rajiv Ranjan and Rajeev Jain is gratefully acknowledged. 
 I would like to welcome all of you to India for the IMF Seminar on "Preparedness within the Financial 
Sector  for  an  Avian  Influenza  Pandemic",  which  has  been  a  source  of  concern  not  only  for  health 
experts  but  also  for  policy  makers  in  Governments  and  Central  Banks  alike.  It  is  important  to 
undertake  activities  that  are  preventive  in  nature,  so  that  the  probability  of  an  undesirable  event  is 
minimised.  The  Fund’s efforts  to  bring countries  that  are  vulnerable  to  the  pandemic  on  a  common 
platform by organising such seminars are highly commendable. It is worth noting that if some thing 
does not happen, people generally remain unaware about how much effort went into making sure that 
it  does  not  happen.  As  I  understand,  the  focus  of  these  IMF  seminars  is  on  business  continuity 
planning for a human influenza pandemic and issues relevant to central banks, supervisory agencies 
and  regulated  financial  institutions.  At  this  stage,  the  avian  flu  is  not  a  current  problem  for  India. 
However, it always has the potential of becoming a severe pandemic, however small the probability 
may  be,  in  case  preventive  measures  are  not  taken  in  time.  It  is,  therefore,  important  to  raise 
awareness among the concerned authorities. It is toward this end that the IMF is sensitising different 
countries towards preparing for any potential outbreak of avian flu. 
At the outset, let me make emphasize that, as I understand it, the major part of  the subject matter 
discussed in this seminar is not specific to avian flu but it could apply to all types of major disruptions 
in the conduct of normal business. The important point to note is that though we may believe that the 
possibility of occurrence of a widespread avian flu pandemic is low, the issues that are discussed in 
such seminars are still useful from the point of view of preparedness for any unforeseen eventualities 
that have the potential of disrupting the normal functioning of the financial system. Such disruptions 
require immediate interventions from the Government and the regulatory authorities. Thus, the scope 
of business continuity plans that the central banks and other institutions develop go beyond the avian 
flu.  Preparedness  with  effective  business  continuity  plans  is  desirable  not  only  for  dealing  with  the 
issue of avian flu but would also be helpful in case of other contingencies of any nature. 
In these introductory remarks, I will try to be brief since the programme has a panel of experts dwelling 
on several aspects of avian flu. I, therefore, thought that the best thing that I can do today is to provide 
a brief overview on the issue mainly from the perspective of the financial system. While highlighting 
the gravity of the avian flu pandemic and challenges for the financial system, I would also dwell briefly 
on our preparedness for the avian flu epidemic. 
Gravity of the avian flu pandemic 
I.  
The  outbreak  of  any  contagious  pandemic  on  a  large  scale  has  always  had  significant  economic 
impact on the affected economies. The outbreak of SARS in 2003 proved that even a disease with a 
relatively  small  health  impact  can  have  adverse  economic  implications.  The severity  of  a pandemic 
can  be  seen  from  a  historical  perspective.  According  to  the  World  Health  Organisation  (WHO),  the 
Spanish Flu of 1918 was the deadliest in which one-fourth of world’s population got sick and 40 million 
people died (2 per cent of global population) (WHO, 2003). 
In the early 20th century, science was sufficiently sophisticated to anticipate that influenza, which had 
twice reached pandemic proportions in the late 19th century, would recur, but was largely powerless to 
blunt  the  devastating  impact  of  the  1918  (H1N1)  pandemic.  Since  then,  scientific  progress  has 
contributed  significantly  in  making  possible  defences  against  the  disease  in  terms  of  increased 
knowledge of influenza viruses that has enabled new capacity to design and manufacture vaccines 
and antiviral drugs to forestall infections. Yet the world is vulnerable to the pandemic, perhaps even 
more than in 1918, when the pace and frequency of  global travel was considerably lower than it is 
today. Earlier experience shows that once the pandemic starts spreading, it will do so very fast giving 
no  time  to  prepare.  Vaccines, antiviral  and  antibiotics  would  be in  short supply  and are  likely  to  be 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 1
unequally distributed. Widespread illness may result in sudden and potentially significant shortages of 
personnel. The effect would be relatively prolonged when compared to other natural disasters. 
Until recently the highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 virus had been concentrated in East Asia, 
particularly in Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia and China. However, in the last 6 to 9 months, the virus 
has gone global, spreading to over 40 more countries (Brahambhatt, 2006). As on July 14, 2006, the 
cumulative number of confirmed human cases of death on account of avian influenza (H5N1) stood at 
132  in  10  countries  as  reported  in  WHO  Fact  Sheet.  According  to  WHO,  "If  the  human-to-human 
transmission  is  not  contained  quickly  the  modern  means  of  transportation  will  rapidly  seed  a 
pandemic". Experts estimate that the next pandemic may cause more than 1 billion cases and up to 
7.4  million  deaths.  During  the  current  H5N1  outbreaks  more  than  150  million  birds  have  been 
destroyed  or  died  and  the  direct  economic  costs  to  affected  countries  amount  to  US$  8-12  billion 
(WHO, 2006). 
According to an estimate by the Asian Development Bank, the economic impact of SARS was around 
US$ 18 billion in East Asia, which comes to around 0.6 per cent of their total GDP (ADB, 2003). The 
recent  outbreak  of  the  avian  influenza  (H5N1),  popularly  known  as  avian  flu,  which  started  in  late 
2003, has raised concerns about a new global pandemic as experts fear that the H5N1 virus strain will 
mutate just enough to allow it to pass easily from person to person, potentially causing a catastrophic 
pandemic as humans lack immunity to it. According to experts, the avian flu is far more lethal than 
SARS. While SARS had a mortality rate of around 15 percent, avian flu, which has now spread from 
Asia to Europe, can kill up to a third of the infected people. 
There  is  substantial  uncertainty  about  the  potential  economic  impact  of  a  pandemic  of  any  given 
severity. It is estimated that a modest pandemic lasting over one year might cause a loss as high as 3 
per cent of Asian GDP and 0.5 per cent of world GDP. This is presently equivalent to about US$ 150-
200 billion in GDP (WHO, 2006). In addition to high morbidity and mortality, the pandemic may cause 
massive  social,  political  and  economic  disruption.  According  to  an  estimate,  the  cost  to  the  poultry 
industry has already exceeded US$ 10 billion across Southeast Asia (United Nations, 2006). Financial 
costs of a human pandemic are impossible to predict. The World Bank estimates that a severe avian 
flu  pandemic  among  humans  could  cost  the  global  economy  about  3.1  per  cent  of  world  gross 
domestic product, around US$ 1.25 trillion on a world GDP of US$ 40 trillion (World Bank, 2006). 
Avian flu as a major public issue 
II. 
Given the severity of the possible threat of pandemic, the avian flu is regarded by some observers as 
a major public issue and is considered by them to be one of the major risks to global growth prospects 
and  the  financial  system.  Therefore,  the  need  to  prepare  for  a  pandemic  is  becoming  an  important 
focus  for  governments  and  international  organisations,  including  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
(IMF).  At  the  Beijing  International  Conference,  US$  1.9  billion  was  pledged  to  support  efforts  at  all 
levels to help fight avian flu and prepare for a possible human flu pandemic (IMF, 2006). The World 
Bank,  the  World  Health  Organisation,  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organisation,  and  the  World 
Organisation for Animal Health are taking the lead in preparing a global coordinated response strategy 
on the possibility of an avian flu crisis, and helping members improve surveillance and control capacity 
and to develop national action plans that focus primarily on human and animal health. We all know 
that  the  Fund  can  play  an  important  role  in  encouraging  its  members  to  prepare  for  a  possible 
pandemic, in facilitating cooperation across the membership, and advising members on appropriate 
macroeconomic policies and helping to support them with balance of payments financing where this is 
needed.  The  Fund  has  already  indicated  that  its  near-term  efforts  will  focus  primarily  on  helping 
members prepare their economic and financial systems to limit the possible disruptions that may be 
caused by a pandemic. 
In the recently held G-8 Summit at St. Petersburg (July 16-17, 2006), understanding the gravity of the 
possible pandemic, the member countries felt that disease can be dramatically more contagious as the 
world  becomes  ever  more  interconnected.  Airlines  now  carry  an  estimated  1.6  billion  passengers 
every year. Trade, commerce and financial markets are increasingly interrelated. The SARS outbreak 
of 2003 vividly demonstrated how much the world has changed in terms of its vulnerability to economic 
and social disruptions when disease outbreaks occur. Though it is difficult to predict the timing and 
severity  of  the  pandemic  but,  for  the  first  time  in  history,  the  world  has  the  advantage  of  advance 
warning  about  a  potential  pandemic.  This  advantage  must  be  fully  exploited  to  enhance  global 
preparedness. Similarly, recognising the risk of avian flu, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 
in  its  Annual  Report  2005-06  (BIS,  2006)  reveals  that  business  continuity  planning  has  received 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2006
additional  priority  in  view  of  the  need  for  increased  preparations  for  a  possible  avian  flu  pandemic, 
which  would  primarily  affect  human  resource  availability  (including  dependencies  on  external 
services).  The  Financial  Stability  Forum,  which  promotes  international  financial  stability,  in  its  15th 
Meeting at Sydney (March 17, 2006) warned, "…the uncertainties relating to the timing, severity and 
impact  of  a  pandemic  are  substantial,  financial  authorities  need  to  consider  well  in  advance  the 
potential impacts of a pandemic on financial systems, to make business continuity plans for their own 
institutions,  to  review  business  continuity  plans  elsewhere  in  the  financial  sector  and  to  improve 
channels  for  communication  and  coordination,  both  within  and  across  borders"  (Financial  Stability 
Forum, 2006). 
Challenges for the financial system 
III.  
Though  the  possible  impact  of  avian  flu  would  be  covered  in  detail  in  this  seminar,  I  would  like  to 
briefly touch upon the risks and challenges which a severe pandemic could pose to a domestic as well 
as the global financial system. Some of these challenges are expected to be similar to the strains on 
the financial system that might be expected from any slowdown in growth irrespective of the source. 
Others  will  be  particular  to  the  conditions  of  a  flu  pandemic,  such  as  uncertain  labour  supply, 
increased  operational  risks,  potentially  unstable  infrastructure  and  restrictions  on  travel,  etc. 
International  attention  has  focused  on  the  need  for  all  countries  to  be  better  prepared,  in  order  to 
reduce the potential death, illness, social and economic consequences of a pandemic. A worrisome 
scenario cannot be ruled out if absenteeism and increased uncertainty about operational risks harm 
the functioning of financial markets or financial institutions. Broadly speaking, financial system effects 
might be on account of reduced capacity of markets and institutions due to absenteeism. 
These challenges have necessitated preparedness within the financial sector so as to minimise the 
adversities  associated  with  a  potential  pandemic,  the  severity  of  which  is  still  uncertain.  A  severe 
pandemic  will  not  only  put  substantial  pressure  on  the  fiscal  balance  of  Governments,  due  to 
increased  spending  on  health,  public  safety,  social  welfare,  and  subsidies  to  businesses  and  lost 
revenues,  but  it  will  also  pose  challenges  for  the  monetary  authorities.  For  financing  the  increased 
need  for  social  spending, financial  markets  are  expected  to  be  thin  at  best  and  recourse  to  central 
bank borrowing may be inevitable for most of countries. 
It would be prudent to assume that a severe pandemic may lead to a surge in demand for liquidity and 
low risk assets. Such risk aversion on the part of economic agents would lead to at least temporary 
declines in asset prices and widening of credit spreads, for both corporations and emerging markets. 
Although these effects are likely to be temporary, asset price declines could put the balance sheets of 
some financial institutions under stress and they may face challenges in meeting regulatory norms. 
Banking stability may not be an issue of immediate concern because deterioration in asset quality is 
not expected to appear quickly and we can perceive them as second order impact. According to the 
IMF, a severe pandemic may also lead to a significant but temporary reduction in net capital flows to 
emerging markets. Such a pandemic can disrupt market operations as well in the case of a breakdown 
in the trading infrastructure. In short, we can contemplate the likely challenges for central banks in the 
context  of  (i)  financing  the  larger  borrowing  needs  of  the  respective  governments,  (ii)  inflation,  (iii) 
liquidity management, (iv) payment and settlement systems, etc. keeping in mind that disruptions in 
one jurisdiction could have spill-over effect in other jurisdictions. 
If required, central banks may have to prepare themselves to act as lenders of last resort. In many 
countries, in order to restore macroeconomic stability and fiscal sustainability, central banks may have 
to  adjust  monetary  policy  to  prevent  a  sustained  increase  in  inflation,  withdrawing  fiscal  stimulus, 
particularly  in  countries  facing  debt  sustainability  issues,  as  well  as  ensuring  external  viability, 
including through a rebuilding of international reserves and greater exchange rate flexibility. Similarly, 
a financial institution’s risk assessment and management plans may have to be expanded to cover the 
possibility of widespread economic disruptions and their impact on loan and other asset performance. 
In addition to the direct impact of avian flu on agricultural output, the indirect effects could severely 
disrupt  domestic  economies,  as  tourism  falls,  trade  and  transport  restrictions  arise,  consumer 
spending drops, and business confidence and investment deteriorate. As a result, the retail sector and 
services exports could be severely affected and balance of payment pressures might arise in tourism-
dependent economies. 
Many institutions in various countries have instituted business continuity plans (BCPs) in order to face 
major disruption to the operations and services of their financial system. BCPs are intended to mitigate 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 3
this  risk,  by  ensuring  the  continuity  of  critical  financial  infrastructure  and  functions  of  individual 
institutions. In some quarters, apprehensions are being expressed that such BCP using a single back 
up  may  not  prove  to  be  much  effective  in  the  event  of  severe  pandemic.  Although  BCPs  could  be 
desirable for every country irrespective of its size to deal with contingencies like avian pandemic but its 
microstructure may differ from country to country. 
Another  important  implication  of  the  avian  flu  pandemic  could  be  for  the  insurance  sector.  As 
emphasized by the Financial Stability Forum, a flood of claims might strain the capacity of the global 
insurance  and  reinsurance  sectors.  Insurers  are  exposed  to  the  effects  of  a  pandemic  through  a 
number  of  business  lines,  including  such  risks  as  business  interruption,  health,  disability,  medical 
malpractice,  workers’  compensation,  and  life  insurance.  Estimates  of  the  impact  of  a  global  flu 
pandemic  on  the  insurance  industry  vary  widely.  Standard  and  Poor’s  recently  suggested  a  mild 
pandemic might produce $15-20 billion in worldwide losses, while losses from a more severe event 
might total up to $200 billion (Standard and Poor’s, 2005). 
Possible preparedness on avian flu 
IV.  
Given  these  possible  risks  and  challenges,  it  is  felt  that  there  should  be  clear  command  and 
communication  structure  for  crisis  management  in  case  this  pandemic  becomes  severe.  Critical 
functions  and  priority  would  have  to  be  identified  in  advance  -  market  operations,  reserve 
management,  clearing  and  settlement  and  banking  supervision.  There  should  be  preparedness  for 
high  absentee  rate  and  back-up  arrangements  for  key  staff.  The  need  for  providing  computers  and 
internet connections to staff at home would arise in order to facilitate "work from home" arrangements. 
Problem  of  insufficient  public  network  bandwidth  may  arise.  There  is  a  need  to  finalise  the  bare 
minimum  banking  services  that  must  continue  operations  in  a  worst-case  scenario  (Phone,  internet 
banking,  ATM,  payment  related  service,  access  to  safe  deposit  boxes).  The  payment  system  and 
currency issue are important from the point of view of the central banks. 
Countries,  which  are  most  vulnerable  to  Avian  flu  pandemic,  may  like  to  initiate  their  own business 
continuity plans by ensuring the continuity of critical financial infrastructure and functions of individual 
institutions. Many countries have already started strengthening such efforts. Preparedness is highest 
among  countries  like  Singapore  and  Hong  Kong  that  experienced  the  SARS  outbreak.  Similarly, 
adequate preparation is unavoidable for countries that have recently dealt with avian flu outbreaks and 
have large, complex financial systems. They are already testing their Business Continuity Plans (BCP) 
and creating awareness among their staff. Several Committees / task forces have been set up to look 
into  issues  like  business,  legal,  human  resources,  payment  system,  currency  management, 
communications,  health/hygiene  and  security.  Several  large  global  financial  institutions  also  have 
advanced preparations, as do providers of payment services, mainly by establishing alternative sites, 
and  recovery  task  forces.  They  have  a  senior  crisis  management  team  in  place  to  plan  for  the 
contingency. In fact, the IMF has rightly emphasized that financial institutions must have BCPs that do 
not focus only on a single, short-lived event (IMF, 2006). In fact, I would say that actions at country 
level  may  not  be  sufficient  and  regional  and  global  coordination,  therefore,  will  remain  essential  as 
well. Coordination efforts already made by various regions and regional organisations of the world, as 
well as the support provided by the UN system are praiseworthy. 
During  the  crisis  itself,  authorities  will  have  a  number  of  potential  roles  to  play.  One  major  job  for 
authorities  is  acting  as  a  focal  point  for  communication  in  a  variety  of  areas  like  (i)  receiving 
information  from  market  participants  on  the  extent  of  disruption  and  on  the  business  continuity 
measures  taken  that  may affect  other participants,  (ii)  acting  as  a  point of  liaison  between  financial 
markets  and  the  wider  government  emergency  response,  and  perhaps  also  with  utilities  and 
telecommunications  providers,  (iii)  providing  information  to  the  market  and  to  the  public  on  the 
functioning of markets and systems (both financial and non-financial). Cross-border communication, in 
fact, becomes even more important than before because of the global nature of the event. 
Because of this central role, it would be better if communication methods are robust enough to take 
care  of  potential  disruption  to  staffing  and  physical  infrastructure  and  are  equipped  with  multiple 
communication  channels  available. 
trading  and  communications 
infrastructure,  ad  hoc  solutions  may  be  needed  in  order  to  allow  smooth  process  of  necessary 
transactions and maintaining critical operations. 
In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  cite  some  instances  in  our  country  where  the  central  bank,  other 
regulatory  authorities  and  government  have  jointly  handled  the  contingencies  successfully.  For 
there  are  disruptions 
to 
If 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2006
instance, there was the beginning of a panic run on a bank in 2003 led by a baseless rumour at one 
particular place of the country. The Reserve Bank immediately clarified that the Bank had sufficient 
liquidity and arranged to provide adequate cash to that Bank to meet the demands of its customers 
and helped that bank to keep its branches open at the affected places even on holidays to restore 
customer confidence. If such measure were not taken in time, then there could have been a possible 
spill-over to other banks as other bank customers could have accessed the ATM of this affected bank 
which could have created further panic. 
Other  interesting  illustrations  of  ensuring  business  continuity  in  the  Indian  context  are  perhaps  the 
stock market episodes of May 17, 2004 and more recently on May 18, 2006. On May 17, 2004, in the 
wake of change of Government, stock markets in India witnessed a record fall in price, which triggered 
the  index-based  circuit  breaker  twice  during  the  day.  The  index-based  circuit  breaker  triggered  a 
stoppage of trades in the stock exchange for around two hours. Seeing the possibility of a spill-over in 
money, G-Sec and forex markets, the Reserve Bank intervened on that day and two separate press 
releases were issued by the Reserve Bank indicating, (a) constitution of an internal Task Force under 
the Executive Director, Financial Market Committee to monitor the developments in financial markets, 
and (b) assuring availability of rupee and forex liquidity. Thus, it was communicated that the Reserve 
Bank  was  keeping  in  touch  with  major  settlement  banks  and  the  stock  exchanges  to  ensure  that 
payment obligations on the exchanges were met and gave assurance of selling dollars through agent 
banks  in  order  to  augment  supply  or  intervene  directly  to  meet  any  demand  -  supply  imbalances. 
Subsequent to the flashing of the press release, the market witnessed a quick recovery and, in fact, no 
Reserve Bank liquidity or forex facilities announced had to be used. In view of developments in stock 
exchanges after May 18, 2006 crash, the Reserve Bank was in constant touch with major settlement 
banks and both the major stock exchanges to ensure that the payment obligations on the exchanges 
were met smoothly. 
Similarly,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  train  bomb  blasts  in  Mumbai  on  July  11,  2006,  the  Reserve  Bank 
made all arrangements to ensure uninterrupted continuation of normal services rendered by it and also 
the critical payment systems. Subsequent to the experience of the potential run on a bank in 2003, the 
Reserve  Bank  has  developed  standard  instructions  for  dealing  with  any  such  eventuality  that  could 
affect business continuity and normalcy in operations. Hence it is important to act fast whenever some 
potential threat is identified. These episodes clearly point out that there is need for proper coordination 
among  all  regulators  so  that  in  the  event  of  contingency,  proper  coordinated  response  could  be 
initiated. Therefore, I would stress again that the scope of business continuity plans for central banks 
goes beyond the avian flu. 
Avian flu: the Indian case 
V.  
If seen in the Indian perspective, the first case of bird flu in Maharashtra was announced on February 
18,  2006  as  a  sample  of  an  affected  poultry  farm  from  Navapur  was  tested  positive  for  highly 
pathogenic H5N1 viral strain. First case of H5N1 infection in birds was reported in India in February 
2006. Initially, the virus infected 52 poultry farms in northern part of Maharashtra and such reports put 
authorities in other states on high alert as such a contagious disease could be source of concern for 
the Indian economy in general and poultry industry in particular. India is the fifth largest producer of 
eggs and the livestock and poultry sector is one of the fastest growing sectors in India. It may be noted 
that outbreak of Avian Flu was Navapur and Uchhal in Maharastra was a localised one, which has 
been contained effectively. The major poultry exporting States are located at a considerable distance 
from Navapur. According to Ministry of Agriculture, the export of poultry/poultry products from these 
States is absolutely safe as the samples tested are negative (Government of India, 2006a). 
According to the Ministry of Agriculture, there has been no case of avian flu reported since April 18 of 
this year. Prudence, however, demands that we should take all possible precautions in this regard and 
be  prepared  to  face  any  eventuality  of  any  nature.  According  to  Minister  of  Agriculture,  Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, "though the poultry industry had suffered heavily because of the 
outbreak of bird flu this year, India would be in a position to declare the country free from this disease 
very  soon  (Government  of  India,  2006b)."  To  avoid  any  large  scale  avian  flu  pandemic,  the  Indian 
authorities have already announced various protective measures. Action Plan has been prepared for 
the guidance of the Animal Husbandry Departments of the State Governments. This Action Plan for 
the State Governments consists of three parts. Part I gives the Action Plan in case of any suspicion of 
occurrence  of  avian  flu  at  any  place.  Part  II  describes  the  Action  Plan  in  the  unlikely  event  of  the 
outbreak of the disease being confirmed by laboratory tests. Part III provides advice to persons who 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 5
may  be  required  to  handle  highly  pathogenic  avian  influenza  (HPAI)  affected  poultry.  Recently,  the 
Indian  Council  of  Agricultural  Research  (ICAR)  has  developed  an  indigenous  vaccine  for  poultry 
against  the  deadly  disease.  Since  the  disease  has got  recurring  possibility,  the  development  of  the 
indigenous vaccine can go a long way in tackling bird flu effectively. 
As part of measures to protect domestic poultry industry from any loss on account of avian flu, in April 
2006, the Reserve Bank announced guidelines for relief measures by commercial banks and urban 
commercial banks. Keeping in view the loss of income that occurred due to culling of birds as well as 
steep fall in the demand for poultry products and their prices on account of outbreak of Avian Influenza 
(bird  flu)  in  some  areas  of  the  country,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  asked  banks  to  consider  extending 
certain  facilities  to  poultry  units  financed  by  them.  Some  of  these  measures  are:  (i)  conversion  of 
principal and interest due on working capital loans, which have fallen due for payment on/ after the 
onset of bird flu, i.e., February 1, 2006 and remaining unpaid, into term loans. The converted loans 
may be recovered in installments based on projected future inflows over a period up to three years 
with an initial moratorium of up to one year, (ii) rescheduling of remaining portion of term loan with a 
moratorium  period  up  to  one  year  depending  upon  the  cash  flow  generating  capacity  of  the  unit, 
(iii)eligibility  of  borrowers  for  fresh  need  based  finance,  and  (iv)  extension  of  relief  measures  to  all 
accounts of poultry industry, which were classified as standard accounts as on March 31, 2006. 
In addition, the Government has granted a one-time interest subvention of 4 per cent per annum on 
the outstanding principal amount as on March 31, 2006 (not including any part of the principal amount 
that  has  become  overdue)  to  all  poultry  units  availing  loans  from  banks.  To  resolve  any  policy 
differences among the regulators and to discuss issues relating to any overlaps, co-ordination and co-
operation,  a  High  Level  Coordination  Committee  on  Financial  and  Capital  Markets  (HLCCFCM) 
consisting  of  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  Chairman,  SEBI  and  Chairman,  IRDA  along  with  the 
Secretary,  Department  of  Economic  Affairs,  Government  of  India,  is  already  in  place.  The  Reserve 
Bank  of  India  has  also  constituted  an  Inter-Departmental  Committee  to  look  into  the  details  of  the 
impact of avian flu on the financial sector of the economy. 
Concluding observations 
VI.  
At  the  end,  I  would  like  to  lay  stress  on  the  need  for  proper  coordination  between  the  health 
authorities, business entrepreneurs and the financial policy makers. As the IMF is making efforts in 
sensitising  the  issue  of  avian  flu  among  the  central  banks  for  better  preparedness,  the  regulatory 
authorities within the countries also need to sensitise the regulated entities in order to ensure better 
preparedness with business continuity plans for the possible avian flu pandemic. I reiterate that these 
continuity  plans  are  desirable  for  all  types  of  contingencies  for  the  financial  sector.  Pandemic  drill 
exercises may also be helpful in assessing such overall preparedness. Further, proper coordination is 
necessary  to  arrive  at  a  realistic  estimate  of  the  potential  risk  of  the  pandemic  and  align  various 
measures within the financial sector with the alert system of health authorities. This will in turn help in 
not  only  chalking  out  effective  preparedness  plans  but  also  to  ensure  effective  communication  in 
implementation  process.  Similarly,  there  is  a  need  to  strengthen  joint  and  strategic  efforts,  without 
which  it  would  be  a  challenging  task  for  country  authorities  to  prevent  and  eliminate  the  health, 
security,  trade  and  financial  threats  emanating  from  avian  influenza  and  other  animal  diseases  at 
global  level.  This  will  require  adequate  resources,  particularly  in  developing  countries  and  regions 
where  challenges  may  be  large  and  resources  insufficient.  Therefore,  our  collaboration  not  only  in 
terms  of  financial  support  but  also  information  sharing  and  exchange  of  ideas  on  various emerging 
issues relating to economic and financial system has become necessary. In this context, such series 
of Seminars being organised on the initiative of the IMF on the Avian Flu pandemic can prove to be 
quite helpful in understanding these issues and exchanging the ideas for apt preparedness which is 
the ultimate goal for all us present here. I wish all the success for the Seminar. 
References 
Asian  Development  Bank  (2003),  Asian  Development  Outlook  2003,  Hong  Kong,  China:  Oxford 
University Press. 
Bank for International Settlements (2006), 76th Annual Report, 1 April 2005 to 31 March 2006, Basel, 
June 26, 2006. 
6 
 BIS Review 106/2006
Brahmbhatt,  Milan  (2006),  "Economic  Impacts  of  Avian  Influenza  Propagation",  Speech  at  the  First 
International Conference on Avian Influenza in Humans, 
Institut Pasteur – Paris, France, June 29, 2006 (available at the www.worldbank.org). 
Financial  Stability  Forum  (2006),  "Press  Release  on  Financial  Stability  Forum  Meets  in  Sydney", 
March 17, 2006. 
Government of India (2006a), "Weekly Report on Notifiable Avian Influenza (H5 & H7) week ending 
July 9, 2006", Ministry of Agriculture. 
Government  of  India  (2006b),  "Press  Release  on  States  Urged  to  help  Poultry  Farmers",  Press 
Information Bureau, Ministry of Agriculture, July 19, 2006. 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2006),  "The  Global  Economic  and  Financial  Impact  of  an  Avian  Flu 
Pandemic and the Role of the IMF", February 2006. 
Standard  and  Poor’s  (2005),  "Determining  the  Insurance  Ramifications  of  a  Possible  Pandemic," 
Ratings Direct, November. 
World Bank (2006), "Avian Flu: The Economic Cost", June 29, 2006 (available at www.worldbank.org). 
World  Health  Organisation  (2003),  "Influenza",  Fact  Sheet  No.  211,  March  2003  (available  at 
www.who.int/en/). 
World  Health  Organisation  (2006),  "Regional  Influenza  Pandemic  Preparedness  Plan  (2006-2008)", 
Regional Office for South East Asia, New Delhi. 
United Nations (2006), Key Economic Developments and Prospects in the Asia-Pacific region 2006, 
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, United Nations, January 2006. 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 7
