Usha Thorat: Urban cooperative banks – evolution of the banks, current issues 
in corporate governance and challenges in their regulation and supervision  
Text of the Late Shri R N Godbole Memorial Lecture (2006), delivered by Ms Usha Thorat, Deputy 
Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at Shivaji University, Kolhapur, 6 December 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I am happy and honoured to be here today to deliver the "Late Shri. R. N. Godbole memorial lecture" 
this year. My thanks to the Shivaji University, Kolhapur for extending me the invitation to deliver this 
lecture. 
I have chosen to speak today on Urban Cooperative Banks - a key sector in the Indian Banking scene, 
which in the recent years has gone through a lot of turmoil. While the ordeal is not as yet over for 
some banks, the sector on the whole is showing signs of looking up. It is encouraging to note that the 
Reserve Bank’s initiatives towards the revival of this sector – a unique sector blending banking and 
cooperation  –  are  bearing  fruit.  Talking  of  cooperation,  one  cannot  but  recollect  the  glory  of  this 
wonderful district that we are in today – Kolhapur, a leading district in the cooperative movement in 
Maharashtra, famous for its cooperatives.  
Indeed,  it  is  a  good  time  and  place  to  have  a  detailed  discussion  on  the  evolution  of  the  UCBs, 
governance  issues  observed  in  them  and  the  challenges  in  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the 
sector.  
I would like to begin with a brief note on the historical perspective on cooperative movement in India 
and the origin of UCBs, and then move on to the current issues. 
Historical perspective 
The cooperative movement in India started a century ago with the enactment of Cooperative Societies 
Act in 1904. Interestingly, legal status was conferred on credit societies keeping in view, in particular, 
the needs of the agricultural sector. Nevertheless, Sir Ibbetson, who piloted the legislation observed: 
"We recognize that artisans, employees on small pay and other persons in towns may very properly 
be admitted to the benefits of our legislation".  
Although  joint  stock  banks  opened  branches  in  urban  and  semi-urban  areas,  they  did  not  find  it 
advantageous  to  cater  to  the  banking  and  credit  requirements  of  the  urban  middle/lower  class 
comprising  small  traders/  businessmen,  artisans,  factory  workers,  salaried  persons  with  limited 
incomes etc.  The  inability  of  joint  stock  banks  to  appreciate and  cater  to  the needs of  this class of 
clientele with limited means effectively drove them to money-lenders and similar agencies for loans at 
exorbitant rates of interest - this situation was the prime mover for non-agricultural credit cooperatives 
coming into being in India. The main objectives of such cooperatives were to meet the banking and 
credit  requirements  of  this  section  of  people  and  to  protect  them  from  exploitation.  Thus,  urban 
cooperative banks’ emergence was a result of local response to an enabling legislative environment, 
unlike rural cooperative movement that was largely State-driven. The origin of cooperative banks can 
be  traced  to  a  small  town  in  South  India,  called  Conjivaram,  where  in  1904,  the  Conjivaram  Urban 
Cooperative  Bank  was  set  up,  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  small  businessmen  as  an  alternative  to 
moneylenders. 
Little  attention  had  been paid  to  the  development  of  the  urban  credit  movement  until  the Maclagan 
Committee (1914) drew attention to its potentials. Interestingly, a banking crisis in India in 1913-14, 
when no fewer than 57 joint stock banks collapsed, led to a flight of deposits from joint stock banks to 
urban cooperative banks. The Maclagan Committee investigating the crisis stated ‘As a matter of fact, 
the crisis had a contrary effect and in most provinces there was a movement to withdraw deposits from 
non cooperatives and place them in cooperative institutions, the distinction between the two classes of 
security being well appreciated and preference being given to latter owing partly to the local character 
and publicity of cooperative institutions but mainly we think, to the connection of Government with the 
cooperative movement’.  
BIS Review 120/2006 
 1
Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs) 
Urban  cooperative  banks,  also  referred  to  as  primary  co-operative  banks,  play  an  important  role  in 
meeting  the  growing  credit  needs  of  urban  and  semi-urban  areas  of  the  country.  They  mobilise 
savings  from  the  middle  and  lower  income  groups  and  purvey  credit  to  small  borrowers,  including 
weaker sections of the society. These banks in India are financial cooperatives akin to credit unions 
found abroad, except that they can also accept deposits from non-members and form a part of the 
payments systems.  
Market share of UCBs 
As on March 31, 2006 there were 1853 UCBs, 84 scheduled commercial banks, 133 Regional Rural 
Banks  (RRBs)  and  398  Rural  Cooperative  Banks  (including  31  State  Cooperative  Banks  and  367 
District Cooperative Banks) in India. An analysis of market share of various bank groups indicates that 
the  share  of  UCBs  in  total  bank  deposits  is  relatively  low.  Nevertheless,  their  market  share  grew 
steadily  from  3.3%  in  1990-91  to  a  high  of  6.6%  in  1999-2000,  but  thereafter  gradually  declined  to 
4.8% (provisional) in 2005-06, as shown in the following Table. 
 Growth of UCBs 
In  1966  when  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  was  made  applicable  to  UCBs,  there  were  about  1100 
UCBs with deposits and advances of Rs.167 crore and Rs.153 crore respectively. As at the end of 
1996, the number of UCBs increased to 1501 and their deposits and advances rose significantly to 
Rs.24,161 crore and Rs.17,927 crore. The UCBs continued to grow at a fast pace till 2003, when their 
number increased to 1941 and their deposits and advances to Rs.1,01,546 crore and Rs.64,880 crore 
respectively.  Subsequently,  the  number  of  UCBs  declined  in  2006  to  1853  with  total  deposits  of 
Rs.1,12,237 crore and advances of Rs.70,379 crore. An overview of their growth since the 1990s is 
given in Table 2 below. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2006
 The spectacular growth of UCBs in the late nineties and up to 2003, which had resulted in increasing 
their penetration, ironically, also led to certain weaknesses in the sector that adversely affected public 
perception and thereby, their competitiveness. A major reason for the decline in public confidence was 
the crisis faced in 2001 by a large multi-state bank in the state of Gujarat, when the bank witnessed a 
sudden  ‘run’  on  its  branches,  following  rumours  of  its  large  exposure  to  a  leading  broker  who  had 
suffered huge losses in the share market. The large-scale withdrawal of deposits within short time had 
resulted in severe liquidity problems for the bank. The bank was also holding about Rs.800 crore of 
inter-bank deposits from a large number of UCBs in the State and from other States, which posed a 
systemic  risk.  In  order  to  protect  the  interests  of  the  general  public  and  also  that  of  the  other  co-
operative banks, RBI had issued directions to the bank restricting certain operations (acceptance of 
fresh deposits, restricting payments to any single depositor to Rs.1000 and ban on fresh lending) and 
requisitioned  the  Central  Registrar  of  Co-operative  Societies,  New  Delhi  to  supersede  the  Board  of 
Directors and appoint an Administrator. An order of moratorium was also enforced on the bank by the 
Central  Government  for  a  short  period.  The  bank  was  subsequently  placed  under  a  scheme  of 
reconstruction with the approval of Reserve Bank of India.  
The  Gujarat  episode  was  followed  by  another  major  crisis  in  the  state  of  Andhra  Pradesh  in  2002, 
when  one  of the  largest  banks  in  the state  faced  a run,  following  a  newspaper  report  regarding  an 
inquiry instituted into the affairs of the bank by the State Registrar of Cooperative Societies. The bank 
was in a weak position, and ultimately, after attempts for its revival failed, its license was cancelled by 
the Reserve Bank in 2004. 
The decline is public confidence in the UCB sector deepened in the aftermath of the crisis in Gujarat 
and Andhra Pradesh and concomitantly, the position of UCBs generally deteriorated. As on June 30, 
2004, 732 out of 1919 UCBs were categorised in Grade III or IV signifying weakness and sickness. 
Recognising the systemic risks and keeping in view the needs of its clientele, Reserve Bank reviewed 
the entire gamut of legislative, regulatory and supervisory framework for these banks, and in March 
2005, brought out a draft ‘Vision Document for UCBs’. The vision document, which was drawn with the 
main  objective  of  maintaining  the  viability  and  competitiveness  of  the  UCBs,  discussed  the 
characteristics of the sector, analysed the problems afflicting the banks and proposed strategies for 
dealing with problems affecting the sector.  
I would first dwell upon the salient features of the UCB sector and, thereafter, elaborate on the vision 
document and other initiatives of the Reserve Bank for ensuring viability and competitiveness of the 
banks in this sector.  
Salient features of the UCB sector 
The UCB sector is unique in that there is significant degree of heterogeneity among the banks in this 
sector  in  terms  of  size,  geographical  distribution,  performance  and  financial  strength.  There  is  also 
diversity among the urban cooperative banks in the levels of professionalism, standards of corporate 
governance and access to advanced technology. Most importantly, the banks in this sector are under 
dual control, with a part of the powers vested in the State Government and a part with Reserve Bank. 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 3
The Reserve Bank is, therefore, continuously evolving the regulatory and supervisory framework for 
UCBs to ensure their soundness without sacrificing their competitiveness. But before, stepping into the 
realm  of  regulation/  supervision,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  further  on  the  aspect  of  heterogeneity  of 
UCBs, which would help in better understanding of the sector. 
Heterogeneity 
While  on  the  one  hand,  there  are  a  number  of  small  neighbourhood  banks  functioning  for  mutual 
interest of their members, on the other, there are several large UCBs with a wide network of branches, 
large number of depositors and borrowers, many of whom are medium/large corporates. In the latter 
kind  of  UCBs,  the  cooperative  structure  remains  only  as  an  organizational  arrangement  and  their 
business model and goals are more akin to commercial banks. The extent of heterogeneity can be 
gauged by size-wise, region-wise and grading-wise analysis of the UCBs.  
Size-wise distribution 
The frequency distribution of UCBs in terms of deposits and advances their relative share is shown in 
Table 3. It is observed that at the lower end of the spectrum, 36.2% of the UCBs have a deposit base 
of less than Rs.10 crore and account for only 3.0% of deposits. At the same time, at the top end, only 
14 banks had a share of 23% in the total deposits. More than 50% of the UCBs (962 banks) fell in the 
deposit base range of Rs.10 crore to Rs.100 crore and accounted for 29.5% of total deposits.  
Region-wise distribution 
The  distribution  of  urban  cooperative  banks  across  the  country  is  skewed,  with  significant 
concentration in southern and western regions. Table 4 gives the region-wise distribution of number of 
UCBs and share of deposits of each region. 
 4 
 BIS Review 120/2006
 Grade-wise distribution  
As part of its on-site inspection exercise, Reserve Bank has a system of categorizing banks into four 
grades  based  on  objective  parameters  relating  to  capital  adequacy,  asset  quality,  earnings, 
compliance  with  CRR/SLR  requirements  and  adherence  to  RBI  guidelines  and/  directives.  While 
Grade  I  covers  banks  with  no  major  supervisory  concerns,  the  other  three  grades  would  indicate 
existence of supervisory concerns in increasing degree. Table 5 gives the grading-wise distribution of 
banks as on March 31, 2006 (as per provisional data). It is seen that 37% of UCBs in the country, 
accounting for 25.60% of total deposits, were in Grades-III and IV signifying weakness/and sickness, 
while  the  remaining  major  portion  (63%)  of  UCBs,  accounting  for  74.40%  of  total  deposits,  were  in 
Grades-I and II, indicating good/satisfactory performance/ financials. 
 Dual control  
Urban co-operative banks are regulated and supervised by both, the State Governments, through the 
Registrars  of  Co-operative  Societies,  and  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  The  Registrars  exercise 
powers  in  regard  to  incorporation,  registration,  management,  amalgamation,  reconstruction  or 
liquidation.  In  case  of  banks  having  presence  in  more  than  one  state,  the  Central  Registrar  of  Co-
operative Societies, on behalf of the Central Government, exercises such powers. The banking related 
functions such as issue of license to start new banks or branches, matters relating to interest rates, 
policies on loans and investments, prudential norms etc. are regulated and supervised by the Reserve 
Bank  of  India.  Duality  of  command  is  not  unique  to  India,  and  requires  delicate  coordination  for 
obtaining synergies in regulatory and supervisory functions.  
BIS Review 120/2006 
 5
Competition and UCBs 
Market scenario 
Since 1991, the financial system has seen several reforms. The process of liberalization was set in 
motion  with  gradual  removal  of  restrictions  on  the  operation  of  the  pricing  mechanism,  especially 
interest  rates  and  statutory  liquidity  and  reserve  requirements  –  a  process  which  is  still  underway. 
Enhanced  competition  in  both  banking  and  non-banking  financial  sectors  has  been  gradually 
introduced – through a dynamic mix of public and private as well as domestic and foreign ownership – 
along with deregulation or adaptive regulations. Simultaneously, regulation and supervision of banks, 
financial  markets  and  infrastructure  were  improved  to  increasingly  align  them  with  international 
standards  and  best  practices.  The  market  driven  economy,  through  deployment  of  more  capital, 
advanced  technology  and  skilled  human  resources,  is  posing  stiff  and  increasing  competition  to  all 
traditional institutions.  
UCBs position 
Market  competition  and  the  need  to  retain  good  clientele  are  affecting  the  UCBs  too  leading  to 
squeezing  of  the  margins  on  many  banks,  especially  the  larger  ones.  The  larger  private  sector 
commercial  banks,  with  their  ability  to  invest  more  in  technology  and  offer  better  remuneration  to 
attract skilled persons, are better off in fending competition. Understandably, therefore, the UCBs that 
are competing in the same space, especially in cities and towns, are also being aggressively targeted 
by the commercial banks and face tough competition. The smaller unit banks on the other hand, by 
and large, manage to retain their niche role through personalized service and informal approach.  
Corporate governance issues in UCBs 
Most  of  the  problems  faced  by  the  UCBs  are  due  to  governance  issues  and  connected  lending.  In 
UCBs borrowers have a significant say in the managements of the banks. This has the potential of 
influencing the Boards to take decisions that may not always be in the interest of the depositors who 
constitute the most important stakeholders of a bank. Also, unlike the case of institutions the shares of 
which can be listed in a stock exchange and can change hands without affecting the capital base, in 
case of UCBs, the shareholders can withdraw their contribution to capital and shrink the capital of the 
bank and thereby limit its ability to increase risk weighted assets and expand business.  
On  this  crucial  aspect  of  corporate  governance,  I  would  like  to,  therefore,  discuss  a  little  about  the 
international best practices. 
Corporate governance – international best practices for credit unions 
As  best  practices  guide,  the  World  Council  of  Credit  Unions  has  enunciated  ideal  governance 
principles for credit unions, which are financial cooperatives similar to our urban cooperative banks. 
These principles address the challenges of organizational power within credit unions at three separate 
levels viz. External Governance, Internal Governance and Individual Governance. 
External governance 
All financial institutions, regardless of type, are expected to comply with the following basic standards 
of transparency, auditing and financial reporting.  
The board should commit to regular, honest communication of its activities with members, 
regulators and the general public in the spirit of full disclosure.  
Financial  statements,  compliant  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  and  local 
regulatory standards, should be made available to members and the public.  
Transparency 
• 
 6 
 BIS Review 120/2006
Compliance 
• 
     Structure 
• 
Continuity 
• 
  Balance 
• 
 The board is expected to comply in both the letter and spirit of regulation, to cooperate fully 
with its regulatory body and to comply with national laws.  
The  board  should  ensure  that  the  credit  union  meets  or  exceeds  the  International  Credit 
Union Safety and Soundness Principles as well as any other relevant standards for financial 
institutions.  
The credit union should undergo annual external audits within 90 days of the end of each 
fiscal year.  
The  audit  relationship  should  be  reexamined  frequently  and  consideration  be  given  to 
changing the auditor at least every 3-5 years in a competitive bidding process.  
Public accountability 
• 
The board of directors and management must be constantly cognizant of responsibilities to 
governmental structures, including but not limited to regulators, legislative bodies, the media, 
the community and the public.  
Internal governance 
Unlike for-profit entities, credit unions exist to serve their members. Thus, credit unions must address 
this additional layer of governance related to their democratic, member-driven nature. This includes a 
commitment  to  "one  member,  one  vote,"  as  well  as  adherence  to  the  International  Credit  Union 
Operating Principles and the role of the general assembly as the highest governing body. 
The  board  of  directors  should  be  composed  of  an  odd  number,  no  less  than  five  and  no 
greater than nine.  
Consideration should be given to the rotation of directors.  
Interested  general  members  who  comply  with  the  standards  of  individual  governance  can 
stand for nomination.  
The board should encourage dialogue with general members at the annual general meeting.  
The  annual  general  meeting  of  the  general  assembly  of  members  should  be  adequately 
promoted to ensure sufficient member participation.  
The board should create strategies to maintain the competitiveness and sustainability of the 
credit union.  
The board should create succession plans for both directors and management that ensure 
the continued existence of the credit union.  
The board should approve a disaster management and recovery plan.  
The composition of the board should aim to adequately reflect the demographic make up of 
its members and balance the financial service demands of members.  
The board should seek to balance diversity and experience, but all directors must meet the 
standards of individual governance.  
BIS Review 120/2006 
 7
Accountability 
• 
The board is formally accountable to the general assembly of members, which is the highest 
governing body.  
The roles and responsibilities of the board, committees and managers should be established 
clearly in the bye-laws or other policies.  
It  is  the  duty  of  the  board  to  establish  strategic  direction,  approve  policies  and  monitor 
management’s implementation of these policies and achievement of targets.  
It  is  the  duty  of  management  to  prepare  the  plan  and  budget,  undertake  operations, 
implement the policies approved by the board and achieve the targets set forth.  
Individual governance 
In  order  to  perform  their  collective  duties,  the  individual  board  members  and  managers  have  an 
obligation to maintain ethical conduct and professionalism and to speak with a single voice once board 
decisions  have  been  made.  Board  members  are  also  expected  to  possess  the  skills  and  technical 
capacity necessary to fulfill their duties. 
The  credit  union  should  adopt  a  standardized  code  of  conduct  clearly  explaining  proper 
behavior.  
Directors  or  managers  must  not  have  criminal  backgrounds,  recent  bankruptcies  or  penal 
backgrounds.  
Immediate family members should not serve on the board or in management at the same 
time.  
Board  members  must  excuse  themselves  from  participating  in  discussions  and  voting  on 
matters from which they or their family have a potential conflict of interest.  
The board must approve loans to directors or management. All such insider loans must be 
made within the approved credit policy parameters and will be reported on a regular basis to 
the full board.  
Directors with delinquent loans more than three months will be removed from their position.  
All members of the board should have basic financial literacy, including the ability to interpret 
financial statements and standards, or commit to acquiring these skills through education or 
training within the first year of service.  
Individual  members  should  have  specialized  financial  or  business  skills  and/or  a  member-
focused viewpoint.  
          Integrity  
• 
Competence 
• 
Commitment 
• 
Directors should be willing and able to commit the necessary time to the credit union. Failure 
to attend board meetings may result in dismissal.  
Directors  must  respect  the  decisions  of  the  board,  adhering  to  all  policies  that  have  been 
adopted, regardless of personal opinion.  
The board and managers, as a cohesive unit, would have to ensure the credit union’s compliance with 
issues related to external and internal governance. In order to achieve this goal, each board member 
has a duty to adhere to the principles of individual governance. 
8 
 BIS Review 120/2006
Competence of directors 
In  the  context  of  urban  cooperative  banks  in  India, the  first  issue  of  importance  is whether  there  is 
collective  expertise  on  the  Board  available  to  meet  the  competitive  challenges  before  the  bank  to 
ensure growth while maintaining soundness? In today’s context, some of the areas where expertise at 
the Board level is very useful is HR, IT and risk management. This enables the Board to get unbiased 
advice  from  such  members  on  the  Board  on  managerial  decisions  and  on  matters  referred  to  the 
Board. Chairman and members of the Board should ensure that the Board has a broad based talent in 
the  Board  in  the  areas  of  accountancy  and  audit,  IT,  HR  and  other  expertise  and  experience  from 
industry, trade and agriculture. Domain knowledge of the Board members enormously increases the 
quality of governance and the Chairman should be able to tap this talent to the advantage of the bank.  
The other aspect relating to the composition of the Board relates to ‘fit and proper’ criteria for directors. 
Internationally,  the  best  principles  of  banking  regulation  require  that  regulators  who  give  banks 
licenses ensure banks are owned, controlled and managed by ‘fit and proper’ shareholders, directors 
and senior managers. In most countries this is done through ensuring that all significant shareholders 
fulfill the fit and proper tests, all directors adhere to "fit and proper" criteria and appointments by the 
Board of CEOs of banks and key functionaries like CFO, COO and the auditors are approved by the 
regulator.  
Role of bank directors 
An important aspect of corporate governance is the role of directors. It would be interesting to note 
that  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  has  spelt  out  the  following  principles  that  should 
guide the bank director: 
• 
the  effectiveness  of 
their  own  governance  practices, 
Understand their oversight role and their fiduciary "duty of loyalty" and "duty of care" to the 
bank and its shareholders;  
Avoid  conflicts  of  interest,  or  the  appearance  of  conflicts,  in  their  activities  with,  and 
commitments to, other organisations;  
Recuse  themselves  from  decisions  when  they  have  conflicts  of  interest  that  make  them 
incapable of properly fulfilling their fiduciary duties;  
Are able to commit sufficient time and energy to fulfilling their responsibilities;  
Are of a size that allows for efficiency and real strategic discussion;  
Continue  to  develop  and  maintain  an  appropriate  level  of  collective  expertise  as  the  bank 
grows in size and complexity;  
Periodically  assess 
including 
nomination and election of board members, determine where weaknesses exist, and make 
changes as necessary;  
Select, monitor and, where necessary, replace key executives, while ensuring that the bank 
has  an  appropriate  plan  for  executive  succession,  and  determining  that  any  intended 
successor(s) are qualified, fit and proper to manage the affairs of the bank;  
Serve as a checks and balances function vis-à-vis the senior management of the bank by 
exercising their duty and authority to question and insist upon straight forward explanations 
from  management,  and  receive  on  a  timely  basis  sufficient  information  to  judge  the 
performance of management;  
Meet regularly with senior management and internal audit to establish and approve policies, 
establish communication lines and monitor progress toward corporate objectives;  
Promote bank safety and soundness, understand the regulatory environment and ensure the 
bank maintains an effective relationship with supervisors;  
Provide  sound  and  objective  advice,  and  recommend  sound  practices  gleaned  from  other 
situations;  
Contribute special expertise in overseeing a bank’s activities which might not be available in 
the rest of the parent or group;  
          BIS Review 120/2006 
 9
 Do not participate as the board of directors in day-to-day management of the bank;  
Exercise due diligence in the hiring and oversight of external auditors in jurisdictions where 
this  is  the  responsibility  of  the  board  (in  some  jurisdictions,  external  auditors  are  hired 
directly by shareholders).  
Policy initiatives of Reserve Bank of India 
Now,  let  us  now  take  a  look  at  various  initiatives  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  for  stabilising  and 
strengthening the Urban Cooperative Banks 
Taking a view on the crisis faced by the sector time and again, the Reserve Bank, in the annual policy 
for  the  year  2004-05,  announced  its  decision  to  stop  granting  fresh  licenses  for  formation  of  new 
UCBs. This was followed up with a decision not to grant any fresh branch license as well. It was made 
clear  that  this  was  necessitated  pending  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  legislative  and  regulatory 
framework governing the sector. It was in this background that a decision was taken to draft a vision 
document for the sector to outline a framework that would facilitate the strengthening of the sector and 
enable it play the assigned role of providing credit to the economically weaker sections. 
Vision document for UCBs 
The  Reserve  Bank  eventually  formulated  a  draft  vision  document,  placed  it  in  the  public  domain  in 
March 2005 and finalised it thereafter, with the following objectives:  
(i) 
To  rationalize  the  existing  regulatory  and  supervisory  approach  keeping  in  view  the 
heterogeneous character of entities in the sector. 
To  facilitate  a  focused  and  continuous  system  of  supervision  through  enhanced  use  of 
technology. 
To  enhance  professionalism  and  improve  the  quality  of  governance  in  UCBs  by  providing 
training  for  skill  up-gradation  as  also  by  including  large  depositors  in  the  decision  making 
process / management of banks. 
To put in place a mechanism that addresses the problems of dual control, given the present 
legal framework, and the time consuming process in bringing requisite legislative changes. 
To put in place a consultative arrangement for identifying weak but potentially viable entities 
in  the  sector  and  provide  a  framework  for  their  being  nurtured  back  to  health  including,  if 
necessary, through a process of consolidation. 
To identify the unviable entities in the sector and provide an exit path for such entities.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
MOU with state governments and constitution of TAFCUBs 
In pursuance of the proposals in the draft vision document, state governments having a large number 
of  UCBs  were  approached  for  signing  memorandum  of  understanding  (MOU).  Some  of  these  state 
governments  have  since  signed  MOUs.  The  memorandum,  in  fact,  provides  the  basis  for  the 
constitution of Task Force for Urban Co-op. Banks (TAFCUB) in each State, which is the forum for the 
consultative decision  making  process.  The  TAFCUB  has,  apart  from  the  representatives  of  the  RBI 
and  the  State  Government,  those  of  the  UCBs  sector  as  well.  The  MOU  also  provides  for 
professionalising the audit and the Reserve Bank's role in improving IT and HR levels in the UCBs. 
The combined access to information from local and national level federations of the banks, as also 
from the regulators and supervisors, has made the TAFCUB effective instruments for consolidating the 
sector  through  quick  and  non-disruptive  exit  of  unviable  entities  and  revival  of  the  viable  ones. 
Recommendations of the TAFCUBs have the consent of all stakeholders including Reserve Bank of 
India and, therefore, can be implemented speedily by all concerned. In states where TAFCUBs have 
not yet been constituted, pending signing of MOU, the potentially viable and non-viable banks do not 
have the benefit of coordinated deliberations on their future set-up, by both regulators/supervisors. In 
such  states,  Reserve  Bank  directly  initiates  supervisory  action  as  per  a  graded  supervisory  action 
framework, which suggests specific and objective course of action for the banks that are in different 
stages of weakness. In keeping with the consultative process initiated with the state governments, the 
10 
 BIS Review 120/2006
Reserve Bank has sought to extend the arrangement to the UCBs functioning in more than one state, 
through  a  MOU  with  the  Central  Registrar  and  enlarging  the  scope  of  the  TAFCUBs  to  cover  the 
Scheduled UCBs, which are systemically even more significant. Further, the consultative approach is 
sought to be extended to the liquidation stage to facilitate early lodging and settlement of insurance 
claims. 
Arsing out of the comfort of coordinated supervision/regulation of banks in the states that have signed 
the  MOU, certain  facilities  have  been extended  to  the  banks  in such  states. Requests  from  eligible 
banks  in  such  states  for  additional  business  opportunities,  like  setting  up  currency  Chests,  selling 
mutual funds, providing forex services, opening of new ATMs etc. are also considered.  
Strengthening of regulatory/supervisory framework 
The  RBI  recognized  that  there  is  a  need  to  mitigate  the  risk  to  which  the  system  is  exposed  by 
providing a regulatory and supervisory framework that will appropriately address the problems of the 
sector  as  also 
the  current 
regulatory/supervisory framework are outlined below. 
the  shortcomings  of  dual  control.  Significant 
features  of 
Dispensing with the one-size-fits-all approach  
In  order  to  achieve  the  objectives  set  out  in  the  Vision  document,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  is 
implementing a two-tiered regulatory and supervisory regime. Banks with deposits under Rs.100 crore 
and whose operations are limited to a single district, are considered to be more closely epitomizing the 
spirit of cooperative banking and as such are placed under simplified regulations to enable them to 
gradually gain in strength, such that, over a period of 3 years they can be brought at par with all other 
banks in term of performance, strength and regulatory prescriptions.  
As a step in this direction, recently Reserve Bank of India has allowed the smaller banks to adopt 180 
days delinquency norms for classification of assets as non-performing, instead of the 90 days norm 
which is applicable for the larger cooperative and all commercial banks in India. This is intended to 
provide a measure of relief to the small UCBs and improve their financial performance through lower 
Non Performing Advances requiring lower provisioning, which in turn would translate into higher profits 
that could be used to shore up the capital base of these banks. Incidentally, about a thousand UCBs 
stand to gain from such differential regulatory regime.  
Further, in view of the market risks associated with investments made in Government securities, the 
smaller UCBs have been given exemption (upto 15 percent of their Net Demand and Time Liabilities) 
from the prescribed SLR of 25% required to be maintained in the form of government securities, to the 
extent of funds placed in interest bearing deposits with the public sector banks. Another, regulatory 
relaxation available to the small banks is in terms of provisioning requirement for 'standard advances' 
which  has  recently  been  enhanced  for  UCBs  from  0.25%  to  0.40%,  but  this  enhancement  has  not 
been  made  applicable  to  banks  having  deposits  below  Rs.100  crore  and  whose  operations  are 
confined to a single district. 
Supervision through enhanced use of technology 
With regard to the mechanism for supervision, the smaller banks, which are limited by their size and 
type  of  operations,  pose  lower  systemic  risks  and  therefore  it  is  envisaged  that  they  would  be 
supervised by a combination of simplified off-site surveillance system of the RBI and on-site audit by 
the  state  governments.  The  dependence  on  off-site  surveillance  and  on-site  supervision  by  state 
agencies in respect of small (unit) banks, in addition to lowering the supervisory burden of the small 
entities, would also provide increased flexibility to the RBI to deploy its supervisory resources to the 
larger and more risky banks.  
Emphasis on corporate governance and professionalism 
It is being increasingly highlighted that depositors are the most important stakeholders in a bank and 
therefore inclusion of depositors as shareholders, particularly the large depositors, is an agenda that is 
being actively pursued independently as also through coordination with state governments. In order to 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 11
enhance professionalism, Reserve Bank insists on inclusion of at least two professional directors on 
the board of each bank, which otherwise is essentially an elected body comprising mainly of persons 
from the field of cooperation rather than banking. In this direction, 'Fit and Proper' criteria for CEOs is 
also being formulated for implementation through the state governments. Market discipline is gradually 
being increased through rigorous disclosure norms and initiatives like public disclosure of penal action 
taken against a bank by the RBI. Also in case of gross violation of RBI guidelines / directives where 
complicity of a director or of the Board is noticed, Reserve Bank of India approaches the Registrar of 
Cooperatives  of  the  concerned  state  for  removing  the  director  or  even  for  superceding  the  entire 
Board, depending upon the nature of violation. If necessary, RBI also files police complaints for taking 
criminal action against officials and directors of banks wherever criminal complicity is suspected by the 
supervisory departments of the RBI. State Governments through the MOU, agree to take immediate 
action on requisitions of RBI for super session of the Board of Directors or for winding up a bank.  
In  order  to  ensure  that  'arms  length  distance'  is  maintained  between  the  Board  and  the  day-to-day 
operations of the bank, connected lending in terms of loans to directors, and relatives of directors and 
to firms in which any director may be 'interested', has been banned in India. Further, as the quality of 
audit is an important aspect of corporate governance, efforts have been made to ensure that statutory 
audit of banks is conducted by professionals. As per the MOU, the states agree to conduct statutory 
audit only through Chartered Accountants in respect of banks with deposits over Rs.25 crore, institute 
special audit by Chartered Accountants at the behest of RBI and enhance the quality of statutory audit 
by aligning their system of rating banks with that of Reserve Bank.  
Consultative approach to regulation 
In  order  to  remain  sensitive  to  developments  in  the  marketplace  as  also  for  ensuring  better 
coordination between the agencies entrusted with supervision and regulation of UCBs viz. Central and 
State  Governments  and  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  certain  processes  and  platforms  for  regular  and 
structured  consultation  have  been  established  by  us.  A  Standing  Advisory  Committee  comprising 
senior  representatives  of  Central  and  state  Governments  and  Federation  of  UCBs  has  been 
constituted, which meets the top and senior management of Reserve Bank once or twice a year and 
reviews  past  policies  and  also  gives  responses  on  important  policy  proposals  and  other  issues  of 
immediate concern. The committee also serves as a platform for the representative of the regulated 
entities to express their views in respect of any regulatory and supervisory issue. This also enables 
RBI to get a pulse on all emerging issues of the sector.  
Non-disruptive exit route for non-viable banks 
The Reserve Bank’s experience with the UCB sector clearly underscored the necessity for providing a 
non-disruptive exit route for non-viable banks. Accordingly, this aspect has been incorporated in the 
vision document. TAFCUBs constituted in the states that have signed MOU have been entrusted with 
the task of identifying potentially viable and non-viable UCBs and suggesting suitable revival path for 
the former and a non-disruptive exit route for the latter. The exit of non-viable banks would be ideally 
through  merger  /  amalgamation  with  stronger  banks  or  conversion  into  societies  that  would  take 
deposits only from members without providing cheque facility or ultimately, through liquidation as a last 
resort.  
Merger and consolidation 
The consolidation of the sector through the process of merger of weak entities with stronger ones has 
been  set  into  motion  by  providing  transparent  and  objective  guidelines  for  granting  no-objection  to 
merger proposals as a strategy for providing non-disruptive exit for the weak banks. It also set up a 
three  member  Expert  Group  of  outsiders  to  vet  the  merger  proposals,  to  provide  a  transparent 
mechanism to the process and impartial inputs on such requests. TAFCUBs have representatives of 
the sector who also provide local level inputs on banks that are on the lookout for taking over other 
weak banks for expansion of business. The merger process has gathered momentum over the last 
one year, partly because the stronger banks found this an inorganic growth route.. In all 44 merger 
proposals  have  been  approved  so  far,  of  which  no  objection  certificate  has  been  issued  for  23 
proposals. Of these, 14 mergers have already materialized. 
12 
 BIS Review 120/2006
Liquidation and settlement of depositors' claims 
Banks that are identified as non-viable and as having no scope whatsoever for revival by merger etc. 
are taken into liquidation keeping in view the interest of depositors. In liquidation cases, the Deposit 
Insurance  and  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  (DICGC)  expeditiously  settle  the  claims  of  depositors. 
However, in certain cases, there is a time lag in settlement of claims mainly on account of delay in 
submission of the claim list by the liquidators. Other factors which affect timely settlement of claims are 
audit of claim list by Chartered Accountants, court cases, delay in receipt of liquidation order from the 
RCS, deficiency in claim list prepared by the liquidators etc. DICGC has put in place follow-up and 
monitoring measures to mitigate the hardship faced by the depositors on account of such delays and 
facilitate settlement of claim list of failed banks at the earliest. 
Recent initiatives  
Apart from drawing up the vision document, signing of MOUs with certain states and constitution of 
TAFCUBs in those states, the Reserve Bank has initiated several other measures for strengthening 
Urban Cooperative Banks like exploring avenues for raising capital, upgrading technology and training 
initiatives, the progress in respect of which is outlined below.  
Avenues for UCBs to raise capital 
The scope for augmenting the capital of UCBs is limited. The Reserve Bank, therefore, constituted a 
group  comprising  representatives  of  the  Bank,  State  Government  and  UCB,  to  study  the  avenues, 
methods and scope for increasing the capital of UCBs and imparting greater permanence to it. The 
group has submitted its report. 
The  Group  has  identified  four  new  instruments  to  enable  the  UCBs  to  raise  long-term  capital/quasi 
capital funds. These are:  
• 
• 
Unsecured, subordinated, non-convertible redeemable debentures/ bonds,  
Special shares that are non-voting in nature (as opposed to shares with membership rights) 
which could be issued even at a premium,  
Redeemable cumulative preference shares, and  
Long term subordinated deposits with maturity in excess of 15 years.  
• 
• 
The Group has recommended that the funds raised through the special shares which are non-voting in 
nature (as opposed to shares with membership rights) which could be issued even at a premium may 
be reckoned for Tier-I capital and the rest for Tier-II capital. None of these instruments would have a 
put  option  but  could  have  a  call  option  exercisable  by  the  bank  with  the  prior  permission  of  the 
Reserve  Bank.  Exercise  of  call  option/redemption  in  case  of  debentures/bonds  and  special  shares 
would  be  subject  to  a  lock-in  clause  of  the  bank  meeting  the  prescribed  Capital  to  Risk  Weighted 
Assets Ratio at the relevant time.  
Since UCBs come under the purview of the Co-operative Societies Act of the State in which they are 
registered or the Multi-state Co-operative Societies Act (2002), the provisions of which are not similar 
in certain respects, the Group has suggested necessary amendments to the Acts/Rules framed under 
them to facilitate issuance of some of the instruments proposed by it. 
Technology initiatives 
In  order  to  enhance  the  access  to  technology  for  UCBs,  Reserve  Bank  would  consider  facilitating 
acquisition  of  basic hardware and  software  for conducting  routine  operations.  Further, software  has 
also  been  developed  to  enable  the  UCBs  to  prepare  and  submit  all  returns  to  Reserve  Bank, 
electronically. The software has been implemented free of cost in the banks and the officials of banks 
are also being provided adequate training in using the software, which enables banks to maintain a 
database of returns submitted to the supervisor which in turn acts as a MIS for the UCBs. The stronger 
UCBs also are members of clearing house and of the Real Time Gross Settlement System. 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 13
Skills development/training, including directors and auditors training 
To the extent that it does not lead to any conflict of interest, the Reserve Bank of India, in addition to 
its  regulatory  and  supervisory  functions  also  seeks  to  play  a  developmental  role  for  the  urban 
cooperative  banks.  In  this  context,  in  order  to  improve  the  skill  level  of  human  resources  and  the 
technological infrastructure of UCBs, RBI in addition to subsidized programs also provides free of cost 
training  on  all  important  areas  of  banking  operations  to  the  staff  and  top  managements  of  UCBs 
through its own training establishments as also through off-shore training programs at regional centers 
that have a large network of such banks. As mentioned earlier, a software has been developed for 
banks to help them prepare and submit all the returns to RBI, electronically and the software has been 
implemented free of cost by RBI, in the banks. 
Recent developments 
As  envisaged  in  the  Vision  Document,  Reserve  Bank  approached  states  having  large  network  of 
UCBs for signing Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to ensure greater coordination between RBI 
and  State  Government  for  supervision  and  regulation  of  the  UCBs.  Since  June  2005,  MOUs  have 
been  signed  with  8  state  governments  viz.  Andhra  Pradesh  (124  banks),  Gujarat  (296  banks), 
Karnataka  (297  banks),  Madhya  Pradesh  (61  banks),  Uttranchal  (7  banks),  Rajasthan  (39  banks), 
Chattisgarh (14 banks) and Goa (6 banks) which together constitute 844 UCBs i.e. over 45 percent of 
total number of UCBs and account for almost 23% of deposits of the sector.  
As mentioned earlier, upon signing of MOU, as per the agreement, RBI constituted State Level Task 
Force for Urban Co-operative Banks (TAFCUB), which is a six-member body with two representatives 
each  from  State  Government,  UCB  sector  and  Reserve  Bank.  The  TAFCUBs  are  chaired  by  the 
respective  Regional  Directors  of  RBI  and  RCS  is  the  Co-Chairperson.  TAFCUBs  also  have 
representatives of the sector who provide local level inputs on banks that are on the lookout for taking 
over other weak banks for expansion of business. As such, the constitution of TAFCUBs and their role 
in the development of the UCBs in the state on sound lines constitutes a compelling attraction for the 
state governments to sign the MOU with RBI. 
Regional flavour of TAFCUBS 
In  order  to  further  instil  transparency  and  improve  inter  regulatory  coordination,  the  MoU  signed 
between RBI and the state government also envisages signing of another MoU between the Registrar 
of  Cooperative  Societies  of  the  State  and  respective  Regional  Directors  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  This 
MOU  stipulates  the  broad  measures  to  be  taken  by  the  signatories  for  implementing  the 
recommendations of the TAFCUB for each of the potentially viable/non-viable UCBs that are placed 
for  consideration  of  TAFCUB.  In  the  last  one-year  five  TAFCUBs  (other  TAFCUBs  constituted  very 
recently)  have  deliberated  upon  and  made  recommendations  on  the  financial  position  of  about  250 
weak UCBs. Based on TAFCUBs recommendations, supervisory actions that have been taken include 
exiting banks through merger with other UCBs, cancellation of license of unviable UCBs and issue of 
license to unlicensed cooperative societies. 
Gains of ‘MOU - TAFCUB’ mechanism – empirical evidence 
The impact of a consultative platform is reflected in the decline in the number of weak and sick banks 
in the states which were among the first to sign the MOU and therefore TAFCUBs were constituted the 
earliest (Table 6). 
14 
  BIS Review 120/2006
Conclusion  
I  have  traced  the  evolution  of  UCBs,  their  unique  structure,  strengths  and  weakness.  I  have  also 
indicated the multi-pronged approach adopted by RBI to arrest deterioration and strengthen the banks 
in this sector, including the recent developments. Our initiatives, we hope, would lead to the evolution 
of the urban cooperative banking system into a strong and vibrant sector with banks that conform to all 
prudential requirements in the medium term and become at par with the commercial banks in terms of 
competitiveness  and performance.  Looking  at  this large  gathering  of academics, bankers  and other 
professionals, I am sure my address would have kindled your interest and involvement on the subject. 
I welcome your views on our approach towards strengthening this important sector of Indian banking. 
Thank you. 
References  
1. World Council of Credit Unions Inc., International Credit Union Governance Principles (Available at 
http://www.woccu.org/lrac/files/1098902687_Governance_Principles_Overview_Draft_11_revised.pdf )  
2. Bank for International Settlements, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision - Enhancing corporate 
governance 
at 
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs122.htm )  
organisations, 
(Available 
February 
banking 
2006 
for 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 15
