Lim Hng Kiang: Growing Singapore’s vibrant insurance industry 
Speech by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and Minister 
for  Trade  and  Industry,  at  the  General  Insurance  Association  40th  Anniversary  Dinner,  Singapore, 
26 October 2006. 
Mr Derek Teo, President, GIA 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
 Introduction 
I  am  happy  to  be  here  celebrating  your  40th  anniversary  with  you.  As  we  celebrate  this  important 
milestone, let us draw lessons from the past as we consider opportunities for the future.  
From $44m in gross premiums in 1965, the general insurance industry has grown more than 60 times, 
writing premiums of $2.8bn in 2005. In real terms, the compound average growth rate is a credible 
8.2%, just above Singapore's average GDP growth of 8.0% over the same period. 
GIA’s role and challenges going forward 
GIA  has  played  an  important  role  in shaping  the  growth  and  development  of  the  general  insurance 
industry.  The  Best  Practices  on  Agency  Management,  the  Premium  Payment  Framework  and  the 
revised Code of Practice are examples of the good work done. 
Another  important  role  played  by  GIA  is  to  be  the  voice  for  the  industry.  For  example,  the  Motor 
Insurance Review Workgroup's initiatives were pivotal in steering the motor insurance sector's return 
to profitability. 
GIA has also taken a pro-active stance in educating consumers on general insurance products. It has 
issued  consumer  guides  and  organized  public  seminars  to  educate  consumers  on  fire  insurance, 
property insurance, health insurance and motor insurance under the MoneySENSE national financial 
education programme.  
There  is,  however,  more  to  be  done.  As  Mr  Teo  mentioned  earlier,  general  insurance  penetration 
remains low in Singapore. Insurance density, measured by gross premiums as a percentage of GDP, 
rose  from  1.0%  in  2000  to  1.5%  in  2005,  but  this  is  still  lower  than  the  1.8%  in  Malaysia,  1.6%  in 
Thailand, 2.9% in Taiwan and 3.0% in South Korea. When compared against developed countries like 
UK  and  Switzerland,  which  reported  insurance  densities  of  between  3.5%  and  5.0%,  we  are  much 
further behind. There is therefore significant room for the industry to grow.  
It would be worthwhile for GIA to focus on improving insurance penetration in Singapore by identifying 
insurance lines that have greater prospects for growth.  
MAS’ supervisory approach 
MAS believes that there should be a constructive partnership between the regulator and the industry. 
On  our  part,  we  will  continue  to  fine  tune  our  supervisory  approach  to  support  the  growth  of  the 
industry.  
Competition is a necessary ingredient for growth, but there are many areas where the industry can 
work  together.  In  particular,  the  industry  should  work  together  to  promote  best  practices  in  risk 
management and professional standards. 
MAS  will  continue  to  support  efforts  by  the  industry  to  promote  sustainable  and  healthy  growth  by 
maintaining an appropriate regulatory framework that recognises innovation. The Risk-Based Capital 
Framework and Risk-Based Supervisory approach give room for institutions to innovate and take more 
risks as long as adequate controls and risk management practices are in place. 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 1
Liberalisation of the general insurance industry 
MAS  will  also  continue  to  encourage  greater  participation  from  a  wide  range  of  global  insurance 
players in our market. In 2000, we lifted the moratorium on admission of new direct general insurers 
and removed the 49% limit on foreign shareholding in locally-owned direct insurers. Since then, the 
industry landscape has evolved considerably. Today, we have a diverse network of 58 direct insurers, 
many  of  whom  are  specialist  insurers,  27  professional  reinsurers  and  60  captives.  Most  of  the  top 
international insurance and reinsurance brokers are also here. We continue to see interest from more 
players seeking to establish a presence here. We will consider all applicants that are well-capitalised, 
have an acceptable rating, and are managed by experienced professionals with a good track record 
even if the company is newly established. 
Singapore as an insurance hub 
Singapore  has  achieved  a  critical  mass  of  insurance  players  and  activities,  becoming  an  insurance 
hub.  This  critical  mass  means  a  wide  range  of  insurance  products  and  services  are  available. 
Singapore is a logical choice for those seeking to purchase insurance because they know that there 
are  capacity  and  expertise  here.  Indeed,  Singapore  serves  as  an  important  regional  reinsurance 
centre as well as the largest captive domicile in Asia. 
Asia holds many opportunities for insurance. China and India's emergence as economic powerhouses 
have  driven  cross-border  trade  and  fuelled  economic  growth  in  Asia.  Japan  has  rediscovered  its 
vigour. Many Southeast Asian economies are enjoying vibrant economic growth. The resultant wealth 
creation will increase demand for insurance.  
To increase our competitiveness as a regional insurance and reinsurance centre, and retain a greater 
share of the Asian business that traditionally flows outside Asia, it is important for Singapore to deepen 
its pool of underwriting and broking expertise, especially in the more specialised risks, and to increase 
the capacity to underwrite such niche risks. We also want to encourage greater specialisation and new 
techniques in the industry, for example by having specialised service providers to support the industry, 
and by facilitating access to a wider variety of risk and capital management tools for insurers. Let me 
share with you some ideas and initiatives we have to help catalyse such developments. 
Insurance expertise and capacity 
Firstly,  regarding  insurance  expertise.  The  industry  needs  to  accelerate  its  efforts  to  provide  more 
regional and international exposure, and advance training across a broad range of business lines, to 
raise the level of technical competency and experience of its staff. The industry should take advantage 
of MAS' Financial Training Scheme (FTS) which provides co-funding for training. 
Such efforts should not be focused only on developing the existing talent stock, but also cultivating the 
talent  pipeline.  The  insurance  industry  faces  strong  competition  for  intellectual  capital  from  other 
economic  sectors.  Hence,  you  need  to  raise  the  profile  of  the  career  in  the  insurance  industry 
collectively,  to  attract  the  best  and  the  brightest.  With  the  right  human  capital,  the  industry  will  be 
better placed to capitalise on Asia's growth prospects.  
There is also a dearth of underwriting capacity in the region for some specialised risks, for example 
aviation, energy, political and terrorism risks, to name a few. MAS will explore ideas to enhance our 
competitiveness to encourage such risks to be underwritten in Singapore. We welcome feedback and 
suggestions. 
Specialisation and new techniques 
We  recognise  the  importance  of  ancillary  service  providers  within  the  insurance  ecosystem,  and 
believe that increased usage of specialised service providers can make our insurers more competitive. 
Singapore's existing infrastructure, political and economic environment is conducive for such service 
providers to thrive in, and we will enhance the business case with initiatives to help reduce the cost of 
operating  in Singapore.  Examples of  specialised  service  providers  include run-off  management  and 
related  services,  claims  management  and  processing  services,  loss  adjusting  services  and  policy 
administration services, amongst others. 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2006
Another new technique that can enhance insurers' competitiveness is insurance-linked securitisation, 
or ILS. ILS enables insurers to transfer risks to the capital market to strengthen their balance sheets. 
These securities also contribute to a more diverse and vibrant capital market. The global ILS market 
saw a record level of issuance in 2005, and 2006 looks set to exceed 2005. 
While there are few ILS deals sponsored by Asian insurers, we expect to see more interest as insurers 
become increasingly sophisticated and focused on efficient management of risk and capital. MAS is 
developing a regulatory framework for ILS and will consult the industry in due course. 
Development  of  more  advanced  risk  management  techniques  has  to  be  supported  by  more 
sophisticated research. For example, more reliable estimates of catastrophic losses will allow insurers 
to  better  price  and  write  larger  risks.  For  ILS  to  be  priced  and  rated,  more  robust  risk  models  are 
needed.  
Singapore is well-placed to serve as a centre for Asian insurance research. We therefore encourage 
the industry to deepen its ties and collaboration with academia, and identify the relevant areas where 
greater  research  can  make  a  difference.  MAS  is  prepared  to  consider  supporting  worthy  projects 
financially.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentleman, the success of our initiatives to grow the insurance industry is contingent upon 
active  participation  from  the  industry.  As  new  products  are  introduced  and  more  players  enter  the 
market, there will be greater vibrancy in our insurance industry. There will be greater cross-fertilisation 
of ideas and upgrading of skills, which will underpin the continued growth of Singapore into a thriving 
insurance marketplace. 
MAS and GIA have enjoyed an excellent working relationship over the years, and we look forward to 
many years of close and fruitful cooperation. It is our collective aim to continue to grow the vibrant 
insurance industry in Singapore and to bring it to even greater heights. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 3
