Eva Srejber: Internationalisation and financial integration
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, Second Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to The Bankers' Club,
Gothenburg, 29 March 2001.
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  to  Gothenburg  and  speak  about  internationalisation  and  the
ongoing process of integration in the financial markets.
I intend to begin by putting developments on the financial markets in a historical perspective and then
to deal with the forces behind current developments. I shall then focus more specifically on Europe
and  the  role  played  by  the  euro  and,  finally,  I  shall  briefly  discuss  the  important  work  pursued  by
international organisations in strengthening the financial system and thus reducing the risk of crises
arising.
Globalisation from a historical perspective
Over the past few decades we have seen how the global economy has been internationalised on a
large scale and how deregulation and technological achievements, particularly within the IT field, have
created new conditions for growth. During the same period, global purchasing power has more than
doubled.  And  it  is  not  only  the  western  world  that  has  benefited  from  the  opportunities  offered  by
internationalisation; many  poor countries have managed to  climb  a  few  steps  up  the  global  income
ladder. The Asian 'tiger' economies are good examples of this.
A look back in time shows that this development is not unique. What we can see is that periods of
relatively  high  global  growth  have  coincided  with  accelerating  international  market  integration,
deregulation and a rapid spread of technology, which has enabled poorer countries to draw closer to
richer countries. If we go back 150 years in time, we find ourselves in exactly this type of situation. At
that time, obstacles to trade  were being abolished and  countries  and  regions  were  being  united  by
railways  and  steamships.  Postal  systems  were  developed  and  the  telegraph  system  made  a
breakthrough.  Intercontinental  cables  were  lowered  into  the  seas  to  connect  Europe  to  North  and
South America, Africa and Asia. The world experienced a revolution in transportation and information
that has yet to be equalled.
The Sweden of that time is a good example of how a country can make use of internationalisation to
lift  itself  out  of  poverty.  When  the  country  entered  the  19th  century,  it  had  extensive  regulations  in
trade and industry. However, the process of deregulation of the economy began during the first half of
the century, under pressure from the growing markets' need for greater flexibility. The cities' toll gates
were  abolished  and  people  could  move  more  freely  around  the  country.  At  the  same  time,  private
ownership was strengthened. The foundations were laid for the rapid industrialisation that took place
during the latter part of the 19th century, when Sweden joined the global economy in earnest.
We  know  that  there  was  great  mobility  within  the  international  economy  of  that  time,  described  for
example in Vilhelm Moberg's books about the Swedish emigrants. Many  of us have relatives in the
USA as a result of the massive emigration,  when more than one million  Swedes  left the country to
seek their living elsewhere. This process was made easier when the obligation to carry a passport was
abolished  in  1860  and  it  became  easier  to  move  across  Sweden's  borders.  There  was  also
considerable  migration  within  Sweden.  Today's  labour  market  cannot  compare  to  this  in  terms  of
flexibility!
Another important element in the dynamic economy of that time was the development on the financial
markets. The rapid industrialisation of Sweden would  hardly  have  been possible  without functioning
capital  markets  that  ensured  savings  were  channelled  where  they  were  most  needed.  The
deregulation of the Swedish interest rate markets in 1864 was important for this capital transfer, but
was not sufficient to enable large-scale industrialisation in Sweden. This required, in addition, access
to the international capital market. I shall let the major Swedish railway project began in the mid-1800s
explain why.
BIS Review 26/2001
1
The state paved the way abroad
Sweden  was  sparsely  populated  with  vast  distances,  which  made  railway  construction  relatively
expensive, compared with large parts of Europe. In addition, the railways tied up investment capital for
a long period of time. As there was a shortage of long-term savings in 19th century Sweden, they were
forced  to  seek  financing  abroad.  In  1857  the  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  ventured  out  onto  the
international capital market. The first railway loan was issued in Germany and comprised the start of
an era with extensive capital imports to Sweden lasting more than 50 years. This provided Sweden
with access to capital for productive investments on a scale that would scarcely have been possible
otherwise.
The central government borrowing paved the way abroad for other borrowers, such as municipalities,
mortgage institutions and industrial companies. The large Swedish banks were to a large extent given
the task of acting as intermediary in bond loans and thus had the opportunity to develop contacts with
foreign  banks.  The  integration  of  the  financial  markets  increased.  For  Sweden,  this  meant  that  our
manufacturing companies could make use of the greater access to capital and lower interest rates in
industrially-developed Europe. Gothenburg, with its proximity to the British goods and capital markets,
played  an  important  role  here.  For  instance,  the  Skandinaviska  Kreditaktiebolaget,  which  was  the
country's  leading bank during the latter part of the  19th  century,  had  its  registered  office  here.  The
internationalisation of the financial markets was facilitated by the fact that Sweden joined the monetary
co-operation  of  the  time,  the  gold  standard,  while  the  national  integration  of  the  markets  was
strengthened by the fact that the Riksbank was granted a monopoly on issuing banknotes at the end
of the century. This also helped to lay the foundation for a more modern monetary policy.
One point of interest is that the railway construction also gave Gothenburgers the decisive influence in
determining the time in the 19th century. It was the railways that ensured that the whole of Sweden
followed the same time. Prior to the railways, time was determined by the sun. It was 12 noon when
the sun stood at its highest point in the sky, regardless of which part of the country one was in. This
meant that there was a time difference of 52 minutes between the most eastern and western parts of
Sweden.  When  the  western  trunk  line  between  Stockholm  and  Gothenburg  was  complete,  it  was
necessary to have the same time so that the timetables would work, and Gothenburg time became the
standard.
This period of liberalisation and internationalisation of the world economy was abruptly broken off by
the outbreak of war in 1914 and was replaced by national isolation. Although Sweden was largely an
open economy during parts of the interwar period, it was not until after the Second World War that this
isolation was broken at a global level. For the past couple of decades we have been in a clear period
of internationalisation and financial integration.
Same driving forces now as then
Today, information technology and communications technology have replaced the railways as symbols
for economic progress, but the driving forces are basically the same now as they were then and the
interaction between the financial markets and other parts of the economy plays the same important
role. The development of functioning markets for risk capital has been an important factor behind the
IT  revolution,  which  in  turn  has  been  an  important  requirement  for  the  way  in  which  the  financial
markets have developed. Thanks to the new technology, capital can now be transferred in seconds
from  one  continent  to  another.  We  have  obtained  a  global  capital  market  that  brings  together
borrowers and lenders from all over the world, 24 hours a day, while new financial instruments deal
with the risks arising from international trade and investments.
Let me take the co-operation within the EU as an example of the changes occurring in the world today.
The work on implementing the single market is aimed at tearing down barriers to the four freedoms,
which  entail  people,  goods,  services  and  capital  being  able  to  move  freely  within  the  union.  The
increased  competitive  pressure  that  ensuing  from  the  deregulation  of  the  single  market  has  led  to
major  structural  changes  in  the  EU  Member  States'  economies.  The  number  of  mergers  and
acquisitions on various markets has increased significantly. In the financial sector, the reduction of the
number of credit institutes has continued and there are now around 7,500 institutes in the euro zone,
which is 3,000 fewer than there were 15 years ago.
The euro has created a basis for an integrated European market for securities. The money market has
undergone a fundamental process of integration and standardisation. The deposit market, that is to
say, the market for loans without collateral, and the derivative markets were in principle fully integrated
2
BIS Review 26/2001
at  the  beginning  of  1999.  The  Eurosystem's  refinancing  transactions  have  strengthened  the
development  of  cross-border  transactions  on  the  money  market,  while  the  TARGET  system  has
enabled a balancing of liquidity within the euro zone and contributed to eliminating price differences
within  various  segments  of  the  money  market.  The  stiffer  competition,  the  increased  number  of
counterparties for individual banks and the improved liquidity are other important structural changes
that  have  taken  place  parallel  to  the  increasing  cross-border  activities.  On  the  other  hand,  the
integration process has been much slower on the repo market and the treasury bills market.
On the bond market the euro has led to an acceleration of growth. The number of outstanding bonds
in private, non-financial companies have increased considerably, albeit from a low level. This increase
mainly  applies  to  the  large  bond  loans,  that  were  issued  to  finance  the  extensive  merger  and
acquisition activities. However,  Europe lags behind the USA,  where the market for private bonds is
three  times  as  large.  On  this  side  of  the  Atlantic  bank  loans  still  dominate,  which  makes  corporate
borrowing more costly.
Europe  also  lies  one  step  behind  the  USA  on  the  stock  markets.  However,  a  clear  trend  towards
increased saving in shares can now be discerned in Europe, too. The change in the national pension
systems contributes to this development. The total number of listed companies in the euro zone has
increased steadily during the 1990s. This development also applied to the 'growth' stock exchanges.
For  instance,  the  number  of  companies  listed  on  the  pan-European  stock  exchange  alliance
EURO.NM increased by almost 100 per cent in 1999.
It  is  not  so  strange  that  Europe  cannot  measure  up  to  the  USA  on  the  financial  markets,  as  the
integration  process  has  not  come  as  far  here.  Whereas  the  USA  has  a  large,  integrated  market,
Europe has many small ones, which are also covered by different regulations. On the other hand, this
means  that  there  is  great  potential  within  Europe's  financial  sector.  Intensive  work  is  currently  in
progress to realise this potential. This includes the EU countries adopting a plan of action for financial
services,  that  should  be  fully  implemented  by  2005.  During  the  Stockholm  European  Council  last
weekend, the Heads of State and Government adopted the Lamfalussy Committee's proposals for a
more effective legislation process in the field of finance in the EU. This was a very important decision.
Today it takes an average of three years for the EU to make decisions on new regulations. Such a
slow process is evidently a problem in the financial field, where development is otherwise very rapid. A
regulatory system that does not correspond to reality can lead to both increased risks in the financial
system and lower economic growth, as the finance markets' contribution to the rest of the economy
will  be  lower  than  it  could  be.  There  is  also  a  risk  that  financial  operations  will  simply  be  moved
somewhere else, where the regulations function better.
Role of the krona unchanged
Now that I have discussed the role of the euro in integration of the financial markets in the euro zone, I
will take the opportunity to deviate from the subject slightly and mention briefly the euro's role on the
Swedish financial market. You will no doubt remember the discussions on the marginalisation of the
krona prior to the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999.  Some  prophets  of  doom  claimed  that  the  krona
would not be able to survive so close to such a large currency. Swedish companies and individuals
would spontaneously and rapidly go over to the euro. As we now know, this was not the case.
According to the statistics the Riksbank collects on a monthly basis from the Swedish credit institutes,
it can be concluded that the krona's share of the total assets has declined slightly. However, it has not
been replaced by the euro, but by other currencies, probably chiefly the US dollar. At the end of last
year, the euro comprised only 6-7 per cent of the total assets.
The  Riksbank's  studies  also  show  that  the  total  Swedish  activity  in  euro  on  the  money  market  is
relatively slight and in particular concentrated to the deposit and swap markets. There are still a few
programmes of certificates in euro and the secondary trading in euro-denominated short-term papers
is very small. On the bond market, there are some corporate and bank bonds issued in euro. However,
trade is modest, which is probably due to the fact that it has not been as cheap to borrow on the euro
market as was expected. The fact that Swedish companies still choose to seek financing there may be
due to the fact that it is the only way for some of them to borrow really large volumes.
Nor has there been any major change in the spot trading in krona on the foreign exchange market,
compared  with  the  period  prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  The  average  daily  turnover  in  SEK
against DEM during the period 1995-1999  was  SEK 19.2  billion. The corresponding figure for 1999
and 2000 was SEK 19.5 billion.
BIS Review 26/2001
3
Developments on the Swedish stock market have been similarly modest. Since the introduction of the
euro, it has been possible to list shares parallel or exclusively in euro on the OM Stockholm Exchange.
During 1999, three companies made use of this possibility. They were Electrolux, Nordea and Stora
Enso. Since then, no new companies have registered an interest in being listed in euro and trading in
the three already listed companies has been very modest.
The talk of the death of the krona has thus been greatly exaggerated. It is hardly surprising that there
was no spontaneous changeover to the euro. This is in fact what we at the Riksbank said when the
debate reached its peak a few years ago. At the time, we pointed out that almost 70 per cent of the
Swedish national income is comprised of wages. The entry of the euro into Sweden is therefore largely
determined by Swedish households. Why would they choose the euro over the krona? There is little
incentive to do so, as long as their wages are used for goods, services, mortgage interest payments
and  other  items  denominated  in  kronor.  The  rest  of  the  national  income  is  the  operating  surplus
generated in companies and that is used to increase the owners' wealth or paid out in dividends. A
large number of these companies used have Swedish owners, who cannot be assumed to have any
motive for changing over to the euro in the reporting of their balance sheets.
Given this, it is reasonable to ask why we had a debate on the repression of the krona at all. I myself
believe that it stemmed from the over-enthusiasm of some EMU supporters. They were quite simply
convinced that Swedes would not be able to resist the attraction of the euro. As an EMU supporter, I
can  of  course  see  the  advantages  of  the  euro,  but  to  believe  in  a  general,  spontaneous  transition
would be going too far. This meant that the idea of a 'euroisation'  was also  a  bad  argument  in  the
debate prior to the start of the EMU. If the Swedes are to be won over to the idea of the EMU, we
should  be  emphasising  the  facts.  Personally,  I  believe  that  it  will  be  easier  to  arouse  interest  in  a
discussion based on facts, when the euro banknotes and coins appear next year.
Globalisation requires stable game rules
After this in-depth foray into the world of the euro, I shall return to the more general issues following on
from the current internationalisation process. This creates, as I said earlier, the right conditions for a
more rapid economic growth, but it does not offer any guarantee that this will be the case  and it  is
important to remember this.
The Swedish economic crisis at the beginning of the 1990s is still fresh in most of our memories. That
experience provided a clear illustration of the importance of pursuing a long-term, credible economic
policy.  However,  it  also  showed  the  importance  of  building  up  properly  functioning  institutions  to
oversee  the  financial  markets  when  deregulated.  In  Sweden  it  was  evident  that  the  supervisory
authorities  were  not  prepared  for  the  reality  that  would  prevail  after  the  deregulation  of  the  credit
markets in the 1980s. Similar conclusions can be drawn from the crises in for example Mexico and
Asia. These also show clearly that countries wanting to participate on the international capital markets
must  meet  the  requirements  for  openness  and  provision  of  information.  This  is  positive,  not  only
because it facilitates access to international capital, but also because the requirements make it more
difficult for the governing elite and pressure groups to line their pockets at the expense of the majority
of the population, if they want to take part in international society.
The crises during the 1990s have also demonstrated that problems in one country can spread to other
countries  at a much greater speed than  before. For this reason, some people  would  like  to  see  an
inbuilt time lag in the markets, for instance by introducing a tax on financial transactions, to reduce the
damage to individual countries when capital moves rapidly across borders. This idea is based on most
of  the  transactions  on  the  international  financial  markets  being  pure  speculation.  Naturally,  there  is
some  harmful  speculation  that  needs  to  be  counteracted,  but  a  transaction  tax  would  probably  do
more  harm  than  good.  It  would  have  a  very  negative  effect  on  risk  management  in  the  global
economy. Financial transactions are increasingly taking place between financial institutes with the aim
of  spreading  different  risks,  that  they  are  paid  to  take  over  from  their  clients.  This  processing  is
important to enable international trading to flow smoothly. We therefore need to look for solutions that
minimise  the  risks  of  financial  crises  and  do  not  destroy  the  institutes'  opportunities  for  risk
management. In addition, and it is important to remember this, we do not want to remove all forms of
speculation. Healthy risk taking is an important factor behind economic growth. So what can we do?
An economic policy that is credible in the long term is, as I said earlier, a very important ingredient in
this  context.  But  it  is  not  enough.  Rules  and  institutes  that  contribute  to  financial  stability  are  also
necessary. This is  why  international organisations  such  BIS,  IOSCO  and  the  OECD  are  working  to
4
BIS Review 26/2001
strengthen the financial system in various ways. In total, the work covers a dozen different areas, from
overseeing  and  supervising  the  financial  system  to  observing  individual  countries'  economies  and
regulations  for  credit  institutes.  Allow  me  to  briefly  mention,  in  this  context,  the  capital  adequacy
regulations worked out by the Basel Committee, as I feel this is a good example of how we can work
internationally  to  create  regulations  and  institutes  that  contribute  to  stability,  without  preventing  the
important, healthy risk taking.
The  Basel  regulations  mean  in  principle  that  the  greater  the  risk  a  bank  takes,  the  more  capital  it
should hold. As capital costs money, the Basel regulations lead to the banks reducing their risk taking.
This in turn reduces the risk of bank crises and other disturbances that would have a negative effect
on  economic  growth  arising  in  the  financial  system.  If  this  is  to  function,  it  requires  a  broad
geographical  support,  which  it  has.  The  Regulations  from  1988  are  applied  in  more  than  120
countries. The Basel Committee has proposed new regulations, which are an extension of the current
ones. There is no reason to believe that fewer countries should apply the new rules.
The work in the international organisations is laborious and complicated, as there are many countries
that have to reach agreement. In other words, it requires both patience and foresight. A large portion
of  humility  is  also  good,  as  our  knowledge  of  these  issues  is  limited.  As  the  financial  markets  are
constantly undergoing change, the work on improving their methods of working should be a constantly
ongoing process.
Conclusion
Over the past few decades, there has been an extensive process of deregulation in many countries,
particularly on the financial markets. And exactly as in the latter part of the 19th century, capital can
move more or less freely between different countries. Deregulation has gone hand in hand with rapid
technological developments, particularly within the field of information and communication. This has,
just as in earlier periods of internationalisation, led to an accelerated global growth. The process has
created opportunities for many countries to escape from the poverty trap.
The work on implementing the single market and introducing the euro can be seen as part of the larger
international  pattern.  The  deregulation  on  the  single  market  strengthens  competitive  pressure  and
increases  flexibility  in  the  European  economies.  The  euro  has  lain  the  foundation  for  continued
integration  of  the  financial  markets.  Sweden  is  actively  participating  in  the  work  on  developing  the
single market, but has so far chosen to remain outside the single currency co-operation. It is therefore
unsurprising that the use of the euro in Sweden is relatively modest so far.
The  main  contribution  of  the  finance  markets  to  internationalisation  is,  as  at  the  national  level,  to
channel capital to where it will do the most good. The rapid globalisation of trade and manufacturing
has  also  created  a  need  for  new  financial  solutions  for  companies  and  individuals.  This  applies  in
particular to the need to manage the risks arising in international trade and investments. Thanks to IT
developments, it has been possible to develop well-adapted financial instruments for this purpose.
At the same time, the integration of the financial markets and the technological developments have
meant that financial crises can now spread between countries and regions much more quickly than
before.  This  shows  that  these  markets  do  not  function  perfectly.  It  is  therefore  important  that
government and authorities continue to co-operate to create regulations and institutions that minimise
the risk of financial crises, without providing obstacles to healthy risk taking, which  is necessary for
good economic growth in the global economy.
BIS Review 26/2001
5
