Villy Bergström: The Riksbank’s role in the economy
Speech  by  Mr  Villy  Bergström,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Swedish
Shareholders Association, Jönköping, 28 February 2001.
 Some time ago, the British journal The Economist wrote that the world’s central banks were now at the
height of their power. It is easy to get that impression when you see the enormous amount of interest
devoted to the central banks in the daily press, the broadcasting media and economic journals. This
applies to the Riksbank in Sweden, to the European Central Bank – the ECB – and, especially to the
U.S. central bank, the Federal Reserve with Alan Greenspan in the foreground.
During the autumn electoral campaign in the United States, a number of newspapers put forward the
view that it would not make any difference whether Al Gore or George Bush was elected as President
- it was in any case Greenspan who was in control. When Greenspan surprisingly cut the American
instrumental rate by 0.5% in January between two ordinary monetary policy meetings of the Federal
Reserve’s  decision-making  body,  the  decision  was  applauded  with  headlines  such  as  “Greenspan
saves the world again”. This type of statement is simply ridiculous. The importance of monetary policy
cannot be compared with the Government’s general policies or with the office of President. However,
things have gone so far that the central bank is regarded as a second government in many countries.
These comparisons are, of course, unreasonable.
Central banks have one or sometimes two well-defined tasks, namely to maintain stable prices and
often also to safeguard the stability of the financial system. For that purpose, the central banks have
primarily one instrument, the instrumental rate, sometimes supplemented by other means of exercising
control. The objectives for central bank activities  are thus simple and clear, their arsenal  of tools  is
limited. This cannot in any way be compared with the complex tasks of governments, their decision-
making situations with conflicting goals and a continually changing agenda. In Sweden, a small part of
the public  policy  has  been  removed  from  the  Government  and  the  Riksdag  to  the  Riksbank  by  the
Riksdag’s own decision, namely responsibility for stable prices and financial stability. Everything else
remains on the Government and Riksdag.
The  tasks  and  policies  of  the  central  banks  are  thus  not  in  any  way  comparable  with  government
policy as regards importance and degree of complexity.
However – having said this – I should like to strongly emphasise the importance of there being a high
level of confidence in the Riksbank. It can perhaps be said that the most important variable we have to
comply  with  is  the  public’s  inflation  expectations.  After  all,  it  is  these  expectations  that  reflect
confidence.  If  disturbances  affect  the  economy  through,  for  instance,  an  oil  price  shock,  so  that
inflation exceeds the Riksbank’s target of 2 per cent, a return to the target can take place more quickly
if public expectations remain at  the  2 per cent target. Despite  oil prices more than  tripling  from  the
beginning  of  1999  to  the  end  of  last  year,  inflation  expectations  stayed  at  the  Riksbank’s  target.  If
expectations  also  increase,  monetary  policy  must  be  made  considerably  more  stringent  to  expel
inflationary expectations from the economy. From this point of view, it is important that monetary policy
is reviewed and that a discussion takes place on the Riksbank’s actions, although the importance of
the bank should not be exaggerated.
Having said that to provide a perspective on the tasks we have at the Riksbank, I should like to move
on to discuss the economic situation in Sweden.
Favourable growth
During the past three  years, GDP has increased in Sweden by an average a bit more than 3.5 per
cent. The rate of growth is increasingly higher than what is possible  in the long term. The Swedish
economy has expanded approximately a half per cent more quickly per year than the euro area in the
past four years, although over one per cent more slowly than in the United States during the same
period.
BIS Review ??/2001
1
Strong foreign trade has made a positive contribution to growth in Sweden for large parts of the 1990s
and  since  1994,  the  current  account  has  been  in  surplus.  The  weak  exchange  rate  for  the  krona
throughout almost the whole of this period with a floating exchange rate, combined with the vigorous
growth  in  the  telecommunications  sector  have  been  the  driving  forces  underlying  the  increase  in
exports.
However, it is first when private consumption has accelerated in recent  years that GDP  growth has
increased so strongly that unemployment has also fallen. Many factors have led to households starting
to consume: Cuts in public finances no longer burden household budgets – instead lower taxes have
increased disposable income. Unemployment has fallen at the same time as real wages have risen
markedly. Finally, household net wealth has increased due to increasing property and share prices up
to summer last year. However, household’s expectations about the future seem to play a crucial role
for household’s propensity to consume.
In the last few years, investments in the business sector have increased quite strongly in volume while
it is only just recently that investments in housing construction have started to increase.
The strong growth we have seen in recent years is higher than that sustainable in the long term. The
Riksbank makes the assessment that annual increases in production of 2- 2.5 per cent are possible in
the long term. The amount that GDP can increase is determined by the increase in productivity and by
how much employment can increase. The larger increase in production in recent years is primarily due
to there being a lot of unused resources in the economy after the problem years in the early 90s, when
there was a substantial drop in production. While the productivity of the business sector has increased,
it has primarily been increased employment that has created scope for growth. If we compare with the
high-inflation period – the 20  years from the mid-1970s,  we can,  however, see that we  have had  a
faster increase in productivity in the past five  years. We should not therefore rule out the possibility
that  we are  on threshold  of  a  faster  growth  in  productivity  when  IT  investments  spread  on  a  broad
basis to the “old economy” in the same way as has happened in the United States.
The strong increase in productivity in recent years has taken place without inflation accelerating. This
has surprised many people – for even though the previously high unemployment, indicated that there
were a lot of unused resources in the economy, there were many who doubted whether it would be
possible  for  so  many  to  return  to  the  labour  market  so  quickly.  Month  after  month,  we  have  seen
increases in employment of 80-90 000 persons on an annual basis, 70 per cent of which have taken
place  by  an  increased  supply  of  labour.  Flexibility  in  the  labour  market  has  thus  exceeded
expectations. Open unemployment is now down to around 4 per cent, which, while it is higher than
that considered normal in the 1980s, is lower than what many people in the early 1990s feared would
be normal.
Stable inflation expectations
The stabilisation of inflation expectations at a low level shows that the Riksbank’s inflation target has
attained high credibility.  A number of  factors  have  contributed  to  confirming  confidence  in  the  price
stability objective. High real wage increases despite moderate nominal pay increases are one factor
that has undoubtedly increased the support of wage earners for the price stability objective. The fact
that the price stability objective has been confirmed by law has also probably contributed to confirming
confidence in the inflation target.
However, the Riksbank has a pedagogical and practical problem. Monetary policy decisions are based
on assessments of inflation a couple of years ahead and are focused on achieving the inflation target
during that period. This means that we can often be compelled to increase the interest rate despite the
actual  rate  of  inflation  at  the  time  being  under  the  target.  In  December  last  year,  for  instance,  the
Riksbank increased interest by 25 points despite  inflation then being  at 1.4 per cent. Decisions are
then made on the basis of forecasts over a two-year horizon.
The most  important  reason  for  not  waiting  until  inflation  actually  exceeds  the  target  is  that  inflation
expectations would then risk accelerating since it takes up to two years before monetary policy has its
full effect. And then we may – to rein in inflationary expectations again – be compelled to tighten up
the economy more than we would have to have done if we had reacted earlier.
The Riksbank’s way of conducting monetary policy obviously  plays  an  important role  with regard to
maintaining confidence in price stability. However, we should not forget that fiscal policy also has to be
conducted  in  a  way  compatible  with  the  price  stability  target.  The  budget  consolidation,  the
2
BIS Review ??/2001
Government’s  expenditure  ceiling  and  balance  targets  have  strongly  contributed  to  achieving
credibility in the price stability objective. It is was first when the budget consolidation in the mid-1990s
had  come  quite  a  long  way  and  optimism  on  the  Swedish  economy  began  to  return  that  inflation
expectations  showed  that  the  price  stability  objective  had  attained  credibility.  The  Riksbank  did  not
then need to counteract high inflation expectations by monetary policy.
The United States important for future growth
Inflation has not just been kept down by the fact that there have been a lot of unused resources until
now  and  that  inflation  expectations  have  stabilised  at  a  low  level  –  we  have  also  been  aided  the
pressure on prices from deregulations and increased competition. However, it is no longer probable
that this process will pull down inflation to the same extent in future.
Some dampening of the rate of growth in coming years is therefore probably necessary if we are to
avoid  tendencies  to  overheating.  This  dampening  can  be  achieved  either  by  a  more  stringent
monetary policy or by the economy dampening by itself. It now looks as if a slackening of the cycle is
on  its  way  led  by  developments  in  the  United  States.  However,  the  strength  and  duration  of  this
downturn is uncertain and depends among other things on future cyclical development in the United
States and the effect that this has in Europe and Sweden.
After  many  years  of  exceptional  growth,  a  rapid  cooling  off  is  now  taking  place  in  the  American
economy. The indicators that have been received in recent months have mainly led to successively
downward adjustments of future GDP growth in the United States by most forecasters. What argues in
favour of a brief downturn is the fact that the effects of the IT development in spreading to the rest of
the economy can hardly be regarded as exhausted. Investments in the American economy have been
of  a  record  size  and  a  lot  of  these  investments  have  been  related  in  fact  to  IT  investments.
Depreciation periods are also short there, which in itself reduces the risk for locking-in effects in large
mistaken  investments.  However,  it  can  also  be  noted  that  both  households  and  companies  have  a
high level of debt. They have invested and consumed more than they have produced during the period
in question and the current account has therefore been in substantial  deficit for a  number of  years.
(See Diagram 1). The savings deficit indicates high indebtedness in both households and businesses.
If optimism about the future were to be replaced by considerable uncertainty, the high indebtedness
would per se reinforce the cyclical downturn and make it more prolonged. Uncertainty about the future
can lead to businesses and households restraining demand in order to consolidate.
BIS Review ??/2001
3
Financial savings in different
sectors in US, per cent of GDP
8,0%
6,0%
4,0%
2,0%
0,0%
-2,0%
-4,0%
-6,0%
-8,0%
Private sector
Current account
Public sector
The earlier optimism about the American economy also made it attractive to invest in American assets.
This  resulted  in  the  dollar  appreciating  greatly  despite  the  large  deficit  in  the  current  account  -  the
strong demand  for  investments  in  American  companies  and  shares  resulted  in  the  effects  from  the
current  account  deficit  being  counteracted.  When  optimism  has  reduced  in  the  past  six  months,
interest in American investments has also been reduced and the dollar has weakened.
Although there is fundamentally a lot to indicate that the American economy will continue to be able to
grow for a period to come at a historically high rate, there is also an evident risk that there will first be a
fairly  strong  downturn.  There  is  also  a  risk  that  uncertainty  about  the  future  will  drastically  reduce
households’ consumption and increase their low saving, that investments will drop and that the dollar
will  clearly  weaken  because  other  countries  are  no  longer  willing  to  finance  the  gigantic  current
account deficits.
The  dollar  could  then  drop  considerably  in  value  and  there  would  be  a  risk  of  considerably  poorer
growth. The current account deficit is large – almost 5 % of GDP – and particularly large in relation to
the United State’s limited foreign trade. In my opinion, American analysts who in general have a very
optimistic view of a very short downturn underrate these risks.
What effect will the  American  economy  have  on  the  Swedish  economy?  The  question  is  also  what
effect developments in the American economy will have. If you look just at the effects on trade flows,
the effect on Europe and Sweden is not so strong. Exports to the United States only account for a bit
more than 2 per cent of our GDP and the American market has about the same importance for the
euro area. In addition, we are affected by demand for Swedish goods from other countries reducing
when their export to the United States drops. Moreover, some international companies with activities in
the United States can affect household wealth in Europe as well through share prices –this applies not
least to Sweden. Our “Swedish” companies are very international (Ericsson, Electrolux, Stora-Enso,
Volvo, Atlas Copco, Skanska) at the same time as a large part of Swedish households’ shareholding is
invested there.
What conclusions should we draw then for the Swedish economy?
I would like to begin by reminding that the Swedish economy is better equipped than for a very long
time  as  regards  the  underlying  climate  for  growth.  We  have  sound  and  stable  public  finances.  We
have  paid  off  our  foreign  debt  after  a  number  of  years  with  a  current  account  surplus.  Inflation
expectations  are  stable  and  unemployment  has  been  considerably  reduced  (see  Diagram  2).
Deregulations have also led to increased competition in many areas. The labour market also seems to
operate more flexibly than before.
4
BIS Review ??/2001
Financial savings in different
sectors in Sweden, per cent of GDP
Private sector
Current account
Public sector
Per cent
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-12
-14
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
And  it  is considered  that there is  considerable  potential  for  growth  with  regard  to  making  use  of  IT
development.  This  is  perhaps  more  true  for  Sweden  than  for  the  US  economy.  In  the  IT  sphere,
Sweden is a long way forward although to date development has not affected productivity in the whole
of the business sector to the same extent as in the United States. Neither have we seen such a strong
growth  in  investment  as  in  the  United  States.  It  will  be  a  while  before  the  new  technology  is
implemented and used to the full although it will be first then that major benefits for the whole economy
can be expected.
Many have pointed out that development in the Swedish economy in recent years has resembled that
in the United States although with a time lag. A difference in the assessment of the impact a cyclical
downturn can have is that Swedish households and companies overall are not indebted to the same
extent as their American counterparts have been in recent years. This is reflected among other things
in our having  had a balance  of trade surplus ever since the mid-1990s. The current  account  in  the
United  States has on the contrary been negative throughout the 1990s and  it  has  been  the  private
sector’s  savings  deficit  that  has  increased  and  now  totals  over  6  per  cent  of  GDP.  Swedish
households and businesses have instead had a savings surplus for large parts of the 1990s and it is
first recently that a deficit has been noted.
There are also many other factors that are positive for the Swedish economy  in the short term: tax
reductions  keep  household  disposable  income  up  and  the  real  hourly  wage  increases  are  high.
Another factor that counteracts a cyclical downturn is that housing investment is on the increase and
will not be affected in the short term by a dampening of the cycle. It also seems as if the expansion of
broadband  is  taking  place  in  an  appropriate  cyclical  situation  if  the  plans  are  fulfilled.  These
investments are also spread throughout the country.
However, there is also a risk that uncertainty about the future of the Swedish economy will result in
households reducing consumption. At present, household’s financial savings are insignificant. In this
respect, the situation is similar to the United States although the problems there are more serious.
Uncertainty about the development of the krona remains great, however. There is general agreement
that  the  krona  is  fundamentally  undervalued  –  this  has  contributed  to  creating  the  surplus  in  the
current  account  that  has  reduced  our  foreign  debt  in  recent  years. When  the  foreign  debt  starts  to
reach levels that are more sustainable in the long run, the krona should be strengthened. There is thus
no reason to depart from the Riksbank’s assessment that the krona will appreciate in the long term.
However, asset prices and exchange rates are sensitive to changes in expectations. And just now it
seems that the krona is being weakened by the focus on the foreign exchange market on the expected
capital outflows, which will be the result of pension funds being invested abroad. Reduced interest in
purchasing Swedish shares is considered by others to be the explanation why the krona is so weak
BIS Review ??/2001
5
just now. During the years with a floating exchange rate, we have noted short-term fluctuations in the
exchange rate do not seem to have any great effect on domestic prices. There is only an effect on
prices  if  businesses  believe  that  changes  in  the  real  exchange  rate  will  be  of  some  duration.
Competition on markets is also determined moreover by the ability to adjust prices.
If export companies decide to reduce their prices in foreign currency, they can win market shares. This
in itself counteracts the negative effects of the weaker international economic situation. At the same
time, there is a risk that import prices  will rise  if importers take compensation for the  weaker krona
exchange rate. On a market with dampened growth where there is stiff competition, the risk may be
less. In this case, the effect of a weaker krona would mainly lead to an increased demand for exports.
It is still too early to say anything about the conclusions for monetary policy that can be drawn from
this reasoning about future cyclical developments. The Riksbank’s overall assessment will be included
in  the  next  inflation  report  on  27  March.  There  will  then  be  a  clearer  basis  for  assessing  whether
resource use is expected to be under such strain that a more stringent policy is required or whether
the cyclical outlook has weakened so much that stimulation is called for. One thing is clear, however.
Downward adjustments of growth assessments mean that the large number of interest rate increases
that most analysts expected during the spring will hardly be necessary to keep inflation on target!
6
BIS Review ??/2001
