Lars Heikensten: What is happening in the United States and how will it affect
us?
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Swedish
Shareholders' Association, Malmö, 9 March 2001.
 First I want to express my thanks for the invitation to speak to you here. It is always a pleasure to visit
Malmö at this time of the year; the signs that spring is approaching are more numerous and clearer
down here.
The current focus for forecasters — around the world, I would say — is the U.S. economy. As usual
when  activity  is  turning,  opinions  among  economists  differ  greatly.  This  reminds  me  of  the  remark
someone made to the effect that if you placed all the economists in the world in a long line, they still
would  not  reach  a  joint  conclusion.  That  I  think  catches  the  mood  at  present  among  economists,
though assessments do seem to be following a pattern. American economists generally appear to be
considerably more optimistic than economists with an outside view of the United States.
The United States has unquestionably been acting as an economic engine for global growth for almost
a decade. It is equally clear that to a large extent it is the U.S. economy’s future path that will steer
international economic activity and thereby the conjunctural situation in Sweden.
Against  this  background  I  shall  be  considering  a  number  of  questions  to  do  with  the  American
economy and outlining some conceivable outcomes. In that respect, however, I must at once admit to
having  no  clear  answer  to  the  question  of  how  the  situation  will  develop.  In  conclusion  I  shall  be
touching on the consequences for economic developments and inflation in Sweden. In that context it is
not just international economic activity that is important but also such factors as wages, productivity
and the exchange rate. That will bring me to the challenges which monetary policy now faces.
The longest upswing ever
First let me take you back a number of years. A look at the exceptional performance in the past nine
years can, I believe, help us to understand the problems which now have to be handled in the United
States. Today we know that the upswing which began in the early 1990s and became successively
stronger is the longest period of continuous expansion the U.S. economy has ever experienced.
At first this came to be known as the Goldilocks economy: not too hot and not too cold, as the fabled
girl commented on the three bears’ porridge. This referred to the phenomenon of high growth without
any signs of overheating. Later there was talk of a ‘new economy’ where investment in new technology
and  growing  use  of  the  internet  were  the  primary  factors  behind  a  more  efficient  performance  with
rising productivity. Firms that utilised the new technology functioned better and competition increased,
partly because the internet made price comparisons easier, stocks could be slimmed and distribution
became more efficient.
In my view, however, the technical innovations are not the only explanation. The deregulations that
began in the 1980s, as well as the consolidation of the federal budget during the 1990s, should also
be  mentioned  as  major  factors.  The  deregulations  have  helped  to  strengthen  America’s  corporate
sector and the  improvement in the federal finances led to increased confidence among  households
and firms as well as somewhat lower long bond rates.
Low  interest  rates  and  higher  productivity  growth  then  paved  the  way  for  the  massive  wave  of
investment. The U.S. economy’s growth rate shot up and unemployment dropped to levels that hardly
anyone believed could be combined with low, stable inflation. As outcomes proved earlier forecasts
wrong,  assessments  of  how  strong  demand’s  long-term  growth  could  be  without  generating  rising
inflation were adjusted gradually upwards.
Turning  then  to  share  prices  in  the  United  States,  in  the  first  place  the  Nasdaq  exchange  with  its
predominance of high-tech companies, we can see that expectations of corporate profits rose rapidly
BIS Review 20/2001
1
to levels that  had  not  been  seen  since  the  1930s.  The  trend  peaked  last  year  with  share  prices  at
record levels and a GDP growth rate above five per cent, in some quarters even higher.
The reverse side of the medal lies in the imbalances that have built up during this period. The United
States has been living on borrowed money; even though the federal budget was first consolidated and
then generated a growing surplus, investment exceeded aggregate saving. Investment was still able to
reach  record  levels  because  the  additional  capital  could  be  borrowed  from  investors  abroad  who
willingly placed their money in U.S. securities in the expectation that the good times would continue.
That  explains  why  the  U.S.  current  account  has  been  able  to  run  up  a  gigantic  deficit,  currently
equivalent to almost 5 per cent of GDP, at the same time as the dollar has appreciated strongly.
Even with rapidly rising productivity, the rate of economic growth became incompatible with long-term
stability. In order to dampen activity, the Federal Reserve started to apply the brakes in summer 1999,
raising the instrumental rate in a series of steps, totalling 1.75 percentage points, to 6.5 per cent.
The  setbacks  were  not  long  in  coming.  Last  year  the  value  of  the  Nasdaq  exchange  was  virtually
halved. Profit warnings have been pouring in, firms are shedding labour, banks have tightened their
lending,  consumer  confidence  is  weakening  and  unemployment  is  tending  to  rise.  Manufacturing
output has virtually stopped growing. In the course of a month the Federal Reserve has lowered the
interest rate 1 percentage point to 5.5 per cent and market agents are counting on further cuts this
spring.
We now have to consider what is actually happening. Is this just a temporary correction after a period
of undue optimism that has led, for example, to surplus investment and will now be followed by a fairly
mild and gradual slowdown? Or has the major long-term and painful correction of the imbalances in
the U.S. economy now begun in earnest? After some months of unpredictable data,  even the most
experienced and qualified observers find it difficult to say anything definite.
So let me outline three conceivable paths — one optimistic, another less so, a third pessimistic — and
then discuss them.
Three scenarios
The optimistic scenario — the V
The alternative most observers, particularly in the United States, believe in just now is that the fall in
the  United  States  is  an  unpleasant  but  innocuous  ‘air  pocket’  in  the  flight  path  of  the  American
economy’s  soft-landing  to  lower  growth  rates.  The  air  pocket  is  attributed  to  a  temporary  output
surplus,  so  that  unduly  large  stocks  and  rather  too  much  IT  investment  have  to  be  adjusted
downwards  during  one  or,  at  most,  two  quarters.  The  profile  of  this  development  is  commonly
described as a capital V; consumption and investment slacken initially and then pick up again, bringing
growth back up to its presumed potential rate of around 3 to 4 per cent.
Underlying this version is the recent years’ exceptional technology-driven improvement in productivity,
which  helps  to  inject  new  life  into  the  optimistic  mood.  The  concern  generated  by  the  correction  is
brushed away by the active monetary policy and the promise of massive tax cuts in the coming years.
The  optimists  set  great  store  by  IT’s  impact  on  growth  and  productivity,  as  well  as  by  a  quick
improvement in expected profits.
The less optimistic scenario — the U
Some observers see a risk of the upturn occurring more slowly than the V scenario assumes. They
see a path that instead resembles a capital U, with a downturn that is more protracted. Investment has
been  a  strong  factor  behind  the  upward  phase  in  recent  years  and  proponents  of  the  U  scenario
consider  the  economy  has  been  hit  by  excessive  investment,  so  that  an  unduly  large  capital  stock
must  now  be  adjusted.  This  adjustment  is  accentuating  the  economic  slowdown,  making  this  more
difficult to counter than seemed likely earlier. It will take time — perhaps a long time — for the interest
rate cuts to have an effect on demand from households and firms.
Moreover,  the  conditions  for  a  quick  recovery  have  been  worsened  by  the  imbalances  that  have
accumulated  in  the  economy.  This  scenario  envisages  that  the  U.S.  labour  market  is  still  so
overheated that if IT prices fall while commodity prices rise, at the same time as a weaker dollar adds
2
BIS Review 20/2001
to the cost of imports, then inflation will move up even though growth is weak. The Federal Reserve
might  have  more  difficulty  in  handling  this  scenario  because  if  inflation  is  threatening  to  rise,  the
interest rate would be less available for turning activity upwards. There is  also the  possibility of the
promised tax cuts taking time to materialise, which would be liable to postpone a recovery.
Instead of the slowdown turning upwards after one or, at most, two  quarters in the V scenario,  this
would take another two quarters or a total of about a year.
The pessimistic scenario — the L
Then  there  are  one  or  perhaps  several  pessimistic  scenarios  in  which  the  imbalances  in  the  U.S.
economy undergo a painful correction that paralyses the economy or delays the recovery for a very
long time. This path can be described as a capital L; the economy loses speed and then fails to get
going again, proceeding instead at a snail’s pace. One assumption behind scenarios of this kind is that
measures of economic policy are not capable of reversing the trend.
In  the  L  scenario,  the  higher  productivity  growth  is  checked,  corporate  investment  is  cut  back  and
consumer confidence is muted by falling share prices, thereby accentuating the downward path. In a
negative  spiral,  share  prices,  investment  and  consumption  all  decline  at  the  same  time  as  worried
investors abroad become averse to placing their funds in the U.S. economy.
The problems are accentuated by the saving imbalances. When money ceases to flow into the United
States,  the  dollar  falls.  The  relatively  limited  size  of  foreign  trade  means  that  a  correction  of  the
massive current-account deficit takes time. The United States has to invest less and save more.
Moreover,  the  debt  position  of  households  and  firms  now  seems  to  be  more  tangible  and  perhaps
more troublesome. The debt levels were possibly motivated earlier, when productivity, expected profits
and  wealth  were  continuously  improving,  but  now  that  wealth  stocks  have  collapsed,  this  is  more
difficult.
There is a risk that instead of investing, firms use every cent they can find to strengthen solvency. A
similar  risk  is  that  heavily  mortgaged  households  will  not  be  prepared  to  take  advantage  of  lower
interest rates.
It is also conceivable that if activity slackens more than expected, the federal finances will not develop
as favourably as many people believe at present. That could deliver another blow to confidence in the
future.
Which of these scenarios seems most probable is debatable. But they are not mutually exclusive. The
outcome may  well consist of features from more than one of them. What looks at  first  like  a  V,  for
example, can change into an L. But some variant of the U scenario does seem most likely today. That
would  call  for  a  clear  downward  revision  of  international  economic  activity  in  relation  to  the
assessment in our main scenario in December.
Conclusions for the Swedish economy
In this situation it is a great help that after a number of years of good growth and  low  inflation, the
Swedish economy now stands on firm ground and that the public finances are in a much better state
than at the time of the previous economic downturn. A series of years of effectively combating inflation
and a restrictive budget policy have created a good initial position that makes an economic slowdown
easier to handle.
Activity in the Swedish economy slowed in the closing months of last year. The tendency was most
evident in export sectors but it looks as though consumption also became more subdued. This is to
some  extent  desirable.  Earlier  last  year,  growth  in  Sweden  was  so  high  that  a  continuation  would
presumably have pushed inflation up and thereby threatened economic stability.
The  signals  received  during  January  and  February  also  point  to  domestic  activity  being  somewhat
weaker than calculated earlier. The change is not dramatic, however. The growth rate seems to falling
back towards the level — between 2 and 2.5 per cent — that the Riksbank identified earlier as being
what the economy can achieve in the longer run without generating higher inflation.
Turning to price tendencies, some increase has been noted in the rate of underlying domestic inflation
(UNDINHX). This indicator excludes changes in interest expenditure, taxes and subsidies, and prices
BIS Review 20/2001
3
of imported goods. The increase is not alarming and it should be borne in mind that in recent years
underlying  domestic  inflation  has  been  exceptionally  low.  The  downward  price  effects  from
deregulations, for example, have been greater than we expected initially — and presumably than we
can count on in the future.
So how will domestic inflationary pressure develop in the future? Will it continue to creep up? Wage
agreements that have been concluded to date are admittedly in line with what we allowed for but in an
international perspective they are on the high side. There are also risks of higher wage outcomes in
some of the areas where settlements are still pending and, in that case, of this spreading throughout
the  labour  market  in  the  coming  years.  That  could  add  to  domestic  price  pressure.  This  might  be
particularly  troublesome  if  it  were  to  be  accompanied  by  falling  productivity,  which  has  been  the
historical  pattern  in  an  economic  slowdown.  There  are  grounds,  however,  for  being  cautious  about
historical comparisons. Some slackening of productivity  seems  likely  but  not  to  the  same  extent  as
previously because firms now seem to adjust their labour force more quickly.
These, briefly, are the tensions in the situation in which monetary policy is being formulated at present.
On the one hand a clear slackening of international activity that may become more marked; on the
other,  wage negotiations that can still cause problems, rising domestic inflationary pressure and  an
exchange rate that may lead to inflationary impulses. It is still too early to judge the strength of these
factors and reach conclusions about which of them will predominate.
Against this background it is important during the spring to maintain a high state  of readiness for a
repo rate adjustment if new information indicates that this is called for.
4
BIS Review 20/2001
