Willem F Duisenberg: The role of financial markets for economic growth
Speech  delivered  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
Economics  Conference  "The  Single  Financial  Market:  Two  Years  into  EMU”,  organised  by  the
Oesterreichische Nationalbank and held in Vienna, on 31 May 2001.
 Introduction
It  is  a  great  pleasure  and  honour  for  me  to  join  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  for  its  2001
Economics Conference on "The Single Financial Market: Two Years into EMU". I would like to take the
opportunity today to talk about the role of financial markets for economic growth. I shall first consider
whether the design of the financial system matters for economic growth. Secondly, I shall say a few
words about where the euro area financial system is heading, two years after the introduction of the
euro. After this I shall discuss the role of monetary policy in the interplay between financial markets
and economic growth. Towards the end, I shall address, as just mentioned by Governor Liebscher, the
role of central banks in prudential supervision.
Does the financial system matter for economic growth?
In the financial system funds flow from those who have surplus funds to those who have a shortage of
funds, either by direct, market-based financing or by indirect, bank-based finance. The former British
Prime Minister William Gladstone  expressed the  importance of finance for the  economy  in  1858  as
follows: "Finance is, as it were, the stomach of the country, from which all the other organs take their
tone."
The financial system comprises all financial markets, instruments and institutions. Today I would like to
address the issue of whether the design of the financial system matters for economic growth. My view
is that the answer to this question is yes. According to cross-country comparisons, individual country
studies as well as industry and firm level analyses, a positive link exists between the sophistication of
the financial system and  economic  growth. While  some  gaps  remain,  I  would  say  that  the  financial
system is vitally linked to economic performance. Nevertheless, economists still hold conflicting views
regarding  the  underlying  mechanisms  that  explain  the  positive  relation  between  the  degree  of
development of the financial system and economic development.
Some economists just do not believe that the finance-growth relationship is important. For instance,
Robert  Lucas  asserted  in  1988  that  economists  badly  over-stress  the  role  of  financial  factors  in
economic growth. Moreover, Joan Robertson declared in 1952 that "where enterprise leads, finance
follows".  According  to  this  view,  economic  development  creates  demands  for  particular  types  of
financial arrangements, and the financial system responds automatically to these demands.
Other economists strongly believe in the importance of the financial system for economic growth. They
address the issue of what the optimal financial system should look like. Overall, the notion seems to
develop that the optimal financial system, in combination with a well-developed legal system, should
incorporate  elements  of  both  direct,  market  and  indirect,  bank-based  finance.  A  well-developed
financial system should improve the efficiency of financing decisions, favouring a better allocation of
resources and thereby economic growth.
Both  market  and  bank-based  financial  systems  have  their  own  comparative  advantages.  For  some
industries  at  certain  times  of  their  development,  market-based  financing  is  advantageous.  For
example,  financing  through  stock  markets  is  optimal  for  industries  where  there  are  continuous
technological  advances  and  where  there  is  little  consensus  on  how  firms  should  be  managed.  The
stock market checks whether the manager's view of the firm's production is a sensible one. For other
industries, bank-based financing is preferable. This holds in particular for industries which face strong
information asymmetries. Financing through financial intermediaries is an effective solution to adverse
selection and moral hazard problems that exist between lenders and  borrowers.  Banks in particular
have developed expertise to distinguish between good and bad borrowers. Economies that have both
well-developed banking sectors and capital markets thus have an advantage. Furthermore, in times of
crisis in either system, the other system can perform the function of the famous spare wheel.
BIS Review 48/2001
1
The financial system is also particularly important in reallocating capital and thus providing the basis
for the continuous restructuring of the economy that is needed to support growth. In countries with a
highly  developed  financial  system,  we  observe  that  a  greater  share  of  investment  is  allocated  to
relatively fast growing sectors. When we look back more than one century ago, during the Industrial
Revolution, we see that England's financial system did a better job in identifying and funding profitable
ventures  than  other  countries  in  the  mid-1800s.  This  helped  England  enjoy  comparatively  greater
economic success. The banker and former editor of "The Economist" Walter Bagehot expressed this
in  1873  as  follows.  "In  England,  however,  ...  capital  runs  as  surely  and  instantly  where  it  is  most
wanted, and where there is most to be made of it, as water runs to find its level".
Nowadays, the lack of a well-developed stock market would be a particularly serious disadvantage for
any  economy.  Equity is essential for the emergence and growth  of innovative firms. Today's  young
innovative  high-technology  firms  will  be  the  main  drivers  of  future  structural  change  essential  for
maintaining a country's long-term growth potential. The contribution of financial markets in this area is
a  necessity  for  maintaining  the  competitiveness  of  an  economy  today  given  the  strongly  increased
international competition, rapid technological progress and the increased role of innovation for growth
performance.
In recent years, "new markets", for stocks of young and growing companies, have become a growing
market segment in the euro area. Equity financing is particularly advantageous for these companies
and their investors given the uncertainties of the economic return. As the term "shares" suggests, with
equity financing you get your share of the outcome, whether it is positive or negative. Banks, on the
other hand, may be reluctant to provide loans owing to the risk profile of these firms, and the greater
exposure to a negative result in a loan contract.
Total market capitalisation of the new markets in five euro area countries grew from EUR 7 billion at
the  beginning  of  1998  to  EUR  167  billion  in  December  2000.  While  some  of  this  increase  can  be
attributed to the overall rise in share prices during this period, it is important to note that the number of
listed companies continued to increase in almost every month. The total number of companies listed
on these new markets in the euro area increased from 63 at the beginning of January 1998 to 564 at
the  end  of  2000.  Developments  over  the  last  year  have  admittedly  been  dismal.  However,  it  is  the
nature  of  new  markets,  given  the  uncertainties  attached  to  future  developments  for  the  companies
listed on these markets, to exhibit more volatility than established markets.
Bank-based finance has a special role to play for many companies in need of funds, and thus helps to
ensure  a  well-balanced  growth  process.  The  economic  literature  on  "relationship  banking"  has
demonstrated that banks can contribute to alleviating the impact of sudden economic shocks on their
clients. Banks stand ready to provide many customers with funds even in adverse circumstances, e.g.
when the liquidity of financial markets dries up.
The banking sector also has an essential role to play with respect to the allocation of funds to the most
profitable investment opportunities. Banks are, as mentioned before, financial intermediaries that by
nature add cost to the allocation of capital. Thus in order for banks to survive in a market economy
they need to provide added benefits. It is difficult to compete with the debt securities market, if a bank
loan  is  of  a  size  where  the  fixed  costs  of  accessing  debt  markets  become  negligible.  However,
securities  markets  are  not  always  sufficiently  liquid  and  some,  especially  small  and  medium,
enterprises cannot cover their liquidity needs via securities markets owing to significant fixed costs of
access.  An  additional  benefit  of  bank-based  finance  relates  to  the  intrinsic  nature  of  the  banking
business:  some  projects  cannot  be  financed  directly  by  the  market  on  account  of  significant
information  asymmetries  between  the  borrowers  and  potential  lenders.  Banks  can  bridge  this  gap
thanks  to  their  comparative  advantages  in  the  assessment  and  monitoring  of  investment  projects,
which contributes to overcoming information asymmetries.
The financial system of the euro area after two years with the euro
Let me now turn to the major changes of the financial system in the euro area after two years with the
euro.
Financial market integration
The  launch  of  the  euro  on  1  January  1999  was  a  historic  event.  Eleven  national  currencies  were
converted into one single currency overnight. Greece became the twelfth EU Member State to adopt
2
BIS Review 48/2001
the single currency on 1 January 2001. The newly created currency area of the twelve participating
European  Union  Member  States  has  a  considerable  weight  in  the  world  economy.  It  accounts  for
around  20%  of  world  GDP  and  world  exports.  The  successful  launch  of  the  euro,  which  is  a  key
element in the creation  of a stable and  prosperous Europe,  has boosted the integration of financial
markets in the euro area. This process of integration in European financial markets coincided with the
trends towards globalisation and securitisation. Other factors, among a wide range, which shape the
financial system are historically determined characteristics,  technological  innovations,  monetary  and
fiscal policies and specific legal and accounting systems that differ from country to country.
Evidence of integration can be found, to varying degrees, in all parts of the financial system. The euro
area money market is among the most integrated parts of the financial system. The conduct of one
common  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  brought  about  immediate  integration  of  the  unsecured
segments of the money market, mainly  the interbank market and the short-term derivatives market.
The secured segments of the money market, that is the repo market and the markets for short-term
securities,  are  also  increasingly  integrated,  but  they  still  suffer  from  underlying  problems  with  the
management of collateral. Nonetheless, the outlook is promising. The euro area bond market has also
developed rapidly. Notably, the private segments of the euro area bond market have flourished since
the introduction of the euro. The amount outstanding of long-term debt securities issued by the private
sector  was  22%  higher  at  the  end  of  2000  compared  with  the  end  of  1998.  Probably  the  most
significant development has been the rapid growth in the euro-denominated corporate bond market,
which  has  increased  several-fold  in  size  since  the  launch  of  the  euro  and  is  now  characterised  by
issues of above EUR 1 billion. EMU has also stimulated integration in the stock markets in the euro
area,  where  structural  developments  have  been  dominated  by  a  series  of  high-profile  mergers  and
attempted mergers.
Regulatory framework
The rapid growth achieved by European securities markets has taken place notwithstanding remaining
regulatory  obstacles  to  their  integration.  The  European  authorities  are  fully  aware  of  the  need  to
address this problem. Several obstacles have been identified in the recent Report of the Committee of
Wise Men, chaired by Alexandre Lamfalussy. The Committee proposes to speed  up the removal of
impediments through the institutionalisation of two new regulatory committees for securities markets,
which  should  allow  for  an  increased  harmonisation  of  securities  regulation  and  less  burdensome
procedures for adapting Community rules to rapidly changing financial markets.
Another  essential  European  initiative  was  the  adoption  by  the  Commission,  in  May  1999,  of  a
programme  for  the  completion  of  the  Single  Market  for  financial  services.  This  programme,  the
Financial Services Action Plan, lists a series of measures with indicative priorities and timetables. The
project considered as a whole and its inherent philosophy are capable of enhancing economic growth.
In this perspective, a handful of specific initiatives deserve a particular mention. A first initiative is the
adoption  of  the  European  Company  Statutes,  which  is  essential  to  enhance  the  level-playing  field
between European firms and to provide a suitable legal framework for transnational conglomerates. A
second  important  aspect  is  the  Risk  Capital  Action  Plan,  which  would  help  redirect  financial  flows
towards fast-growing small and medium-sized enterprises. Let me also mention the last four initiatives,
namely  the  e-commerce  policy  for  financial  services;  the  harmonisation  of  rules  on  the  accounting
requirements  for  European  companies;  the  takeover  bids  Directive;  and  finally  the  removal  of
accounting,  legal  and  fiscal  discrepancies  hindering  the  cross-border  use  of  collateral.  A  European
Directive on this subject should be adopted in 2003.
Many of these initiatives may appear to be unimportant and somewhat "esoteric" regulatory changes.
However,  they  can  provide  a  real  boost  to  the  smooth  operation  of  markets  and,  therefore,  to
economic  growth.  For  example,  obstacles  to  the  cross-border  use  of  collateral  prevent  the  further
cross-border  integration  and  consolidation  of  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructures,  thus  hindering
the  integration  of  European  money,  bond  and  equity  markets.  A  smooth  electronic  integration  of
trading,  clearing  and  settlement  operations  would  help  reduce  transaction  costs  substantially.  The
gradual dismantling of regulatory obstacles to remaining market integration in Europe will contribute to
enhancing their depth and efficiency, in turn contributing to an improved allocation of funds to the most
profitable investment opportunities, and thus supporting economic growth.
BIS Review 48/2001
3
What is the role of monetary policy and central banks?
Price stability
The interaction between financial markets, economic growth and monetary policy is by no means a
new issue for central bankers. However, financial market developments have brought the question to
the forefront of the policy debate. The continued integration and deepening of financial markets is a
significant issue for policy-makers, and particularly for central bankers, since smoothly functioning and
efficient financial markets are crucial in ensuring a smooth transmission of monetary impulses.
The  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  the  smooth  functioning  and  integration  of
European  financial  markets  and  to  economic  growth  is  to  maintain  a  steady  medium-term  price
stability orientation. Such a policy will be beneficial, as it will minimise the adverse effects of inflation
and high inflation uncertainty. As we all know, price stability is beneficial in numerous ways. It not only
creates a climate for higher economic activity over the medium term, but also reduces the economic
and  social  inequalities  caused  by  the  asymmetric  distribution  of  the  costs  of  inflation  among  the
various economic agents. In addition, in an environment of low inflationary expectations, inflation risk
premia become relatively less important as a determinant of financial prices. As a result, other factors
such as credit risk can play a larger role in the price formation mechanism. Ultimately, this results in a
more efficient allocation of financial resources.
The  approach  of  focusing  on  price  stability  is  by  now  the  conventional  wisdom  in  industrialised
countries. In the case of Europe, this consensus on the contribution of price stability in the medium
term to promoting  long-term growth is explicitly enshrined  in the  Statute of the  ESCB,  which  states
unambiguously  that  "the  primary  objective  of  the  ESCB  shall  be  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the
medium  term."  The  ECB  is  convinced  that  by  rigorously  fulfilling  this  mandate,  monetary  policy  is
making  its  most  effective  contribution  to  the  realisation  of  strong  output  growth  and  satisfactory
employment prospects.
Financial stability and the role of central banks in banking supervision
Also the design of prudential regulation plays an important role from a growth perspective. Supervision
is the  guardian of financial stability,  which in turn crucially  determines the capability  of  the  financial
system to allocate resources efficiently and absorb liquidity shocks. Financial crises can have a deep
and  protracted impact on economic growth,  as illustrated  by several  episodes of  financial  instability
that  occurred  in  many  countries.  The  contribution  of  prudential  supervision  to  economic  growth
proceeds  along  two  dimensions.  From  a  preventive  perspective,  supervision  has  to  ensure  a
continuous and comprehensive monitoring of all the potential threats to financial stability. The role of
supervision is also crucial after the emergence of a crisis, in order to provide for a swift and ordered
resolution. Supervisors can only be  effective in these two respects if they  are able to  pay sufficient
attention to systemic issues, namely the risk of contagion effects. In order to address this issue in an
effective way, they should be able to bridge the gap between information of a micro-prudential nature,
namely  information  on  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual  institutions,  and  macro-prudential
analysis, which encompasses all activities aimed at monitoring the exposure to systemic risk and at
identifying potential threats to financial stability arising from macroeconomic or financial developments.
This  line  of  argument  would  support  a  large  role  for  central  banks  in  supervision,  since  they  have
traditionally played a large role in macro-prudential analysis and the preservation of financial stability
and they have acquired a strong expertise in this field. Furthermore, smooth access of central banks
to  micro-prudential  information  would  also  be  profitable  from  the  perspective  of  another  traditional
central banking task, namely the oversight of payment systems.
In spite of these arguments supporting a  large role of central banks  in  supervision,  the  debate  has
remained  broadly  inconclusive  in  the  economic  literature  so  far,  owing  to  the  existence  of  opposite
considerations.  The  first  important  argument  against  a  large  role  for  central  banks  is  the  so-called
"conglomeration  argument",  which  crucially  relies  on  the  idea  of  a  blurring  of  distinction  between
banking, insurance and securities firms. In order to preserve the level-playing field, all segments of the
financial industry would have to be supervised under the aegis of a common supervisor. According to
this line of reasoning, this "umbrella" could not be the central bank, since the latter is traditionally in
charge of supervising monetary organisations. I will not embark upon a thorough analysis of this issue
now. Let me just say that I am convinced that this argument has lost relevance in the current context
4
BIS Review 48/2001
characterised by a more market-based conduct of supervision – which alleviates the level-playing field
concern - and by an increased relevance of systemic risk issues.
The second major argument against a large involvement of central banks in supervision is the alleged
conflict  of  interest  between  monetary  policy  and  prudential  supervision.  Many  authors  have  argued
that  the  institution  in  charge  of  monetary  policy  cannot  be  entrusted  with  supervision,  because  the
monetary  policy  stance  would  be  "contaminated"  by  supervisory  issues,  for  instance  the  need  to
safeguard the liquidity of individual banks.
The advent of the euro, however, has shifted the balance of arguments decisively in favour of a large
involvement of national central banks (NCBs) in supervision, for two main reasons. First, the argument
of a conflict of interest between monetary policy and prudential supervision becomes irrelevant within
the  euro  area,  where  supervisory  responsibilities  are  at  the  national  level.  Since  the  geographical
jurisdictions  of  monetary  policy  and  prudential  supervision  no  longer  coincide,  NCBs  in  charge  of
prudential supervision are shielded from the traditional conflict of interest.
The second key factor is the increased relevance of systemic risk since the advent of the euro. The
nature and scope of systemic risk have changed in a  decisive  way.  A first decisive evolution  is the
growing integration of European financial markets in the euro area. As I have already mentioned, the
interbank market, especially the unsecured segment, is already fully unified across the area owing to
the  disappearance  of  the  currency  risk  and  the  connection  of  national  real-time  gross  settlement
systems via TARGET, the large-value cross-border payment system of the Eurosystem. A second key
evolution from the perspective of systemic risk is the growing merger and acquisition activity and the
trend  towards  the  emergence  of  financial  conglomerates  in  Europe,  which  has,  for  instance,  been
identified  in  a  recent  G10  report  on  consolidation  in  the  financial  sector.  In  this  new  environment,
financial institutions are increasingly involved in intricate networks of counterparties  in the interbank
market and via payment and settlement systems, and the impact an unwinding of their positions could
have on asset prices becomes even more ambiguous. These interrelations have a more international
character than before the advent of the euro, which implies that supervision has to pay much more
attention  to  euro  area-wide  developments.  The  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  have  a
comparative  advantage  in  this  field  owing  to  their  responsibilities  over  payment  and  settlement
systems, their traditional focus on systemic risk and their role as components of the Eurosystem.
My conclusion is that the successful pursuance of financial stability in Europe, which is a prerequisite
for  economic  growth,  could  benefit  considerably  if  NCBs  maintain  and  even  reinforce  their  role  in
prudential supervision. The debate on the organisation of banking supervision seems to be taking a
different course for the moment at least in a few euro area countries. Institutional arrangements based
on a single supervisory authority for the financial systems as a whole seem to have gained momentum
over the past months in some euro area countries like Ireland and Finland, and also in your country,
Austria,  where  a  single  supervisor  for  banking,  insurance,  securities  and  staff  pension  funds
(Pensionskassen)  should  be  established  early  2002  according  to  the  recent  draft  Financial  Market
Supervisory Authority Act ("Finanzmarktaufsichtgesetz").
At first sight, this evolution runs counter to the  need for a larger  involvement of NCBs in  prudential
supervision.  However,  in  this  field  implementation  details  are  crucial.  In  particular,  it  is  crucial  that
effective  provisions  for  a  close  co-operation  and  a  smooth  exchange  of  information  between  the
separate supervisory authority and the NCB are laid down. NCBs should in any case be entrusted with
the task of safeguarding financial stability of the system as a whole and endowed with the instruments
needed to pursue such an objective effectively. In this respect, an extensive operational involvement
of NCBs in the conduct of prudential supervision is a key factor.
Conclusions
In concluding, I believe it is fair to say that EMU has already had a profound impact on the process of
EU  financial  integration.  The  impact  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  as  a  single  currency  of  twelve
Member  States  has  created  the  potential  for  large,  deep  and  liquid  euro-denominated  financial
markets, which should help to deliver high rates of output and employment growth in the euro area
economy. This transformation in the financial and economic landscape entails certain potential risks,
but it will provide many opportunities for enhanced efficiency and growth in the financial markets and
economies in the euro area. I am convinced that the latter will prevail.
BIS Review 48/2001
5
Thank you very much for your kind attention.
6
BIS Review 48/2001
