Hermann Remsperger: Convergence and divergence in the European monetary
union
Address by Prof Dr Hermann Remsperger1, Member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
delivered at the conference "Conflict potentials in monetary unions" held in Kassel, 25 April 2001.
 The subject of convergence and divergence in the monetary union has many facets. Some of them
impinge directly on the issue of the appropriate monetary strategy for the euro area. After all, there
have already been calls for relaxing the stability standard of the Eurosystem because of the structural
differences between the countries participating in EMU. In addition, the eastward enlargement of the
European Union foreseeable in the next few years has already sparked off a debate on whether the
conditions for participation in EMU laid down in the Maastricht Treaty attach enough importance to the
aspect of convergence in real terms. I shall, however, not try  to  answer that  question  until the final
section of my address.
I shall start with a brief glance back at the convergence process in the run-up to monetary union, and
then draw your attention to the differences in growth and inflation rates that still exist in the monetary
union.  From  the  monetary  policy  standpoint,  what  interests  me  most  are  the  reasons  for  those
differences.  Only  in  that  way,  after  all,  can  one  verify  whether  such  differences  constitute  conflict
potential for the single monetary policy.
Convergence in the run-up to monetary union
I.
In retrospect, it must first of all be recalled that the road to European monetary union was mapped out
in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  of  December  1991.  The  Treaty  specifies  the  conditions  for  participating  in
monetary union. They include, in particular, proof of a high degree of sustainable convergence (Article
121 (1)  of the EC Treaty). That entails a high  degree of price stability, a convergence  of  long-term
interest rates, a lastingly sustainable government financial position and exchange-rate stability. By the
application  of  those  criteria,  which  were  defined  more  precisely  in  an  additional  protocol,  it  was
intended to ensure that only countries which had already duly displayed their willingness and ability to
pursue long-term anti-inflation policy should participate in monetary union.
Consequently, the second half of the nineties was marked by the efforts of the EU member states to
meet  the  convergence  criteria.  The  first  convergence  assessment  took  place  at  the  end  of  1996.
Progress towards convergence was then manifest mainly in combating inflation. Already in 1996, the
reference value for the inflation rate was undershot by ten member states. In the other five member
states (Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain and the UK), the pace of inflation had slackened distinctly. By
contrast, the consolidation of government finances remained unsatisfactory. Thus, the financial deficit
of the majority of countries overshot the reference value of 3 % of GDP. The level of government debt
was above the reference value of 60 % of GDP in no fewer than eleven countries. As  a result, the
European Council decided in December 1996 that the conditions for the launch of the single currency
had not yet been met, and that EMU should therefore not be launched until the beginning of 1999.
The convergence assessment required to that end took place in the spring of 1998, on the basis of the
economic statistics for the year 1997. By that time, the pace of price rises in all EU countries other
than Greece had dropped below 2 %, so that the ceiling of 2.7 % for the inflation rate was no longer
much of an obstacle. Greater convergence had also been achieved in exchange-rate movements and
in long-term interest rates. Hence almost all attention was focused on the question of which countries
could be said to have a sustainable government financial position.
In 1997 only Greece overshot the reference value for the budget deficit, but the reference value for the
level of debt was still exceeded by eleven countries. The scale of the overshootings ranged from a few
percentage points to a debt level of over 120 % of GDP in the case of Italy and Belgium. After long
discussions, the European Council decided on May 2, 1998 to launch a monetary union consisting of
                                                     
1 
I would like to thank Christina Gerberding and Axel Jochem for their valuable contributions to this paper.
BIS Review 33/2001
1
eleven  member  states.  Of  the  four  EU  nations  not  taking  part,  Denmark,  Sweden  and  the  UK  had
previously  declared  that  they  would  not  join  EMU  on  January  1,  1999.  Greece  met  none  of  the
convergence criteria.
II.
Differences in growth and inflation rates since the launch of monetary union
Scale and progress of the divergences
1.
Since  January  1,  1999,  the  European  Central  Bank  has  been  responsible  for  longer-term  price
movements  in  the  euro  area.  But  the  single  monetary  policy  does  not  rule  out  the  possibility  of
individual member states’ inflation rates diverging from one another. As a matter of fact, a number of
statistical  indicators  show  that  the  inflation  differentials  between  the  member  states  of  EMU  have
widened somewhat again since the high-spot of the convergence process. Thus, the spread between
the highest and lowest inflation rate according to the Harmonised Consumer Price Index, which had
been 0.7 percentage point in January 1998, rose to an average of 2 percentage points during 1999
(between  Ireland  with  2.5  %  and  Austria  with  0.5  %).  Last  year,  the  spread  between  the  average
annual inflation rates increased to as much as 3.5 percentage points (between Ireland with 5.3 % and
France with 1.8 %). However, the maximum spread might be said to overstate the differences between
inflation rates, inasmuch as it looks only at the two countries with the largest inflation differential. If,
instead, one measures divergence by the weighted standard deviation of the inflation rates of the EMU
countries, one is led to conclude that inflation differentials have remained essentially unchanged since
the  launch  of  monetary  union,  after  they  had  previously  diminished  substantially  during  the
convergence process.
The divergence in growth rates between the individual EMU countries continues to be considerable.
Thus, the expansion of real GDP last year in the three countries with the highest growth rates (Ireland,
Luxembourg and Finland) averaged 8 %, which was 5 percentage points above the average pace of
growth  in  the  three  countries  with  the  lowest  rates  of  expansion  (Germany,  France  and  Italy).
However, this measure of divergence is again somewhat qualified by the observation that it is mainly
the growth rates of some smaller countries  which  diverge  rather  strongly  from  the  average.  On  the
contrary, the growth rates of the large countries are much closer to one another.
implied  a 
considerable 
The reasons for the divergent trends
2.
Some of the remaining differences in growth and inflation rates are unquestionably due to differences
in the position of individual economies in the business cycle, and hence may presumably be rated as
transitory. Asynchronous national business cycles may be caused by country-specific shocks. A good
example  of  such  a  shock  is  provided  by  the  interest-rate-convergence  process  in  the  run-up  to
monetary union. The convergence prior to the launch of monetary  union contributed to divergences
afterwards.  Whereas  the  interest-rate  level  hardly  changed  at  all  in  the  low-interest-rate  countries
Germany, Austria and the Netherlands, in countries such as Ireland, Portugal and Spain interest-rate
convergence 
the
interest-rate-convergence process exerted the impact of an asymmetrical demand shock, whose effect
was reinforced by the fact that, in a number of high-interest-rate countries, the real rate of interest fell
even more sharply than the nominal interest rate.2
However,  in  a  monetary  union  there  are  also  forces  that  work  towards  a  reduction  of  cyclical
divergences. For instance, it is to be expected that a "shock-induced" acceleration of price rises will
lessen the competitiveness of the economy in question, and thus trigger an adjustment process that
ultimately reduces the growth advantage.
Asymmetrical  shocks  are  not  the  only  potential  cause  of  cyclical  divergences  in  a  monetary  union.
Differences in growth and inflation rates may also be due to divergences in the responses of individual
economies to cross-country shocks. An example of that is provided by the differing degrees to which
the member states of the monetary union were affected last year by the dramatic upturn in oil prices
and the weakness of the euro. Some of the inflation differential related to this shock is undoubtedly
attributable to differences in trading patterns and in energy consumption. For instance, the share of
relaxation  of  monetary 
conditions.  Hence 
                                                     
2  This  argument  can  be  traced  back  to  Sir  Alan  Walters.  See  Favero,  C.  et  al.  (2000):  One  Money,  Many  Countries,
Monitoring the European Central Bank, 2, CEPR, London, p. 3.
2
BIS Review 33/2001
imports  from  non-euro-  area  countries  varies  between  less  than  10  %  of  GDP  in  Italy,  France  and
Spain, via nearly 12 % in Germany, to almost 40 % in Ireland.3 Divergent economic policy responses
to the oil-price rises in individual countries may – in themselves – have actually enhanced the inflation
differentials.
Whether the economic structures of the countries participating in EMU will converge in the longer run
or  whether  monetary  union  will  tend  to  exacerbate  existing  differences,  is  difficult  to  say.  Sceptics
point out that the integration process in Europe has been accompanied by increasing specialisation on
the part of individual countries. That has meant that the differences in production patterns have tended
to increase.4  Advocates of  the  "convergence  hypothesis"  argue,  notwithstanding  that  assertion,  that
monetary  union  enhances  competition  between  the  participating  economies.  That  obliges  national
governments to adjust the institutional rules of their tax and social security systems, and of the goods,
labour  and  financial  markets.  On  the  whole,  EMU  has  already  led  to  a  rapprochement  of  financial
market structures in the participating countries. Mention should be made in this context of the creation
of an EMU-wide money market, of the rapid growth of the euro-denominated bond and equity markets
and  of  progressive  consolidation  in  the  banking  sector.  Still  there  can  be  no  talk  of  completely
integrated financial markets, if only because of the persistent differences in the regulation of property
rights and in accounting rules.
Differences in institutional regulations are not only one potential cause of divergent responses on the
part of individual economies to  "one-off"  events;  they  may  also  cause  the  longer-term  trend  growth
rates of the countries participating in a monetary union to diverge from one another. For instance, the
slower growth of some larger EMU member states may owe something to heavy tax burdens and to
inadequate reforms on the labour market. This is where national governments must take action.
The growth differentials in EMU may likewise reflect in part the economic catching-up process of those
economies whose income level remains distinctly below the EMU average. Countries in the process of
catching up are typically marked by sharp advances in productivity in the tradable goods sector. The
acceleration  of  productivity  growth  is  normally  mirrored  in  corresponding  wage  rises.  If  such  wage
rises are transferred to the non-tradable goods sector without corresponding increases in productivity
being recorded there, then that results in the general price level in the country in question going up
faster than in the advanced countries. Put simply, the catching-up process leads to a rapprochement
of living standards. Such convergence in real terms is then linked with divergence in rates of inflation
via what is known as the "Balassa-Samuelson effect".
The implications for monetary policy
3.
From what I have said so far, it follows that there may be a potential for divergences in growth and
inflation rates between the individual member states of a monetary union.
If the inflation rate in specific member states of EMU exceeds the stability standard of the ECB, such
overshooting has to be offset by correspondingly lower inflation rates in the other countries. Whether
that  poses problems for the countries at the bottom end  of the "price  range"  depends  firstly  on  the
scale of the overshooting and secondly on the weight assigned to the inflation rate of the "problem"
countries in the EMU-wide inflation rate. Viewed in these terms, higher inflation rates run by smaller
countries present less risk of conflict than similar trends in large countries.
As you know, against the background of the current differences in inflation rates, and those expected
for the future, there have been calls for the ECB to interpret its stability standard more leniently than in
the past. Failing this, there would be a risk of "too little" inflation being left over for the countries that
are growing more slowly. Specifically, the ECB Governing Council has already been recommended to
extend  the  spread  of  its  definition  of  price  stability  to  0  to  2½%.  Behind  this  recommendation  are
model calculations which suggest that in future the countries of the euro area will have very different
inflation  rates.  According  to  those  calculations,  the  longer-term  inflation  rate  in  Germany  will  run
almost 1 percentage point below the EMU-wide inflation rate. In this case, given an orientation to the 2
% mark for the euro area as a whole, an inflation rate of only 1% would be left for Germany.
                                                     
3  Cf. ECB Monthly Bulletin, August 2000, p. 61.
4 Cf.  Klüver,  A.  and  G.  Rübel  (2001):  Industrielle  Konzentration  als  Kriterium  für  die  Geeignetheit  eines  einheitlichen
Währungsraums  (Industrial  concentration  as  a  criterion  of  the  suitability  of  a  single  monetary  area).  Eine  empirische
Untersuchung der Europäischen Union von 1972 bis 1996, Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, 221, 1 pp. 68-86.
BIS Review 33/2001
3
the 
the  non-tradable  and 
tradable  goods  sector.  They  may  well  weaken 
Because  of  the  likely  overestimation  of  the  "true"  rate  of  inflation  by  the  measured  rate,  and  the
rigidities on the German labour market, Sinn and Reutter regard that value of 1% as too low. In their
study,  they  recommend  the  raising  of  the  stability  standard  in  the  euro  area  by  one-half  of  a
percentage point, in order that the German inflation rate is not obliged to turn out lower than would be
consistent with the Bundesbank’s old stability standard.5
When  assessing  such  policy  recommendations,  it  must,  however,  be  borne  in  mind  that  they  are
based not least on the extrapolation of differences in rates of productivity growth observed in the past.
But historic figures for a specific range of countries cannot readily be applied to the future, since the
pattern  of  catching-up  and  advanced  countries  may  have  changed  significantly  in  the  interim.  For
instance, Finland and Ireland have meanwhile reached a level of per capita income which is above the
EMU average.6 Today, only Greece, Portugal and Spain can be identified as definite candidates for
catching-up. In the year 2000, their per capita income was still 33%, 25% and 18% below the EMU
average, respectively.
Moreover,  it  is  to  be  kept  in  mind  that,  in  the  member  states  of  EMU,  there  are  wage  differentials
between 
the
Balassa-Samuelson correlation.7 After all, it is not impossible that countries in the process of catching
up make greater productivity gains than hitherto, not only in the tradable goods sector but also in the
non-tradable  goods sector, because, for instance, they are pursuing a systematic policy of opening up
and deregulating markets. That, too, would qualify the Balassa-Samuelson effect.
A simple and hypothetical back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that an inflation differential of two
percentage points between the three catching-up candidates Greece, Portugal and Spain and all other
member countries  would raise  the  EMU-wide  inflation  rate  by  0.3  percentage  point.8  To  prevent  an
overshooting of the ECB stability standard, average inflation in the other member states would have to
be kept at a maximum of 1.7%.
All in all, differences in inflation rates, which are likely to persist for some time, should not be a reason
for the ECB to revise its definition of price stability upwards. In the first place, the ceiling of just under
2% provides sufficient leeway for a certain Balassa-Samuelson effect. Secondly, the main reason why
a redefinition of the stability standard should not be contemplated is that an increase might adversely
affect the credibility of monetary policy in EMU. For the rest, it is to be expected that the divergences
in inflation rates due to catching up will diminish because a large part of the catching-up process is in
the past.
The monetary policy of the Eurosystem is geared to safeguarding price stability in the euro area as a
whole.  Hence  it  is  neither  required  nor  able  to  influence  growth  and  inflation  differences  within  the
monetary union. If economic problems arise from catching-up processes and cyclical divergences, that
presents a challenge, rather,  to national  economic policy-makers. In such cases, not  only structural
and wage policy but also fiscal policy must be brought into play.
Some  observers  think  that  the  European  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  might  exacerbate  cyclical
divergences  because  it  hampers  unduly  the  stabilising  role  played  by  national  fiscal  policy.  This
argument fails to take sufficient account of the fact that the Pact requires EMU member states to aim,
over the medium term, at a budget "close to balance or in surplus". It is exactly the accomplishment of
that  objective  which  creates  sufficient  leeway  for  the  automatic  stabilisers  to  fulfill  their  role  without
endangering the budget-deficit ceiling of 3% of GDP, even under economically difficult circumstances.
However, the Stability and Growth Pact does not contain any mechanism that might force countries, at
times of cyclical overheating, to run budget surpluses or to  work towards greater  wage  restraint.  In
such cases the "Resolution on economic coordination in Stage Three of EMU" adopted in December
1997 draws attention to the instruments for coordinating national economic policies provided for in the
Maastricht  Treaty.  Such  instruments  include  the  mandate  of  the  Ecofin  Council  to  monitor  both
                                                     
5 Cf.  Sinn,  H.-W.  and  M.  Reutter:  Die  Mindestinflationsrate  für  die  Euro-Länder  (The  minimum  inflation  rate  for  the  euro
member states), ifo-Schnelldienst 35-36/2000, p. 23.
In the year 2000, per capita Irish GDP was 14 %, and Finnish per capita GDP 0.6 %, above the EMU average.
This is the conclusion reached, for instance by Alberola, E. and T. Tyrväinen (1998): Is there Scope for Inflation Differentials
in EMU?, Bank of Finland Discussion Papers 15/98.
In this calculation, it is assumed for the sake of simplicity that the share of those three countries in the HCPI for the euro
area is constant, at 15 %. If the share of those countries in consumer spending in EMU rises in the course of the catching-
up process, then the impact of inflation due to catching up on EMU-wide inflation must be put a little higher.
BIS Review 33/2001
6
7
8
4
economic performance in the member states and the compatibility of national economic policies with
the  economic  policy  guidelines  of  the  EU.  If  the  Council  decides  that  the  policies  of  any  country
infringe the jointly agreed guidelines, it may issue the appropriate recommendations to the member
state  in  question,  and  publish  them  as  well  (Article  99  (4),  EC  Treaty).  The  Ecofin  Council  took
advantage of that option last February, to censure the budget policy of the Irish Government and to
request it to moderate the overheated pace of business activity. The Irish Government rejected that
criticism,  and  refused  to  amend  its  budget  plans,  pointing  out  that  it  was  running  a  large  budget
surplus and had a low level of government debt.
As we all know, the Irish inflation rate has no significant impact on EMU-wide price rises because of
that country’s small share in the aggregated series. However, the Irish case did make plain that  no
binding mechanisms exist for the eventuality of overheating in any one country pushing up area-wide
inflation,  thus  compelling  the  other  member  states  to  adopt  a  monetary  stance  which  is,  by  their
standards, too restrictive.
The implications of an enlargement of the monetary union
III.
The debate on convergence and divergence in the monetary union has acquired a further dimension
as  a  result  of  the  projected  eastward  enlargement  of  the  EU.  From  the  monetary  policy  angle,  the
question  arises as to  which problems may  be posed  by  the accession  of countries  that  are  at  very
different stages of economic development. With respect to the eastward enlargement of the EU, there
will  be  a  "threefold  heterogeneity"9  in  per  capita  GDP:  the  size  disparities  within  the  group  of
candidates;  the  divergences  between  that  group  as  a  whole  and  the  EU;  and,  moreover,  the
differences in size among the present EU member states.
In this connection, it is being debated, not least, whether the convergence criteria specified in the EC
Treaty will suffice to assess the sustained economic rapprochement of the EMU candidate countries
with  the  existing  monetary  union.  In  the  light  of  the  comparatively  low  per  capita  incomes  in  the
formerly  socialist  transition  economies  of  central  and  eastern  Europe,  there  are  fears  that  the
above-mentioned  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  might  engender  a  greater  divergence  of  inflation  rates
within an enlarged EMU.
In the present composition of the monetary union, the differences in inflation rates are running within a
range  of  several  percentage  points.  A  gap  of  1½  percentage  points  from  the  three  best-performing
countries  in terms of price stability  in  the  convergence  assessment  therefore  obviously  provides  no
adequate  guarantee  that  no  major  tensions  will  arise  again  afterwards.  As  long  as  the  country  in
question pursues a monetary policy of its own, it can curb inflation to such an extent that it will meet
the  criterion  at  the  time  of  the  convergence  assessment.  But  the  problem  of  diverging  price
movements may also crop up later – namely, when the country is no longer pursuing an autonomous
monetary policy tailored to its specific needs.
If this problem case arose after the enlargement of the monetary union, the advanced core countries,
given  a  definite  union-wide  stability  objective,  would  be  faced  with  greater  pressure  for  monetary
restrictions than before. Along with insufficiently flexible merchandise and labour markets, that might
pose risks to the economy. That, in turn, would increase the political pressure on the ECB to relax its
present stability objective.
A  glance  at  the  movement  of  the  relative  prices  of  the  principal  candidates  for  admission  to  the
European Union bears out the supposition that, besides monetary factors, real economic catching-up
processes contributed to the fact that those countries' inflation rates were all running above the EU
average. In the Czech Republic and Hungary, for instance, the prices of non-tradables rose between
1995 and 2000 about 2 percentage points faster each year than the  overall cost of living. A similar
picture is presented by Poland and other transition economies. It must be admitted, though, that the
scale of the real appreciation varies considerably, both between the individual countries and over time.
At  the  same  time,  it  is  conspicuous,  however,  that  the  price  indices  for  non-tradables  and  for  the
overall cost of living in Germany and in France moved virtually in parallel during that period.
Besides  the  long-term  movement  of  relative  prices,  the  scale  and  correlation  of  short-  and
medium-term fluctuations provide evidence of the progress made in convergence between the present
and the potential members of EMU. According to the classical theories of optimum monetary areas,
                                                     
9 Cf.  BHF-Bank,  EU-Osterweiterung:  Jenseits  von  Nizza  (EU  enlargement:  beyond  Nice)  in  Wirtschaftsdienst  dated
20.1.2001.
BIS Review 33/2001
5
countries should combine into a monetary union only if they are subject to largely parallel disruptions.
The flexibility of the labour markets is crucial to this criterion, too. The faster and more smoothly wages
adjust to new conditions, the easier it is to prevent unwelcome repercussions on the real economy.
In the assessment of cyclical convergence, as in the appraisal of the longer-term catching-up process,
one may have recourse to the movement of sectoral price indices. For instance, the relative prices of
non-tradables  in  Poland,  the  Czech  Republic  and  Hungary  between  1995  and  2000  exhibit  much
greater volatility than the corresponding indices in Germany or France. Moreover, the disruptions in
Poland  and  Hungary  mostly  seem  to  have  run  in  the  opposite  direction  to  the  business  cycles  in
Germany.
Empirical  studies  of  price  adjustments  during  economic  catching-up  processes  have  shown  that
differences in per capita incomes may be only a very rough indicator of potential structural disparities
in  inflation  rates  within  a  monetary  union.10  What  seems  to  make  better  sense  is  an  analysis  and
appraisal procedure based on a direct comparison of the price and cost movements of tradables and
non-tradables in the individual countries. The inclusion of such indices in the convergence assessment
is  wholly  consistent  with  the  EC  Treaty,  which  inter  alia  calls  explicitly  in  Article  121  for  "the
development of unit labour costs and other price indices" to be taken into account.
In  my  opinion,  the  provisions  of  the  EC  Treaty  are  therefore  suited  to  the  assessment  not  only  of
nominal but also – at least to some extent – of progress towards real convergence. I do not subscribe
to the view that the present regulations have only applied to the old EU countries, but are completely
unsuitable for gauging the degree of convergence of the emerging economies.
But I do  not  ignore the  problems associated  with direct recourse to the approach  of  price  and  cost
analysis.  Problems  arise,  above  all,  if  the  relevant  indicators  are  distorted  by  special  factors  of  the
transition  process.  Thus,  high  domestic  price  stability  may  –  among  other  things  -  also  reflect  still
incomplete liberalisation and wide-ranging government regulation.
Even so, I come to the conclusion, by and large, that, notwithstanding the special economic situation
of the central and eastern European transition economies, no new convergence criterion needs to be
devised for assessing the candidates for admission to EMU. Instead, the provisions on convergence
assessment specified in Article 121 of the EC Treaty, including their real economic elements, should
be complied with meticulosity. In this connection, such inflation risks should be heeded as may arise,
owing  to  real  convergence  in  the  economic  catching-up  and  adjustment  process,  from  existing
divergences in price and cost patterns. That means that the movements of unit labour costs and other
price indices must be included in the assessment. Special attention must also be paid to the relative
prices  of  non-tradables,  for  they  include  evidence  of  the  degree  of  real  convergence  and  of  future
inflation risks. The EC Treaty explicitly emphasises that an accession country has to have achieved a
sustainable high degree of price stability.
As has recently been reconfirmed in Malmö, it will be necessary to insist  already at the  time of the
eastward enlargement of the European Union on the acquis communautaire of the European Union
being adopted as far as possible by the new members. In other words, the number of exceptional and
transitional arrangements will have to be kept down to a minimum. The essential economic conditions
for joining the European Union include a functional market economy and the ability to withstand the
competitive pressure exerted by the single market.
All these requirements do not constitute any new obstacles on the long way to monetary union. They
are  consistent  with  the  existing  Treaties.  At  the  same  time,  strict  compliance  with  them  takes  due
account  of  the  fear  that  structural  differences  in  inflation  rates  in  the  euro  area  might  increase  if
emerging economies were to join the monetary union too early.
I  want  to  conclude  with  the  statement  that  the  catching-up  process  of  accession  countries  can  be
promoted by foreign direct investment. The transfer of technology and knowledge, which is connected
to  foreign  direct  investment,  helps  to  enhance  overall  economic  productivity  and  tends  to  reduce
inflationary risks. It is hence an encouraging fact that - by the end of 1999 - German investors have
been engaged in the potential accession countries with around 20 billion Euro.
                                                     
10 Cf.  Alberola,  E.  and  T.  Tyrväinen  (1998)  op.  cit.  and  de  Grauwe,  P.  and  F.  Skudelny  (2000):  Inflation  and  Productivity
Differentials in EMU, CES Discussion Paper Series 00.15.
6
BIS Review 33/2001
