Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and the outlook for the Norwegian economy
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Norges Bank, at the Wage Bargaining Conference of
the Electricians and IT Workers' Union in Vestfold and Telemark counties, Drangedal, 24 August 2001.
 The objective of monetary policy
In spring this year, the Norwegian Government and the Storting (Norwegian parliament) laid down new
guidelines  for  economic  policy.  The  Government  has  announced  that  it  will  use  the  expected  real
return on petroleum revenues in the Government Petroleum Fund over the central government budget.
The  Government  stresses  that  it  will  nevertheless  use  fiscal  policy  to  smooth  fluctuations  in
employment and activity levels. At the same time, Norges Bank was given a new operational mandate
for  monetary  policy.  Norges  Bank  shall  set  the  key  rate  with  a  view  to  maintaining  low  and  stable
inflation. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent.
Low and stable inflation is the best contribution monetary policy can make to growth and prosperity.
High and varying inflation weakens growth potential. The function of prices as a vehicle for information
is impaired. Many choices will be based on a false foundation. Pay increases may be cancelled out by
high  price  inflation. With  high  and  varying  inflation,  it  is  difficult  to  determine  whether  higher  house
prices,  for  example,  entail  a  real  increase  in  the  value  of  property,  or  whether  the  rise  in  prices  is
mainly due to a decrease in the value of money. In an  environment of substantial  uncertainty,  both
homeowners and homebuyers make wrong decisions more frequently. Lenders protect themselves by
imposing high risk premiums on loans for which enterprises and individuals in the start-up phase pay
dearly. Uncertainty has a price. High and variable inflation leads to an arbitrary redistribution of wealth
and income. Thus there is no conflict between distribution policy objectives and the objective of low
and stable inflation.
Unexpected swings in the price level may easily lead to fluctuations in the real economy and instability
in financial and property markets. Experience shows that high inflation does not result in more jobs or
lower unemployment, and that the booms associated with high inflation are followed by recessions.
Since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  inflation  has  been  low  and  employment  has  grown  sharply.  Pay
increases measured in kroner have been lower than in the 1980s, but low inflation has nevertheless
generated stronger growth in purchasing power for wage earners than in the previous decade.
The implementation of monetary policy
Price  and  cost  inflation  are  influenced  through  a  number  of  channels.  When  interest  rates  rise,  it
becomes more costly to take up loans and more profitable to save and to postpone consumption and
investment.  A  rise  in  interest  rates  will  also  reduce  demand,  because  the  value  of  houses,  leisure
homes,  cars  and  shares  decreases.  Household  wealth  declines.  A  rise  in  interest  rates  may  also
strengthen the krone. A stronger exchange rate will curb the rise in prices for imports, which directly
and indirectly account for 40 per cent of goods and services in the consumer price index. A stronger
krone weakens earnings and reduces activity in enterprises in the internationally exposed sector. This
has an impact on enterprises’ capacity to pay, wage growth and price inflation.
We do not expect a change in interest rates to have an immediate effect on inflation. Our analyses
indicate  that  a  substantial  share  of  the  effects  of  an  interest  rate  change  occurs  within  two  years.
Hence, the key rate is set with a view to achieving an inflation rate of 2½ per cent two years ahead.
The social partners  will take account  of  the  inflation  outlook  in  their  wage  negotiations.  If  there  are
prospects of higher inflation, the nominal wage increases will be higher. At the same time, higher wage
growth means higher inflation. Developments in the labour market and wage formation are therefore
important for interest rate setting in Norges Bank. It is also important to be aware that developments in
labour  costs  may  influence  inflation,  growth  and  employment  differently  in  a  system  with  a  floating
exchange  rate  that  in  a  system  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate.  In  our  open  economy,  with  a  floating
exchange rate, it can be assumed that an increase in wage growth of one percentage point without
BIS Review 72/2001
1
any monetary policy response will gradually translate into a corresponding increase in price inflation
unless wage increases are anchored in higher productivity.1
When Norges Bank concludes that the key rate should be changed, the change will in most cases be
made  gradually.  This  is  because  there  is  normally  uncertainty  about  the  situation  in  the  economy,
potential disturbances to the economy and how fast an interest rate change will affect price inflation.
But we will not always take a gradualist approach. A rapid and pronounced change in the interest rate
is  appropriate  if,  for  example,  heightening  turbulence  in  financial  markets  or  a  cost-push  shock
resulting from negotiations indicates that confidence in monetary policy is in jeopardy.
Norges  Bank  analyses  the  inflation  outlook  in  separate  inflation  reports,  which  are  published  three
times a year. Further assessments are presented every sixth week in connection with the Executive
Board's monetary policy meetings.
Higher interest rates curb demand for goods and services and reduce inflation. Lower interest rates
have  the  opposite  effect.  If  evidence  suggests  that  inflation  with  unchanged  interest  rates  will  be
higher than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation with unchanged
interest rates will be lower than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will be reduced. There is symmetry here.
It is equally important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low, as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is
too high.
The situation in the labour market
The supply of labour is limited in the Norwegian economy at present. We have a tight labour market.
The labour force participation rate is high. Extensive use of disability and sickness benefits is limiting
the supply of labour. Reforms such as contractual pension schemes, which were expanded through
the 1990s, cash allowances for families with small children and an increased number of vacation days
this year and next also contribute to reducing the labour supply. Recently, unemployment has declined
again. Adjusted for normal seasonal variations, the number of registered unemployed now stands at
59000, or 2.5 per cent of the labour force. Of these, about ¾ percentage point, or about 16 000, have
been unemployed for more than 6 months. The tight labour market is the result of a high activity level
in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Growth  in  household  and  enterprise  debt  is  strong.  The  phasing  in  of
petroleum revenues in the years ahead will keep demand for labour at a high level.
The  centralised  income  settlements  in  Norway  have  been  an  arena  of  coordination,  where
considerable emphasis has been placed at times on overall employment. This has contributed to low
unemployment levels in our country. But we have also experienced that the income settlements may
be a source of economic disturbances. The income settlements in 1974/75 and 1986 in particular, but
also  the  settlements  in  1998  and  2000,  contributed  to  higher  cost  inflation  and  weaker  demand  for
labour.
We have seen that income formation is affected by labour market conditions and profit trends in the
business  sector.  This  is  also  true  of  wage  and  income  developments  among  managers,  salaried
employees  and  the  liberal  professions.  The  structural  changes  that  now  seem  to  have  occurred  in
income  determination  for  these  groups  has  probably  also  been  important  for  the  outcome  of  the
ordinary wage settlements.
Through the last part of the 1990s, factor income rose as a share of labour costs. Over time, a balance
will probably be reached between labour costs and the portion of income that goes to servicing capital.
To  some  extent  the  process  will  be  self-regulating.  High  profits  tend  to  lead  to  stronger  growth  in
wages.  Lower  earnings  prompt  companies  to  cut  costs.  This  may  take  the  form  of  increased  work
effort, or possibly workforce reductions, in order to increase productivity. Companies may also reduce
growth in business fixed investment.
Since  1997,  price  inflation  has  been  higher  in  Norway  than  among  our  trading  partners.  The  most
important reason for higher price inflation in Norway is that we have had a tight labour market for many
years. This has also led to high growth in wages and labour costs. In the light of higher price and cost
inflation in Norway than in other countries, it has been appropriate to maintain higher interest rates in
Norway than in most comparable countries. Norges Bank increased the sight deposit rate - which is
our key rate - by a total of 1½ percentage points last year. So far this year, the key rate has remained
                                                     
1  The relationship between wage growth and price inflation was also discussed in the Annual Address in February this year.
2
BIS Review 72/2001
unchanged. As a result, the difference between short-term rates in Norway and other countries has
increased.
The economic outlook
The  Bank  last  analysed  the  outlook  for  the  Norwegian  economy  in  the  June  2001  Inflation  Report.
Price inflation is projected to fall to 2½ per cent by next year already.
The risk picture is mixed. The Norwegian economy is still characterised by high capacity  utilisation.
The  labour  market  is  tight.  There  is  a  risk  that  domestic  pressures  may  gradually  translate  into  a
stronger price impetus than we have projected.
The  consumer  price  index  has  risen  by  2.7  per  cent  since  July  2000.  The  consumer  price  index
excluding the direct effects of changes in excise duties and energy prices (CPIXE) has risen by 2.6 per
cent since July last year, as calculated by Norges Bank. Statistics Norway publishes a consumer price
index excluding electricity prices and a consumer price index excluding energy prices. They have a
broader definition of energy prices than we use in our calculations. Statistics Norway has not adjusted
for the direct effects of excise duties in their indices, but projects that the combined effect of changes
in  excise  duties 
the  CPI  by
0.5-0.6 percentage points in July. According to Statistics Norway, the CPI excluding energy prices and
excise duties can then be estimated at 2.2-2.3 per cent.
Whereas  the  activity  level  and  pressures  in  the  Norwegian  economy  are  high,  there  is  growing
uncertainty  about  developments  in  the  global  economy.  The  Norwegian  business  sector  has  so  far
largely been protected from weaker growth in the global economy, but this may change. Low growth in
the  world  economy  may  reduce  demand  for  Norwegian  products  and  pressures  in  the  Norwegian
economy. It may also help to curb imported price inflation. This could also result in lower price inflation
than we have projected.
Against this background, Norges Bank has expressed its view that  with an unchanged  interest rate
ahead, the probability that inflation two years ahead will be higher than 2½ per cent is the same as the
probability that it will be lower.
in  January  and  July  will  depress 
the  year-on-year  rise 
in 
BIS Review 72/2001
3
