Laurence H Meyer: Federal deposit insurance reform
Testimony of Mr Laurence H Meyer, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve
System, before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on
Financial Services, US House of Representatives, 26 July 2001.
 It is a pleasure, Mr Chairman, to appear before this subcommittee to present the views of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System on deposit insurance reform as proposed by the Federal
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  this  past  spring.  At  this  point,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s
views are necessarily general because the FDIC’s recommendations were purposefully quite broad.
That said, on behalf of the Board I want to compliment the FDIC for an excellent report that highlights
the issues and develops an integrated framework for addressing them. We urge the Congress to use
that  framework  for  promptly  developing  a  detailed  legislative  proposal  that  addresses  the  most
important deficiencies in our current deposit insurance system. I hope my comments this morning will
be helpful in doing so.
Benefits and costs of deposit insurance
As background to our suggestions, the Board believes it is important first to understand the benefits
and costs of deposit insurance. Deposit insurance has played a key – at times even critical – role in
achieving the stability in banking and financial markets that has characterized the past almost seventy
years. Deposit insurance, combined  with  other components of our banking safety  net – the  Federal
Reserve’s  discount  window  and  payment  system  guarantees –  and  with  enhanced  macroeconomic
stability resulting from monetary and fiscal policies, has meant that periods of financial stress are no
longer characterized  by  depositor runs on  banks  and  thrifts.  Quite  the  opposite:  Asset  holders  now
seek out deposits as safe havens when they have strong doubts about other financial assets.
Looking  beyond  the  contribution  of  deposit  insurance  to  overall  financial  stability,  we  should  not
minimize the security it has brought to millions of households and small businesses. Deposit insurance
has  provided  a  safe  and  secure  place  for  those  households  and  small  businesses  with  relatively
modest amounts of financial assets to hold their transaction and other balances.
These benefits of deposit insurance, as significant as they are, have not come without cost. The very
same process that has ended deposit runs has made insured depositors largely indifferent to the risks
taken  by  their  banks  because  their  funds  are  not  at  risk  if  their  institution  is  unable  to  meet  its
obligations. As a result, the market discipline to control risks that insured depositors would otherwise
have imposed on banks and thrifts has been weakened. Relieved of that discipline, banks and thrifts
naturally feel less inhibited from taking on more risk than they would otherwise assume. No other type
of private financial institution is able to attract funds from the public without regard to the risk it takes
with  its  creditors’  resources.  This  incentive  to  take  excessive  risks  is  the  so-called  moral  hazard
problem of deposit insurance, the inducement to take risk at the expense of the insurer.
Because  of  the  reduced  market  discipline  and  moral  hazard,  there  is  an  intensified  need  for
government  supervision  to  protect  the  interests  of  taxpayers  and,  in  essence,  substitute  for  the
reduced  market  discipline.  Deposit  insurance  and  other  components  of  the  safety  net  also  enable
banks and thrifts to attract more resources than would otherwise be the case. In short, insured banks
and thrifts receive a subsidy in the form of a government guarantee that allows them both to attract
deposits at lower interest rates than would be required without deposit insurance and to take more risk
without  the  fear  of  losing  their  deposit  funding.  Put  another  way,  deposit  insurance  misallocates
resources by breaking the link between risks and rewards for a select set of market competitors.
From  the  very  beginning,  deposit  insurance  has  involved  a  tradeoff.  On  the  one  hand,  there  are
benefits from the contribution of deposit  insurance  to  overall  financial  stability  and  the  protection  of
small  depositors.  On  the  other  hand,  deposit  insurance  imposes  costs  from  the  inducement  to
risk-taking,  the  misallocation  of  resources,  and  the  increased  need  for  government  supervision  to
protect the taxpayers’ interests. The crafting of reforms of the deposit insurance system must struggle
to  balance  these  tradeoffs.  Moreover,  the  Board  urges,  we  should  be  reasonably  certain  that  any
BIS Review 68/2001
1
reforms are aimed primarily  at protecting the  public  interest and not the profits or market shares of
particular businesses.
The Federal Reserve Board believes that deposit insurance reforms should be designed to preserve
the benefits of heightened financial stability and the protection of small depositors without at the same
time increasing moral hazard or reducing market discipline. This view underpins the response of the
Federal  Reserve  Board  to  the  FDIC’s  recommendations.  In  addition,  although  at  this  time  we  are
responding  to  very  broad  recommendations,  we  urge  that  the  implementing  details  be  kept  as
straightforward  as  possible  to  minimize  the  risk  of  unintended  consequences  that  comes  with
complexity.
Recommendations for reform
The FDIC has made five broad recommendations.
Merging BIF and SAIF
1.
The  Board  strongly  supports  the  FDIC’s  proposal  to  merge  the  BIF  and  SAIF  funds.  Because  the
charters and operations of banks and thrifts have become so similar, it makes no sense to continue
the  separate  funds.  Separate  funds  reflect  the  past,  but  neither  the  present  nor  the  future.  Equally
important, the insurance products provided to the two sets of institutions are identical, and thus the
premiums  should  be  identical  as  well.  Under  current  arrangements,  the  premiums  could  differ
significantly  if  one  of  the  funds  fell  below  the  designated  reserve  ratio  of  1.25 percent  of  insured
deposits  and  the  other  fund  did  not.  Merging  the  funds  would  also  diversify  their  risks  and  reduce
administrative expenses.
Statutory restrictions on premiums
2.
Current law requires the FDIC to impose higher premiums on riskier banks and thrifts but restricts its
ability  to  impose  any  premium  on  well-capitalized  and  highly-rated  institutions  whenever  the
corresponding fund’s reserves exceed 1.25 percent of insured deposits. The Board strongly endorses
the  FDIC  recommendations  that  would  (1) require  that  a  premium  be  imposed  on  every  insured
depository institution, no matter how well capitalized and well rated it may be or how high the fund’s
reserves, and (2) eliminate the statutory restrictions on risk-based pricing.
The  current  statutory  requirement  that  free  deposit  insurance  be  provided  to  well-capitalized  and
well-rated banks when FDIC reserves exceed a predetermined ratio maximizes the subsidy provided
to these institutions and is inconsistent with efforts to avoid inducing moral hazard. Put differently, the
current rule requires the government to give away  its  valuable guarantee  when fund reserves meet
some ceiling level. This free guarantee is of value to banks and thrifts even when they themselves are
in  sound  financial  condition  and  when  macroeconomic  times  are  good.  At  the  end  of  last  year,
92 percent of banks and thrifts were paying no premium. Included in this group were banks that have
never  paid  any  premium  for  their,  in  some  cases  substantial,  coverage  and  fast-growing  entities
whose  past  premiums  were  extraordinarily  small  relative  to  their  current  coverage.  We  believe  that
these anomalies were never intended by the framers of the Deposit Insurance Fund Act of 1996 and
should be addressed by the Congress.
The Congress did intend that the FDIC impose risk-based premiums, but the 1996 Act limits the ability
of the FDIC to impose risk-based premiums on well-capitalized and well-rated banks. And these two
variables – capital strength and examiner overall rating – do not capture all of the risk that banks and
thrifts  could  create  for  the  insurer.  The  Board  believes  the  FDIC  should  be  free  to  establish  risk
categories based on any well-researched economic variables and to impose premiums commensurate
with  these  risk  classifications.  Although  a  robust  risk-based  premium  system  would  be  technically
difficult to design, a closer link between insurance premiums and individual bank or thrift risk would
reduce moral hazard and the distortions in resource allocation that accompany deposit insurance.
We note, however, that significant benefits in this regard are likely to require a substantial range  of
premiums but that the FDIC has concluded  in  its report that  premiums for  the  riskiest  banks  would
probably need to be capped in order to avoid inducing failure at these weaker institutions. We believe
that capping premiums may end up costing the insurance fund more in the long run should these weak
institutions  fail  anyway,  with  the  delay  increasing  the  ultimate  cost  of  resolution.  The  Board  has
2
BIS Review 68/2001
concluded, therefore, that if a cap is required, it should be set quite high so that risk-based premiums
can be as effective as possible in deterring excessive risk-taking.
Designated reserve ratios and premiums
3.
The current law establishes a designated reserve ratio for BIF and SAIF of 1.25 percent. If that ratio is
exceeded,  the  statute  requires  that  premiums  on  well-capitalized  and  well-rated  banks  must  be
discontinued. If the ratio declines below 1.25 percent,  the FDIC must develop a set of premiums to
restore  the  reserve  ratio  to  1.25 percent;  if  it  appears  that  the  fund  ratio  cannot  be  restored  to  its
statutorily  designated  level  in  twelve  months,  the  law  requires  that  a  premium  of  at  least  23 basis
points be imposed on the least risky category of banks.
These  requirements  are  clearly  procyclical,  lowering  or  eliminating  fees  in  good  times  when  bank
credit is readily available and fund reserves should be built up, and abruptly increasing fees sharply in
times of weakness when bank credit availability is under pressure and fund resources are drawn down
to cover the resolution of failed banks. The FDIC recommends that surcharges or rebates should be
used  to  bring  the  fund  back  to  the  target  reserve  ratio  gradually.  The  FDIC  also  recommends  the
possibility  of a target  range  for  the  designated  reserve  ratio,  over  which  the  premiums may  remain
constant, rather than a fixed target reserve ratio and abruptly changing premiums.
We  strongly  support  such  increased  flexibility  and  smoothing  of  premiums.  Indeed,  we  recommend
that the FDIC’s suggested target reserve range  be  widened in order to  reduce  the  need  to  change
premiums sharply. Any floor or ceiling, regardless of its level, could result in requiring that premiums
be  increased  at  exactly  the  time  when  banks  and  thrifts  could  be  under  stress  and,  similarly,  that
premiums  be  reduced  at  the  time  that  depositories  are  in  the  best  position  to  fund  an  increase  in
reserves.  Building  a  larger  fund  in  good  times  and  permitting  it  to  decline  when  necessary  are
prerequisites  to  less  variability  in  the  premium.  In  addition  to  widening  the  range,  the  Board  would
recommend that the FDIC be given the latitude to temporarily relax floor or ceiling ratios on the basis
of  current  and  anticipated  banking  conditions  and  expected  needs  for  resources  to  resolve  failing
institutions.
Rebates
4.
Since  its  early  days,  the  FDIC  has  rebated  “excess”  premiums  whenever  it  felt  its  reserves  were
adequate.  This  procedure  was  replaced  in  the1996  law  by  the  requirement  that  no  premium  be
imposed on well-capitalized and highly rated banks and thrifts when the fund reaches its designated
reserve ratio. The FDIC proposals would re-impose a minimum premium on all banks and thrifts and a
more  risk-sensitive  premium  structure.  These  provisions  would  be  coupled  with  rebates  for  the
stronger entities when the fund approaches what we recommend be a higher upper end of a target
range than the FDIC has suggested, and surcharges when the Fund trends below what we suggest be
a lower end of a target range.
The FDIC also recommends that the rebates not be uniform for the stronger entities. Rather, the FDIC
argues that rebates should be smaller for those banks that have paid premiums for only short periods
or that have in the past paid premiums that are not commensurate with their present size and hence
FDIC exposure.
The  devil,  of  course,  is  in  the  details.  But  this  latter  proposal  makes  considerable  sense,  and  the
Board  endorses  it.  There  are  over  900  banks  – some  now  quite  large –  that  have  never  paid  a
premium, and without this modification they would continue to pay virtually nothing, net of rebates, as
long as their strong capital and high supervisory ratings were maintained. Such an approach is both
competitively inequitable and contributes to moral hazard. It should be addressed.
Indexing insured-deposit coverage ceilings
5.
The FDIC recommends that the current $100,000 ceiling on insured deposits be indexed. The Board
does not support this recommendation and believes that,  at  this  time,  the  current  ceiling  should  be
maintained.
In  the  Board’s  judgment,  it  is  unlikely  that  increased  coverage,  even  by  indexing,  today  would  add
measurably to the stability of the banking system. Macroeconomic policy and  other elements of the
safety net, combined with the current, still-significant level of deposit insurance, continue to underpin
the stability of the financial system. Thus, the problem that increased coverage is designed to solve
BIS Review 68/2001
3
must  be  related  to  either  the  individual  depositor,  the  party  originally  intended  to  be  protected  by
deposit insurance, or to the individual bank or thrift. Clearly, both groups would prefer higher coverage
if  there  were  no  costs.  But  Congress  needs  to  be  clear  about  the  problem  for  which  increased
coverage would be the solution.
Depositors
At  the  Federal  Reserve,  we  frequently  receive  letters  from  banks  urging  that  we  support  increased
deposit insurance coverage. But we virtually never receive similar letters from depositors, who are not
shy about sharing their many other concerns. This experience may reflect the fact that, as our surveys
of  consumer  finances  suggest,  depositors  are  adept  at  achieving  the  level  of  deposit  insurance
coverage  they  desire  by  opening  multiple  accounts.  Such  spreading  of  asset  holdings  is  perfectly
consistent with the counsel always given to investors to diversify their assets – whether stocks, bonds,
or mutual funds – across different issuers. The cost of diversifying for insured  deposits  is surely no
greater  than  doing  so  for  other  assets.  An  individual  bank  would  clearly  prefer  that  the  depositor
maintain  all  of  his  or  her  funds  at  that  bank,  and  would  prefer  to  eliminate  the  need  for  depositor
diversification by  being  able to offer  higher  deposit  insurance  coverage.  Nonetheless,  the  depositor
appears  to  have  no  great  difficulty  – should  he  or  she  want  insured  deposits –  in  finding  multiple
sources of fully insured accounts.
In  addition,  the  singular  characteristic  of  postwar  household  financial  asset  holdings  has  been  the
increasing diversity of portfolio choices. The share of household financial assets in bank deposits has
been  declining  steadily  throughout  the  postwar  period  as  households  have  taken  advantage  of
innovations  that  make  available  to  them  attractive  financial  instruments  with  market  rates  of  return.
There  has  been  no  break  in  that  trend  that  seems  related  to  past  increases  in  insurance  ceilings.
Indeed, the most dramatic substitution out of deposits in recent years has been from both insured and
uninsured deposits to equities and mutual funds. It is difficult to believe that a change in ceilings during
the 1990s would have made any measurable difference in that shift. In fact, bankers’ comments and
the data indicate that the weakness in stock prices in recent quarters has been marked by increased
flows into bank and thrift deposits.
Depository institutions
Does  the  problem  to  be  solved  by  increased  deposit  insurance  coverage  concern  the  individual
depository  institution?  If  so,  the  problem  would  necessarily  be  concentrated  at  smaller  banks  that
generally  do  not  have  access  to  the  money  market  or  foreign  branch  networks  for  supplementary
funds. Since the mid-1990s, banks’ U.S. assets have grown at an average annual rate of 7.7 percent.
Adjusted for the effects of mergers, the smaller banks, those below the largest 1,000, have actually
grown at a more rapid average annual rate of 13 percent. Uninsured deposits at these smaller banks
have also grown more rapidly than at larger banks – at average annual rates of 20.5 percent at the
small banks versus 10.9 percent at the large banks, both on the same merger-adjusted basis. Clearly,
small  banks  have  a  demonstrated  skill  and  ability  to  compete  for  uninsured  deposits.  To  be  sure,
uninsured deposits are more expensive than insured deposits, and bank costs would decline if their
currently  uninsured  liabilities  received  a  government  guarantee.  But  that  is  a  different  matter,  and
raises the issue of a subsidy in its starkest terms. I might add that throughout the 1990s, small banks’
return on equity was well maintained. Indeed, the attractiveness of banking is evidenced by the fact
that  1,363 banks  were  chartered  during  the  past  decade,  two-thirds  since  1995,  when  bank  credit
demands began to intensify.
Some  small  banks  argue  that  they  need  enhanced  deposit  insurance  coverage  to  equalize  their
competition with large banks because depositors prefer to put their uninsured funds in an institution
considered too big to fail. As I have noted, however, small banks have more than held their own in the
market for uninsured deposits. In addition, the Board rejects the notion that any bank is too big to fail.
In FDICIA, Congress made it clear that the systemic-risk exception to the FDIC’s least-cost resolution
of  a  failing  bank  should  be  invoked  only  under  the  most  unusual  circumstances.  Moreover,  the
resolution rules under the systemic-risk exception do not require that uninsured depositors and other
creditors,  much  less  stockholders,  be  made  whole.  Consistent  with  this  view,  the  market  clearly
believes that large institutions are not too big for uninsured creditors to take at least some loss, with
spreads on their subordinated debt larger than those on similar debt of large and highly rated nonbank
financial institutions. Indeed, there are no Aaa-rated U.S. banking organizations.
4
BIS Review 68/2001
Another argument often raised by smaller banks regarding the need for increased deposit insurance
coverage is their inability to match the competition from those large securities firms and bank holding
companies with multiple bank affiliates, offering multiple insured accounts through one organization.
While the Board believes that such offerings are a misuse of deposit insurance, raising the coverage
limit  for  each  account  would  also  increase  the  aggregate  amount  of  insurance  coverage  that  large
multibank organizations would be able to offer, so the disparity would remain.
Conclusion
The  Board  commends  the  FDIC  for  its  review,  analysis,  and  recommendations  for  reform  of  the
deposit  insurance  system.  There  are  several  aspects  of  that  system  that  need  reform.  The  Board
supports, with some modifications, all of the FDIC’s recommendations except indexing of the current
$100,000 ceiling. The thrust of our proposed modifications would call for a wider permissible range for
the size of the fund relative to insured liabilities, reduced variation of the insurance premium as the
relative  size  of  the  fund  changes  with  banking  and  economic  conditions,  and  a  premium  net  of
rebates.
There may come a time when the Board finds that households and businesses with modest resources
are finding difficulty in placing their funds in safe vehicles and/or that there is reason to be concerned
that  the  level  of  deposit  coverage  could  endanger  financial  stability.  Should  either  of  those  events
occur, the Board would call our concerns to the attention of the Congress and support adjustments to
the ceiling by indexing or other methods.
But  today,  in  our  judgment,  neither  financial  stability,  nor  depositors,  nor  depositories  are  being
disadvantaged by the current ceiling. Raising the ceiling now would extend the safety net, increase the
government subsidy to banking, expand moral hazard, and reduce the incentive for market discipline,
without providing any real public benefits. With no clear public benefit to increasing deposit insurance,
the Board sees no reason to increase the scope of the safety net. Indeed, the Board believes the time
has come to draw the line on expanding government guarantees.
BIS Review 68/2001
5
