Svein Gjedrem: Economic developments and monetary policy in Norway
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Norges Bank, at the meeting of the National Council of
the Confederation of Norwegian Commercial and Service Enterprises, Oslo, 30 May 2001.
Monetary policy objectives and guidelines
 The most important objective of monetary policy is to contribute to low and stable inflation. Economic
agents should be fairly certain of the future value of money. High and fluctuating inflation impairs the
function of prices as an information vehicle. Agreements pertaining to sales and purchases, loans and
interest rates are concluded in nominal krone amounts. The tax system is in nominal rates. When the
price level displays wide variations, it is difficult to predict the real content of agreements and budgets.
Unexpected swings in the price level can easily lead to fluctuations in the real economy and instability
in  financial  and  property  markets.  The  experience  of  our  country  and  that  of  others  in  the  1970s,
1980s and 1990s is that periods of high inflation are followed by downturns with high unemployment.
High and variable inflation also leads to an arbitrary redistribution of wealth and income. Hence price
stability  is  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  economic  growth,  welfare  and
appropriate distribution.
This  spring,  the  Government  and  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament)  issued  new  guidelines  for
economic policy. The guideline for fiscal policy implies the use of petroleum revenues equivalent to the
expected  real  return  on  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund,  ie  an  estimated  increase  in  the  use  of
petroleum revenues over the central government budget of about 0.4 per cent of mainland GDP each
year up to 2010. A clear majority in the Storting supported the Government's long-term strategy for
using petroleum revenues.
BIS Review 47/2001
1
At  the  same  time,  the  guidelines  stipulate  that  the  Government  shall  use  the  budget  to  stabilise
economic  developments.  The  annual  budget  resolutions  will  provide  an  indication  of  the  emphasis
placed on this consideration.
The  Norwegian  economy  and  state  finances  are  marked  by  a  high  and  varying  level  of  petroleum
revenues. The basis for determining central government expenditure from one year to the next may
thus easily be impaired. If budget outlays are allowed to swing in pace with oil prices, the result may
be  abrupt  shifts  and  instability  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Changes  in  oil  prices  will  then  rapidly
influence wage and price expectations, the exchange rate and long-term interest rates. In that case, it
would be very demanding to ensure price stability. This would prompt rapid and pronounced changes
in short-term interest rates and be accompanied by a higher risk premium on Norwegian kroner, which
would  lead  to  a  generally  higher  interest  rate  level  over  time.  Norges  Bank  therefore  attaches
substantial importance to what seems to have become a fairly broad consensus on a long-term anchor
for fiscal policy that takes into account possible fluctuations in oil prices from one year to the next. The
rule would appear to be credible as well since it is robust in relation to various scenarios for oil prices
and oil production.
The Government was of the view that a clearer anchor was required to reinforce monetary policy’s role
in underpinning stable economic developments. This is why Norges Bank was given a new operational
mandate for monetary policy. Norges Bank shall set the key rate with a view to maintaining low and
stable inflation. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent.
The new mandate for monetary policy is in line with international practice. Sweden and the UK have
an  inflation  target.  These  countries  generally  have  a  positive  track  record,  but  this  may  also  be
ascribable to a situation that was conducive to low inflation after the downturn in many countries in the
early 1990s.
In  our  view,  there  has  been  a  reasonable  degree  of  confidence  in  monetary  policy  over  the  past
decade.  Inflation  has  been  low  and  stable.  By  quantifying  an  inflation  target,  the  Government  may
nevertheless have made it easier to understand Norwegian monetary policy.
With the revision of monetary policy, the Government has also, in our view, recognised low inflation as
a benefit in itself. A track record of low inflation over several years has provided Norges Bank with a
2
BIS Review 47/2001
better basis for implementing monetary policy.
The new guidelines do not imply a significant change in the conduct of monetary policy. The key rate
is set on the basis of an overall assessment of the inflation outlook.
Higher interest rates curb demand for goods and services and reduce inflation. Lower interest rates
stimulate economic growth. Lower interest rates have the opposite effects. If evidence suggests that
inflation  with  unchanged  interest  rates  will  be  higher  than  2½  per  cent,  the  interest  rate  will  be
increased. If it appears that inflation with unchanged interest rates will be lower than 2½ per cent, the
interest rate will be reduced. There is symmetry here. It is equally important to avoid an inflation rate
that is too low, as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high.
A  change  in  interest  rates  is  not  expected  to  have  an  immediate  effect  on  inflation.  Our  analyses
indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change occurs within two years. Two
years is thus a reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target of 2½ per cent. Hence, the
key rate is set with a view to achieving an inflation rate of 2½ per cent two years ahead.
In  some  situations  where  unexpected  events  lead  to  an  inflation  rate  that  is  too  high,  it  may  be
appropriate to apply a longer time horizon than two years. For example, reducing inflation to 2½ per
cent within this time horizon may be associated with unnecessary real economic costs. A precondition
for applying a longer time horizon is that there is clear evidence of strong confidence in low and stable
inflation over time on the part of economic agents. As experience with setting interest rates using an
inflation target is gained, the scope for placing emphasis on stability in the real economy will probably
increase.
Low and stable inflation is a necessary precondition for stability in the foreign exchange and financial
market  and  the  property  market.  However,  there  have  been  episodes  where  bubbles  have
accumulated in these markets, in the form of sharp increases in asset prices in an environment of low
inflation. Price increases in property and financial markets can have a considerable impact on wage
growth  and  consumer  price  inflation  after  a  period.  When  the  bubbles  burst,  the  result  may  be  an
economic downturn. Developments in financial markets and property markets can be a source of a
more unstable  inflation environment.  In  principle,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  use  the  interest  rate  to
counter this. In practice, however, it is difficult to assess whether price trends in property and financial
markets are sustainable.
When Norges Bank concludes that a change in the key rate is appropriate, the change will in most
cases be made gradually. This is because there is normally uncertainty attached to the situation in the
economy, disturbances to which the economy may be exposed and how fast an interest rate change
influences price inflation. But we will not always take a gradualist approach. A rapid and pronounced
change in the interest rate is appropriate if, for example, heightening turbulence in financial markets or
a  cost-push  shock  resulting  from  negotiations  indicates  that  confidence  in  monetary  policy  is  in
jeopardy.
Norges  Bank  analyses  the  inflation  outlook  in  its  Inflation  Report,  which  is  published  three  times  a
year. Further assessments are presented every sixth week in connection with the Executive Board's
monetary policy meetings. It is, as mentioned, the inflation outlook two years ahead that determines
the interest rate set by Norges Bank. If special circumstances prompt Norges Bank to apply a different
time horizon, the Bank will provide an assessment of this. The same applies should special emphasis
be placed on developments in financial markets and property markets.
Today's inflation rate is partly the result of the interest rate that was set one to two years ago. Current
inflation  figures  do  not  provide  an  adequate  basis  for  determining  the  level  at  which  interest  rates
should be set today. Monthly figures for the consumer price index are also influenced by random and
temporary  factors  that  have  little  impact  on  developments  in  inflation  over  time.  Precipitation  levels
have  an  effect  on  electricity  prices.  Changes  in  indirect  taxes  have  an  immediate  impact  on  the
consumer  price  index.  The  direct  effects  of  these  factors  on  inflation  are  exhausted  after  a  year.
Hence these factors do  not have any  implications for the interest rate,  which  is normally set  with  a
view to maintaining inflation at 2½ per cent two years ahead.
However,  it  is  still  interesting  to  adjust  monthly  inflation  figures  for  temporary  effects  to  determine
whether  developments  are  broadly  in  line  with  our  projections.  This  is  why  Norges  Bank  presents
figures  for  consumer  price  inflation  where  the  effects  of  some  temporary  factors  are  excluded.
However, the automatic adjustment of inflation figures for direct effects of one-off factors can also be
associated  with  pitfalls.  Higher  indirect  taxes  and  electricity  prices  can  be  a  source  of  accelerating
inflation via spillover effects on other prices and wages.
BIS Review 47/2001
3
The mandate for monetary policy with an inflation target provides a sound basis for assessing Norges
Bank's  interest  rate  setting.  Inflation  at  one  point  in  time,  adjusted  for  certain  temporary  effects,
provides a measure of whether interest rate setting was appropriate. Market participants and others
can assess the quality in the inflation reports and analyses published by the Bank, and whether our
analyses  are  consistent  with  our  interest  rate  setting.  The  uncertainty  associated  with  economic
developments and inflation, as observed since the mid-1990s, may indicate that we normally reach the
inflation target within an interval of +/- 1 percentage point.
The Government has assigned a task to Norges Bank. Norges Bank uses its professional judgement
in a delimited area. The results of our decisions can be measured. Hence the government authorities
can evaluate our performance.
The interest rate differential against other countries has widened
Central  banks  in  several  countries  have  reduced  interest  rates  earlier  this  year  with  a  view  to
countering an economic turnaround. The Federal Reserve has cut the federal funds target rate by a
total of 2½ percentage points since the beginning of the year. The Bank of England and the European
Central Bank have recently cut rates. There is a also a tendency towards a more expansionary fiscal
stance  in  many  countries.  In  the  US,  fiscal  policy  has  become  somewhat  more  expansionary  after
many  years  of  relatively  tight  budgets.  Many  European  countries  have  also  taken  a  pause  in  the
consolidation of state finances.
Norges Bank increased the sight deposit rate – which is our key rate – by a total of 1½ percentage
points last  year. So far this year, the key rate has remained  unchanged.  As a result, the difference
between short-term rates in Norway and other countries has increased. Money market rates are about
3 percentage points higher than among our trading partners. Money market rates are 3½ percentage
points lower in Sweden than in Norway.
The wider interest rate differential implies, in isolation, a somewhat tighter monetary policy. The krone
becomes a more attractive investment currency, and this may have contributed to strengthening the
krone. Investments in the NOK market are now generating a return of 7 per cent. A stronger krone
reduces the cost of imported goods and services for enterprises and households. Imported inflation is
lower. So far this year, the import-weighted krone exchange rate has appreciated by about 3 per cent.
Substantial uncertainty surrounding international economic developments
There is considerable uncertainty attached to international economic developments.
4
BIS Review 47/2001
In  the  US,  industrial  output  and  retail  sales  have  weakened  markedly  over  the  last  three  months.
Between March and April employment declined by more than 200 000. GDP growth slowed from an
annualised rate of a good 5 per cent in the first half of 2000 to about 1 per cent in the fourth quarter of
last year and the first quarter of 2001.
US equities, as measured for example by the Dow Jones index, declined markedly through 2000 and
in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  Stock  markets  in  other  countries  also  fell  during  this  period.  Equity
prices have picked up again since the beginning of April, however. In addition, industrial commodity
prices  and  oil  prices  have  risen  over  the  last  month.  Moreover,  long-term  interest  rates  have
increased. These developments may indicate that many operators in financial markets and commodity
markets have again become somewhat more optimistic about the prospects ahead.
Household and business confidence also deteriorated through the latter half of last year and early this
year,  but  has  remained  steady  over  the  last  two  to  three  months,  as  illustrated  by  the  confidence
indicators in this chart.
BIS Review 47/2001
5
There is substantial uncertainty associated with developments in Japan. Industrial output and exports
have declined. The financial sector is struggling in the face of large losses and poor performance, and
the general price level is falling.
In the euro area the picture is mixed. Growth is  solid  in  countries  like  France,  Finland  and  Ireland.
Germany  has  a  large  internationally  exposed  industrial  sector,  which  is  feeling  the  effects  of  the
slowdown in growth in the US and Asia. In a survey1, growth forecasts for Germany have been revised
downwards  this  year  from  3  per  cent  a  few  months  ago  to  a  good  2  per  cent.  Economic  growth
prospects for Sweden and the UK are also weaker than a few months ago.
However, the easing of monetary and fiscal policy in many countries should contribute to a pick-up in
growth and reduce the risk of a pronounced international downturn.
The Norwegian economy will be particularly hard hit by an international downturn if this translates into
a sharp fall in oil prices and other commodity prices that are  important for Norwegian exports. This
would  lead  to  lower  export  revenues  and  slower  growth.  Employment  would  also  be  affected.  An
international downturn would also lead to lower prices for imported goods and services and thereby
reduce domestic inflation. If other Nordic countries are negatively affected, this will have an impact on
the supply of labour in Norway since the Nordic labour market has become increasingly integrated.
Continued pressures in the Norwegian economy
                                                     
1  Consensus Forecasts.
6
BIS Review 47/2001
Available labour resources are limited in the Norwegian economy. The labour force participation rate is
high. Vacancies are numerous, particularly in the health sector, schools and the construction industry
due to a shortage of teachers, nurses, dentists and construction workers. Extensive use of disability
and sickness benefits is limiting the supply of labour. Reforms such as contractual pension schemes,
which  were stepped up through  the  1990s, cash allowances for families  with small children  and  an
increased number of vacation days this year and next also contribute to reducing the effective labour
supply.
The country  as  a  whole  is  experiencing  labour  shortages,  but  the  differences  between  regions  and
industries  are  considerable.  In  Eastern  Norway,  where  service  industries  are  very  important,
unemployment has declined the last year. From 1998 to 2000 alone, employment in private services
rose by 26 000 nationwide. In Southern and Western Norway, unemployment rose last year, largely
reflecting the decline in manufacturing employment since the beginning of 1999. Unemployment has
declined again recently.
Employment in the public sector has also increased markedly in recent years. Over the last 30 years,
the public sector and private services have laid claim to an  increasing share of labour resources in
Norway, a trend that will probably continue.
BIS Review 47/2001
7
The  tight  labour  market  reflects  a  high  activity  level  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  The  mainland
economy  is  experiencing  an  upturn,  but  growth  is  low.  Growth  in  private  consumption  has  been
moderate the last year following many years of high consumption growth in the 1990s. House prices
have increased markedly the last decade. Inflation-adjusted house prices are now more than 10 per
cent higher than at the highest level in the 1980s. Growth in lending to the household and enterprise
sectors remains high.
Since 1997, price inflation has been higher in Norway than among our trading partners. Price inflation
has accelerated the last year, also when we disregard the increase in petrol prices and indirect taxes
since the beginning of this year. The year-on-year rise in overall consumer prices was 3.8 per cent in
April 2001. Excluding indirect taxes, electricity and petrol prices, the  year-on-year rise in prices was
about 2 ½ per cent in April of this year.
8
BIS Review 47/2001
Higher price inflation in Norway is primarily due to a tight labour market that has persisted over many
years, fuelling strong growth in wages and labour costs. In the light of higher price and cost inflation in
Norway  than  in other countries, it  has been appropriate to maintain higher interest  rates  in  Norway
than in most comparable countries.
A  special  feature  of  wage  formation  in  Norway  has  been  that  conditions  for  exposed  industries,
including those that do not face international competition, have received considerable emphasis in the
negotiations.  The  last  few  years,  the  sheltered  sector  has  had  a  greater  influence  on  overall  wage
developments.
The  centralised  income  settlements  in  Norway  have  been  an  arena  of  coordination,  where
macroeconomic considerations have at times received considerable emphasis. This has contributed to
low unemployment levels in our country. But we have also seen that the income settlements may be a
source  of  economic  disturbances.  The  income  settlements  in  1974/75  and  1986  have  had  the
strongest  negative  impact.  The  settlements  in  1998  and  2000  also  fuelled  higher  cost  inflation.  In
1998,  high  wage  growth,  combined  with  the  fall  in  the  krone  exchange  rate,  contributed  to  a  4  ½
percentage point rise in interest rates during the spring and summer months. The retail and service
industry almost acted as a spearhead in this wage negotiation. During and after the wage settlement
in 2000, short-term interest rates rose by 1½ percentage points.
We have also seen that income formation is affected by labour market conditions and profit trends in
the business sector. This is also true of wage and income developments among managers, salaried
employees and the liberal professions. The structural changes that now seem to have occurred in the
income formation for these groups has probably also been important for the outcome of the ordinary
wage settlements.
Distributive trades
BIS Review 47/2001
9
Growth in wages and labour costs in distributive trades has also been high the last five years, with an
average wage growth per normal person-year of 5 per cent, the same as for mainland Norway.
National  accounts  figures  for  service  industries  are  more  uncertain  than  figures  for  manufacturing
industry. Measuring productivity in service industries is difficult. The chart shows that according to the
national accounts, productivity growth is very volatile.
If we smooth the data somewhat, it appears, however, that productivity growth has been relatively high
through  the  1990s,  following  low  growth  at  the  end  of  the  1980s.  At  the  very  end  of  the  1990s,
however, productivity growth was weak.
10
BIS Review 47/2001
One  source  that  may  be  used  to  analyse  developments  in  distributive  trades  is  Norges  Bank’s
database Sebra which contains figures for all limited companies that have turned in valid accounts to
the Brønnøysund Register. The figures, from 1988 to 1999, show that profitability in this industry has
been positive since 1993. Both measures of profitability show a slightly falling trend from the peak year
1994 to 1998. In 1999, it appears that profitability improved again. The increase in profitability from the
end of the 1980s to the mid-1990s reflects a structural development in the industry since the 1980s.
The most important changes were the emergence of chains and the development of shopping centres.
When  the  upturn  came  in  the  mid-1990s,  a  better  structure  was  in  place.  Both  the  chains  and  the
shopping centres have increased their market shares.
This structural development has probably made it possible to maintain satisfactory profitability at the
same time that profit margins2 have declined. Operations became more efficient. Profitability has been
satisfactory despite lower mark-ups on the cost of goods. In 1998 and 1999, however, profit margins
increased somewhat.
The higher profit margins since 1997 may reflect the greater concentration in the grocery trade.
                                                     
2  Profit margin is defined as operating income less cost of goods as a percentage of operating income.
BIS Review 47/2001
11
Labour cost growth and wage costs as a share of income in distributive trades declined sharply until
the mid-1990s and have since picked up. This had the opposite effect on operating margins3, which
fell in the five years to 1999.
One possible explanation is that weaker competition in distributive trades the last few years has made
it possible to increase profit margins without losing market shares and thereby weakening profitability.
This may also have contributed to the industry’s role of spearhead in the wage settlement in 1998.
However,  a  fresh  report  from  the  Norwegian  Agricultural  Economics  Research  Institute  and  ECON
shows that gross margins4 on meat in the grocery trade were reduced somewhat between the spring
of 1999 and the autumn of 2000. Farmers' margins fell fairly markedly. The survey concludes that it is
primarily the processing industry that increased margins on meat products in this period.
A substantial share of the food industry is sheltered from international competition through trade policy
measures. Analyses conducted by Statistics Norway show that productivity growth in this industry was
very low between 1993 and 19995. Weak productivity growth in this industry and in the graphics and
publishing  industry  contributed  to  the  substantially  poorer  productivity  growth  in  Norway  compared
with Sweden in this period. A substantial share of the graphics and publishing industry is characterised
by natural protection against foreign competition.
Excluding border trade, distributive trades are exposed to foreign competition only to a limited extent.
Exposure  to  international  competition  is  a  source  of  learning,  innovation  and  development  for
industries.  It  is  essential,  in  my  view,  to  maintain  a  broad  internationally  exposed  sector  in  the
                                                     
3  Operating margin is defined as operating result as a percentage of operating income.
4  Gross margin is defined here as the difference between retail price and purchase price for meat products and is to cover
profits and all costs other than the meat raw material (see NILF)(2001).
5  See Boug, P. and Naug, B. (2001).
12
BIS Review 47/2001
mainland  economy.  At  the  same  time,  constructive  unrest  in  retail  and  service  industries  and  other
sheltered  industries,  with  new  entrants,  mergers  and  demergers,  could  also  promote  efficiency  and
lower prices.
Conclusion
The operational mandate for monetary policy is to stabilise  inflation  around  2½  per  cent.  Prices  for
goods and services that are set by commercial and service enterprises are an important component of
the  consumer  price  index.  It  has  therefore  been  a  pleasure  for  me  to  provide  this  assembly  with  a
presentation of how Norwegian monetary policy is conducted.
Thank you for your attention.
BIS Review 47/2001
13
