Lim Hng Kiang: Meeting the challenges of the globalised economy
Opening remarks by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at
the 36th SEACEN Governors' Conference, Singapore, 31 May 2001.
 Honourable Governors
Distinguished Guests and Delegates
Ladies and Gentlemen
Introduction
It gives me great pleasure to bid you a warm welcome to the Annual Conference of the Governors of
the South-East Asian Central Banks. This is the 36th Conference and reflects the close ties and strong
co-operation  that  central  banks  and  monetary  authorities  in  the  region  have  forged  over  the  last
30 years.
SEACEN economy/Recent financial developments
This year's Conference is held amid concerns of a global economic slowdown. After expanding by an
average rate of 7.3% in the year  2000, prospects for regional  economies are set  to  slow  this  year.
Average real GDP growth for the East Asian economies1 is projected to fall to around 4.5% for 2001.
The slowdown will be due largely to the cyclical downturn in the US economy, as well as the global
electronics industry, both of which will hurt regional exports.
Due to its very open nature, East Asian economies are susceptible to the current global downturn in
external demand. The US is the largest export market for most of the SEACEN economies, with export
shares averaging 20%. In terms of goods structure, electronics accounts for over 20% of total exports
in  all  East  Asian  economies.  Exacerbating  the  downturn  is  the  continued  economic  weakness  in
Japan,  the  second  largest  market  in  the  region.  Reflecting  the  weak  external  environment,  export
growth in many SEACEN economies has fallen sharply. This has also undermined domestic demand.
Challenges for Asia
Concerns  over  the  slowing  growth  in  the  US  and  the  much  weaker  Japanese  economy  have  hit
regional currencies. Since end-2000, regional currencies have seen higher volatility. While the greater
flexibility of exchange rates has reduced the risk of large speculative attacks, such fluctuations are not
without risk. The challenge facing policymakers is how to ensure the greater exchange rate flexibility
does not lead to greater financial system fragility.
Aside  from  macro-prudential  risk,  financial  regulators  also  faced  challenges  arising  from  the  rapid
changes  in  the  global  financial  landscape.  In  particular,  advancement  in  technology,  investors'
demand  for  shareholder  value  and  customers'  demand  for  integrated  financial  supervision  have
accelerated consolidation and globalisation of financial institutions and markets. The boundaries of the
banking, insurance and securities industries are less clearly defined. This calls for a more harmonised
and  integrated  approach  to  supervision  of  the  financial  system.  Besides  co-ordinating  among  the
different  regulatory  bodies  to  address  unsupervised  risks,  overlaps  and  gaps  in  their  regulatory
framework, there may be a need to re-look the way national regulatory and supervisory authorities are
organised, to create greater synergies and enhance efficiency.
At  the  international  level,  efforts  are  underway  to  strengthen  the  architecture  of  the  international
financial  system.  In  particular,  efforts  have  been  taken  to  increase  transparency,  and  develop  and
implement standards and codes to promote greater stability and enhance the robustness of financial
systems to shocks. Efforts undertaken by international financial institutions include the IMF's Reports
                                                     
1  The  East  Asian  9  economies  are  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Thailand,  the  Philippines,  Singapore,  Korea,  Chinese  Taipei,
Hong Kong and China.
BIS Review 48/2001
1
on Standards and Codes (ROSCs), and the IMF/World Bank's Financial Sector Assessment Program
(FSAP). Many developing countries, however, have expressed concerns over the tendency of these
organisations  to  adopt  a  one-size-fits-all  approach  without  taking  into  account  the  different
circumstances and varying implementation capacity of the countries involved.
In the banking industry, the Basle Capital Accord of 1988 was a landmark agreement which helped to
increase the capital held by internationally active banks, and to create a more level playing field for
banks  under  different  jurisdictions.  However,  the  rapid  changes  in  banking  and  finance  have  led
regulators  to  propose  a  New  Basle  Capital  Accord  which  will  establish  a  more  risk  sensitive  and
comprehensive capital framework, to benefit banks as well as improve safety and soundness of the
financial system. The new Accord, however, poses challenges to Asian  banks and regulators  alike.
The banks would have to develop more sophisticated risk management capability while the regulators
would need to build up technical knowledge as well as supervisory resources to validate banks' risk
management systems and determine if banks are sufficiently well capitalised on an on going basis.
MAS initiatives to face the challenges
I  am  sure  Governors  will  discuss  at  length  the  various  challenges  that  I  have  highlighted  earlier.
Perhaps  I  could  share  with  Governors  efforts  taken  by  Singapore  to  address  some  of  these
challenges.
The  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  undertook  a  fundamental  review  of  our  supervisory  and
regulatory  policies.  In  the  area  of  banking,  our  reforms  have  focussed  on  liberalising  the  banking
sector,  strengthening  corporate  governance  and  raising  disclosure  standards  of  local  banks,  and
shifting away from one-size-fits-all regulation  to risk-based supervision. MAS  announced a five-year
programme to liberalise access by foreign banks to the domestic banking sector in May 1999. We are
currently reviewing the measures to position ourselves for the next phase of liberalisation.
In  the  area  of  corporate  governance,  MAS  has  set  guidelines  on  the  composition,  roles  and
responsibilities  of  banks'  Board  of  Directors  and  Nominating  Committees.  We  are  finalising  the
guidelines for the Compensation and Audit Committees. Local banks are also required to divest all of
their  non-financial  business  interests  to  limit  contagion  risks  to  the  local  banks  arising  from  their
non-financial  businesses,  enhance  market  discipline  and 
focus
management attention on core banking business. Disclosure standards of our banks have also been
significantly  raised.  Local  banks  have  taken  steps  to  disclose  directors'  remuneration,  related  party
transactions and risk management practices. They  will be disclosing further details  next  year  on  all
these areas.
Our  success  in  these  endeavours  will  require  effort  by  all  market  participants.  A  private-sector-led
panel  will be set  up  later  this  year  to  advise  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Monetary  Authority  of
Singapore  on  matters  relating  to  corporate  governance,  disclosure  requirements  and  accounting
standards. Through feedback from market players and continual reviews, we will continue to refine our
regulations  to  promote  competition  and  innovation  whilst  maintaining  high  prudential  standards  and
the stability of the financial system.
transparency,  and 
improve 
The future of SEACEN
The  Asian  financial  crisis  clearly  demonstrated  that  the  world  has  become  more  inter-linked.
Liberalisation of markets in the region resulted in the fortune of each economy being more intertwined
to one another than ever before. There is much scope for co-operation, and room for economies to
learn  from  the  experiences  of  one  another.  Over  the  past  couple  of  years,  there  has  also  been  a
proliferation of regional and international foras, bringing together regulators and government officials
to deliberate the intricacies of financial stability.
In this regard, the challenge for SEACEN is to remain attuned to the needs of its various members,
and to maintain  its relevance by reaching  out  to  its  members. The  SEACEN  Centre  has  played  an
important role in facilitating the exchange of information and expertise on financial supervision and the
conduct  of  monetary  policy  among  the  staff  of  SEACEN  central  banks.  There  is  room  for  greater
co-operation  among  regulators,  as  well  as  with  other  regional  groupings  and  international  financial
institutions.  SEACEN should explore  ways to leverage off the expertise of these various  groupings,
and to create greater synergies through partnership and co-operation.
2
BIS Review 48/2001
I understand that the SEACEN Board of Governors will deliberate at length a strategic review of the
SEACEN  Centre  during  the  Conference.  This  is  an  opportunity  for  Governors  to  re-examine  the
relevance of SEACEN activities, and explore ways in which SEACEN can better serve its members.
SEACEN has to reposition itself to meet the challenges of the new globalised economy.
Conclusion
We have a full and demanding agenda ahead of us. At the same time, the Conference tomorrow will
allow us to share experiences and exchange ideas, as well as strengthen existing relationships and
forge new friendships. I  would also like to  wish  all  participants  a  pleasant  stay  in  Singapore.  I  now
have the pleasure of declaring the 36th SEACEN Governors Conference open.
Enjoy the evening. Thank you.
BIS Review 48/2001
3
