Alan Greenspan: Trade policy
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the  US Federal Reserve
System, before the Committee on Finance, US Senate, on 4 April 2001.
 I am pleased to be invited to discuss some of the important issues concerning international trade and
the attendant implications for the U.S. economy and the world economy more generally. In doing so, I
want to emphasize that I speak for myself and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve.
One  of  the  most  impressive  and  persistent  trends  of  the  last  several  decades  is  the  expansion  of
international  trade.  Trade  across  national  borders  has  increased  far  faster  than  world  GDP.  As  a
consequence, imports of goods and services as a percentage of gross domestic products worldwide,
on average, have risen from approximately 12 percent forty years ago to 24 percent today.
To  most  economists,  the  evidence  is  impressively  persuasive  that  the  dramatic  increase  in  world
competition - a consequence of broadening trade flows - has fostered markedly higher standards of
living for almost all countries that have participated in cross-border trade. I include most especially the
United States.
Globalization  as  generally  understood  involves  the  increasing  interaction  of  national  economic
systems.  Of  necessity,  these  systems  are  reasonably  compatible  and,  in  at  least  some  important
respects, market oriented. Certainly, market-directed capitalism has become the paradigm for most of
the world, as central-planning regimes have fallen into disfavor since their undisputed failures around
the world in the four decades following World War II.
Globalization, in turn, has been driven importantly by advances in technology. By lowering the costs of
gathering  information  and  conducting  transactions,  new  technologies  have  reduced  market  frictions
and provided significant impetus to the process of broadening world markets. Expanding markets, in
turn,  have  both  increased  competition  and  rendered  many  forms  of  government  intervention  either
ineffective or perverse.
The recognition of this prosperity-enhancing sea-change in world markets and, in that context, of the
counterproductive consequences of pervasive intervention has led many governments to reduce tariffs
and  trade  barriers  and,  where  necessary,  to  deregulate  markets.  These  actions  themselves  have
further  promoted  the  very  globalization  that,  interacting  with  advancing  technology,  spurred  the
deregulatory initiatives in the first place. The result of this process has been an advance and diffusion
of technical change that has raised living standards in much of the world.
The international trading system that  evolved  has  enhanced  competition  and  nurtured  what  Joseph
Schumpeter a number of decades ago called “creative destruction,” the continuous scrapping of old
technologies to make way for the new. Standards of living rise because the  depreciation  and  other
cash  flows  of  industries  employing  older,  increasingly  obsolescent  technologies  are  marshaled  to
finance the newly produced capital assets that almost always embody the cutting-edge technologies.
This is the process by which wealth is created incremental step by incremental step. It presupposes a
continuous churning of an economy in which the new displaces the old.
But there is also no doubt that this transition to the new high-tech economy, of which rising trade is a
part, is proving difficult for a large segment of our workforce that interfaces with our rapidly changing
capital  stock  day  by  day.  This  is  most  evident  in  the  rising  fear  of  job  skill  obsolescence  that  has
induced a marked increase in experienced workers going back to school - often community colleges -
to upgrade their skills for a rapidly changing work environment.
While major advances in standards of living are evident among virtually all nations that have opened
their borders to increased competition, the adjustment trauma resulting from technological advances
as well as globalization has also distressed those who once thrived in industries that were once at the
cutting edge of technology but that have become increasingly noncompetitive. Economists will say that
workers  should  move  from  the  steel  districts  of  western  Pennsylvania  to  Silicon  Valley  or  its
equivalent. And eventually they, or more likely their children, will move. But the adjustment process is
wrenching to an existing workforce made redundant largely through no fault of their own. It may be
argued  that  all  workers  should  have  the  foresight  to  recognize  long-term  job  opportunity  shifts  and
move  in  advance  of  obsolescence.  Such  forecasting  abilities  are  not  in  great  abundance  among
BIS Review 28/2001
1
in  which 
those  rendered 
workers.  But  neither  are  they  evident  among  business  managers  or  the  economists  who  counsel
them.
Yet  the  protectionist  propensity  to  thwart  the  process  of  the  competitive  flow  of  capital,  from  failing
technologies to the more productive, is unwise and surely self-defeating. History tells us that, not only
is it unwise to try to hold back innovation, it is also not possible over the longer run. Generation after
generation  has  experienced  episodes 
technologically  obsolescent
endeavored to undermine progress, often appealing to the very real short-term costs of adjusting to a
changing economic environment. In the end, these attacks did not prevail, and long-term advances in
standards of living resumed.
Nonetheless, the campaign to expand free trade is never won. It is a continuing battle. Though tariffs
in industrial countries have come down sharply over the past half-century, other barriers have become
more prevalent. Administrative protection in the form of antidumping suits and countervailing duties is
a case in point. These forms of protection have often been imposed under the label of promoting “fair
trade,”  but  oftentimes  they  are  just  simple  guises  for  inhibiting  competition.  Typically,  antidumping
duties are levied when foreign average prices are below the average cost of production. But that also
describes a practice that often emerges as a wholly appropriate response to a softening in demand. It
is the rare case that prices fall below marginal cost, which would be a more relevant standard. In the
view  of  many  economists,  antidumping  initiatives  should  be  reserved  for  those  cases  in  which
anticompetitive behavior is involved. Contrary to popular notions about antidumping suits, under U.S.
law, it is not required to show evidence of predatory behavior, or of intention to monopolize, or of any
other intentional efforts to drive competitors out of business.
In the end, economic progress clearly rests on competition. It would be a great tragedy were we to
stop the wheels of progress because of an incapacity to assist the victims of progress.
Our efforts should be directed at job skills enhancement and retraining - a process in which the private
market is already engaged - and, if necessary, selected income maintenance programs for those over
a certain age, where retraining is problematic. Thwarting competition, by placing barriers to imports,
will  prevent  markets  in  the  United  States  and  other  nations  from  deploying  capital  to  their  most
productive uses, that is, the most cost-effective production of those goods and services most highly
valued by consumers.
Protectionism will also slow the inevitable transition of the workforce to more productive endeavors. To
be sure, an added few years may enable some workers to reach retirement with dignity, but it will also
keep  frozen  in  place  younger  workers  whose  opportunities  to  secure  jobs  with  better  long-run
prospects diminish with time.
I regret that trade policy has been inextricably linked with job creation. We often try to promote free
trade on the mistaken ground, in my judgment, that it will create jobs. The reason should  be that  it
enhances  standards  of  living  through  the  effects  of  competition  on  productivity.  It  is  difficult  to  find
credible evidence that trade has affected the level of total employment in this country over the long
run.  Indeed,  in  recent  months  we  have  experienced  the  widest  trade  deficit  in  history  with
unemployment still close to record lows.
Certainly, the distribution of jobs by industry is influenced by international trade, but it is also affected
by  domestic  trade.  The  relative  balance  of  supply  and  demand  in  a  competitive  market  economy
determines the mix of employment. When exports fall or imports rise, domestic demand and relative
prices have invariably adjusted in the long run to leave total employment generally unaffected.
I  also  regret  that,  despite  the  remarkable  success  over  a  near  half-century  of  GATT,  the  General
Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, and its successor, the World Trade Organization, in reducing trade
barriers,  our  trade  laws  and  negotiating  practices  are  essentially  adversarial.  They  presume  that  a
trade concession extracted from us by our trading partners is to their advantage at our expense and
must be countered. Few economists see the world that way; trade is not a zero sum game.
If trade barriers are lowered by both parties, each clearly benefits. In almost every credible scenario, if
one lowers barriers and the other does not, the country that lowered barriers unilaterally would still be
better  off  having  done  so.  Raising  barriers  to  achieve  protectionist  equality  with  reluctant  trading
partners would be neither to our benefit nor to theirs. The best of all possible worlds for competition is
for both parties to lower trade barriers. The worst is for both to keep them up.
For these reasons, we should welcome the opportunity to contribute to  the  effort of working toward
further  trade  liberalization.  If  we  freeze  competitive  progress  in  place,  we  will  almost  certainly  slow
2
BIS Review 28/2001
economic  growth  overall  and  impart  substantial  harm  to  those  workers  who  would  otherwise  seek
more-effective  longer-term  job  opportunities.  Protecting  markets  from  new  technologies  has  never
succeeded. Adjustments to newer technologies have been delayed, but only at significant cost.
Moreover,  even  should  our  trading  partners  not  retaliate  in  the  face  of  increased  American  trade
barriers - an unlikely event - we would do ourselves great harm by lessening the vigor of American
competitiveness.  The  United  States  has  been  in  the  forefront  of  the  postwar  opening  up  of
international markets, much to our and the rest of the world’s benefit. It would be a great tragedy were
that process stopped or reversed.
The arguments against the global trading system that emerged first in Seattle and then spread over
the past year and  a half arguably touched a chord in many people  partly,  in  the judgment of many
analysts, by raising the fear that they would lose local political control of their destinies. Clearly, the
risk is that support for restrictions on trade is not dead, only quiescent.
Those  who  protest  against  “globalization”  appear  too  often  to  be  self-designated  representatives  of
developing country interests. For all the reasons that I have cited earlier, these protests, however well
intentioned, are wrong-headed. In particular, it is essential to note that probably the best single action
that  the  industrial  countries  could  actually  take  to  alleviate  the  terrible  problem  of  poverty  in  many
developing  countries  would  be  to  open,  unilaterally,  markets  to  imports  from  these  countries.  Such
countries need more globalization, not less.
In many important respects, the past half-century has represented an uneven struggle to repair the
close linkages among national economies that existed before the First World War. The hostilities bred
of war, the substantial disruptions to established trading patterns associated with that conflict, and the
subsequent poor economic performance over the next few decades engendered the erection of trade
barriers  around  the  world  that  have  taken  even  longer  to  dismantle.  To  repeat  that  error  would
increase poverty among a significant segment of the world’s population.
The United States has been a world leader in terms of free trade and open markets for capital as well
as goods and services. We  have  benefited  enormously  from  the  resulting  international  competition:
We have a wide range of goods and services available for consumption; our industries produce and
employ cutting-edge technologies; and the opportunities created by these technologies have attracted
capital  inflows  from  abroad.  These  capital  inflows  have  reduced  the  costs  of  building  our  country’s
capital stock and added to the productivity of our workers. Most economists would argue that we must
reaffirm the United States’ leadership role in the area of international trade policy in order to improve
standards of living in the United States and among all of our trading partners.
BIS Review 28/2001
3
