Willem F Duisenberg: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and
Monetary Affairs
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels,
12 September 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
In  the  light  of  the  unprecedented  and  tragic  events  that  occurred  in  the  United  States  yesterday,  I
should  like  to  be  as  brief  as  possible  today  in  my  introductory  statement.  Firstly,  I  should  like  to
express my deep sympathy with the citizens of the United States and, in particular the relatives and
friends  of  the  victims  of  this  brutal  attack.  Moreover,  I  should  like  to  emphasise  that  the  European
Central Bank and the national central banks are standing ready to support the normal functioning of
markets  and  relevant  operational  systems,  if  the  need  arises.  Indeed,  the  ECB  has  been  in  close
contact with the other major central banks in the world since the events have unfolded.
Let me now report to you on the recent monetary policy decision taken by the Governing Council of
the ECB.
1. Economic and monetary developments
Over  the  last  few  months,  the  evidence  available  to  the  Governing  Council  has  gradually  pointed
towards an improvement in the outlook for price developments. This has been particularly apparent
from the information stemming from what  we call  the  second  pillar  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy,
while  the  information  coming  from  the  first  pillar  of  our  strategy  has  remained  consistent  with  a
favourable outlook for price stability in the medium term. At this stage, I do not want to speculate about
the  possible  consequences  of  yesterday's  developments  in  financial  markets  on  economic  and
monetary developments. We will have a first discussion on this issue tomorrow, at the meeting of the
Governing Council.
As regards the first pillar, the three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3 was 5.9% in the
period  from  May  to  July  2001.  This  figure,  however,  has  to  be  carefully  analysed.  First,  the  figure
needs  to  be  corrected  for  holdings  of  money  market  paper  and  short-term  debt  securities  by  non-
residents of the euro area. As already announced, the ECB intends to publish an M3 series which is
adjusted  for  these  non-resident  holdings  of  negotiable  instruments  towards  the  end  of  the  year.  At
present,  some  preliminary  estimates  of  the  impact  of  these  holdings  on  monetary  aggregates  are
available. When these are taken into account, the three-month average of the annual growth of M3
would turn out to be slightly above 5%, thus not very far from the reference value of 4½%.
In  addition,  the  increase  in  the  annual  growth  of  M3  in  the  recent  past  has  to  be  interpreted  with
caution, as several factors indicate that it might not necessarily imply risks to price stability. In fact, the
relatively flat yield curve and the weakness in the stock markets appear to have made the holding of
short-term deposits and marketable paper included in M3 more attractive, thereby temporarily affecting
M3 growth. Furthermore, the recent increase in the money stock seems also to reflect the adjustment
in transaction balances in reaction to the past rise in energy and food prices. This, by itself, should be
seen  as  a  one-off  level  adjustment  and  should  not  indicate  future  upward  pressures  on  inflation,
provided that the rise in energy and food prices does not trigger second-round effects on inflation via
wages. A further factor which suggests that the rise in M3 growth should be interpreted with caution is
that  the  annual  rate  of  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  has  continued  to  decline  over  recent
months.
Turning to the analysis from the second pillar of our monetary policy strategy, several developments
clearly pointed to lower inflationary pressures coming from the demand side. Recent data on economic
activity indicate that real GDP growth in the euro area will most likely be lower than was expected a
few  months  ago.  This  reflects  the  slowdown  in  economic  activity  in  the  United  States  and  the
persistent economic weakness in Japan, which have both been more pronounced than was expected
a few months ago, and have also affected other areas of the world. On the domestic side, the past
strong increases in oil and food prices have counteracted the beneficial  effects on households' real
BIS Review 76/2001
1
disposable income of the recent tax reductions in some Member States. All these factors have also
had adverse effects on investment.
Looking ahead, a gradual strengthening in growth of domestic demand can be expected as the past
increases  in  inflation  continue  to  unwind.  Domestic  demand  should  be  further  supported  by  the
positive  impact  on  consumption  of  the  recent  tax  reductions,  and  by  the  favourable  financing
conditions in the euro area.
In the current environment, it is likely that the process of wage moderation which we have seen thus
far  will  continue  in  the  period  ahead.  First,  the  slowdown  in  economic  activity  should  contribute  to
containing  inflationary  pressure  stemming  from  the  labour  market.  In  addition,  the  latest  figures  on
producer  and  consumer  prices  provide  encouraging  signs  that  the  past  increase  in  consumer  price
inflation has been temporary and that, in the absence of further unfavourable shocks, HICP inflation
will return to levels of below 2% in the not too distant future. The expected falling trend in consumer
price  inflation  should  contribute  to  containing  the  inflation  expectations  of  economic  agents  and
thereby have a positive influence on price and wage-setting behaviour. This view is confirmed by bond
yields,  which  indicate  that  financial  markets  expect  inflation  developments  to  be  in  line  with  the
definition of price stability in the medium term.
Overall, in view of recent monetary, financial and economic developments, the Governing Council saw
scope for a downward adjustment in key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points on 30 August 2001.
The Governing  Council considers the  new  level of key ECB interest rates  to  be  appropriate  for  the
maintenance of price stability over the medium term.
Turning to fiscal policies, let me express my concern about the  possible  impact of the slowdown in
economic activity on the willingness of the governments of some euro area countries to stick to the
Stability and Growth Pact and to their stability programmes. Any loosening of fiscal commitments, or
initiatives  to  "re-interpret"  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  itself,  can  only  be  counterproductive  in  the
current circumstances, since this could undermine the confidence in the determination of the euro area
to stick to a stability-oriented fiscal policy. To avoid this, only countries  whose  budget  positions are
close to balance or in surplus have scope to let the automatic stabilisers work fully in this phase of
lower  economic growth. By contrast, it  would  be  advisable  for  those  countries  with  remaining  fiscal
imbalances to limit the deviation from the nominal targets set out in their latest stability programmes.
Looking ahead, it will be important that budgetary targets for 2002 be set in such a way that budgetary
positions close to balance or in surplus are either maintained or can be reached within the time frame
set by the existing stability programmes. Indeed, a medium to long-term orientation is essential for the
conduct  of  fiscal  policies  in  all  euro  area  countries.  Short-term  discretionary  measures  aimed  at
strengthening domestic demand not only risk having an unwelcome impact on the economy, partly as
a result of time lags, but may also affect the solidity of public finances and the consolidation process in
a more lasting manner.
Efforts to set the conditions for the further expansion of the production potential of the euro area must
remain a priority. While progress is being made in a number of areas, more ambitious market-oriented
structural reforms remain a challenge. Labour market reforms aimed at providing the right incentives to
economic agents and the liberalisation of sectors still sheltered from competitive forces are areas in
which  progress  is  still  needed.  Fiscal  reforms  to  diminish  the  adverse  incentives  provided  by  tax,
benefit  and pension systems  need  to  be  accompanied  by  ambitious  expenditure  restraint.  It  should
always be kept in mind that such reforms will be beneficial to employment growth in the euro area and
will help to improve the resilience of the euro area economy to potentially adverse shocks in the future.
2. Preparations for the introduction of euro banknotes and coins
Madam Chairman, honourable Committee Members, as you are aware, in less than four months we
will enter the final stage of monetary integration, marked by the introduction of the euro banknotes and
coins. This will make the single currency a tangible reality for the people of Europe, and even more –
the euro in its final visual appearance, as displayed in the star before you, is indeed a new symbol of
European integration. Madam Chairman, honourable Committee Members, it is my pleasure to offer
this star to the European Parliament as a symbol of the achievements of European integration towards
which we have all been working together and in the spirit of excellent co-operation that has always
characterised the relations between our institutions.
2
BIS Review 76/2001
