YV Reddy: Financial sector reforms: an update
Speech  by  Dr  YV  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Annual  General
Meeting  of  the  Indian  Banks’  Association  and  the  Banks’  Sports  Board  held  in  Mumbai,  15  March
2001.
 Mr. Kohli, Mr. Krishnamurthy and friends,
I am happy to be here again in this gathering of friends in the banking community on the occasion of
the annual general meeting of the Indian Banks’ Association and Bankers’ Sports Board. I feel that it is
more an occasion to conduct focussed business and celebrate rather than one to deliberate on policy
issues. Yet as per tradition, I believe that there has to be an address by the chief guest. As a central
banker, one always has to seriously consider market expectations and sometimes respond positively,
even if somewhat unpredictably!
The vision of the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) is stated to be "to work proactively for the growth of a
healthy,  professional  and  forward  looking  banking  and  financial  services  industry,  in  a  manner
consistent with public good". The critical words are: ‘proactively’ and ‘public good’ and it is in this light
that Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has consistently interacted with IBA. I would like to place on record,
on behalf of RBI, and on my own behalf, the impressive achievements of IBA during the past one year
and also the spirit of active cooperation extended by IBA in the whole process of reform of the financial
sector. In particular, RBI had the benefit of IBA’s advice on several regulatory reforms and also in the
work of the Regulations Review Authority. The RBI is always with  you, "proactively" in the cause of
"public  good".  While  talking  of  serving  "public",  I  am  reminded  of  what  our  Professor  in  the  then
National Academy of Administration told us, the civil service probationers on training, 37 years ago. He
said that civil servants are public servants and that they should serve the public, and added that civil
servants should remember that public  are  those  who  are  not  in  civil  service!  Often,  in  many  of  our
public systems, and perhaps in all large organisations, lot of attention is given to house keeping and
staff welfare often overlooking the broader purpose for which the organisation itself exists.
Of  course,  in  a  competitive  environment  that  is  evolving  in  the  financial  sector,  banks  and  other
financial  intermediaries  are  compelled  to  place  the  cost  and  quality  of  delivery  of  services  at  the
forefront. This is a healthy development, in which the RBI, Government of India and members of IBA
have a stake. In this spirit, I will recall and share with you important issues that have been addressed
by each of the three stakeholders in the recent  past. Of course, the narration is  illustrative and not
exhaustive and covers the last couple of years.
Reserve Bank of India
First, the status of pursuit of medium term objective of reducing preemptions through both CRR and
SLR. SLR has been brought down to the statutory minimum. Progress in reduction in CRR continues
to be closely related to the pace of reduction in fiscal deficit, monetary developments vis-à-vis growth
in real output, and uncertainties in forex markets. On all these fronts, greater comfort in the past could
have helped more rapid reduction in CRR, to achieve the medium term objective. In a structural sense,
RBI  has  since  progressed  in  the  pursuit  of  the  objective  viz.  proposal  to  amend  the  law  relating  to
preemptions to give flexibility to RBI to bring the CRR and SLR even below 3 per cent and 25 per cent,
as and when rendered possible.
In a  procedural sense, significant progress  has  been  made  in  the  prescribed  manner  of  calculating
and maintaining the reserve requirements.
The  medium  term  objective  of  reducing  pre-emptions  and  imparting  a  greater  flexibility  and
simplification of procedures continues to be at the top of the RBI’s agenda for reform. In pursuing this
objective, the RBI keeps in view not only the balance sheets of the banks but also the need to move
towards universal banking, and diversifying financial intermediation which is heavily concentrated now
in  banks  rather  than  non-banks.  Reduction  in  refinance  window  and  introduction  of  Liquidity
Adjustment Facility have provided greater flexibility in this regard, and further progress in these two
areas is bound to ensure lesser recourse to preemptions in the conduct of monetary policy.
BIS Review 24/2001
1
Second, on interest rates, the reform objectives in terms of greater deregulation and rationalisation of
small savings rates etc. have been achieved to a significant degree. Further progress in deregulation
continues  to  depend  on  some  stability  in  inflationary  expectations,  which  in  turn  is  dependent  on
credibility of price-stability. The emphasis in future has to be to impart greater flexibility to interest rate
regimes,  in  an  environment  of  reasonable  price-stability  and  a  rational  tax-regime.  A  rational  tax-
regime in the context of an appropriate interest regime should factor in several elements viz. treatment
of  interest-income  vis-à-vis  dividend  income  and  of  contractual  savings  vis-à-vis  marketable  debt-
instruments. The statement of Finance Minister in the latest budget speech that an Expert Committee
will be appointed to provide recommendations on the issue of better system for determination of the
interest rates governing Provident Funds and Small Savings is welcome. It is hoped that the Expert
Committee  would  address  broader  issues  such  as  tax-regimes  affecting  all  forms  of  savings,
especially  the  possible  distortions  between  debt  and  equity  instruments.  However,  interest  rate
flexibility should not be taken to mean a continuous downward movement in interest rates. In fact, the
reference  in  the  Economic  Advisory  Council  Report  to  stable  real  rates  of  interest  does  imply  that
depending on the inflation rates, the nominal interest rates would move up and down. Furthermore, it
is  necessary  for  banks  to  appreciate  the  need  for  reduction  in  their  interest-spreads.  Cost  of  debt-
funds to investors can come down, without hurting the saver, the goose that lays golden eggs, only
and only as the interest-spreads of banking sector comes down further.
Third, the issues of prudential requirements including those relating to weak banks, capital adequacy
etc. Here, the public sector banks continue to be on a different footing from private sector banks and
approaches  for  reform  do  vary.  In  any  case,  impressive  progress  has  been  made  in  imparting  a
supervisory environment conducive to enhancing efficiency while maintaining stability of the system.
The banking system of India has shown remarkable resilience in the face of several challenges and
changes  in  external  environment.  In  the  medium  term  perspective,  the  main  challenge  will  be  to
subscribe  to  the  proposed  New  Basel  Capital  Accord  meant  to  replace  the  existing  1988  Capital
Accord. The new  Accord  is likely to  be finalised  by  the end of 2001 and mandated for  adoption  by
2004. It should be clear to all concerned that the new Accord is likely to be more complex and more
binding, warranting early and vigorous preparatory work by both banks and RBI.
Fourth, the issue of competition between banks and between banks and non-banks, and the related
issue of a level playing field. The RBI’s policy framework in regard to approach to universal banking
has already been spelt out. An approach to reform of urban cooperative banks and rural cooperatives
has  been  drawn  up  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Madhava  Rao  Committee  and  the  Jagdish
Capoor Committee. There are significant legal and institutional changes that need to be addressed to
ensure  further  progress  in  imparting  competition  without  serious  systemic  implications,  including
ensuring availability of adequate credit to rural areas and agriculture. In fact, in the recent past, there
has  been  a  fast  growth  in  urban  banks  and  perhaps  we  should  focus  on  the  cooperative  bank
segment, which should get activated to serve the rural areas.
Fifth, improvements in transparency, disclosure standards as also accounting standards to attain the
best  international  practices.  Since  1998,  there  have  been  dramatic  developments  in  this  sphere,
especially in codifying the international practices and assessing the domestic standards. RBI has put
out for discussion, several reports  of Advisory Groups on a  variety of Standards and Codes, and  a
road map for bringing about changes is bound to evolve out of these reports. Of particular interest to
IBA  are  the  reports  on  (1)  Transparency  in  Monetary  and  Financial  Policies,  (2)  Payments  and
Settlement  System,  (3)  Banking  Supervision,  and  (4)  Bankruptcy  Laws.  These  are  already  in  the
public domain through RBI’s website.
Sixth, on credit delivery systems several procedural initiatives have been taken. The two major areas
that need immediate attention to ensure credit delivery are : the fast growing services sector and the
critical ‘peoples sector’ viz. agriculture on which a large part of our population depends.
Seventh,  improvements  in  financial  markets.  Over  the  last  three  years,  impressive  growth  can  be
observed  in  all  the  three  segments  of  financial  markets  that  are  of  direct  concern  to  the  RBI  viz.
money,  government  securities  and  forex.  The  markets  have  grown  in  size,  depth,  instruments  and
participants while imparting both efficiency and stability to the system. The next landmark development
would be the operation of Clearing Corporation, an organisation being promoted by several banks. A
successful  operation  of  the  Clearing  Corporation  would  inter  alia  help  quicker  forex  settlement,
enlargement of repo market and retailing of government securities market. The Finance Minister in his
budget speech has set a clear timetable in this regard.
2
BIS Review 24/2001
There are some developments in the financial sector, which had not been flagged a few years ago but
have received attention recently. First, changes in Deposit Insurance that have been proposed by RBI
to  government.  Second,  establishment  of  a  Regulations  Review  Authority  to  review  procedural
requirements. As IBA is aware, Master Circulars have replaced hundreds of earlier circulars and these
will be updated annually. Third, setting up of Credit Information Bureau in which some members of IBA
had taken initiative.  Fourth,  banks’  foray  into  insurance  business,  which  has  been  carefully  crafted.
Fifth,  the  extremely  complex  task  of  bringing  an  almost  totally  unregulated  non-banking  financial
companies sector into a system of focussed regulation of those which accept public deposits. Sixth,
technological upgradation, which has several dimensions. These include computerisation in RBI and
projects for use of banks and financial institutions mainly in the areas of payment and settlement as
well as public debt office. RBI also closely monitors upgradation of technology in banks. Eighth, and a
related  measure  under  implementation  is  RBI’s  Central  Database  Management  System,  which  will
become a pioneering project among emerging countries. Ninth, there has been an increasing recourse
to auditors as a supervisory resource from RBI. Finally, to monitor developments in financial markets
and take prompt actions a Financial Markets Committee (FMC) has been constituted within the RBI
which  meets  at  least  once  a  day  and  often  several  times  during  periods  of  excess  activity  in  the
financial markets. The FMC provides crucial inputs in assessment of short-term liquidity and operation
of Liquidity Adjustment Facility. FMC also helps in designing of development of financial markets.
Thus, RBI has not only focussed on a medium term agenda for financial sector reform outlined earlier
but has refined and reoriented the agenda from time to time, as warranted by developments.
Government of India
Three  broad  areas  were  identified  as  critical  for  reform  viz.  fiscal  deficit,  legislative  changes  and
structural issues affecting public sector banks. Undoubtedly, Government has devoted some attention
in regard to all the three areas, and the measures taken are well known. Yet, it will be interesting to
recall the relevant budget pronouncements.
The Budget for 1999-2000 concentrated on reform of the banking sector i.e. Debt Recovery Tribunals,
restructuring  of  weak  banks,  Settlement  Advisory  Committees,  and  tax  deductibility  for  provisions
made by banks. The reform of capital markets focussed on UTI and mutual funds but of interest to
financial markets was abolition  of Stamp  Duty  on  transfer  of  debt  instruments  within  the  depository
mode.
The budget for 2000-2001 carried forward reform on public sector banking by announcing intention for
a  more  diversified  ownership  of  public  sector  banks,  establishment  of  Financial  Restructuring
Authority, debt recovery, etc. Of particular interest are announcements relating to establishment of a
Credit Information Bureau and possible legislative amendments to accord greater operational flexibility
to the RBI. Most important of all was the intention to bring about a Fiscal Responsibility Act.
The canvass gets further enlarged beyond public sector banks and fiscal management to development
of debt markets and interest rate flexibility in the budget for 2001-02. No doubt, in all the budgets there
is progressive liberalisation of capital account.
In brief, the budgets over the last three years have contained larger and wider reference to reforms in
the financial sector. The canvass is spreading from banks to financial markets. During the period, the
regulatory jurisdiction of RBI was fine tuned and clarified through amendments to Securities Contract
Regulations Act, and enactment of Foreign Exchange Management Act. While these are some of the
several governmental initiatives, significant changes in legal and institutional framework are necessary
for further progress in reform of financial sector.
Banks
Elaborating on issues related to banks, in this gathering would certainly be superfluous. Suffice it to
say that there has been noticeable progress in respect of all the four issues flagged before viz. internal
control  systems,  placement  and  work  practices,  flexibility  in  hiring  people  and  use  of  technology  in
banks.  However,  there  is  a  long  way  for  public  sector  banks  to  traverse  from  current  industry-wise
approaches  to  bank-wise  autonomy  to  enhance  efficiency  and  profitability.  It  may  be  worthwhile  to
chart  a  roadmap  for  genuine  autonomy  for  public  sector  banks  consistent  with  principles  of  good
corporate governance.
BIS Review 24/2001
3
Conclusion
In brief, a notable part of agenda for reform has been completed and in the process, some items not in
the original medium-term agenda became necessary for reform.
Currently,  the  focus  is  rightly  shifting  to  legislation,  markets,  technology  and  beyond  banks  to  non-
banks.
It  is  also  evident  that  reforms  can  succeed  only  and  only  if  coordinated  efforts  are  made  by  RBI,
Government of India and banks, themselves.
It must, however, be recognized that key to financial sector reform is banking reform; key to banking
reform is public sector banking reform; and key to public sector banking sector reform is Government’s
initiative.
Finally, you would appreciate that, by and large, we in RBI try to be aware of what is desirable and we
are implementing whatever is feasible.
Before  concluding,  I  must  mention  that  the  tasks  ahead  of  you  listed  by  the  IBA  are  appropriate,
complex, and urgent. These are broadly divided into four areas viz. human resources management,
technology,  structure  of  banking,  and  sound  banking.  The  Banks’  Sports  Board,  a  relatively  recent
institution has already impressive achievements to its credit and is bound to advance  the course of
national sports in the coming year also.
I have great pleasure in wishing you all the best on this happy occasion.
Thanking you all again!
4
BIS Review 24/2001
