T T Mboweni: Transparency and the public understanding of monetary policy
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the annual banquet of
the Institute of Bankers, Johannesburg, 6 March 2001
 Introduction
1.
Good  evening  ladies  and  gentleman.  I  thank  you  for  inviting  me  here  this  evening  to  speak  at  this
prestigious event. The Institute of Bankers is an important organisation and encompasses an industry
that is, as I am sure you are well aware, crucial to the South African Reserve Bank as a partner in our
commitment to maintain and enhance the stability of the country(cid:146)s financial sector.
My remarks this evening centre on "Transparency and the Public Understanding of Monetary Policy".
The public understanding of what we aim to do at the Reserve Bank is something that concerns us
deeply. It is something that should go hand in hand with the work of the Bank and it is central to the
Bank(cid:146)s commitment of making monetary policy transparent to the people affected by it (cid:150) the citizens of
South Africa.
First I  will  discuss the  Reserve Bank(cid:146)s monetary policy framework  and  the  developments  that  have
occurred in this area recently. I will then move onto the institutional arrangements for the conduct of
monetary policy, the work of the Monetary Policy Committee and the Bank(cid:146)s modelling and forecasting
activities. Finally, I will say a few words about the central objective of the South African Reserve Bank.
The monetary policy framework
2.
We announced the adoption of the inflation targeting monetary policy framework in February just over
a year ago. The formal adoption of an inflation targeting framework indicated a shift from the previous
informal policy framework. In the past, monetary policy had embraced an eclectic approach in which
recognition was formally given to a medium to longer-term stance of monetary policy  by monitoring
developments  in  a  number  of  financial  aggregates  and  not  only  money  supply  and  bank  credit
extension.
The eclectic approach  to monetary policy was  applied  during the 1990s,  against the  background of
explicitly articulated guidelines for money supply growth. This framework recognised that the Reserve
Bank  had  to  combat  inflation,  as  outlined  in  the  Constitution  and  the  Reserve  Bank  Act.  However,
since the Bank(cid:146)s policies had their most direct impact in the area of money and credit, intermediate
guidelines were set for growth in money supply. It was argued that if money supply growth could be
contained, too much money would not be chasing too few goods, and inflation would be brought under
control.
While formally it was stated that broad money supply growth should fall in the range of 6 to 10 percent
per annum (since the mid-1990s), in practice the Bank adopted a relatively flexible approach where
these guidelines were indeed treated as guidelines only. A further guideline for growth in total bank
credit extension of around 10 percent was also adopted. But when these guidelines were exceeded by
considerable margins, this was on occasion tolerated without strong policy adjustments, on the basis
of developments in other variables.
In practice it was quite apparent that growth in the money supply could sometimes be a misleading
indicator of current and future inflation. Accordingly, a number of other variables were also analysed in
deciding  upon  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance.  These  included  the  pace  of  growth  in  the
banking  sector(cid:146)s  credit  extension,  movements  in  consumer  price  and  production  price  inflation,
domestic production and expenditure, the balance of payments and exchange rate situation, and the
fiscal policy stance. The inflationary potential of developments in all these and many other variables
was assessed on an ongoing basis. Accordingly, growth in money supply was not really  the  pivotal
variable around which monetary policy revolved - although excessive growth in money supply certainly
BIS Review 19/2001
1
did signal the need for additional caution. However, money supply growth was deemed to be important
and was formally recognised as the intermediate target variable.
What  has  since  changed?  Instead  of  targeting  guidelines  for  intermediate  objectives,  the  Reserve
Bank now directly targets inflation. It monitors and analyses a whole range of factors that can affect
the rate of inflation. The inflation rate, or more specifically CPIX, which is the headline consumer price
index excluding mortgage costs, has to fall between 6 and 3 percent by the end of the calendar year
2002.
It is  within this target and this monetary policy framework that  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  will
strive to achieve in the short term what we are mandated to do: that is to achieve price stability. Such
a framework for monetary policy ensures that monetary  policy  is transparent,  in  that  the  authorities
have  a  definite  and  measurable  aim  in  their  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  And  at  the  same  time,  it
should  give  the  citizens  of  this  country  an  aspect  of  clarity  about  the  future  as  it  makes  clear  the
Bank(cid:146)s  intentions.  In  so  doing,  inflation  targeting  should  also  ease  the  burden  and  take  the
"guesswork"  out  of  many  of  the  decisions  that  businesses  have  to  make  when  planning  for  future
expansion and investment. It should also provide an anchor for inflation expectations and guide both
employers and employees when undertaking forward-looking negotiations.
However, it must be emphasised that at least some of the success of the inflation targeting framework
rests on whether it is fully understood by labour, business, the private sector and the other sectors of
the economy. If these sectors understand that the Bank targets inflation and that it is committed to the
chosen  target,  this  will  engender  public  confidence  about  the  Reserve  Bank(cid:146)s  monetary  policy
procedures.
I will now turn to the specifics of our inflation targeting monetary policy framework. The Reserve Bank
monitors  a  number  of  factors  that  have  a  direct  influence  on  inflation.  These  include  the  growth  in
money supply  and bank credit extension,  the changes in nominal and real salaries and  wages,  the
nominal unit  labour  costs,  the  gap  between  potential  and  actual  national  output,  the  exchange  rate
developments  and  import  prices.  The  oil  price  is  another  factor  that  has  played  a  major  part  in
domestic inflationary trends of late and one that we have closely monitored. This exogenous factor is
one over which we have little control. Another exogenous factor is food prices, which can be volatile as
a result of drought or floods. And administered prices, those influenced by government or monopolies
including medical and education costs, also have an impact on domestic inflationary trends.
In order to monitor these factors, the Reserve Bank has embraced the system of a small core model
supported by other models. It has moved away from the single large-scale macroeconomic model, in
keeping with international developments. The aim is to keep the core model concise so as to focus on
the  key  economic  variables  that  influence  inflation,  as  I  have  already  mentioned.  The  core  model
incorporates some basic assumptions about the economy. It presupposes, among other things, that
higher output cannot be achieved in the face of persistently higher inflation and that the level of prices
in money terms and the rate of inflation in the longer term depend on monetary policy.
Changes  in  monetary  policy,  that  is  changes  in  the  Bank(cid:146)s  repo  rate,  are  transmitted  through  the
economy  via  various  channels,  the  so-called  transmission  mechanism.  However,  the  transmission
mechanism is a complex structure and can encompass a large number of cause and effect scenarios.
The  traditional  channel  is  the  direct  effect  of  changes  in  interest  rates  on  demand  and  supply.
Changes in the repo rate have a direct effect on other interest rates, the exchange rate and decisions
on  spending  and  investment.  Changes  in  the  repo  rate,  therefore,  affect  the  demand  for  and  the
supply of goods and services. The pressure of demand against the supply capacity of the economy is
the key factor influencing domestic inflationary pressures.
The link between the Reserve Bank(cid:146)s modelling activities and its forecasting process is indirect and far
from the mechanical, "black box" approach favoured by scientists. There is no mechanical process in
which  the  forecast  directly  determines  the  policy  decision.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the
econometric models and forecasts are tools to help the Reserve Bank solve economic problems. They
are also only one set of tools used in the policy decision-making process. I will illustrate my point by
referring  to  a  summary  from  the  Bank  of  England  on  the  use  of  models  and  the  Monetary  Policy
Committee(cid:146)s  responsibilities.  This  summary  encapsulates  the  philosophy  behind  the  use  of  models
and forecasts at the Reserve Bank. I quote:
"In an ever-changing economy, no single model can possibly assimilate in a comprehensive
way all the factors that matter for policy. Forming judgements about those factors, and their
2
BIS Review 19/2001
implications for policy, is the job of the Committee, not something that can be abdicated to
models or even modellers. But economic models are indispensable tools in that process."
To return to the broader picture, while inflation targeting forms the framework for the Reserve Bank(cid:146)s
monetary policy, it must be remembered that monetary policy is only a part of macroeconomic policy.
The  task  of  macroeconomic  policy  is  to  promote  economic  growth  and  development,  create
employment,  improve  the  living  conditions  of  all  the  people  of  the  country,  and  eliminate  the
unjustifiable discrepancies between the disparate average incomes of various groups in the economy.
Monetary policy has a narrower focus but it occupies an important component of the foundation upon
which the broader goals of macroeconomic policy rest. Monetary policy aims to create and maintain a
stable financial environment within which overall economic activity can be expanded, jobs created and
poverty reduced.
This monetary policy objective is supported by the legal obligations of the Reserve Bank as set out in
the Constitution of the Republic and in the South African Reserve Bank Act. These statutes state that
the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  protect  the  value  of  the  currency  in  order  to  obtain
balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth  in  South  Africa.  This  requires  the  achievement  of  two
objectives: price stability and stable conditions in the financial sector.
Price  stability  is  said  to  occur  when  changes  in  the  general  price  level  do  not  materially  affect  the
economic decision-making processes. Although relative price movements will still have an impact on
production,  consumption,  saving  and  investment,  the  rate  of  inflation  should  be  so  low  that  it  is  no
longer an important factor in the economic decision making process.
We  can  say  that  stable  conditions  prevail  in  the  financial  sector  when  there  is  a  high  degree  of
confidence  that  the  financial  institutions  and  financial  markets  are  able  to  meet  their  contractual
obligations.  These  stable  conditions,  however,  do  not  preclude  the  failure  of  individual  financial
institutions. A financial institution can fail and be allowed to fail even under stable financial conditions.
It is only when there is the threat of systemic risk and an important part of the financial sector is at risk
that the situation can be described as financially unstable.
Since inflation is our main focus, you may question where the exchange rate of the rand fits into the
monetary policy framework? Targeting inflation does not mean that the exchange rate of the rand is
ignored. On the contrary, the impact of the exchange rate on inflation is what concerns us and this is
what we closely monitor. The impact of the fluctuations in the exchange rate on inflation is carefully
considered when we go about the daily task of managing domestic liquidity and determining the repo
rate.  If  signs  do  emerge  of  increased  inflationary  pressures  arising  from  a  depreciation  of  the
exchange rate of the Rand, in the absence of any other counterveiling factors referred to above, then
monetary policy would have to respond in the appropriate way. This, however, does not imply that the
Reserve Bank will defend a specific level of the exchange rate.
Institutional arrangements for monetary policy
3.
Our commitment to transparent monetary policy goes hand in hand with the attempts we have already
made in communicating both our intentions and the outcomes of our meetings to the public.
The Monetary Policy Committee was set up shortly before South Africa adopted the inflation targeting
framework for monetary policy. The 14-member-MPC, as it is known  in short, meets seven times a
year.  It first met on 13 October 1999. The task of its meetings is to  decide  on  the  monetary  policy
stance, with a focus on the inflation targets that must be met in the target year. A press conference is
held after the two-day meeting has been concluded and the Committee releases a statement fleshing
out  the  developments  in  the  international  and  domestic  economy  and  the  reasons  for  its  monetary
policy stance relating to these prevalent developments.
The Reserve Bank has also convened Monetary Policy Forums, which as the name suggests, provide
a forum for open discussions on monetary policy and general economic developments. The MPFs are
held twice a  year in the major centres of the country and engage with labour, business, community
and other organisations. The Forums also ensure that the views of interested parties are taken into
account  when  determining  monetary  policy.  This  endeavour  is  an  earnest  attempt  on  our  part  to
communicate  monetary  policy  and  economic  issues  with  the  broadest  spectrum  of  people.
Unfortunately, to date, these Forums are not that well attended, particularly on the part of the trade
union movement.
BIS Review 19/2001
3
The  Reserve  Bank  will  also  publish  a  Monetary  Policy  Review  twice  a  year  to  increase  the
understanding of its conduct of monetary policy. The first Review will be published on 19 March this
year  and  will  describe  the  monetary  policy  framework  in  more  detail.  It  will  also  analyse  local  and
international economic developments and the inflationary trends arising from these. The Reserve Bank
will also publish its inflation forecasts in the form of a fan chart. The fan chart is used by many central
banks  to  illustrate  their  inflation  forecasts.  So-called  confidence  bands  are  used  to  signify  varying
degrees of certainty for each broadly expected level of inflation.
Last but not least, the Reserve Bank regularly reports to parliament on the stance of monetary policy.
This is in line with international practice and this is part of our accountability to the citizens of South
Africa.
MPC decisions at times still misunderstood
4.
Despite  our  efforts  at  creating  transparent  and  open  channels  of  communication  on  the  conduct  of
monetary policy and the centrality of inflation targeting, many people in South Africa are still fixated on
the fluctuations in the exchange rate of the Rand. Questions will be asked of me not about changes in
consumer  prices.  But,  almost  certainly,  questions  will  arise  when  the  exchange  rate  depreciates.
Together with this, the Monetary Policy Committee(cid:146)s decisions are misunderstood from time to time.
One of those times was on 16 October last  year when the Monetary Policy Committee convened  a
special meeting in between its regular scheduled meetings to review the effects of developments on
the  country(cid:146)s  inflation  outlook.  We  decided  to  underprovide  in  the  banking  sector(cid:146)s  liquidity
requirement thereby leading to a rise in the repurchase rate to 12 percent. Some saw this move as a
strategy  aimed  at  protecting  the  rand.  Yet  the  Committee  made  it  quite  clear  that  this  was  not  the
case. It gave the following reasons, and I quote:
"At the end of its previous meeting (21 September 2000), the Committee expressed concern
about the second-round price effects of the depreciation in the exchange rate of the rand and
the continued high prices of petroleum. Trade statistics that have been released since the
last meeting indicate that the surplus on the current account of the balance of payments in
the second quarter of 2000 could have changed to a deficit in the third quarter. At the same
time non-residents again became net sellers of South  African bonds, signalling a  possible
shortfall on the financial account. As a result of these changes and the continued strength of
the US dollar, downward pressure  was  exerted  on  the  rand  with  concomitant  import  price
increases,  raising  the  risk  of  higher  inflation.  These  tendencies  were  aggravated  by
continued high levels of international petroleum prices."
Because  of  these  developments  and  their  likely  impact  on  future  price  developments  and
expectations, the Monetary Policy Committee went on to say that it had decided to revise its monetary
policy stance. Once again, I quote: "It was concluded that a modest increase in interest rates at this
stage may avoid later steep increases in rates in order to meet the inflation target."
To give effect to this, the Reserve Bank marginally under-provided in the liquidity requirement of the
banks at the daily repo auction on October 17, expecting this to lead to an increase of some 25 basis
points in the repurchase rate.
Upon  evaluating  the  outcome  of  its  decision  at  its  next  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meeting,  the
Committee said although prime lending rates were unchanged after the 25 basis point rise in the repo
rate, other money market rates generally rose. Expectations of future rate increases also heightened
immediately after the increase in the repurchase rate.
Statistics  confirmed  the  Committee(cid:146)s  concern  that  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments
would slip into a deficit from the second to the third quarter of 2000. This current account deficit, the
slowdown in the inflow of portfolio capital from the beginning of September 1999 and the reversal in
sentiment  towards  emerging  markets  put  further  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand,  the
Committee said. The concern was that the Rand(cid:146)s depreciation could have inflationary consequences
if it was not countered by other developments.
Although the weakness in the rand, the steep rise in the cost of imported crude oil and an upward shift
in  food  prices  led  to  a  sharp  increase  in  consumer  prices  excluding  mortgage  costs  (CPIX),  the
Monetary Policy Committee emphasised that the exogenous shocks were not as yet then leading to
visible second-round effects on consumer prices.
4
BIS Review 19/2001
However,  the  Committee  cautioned  that  there  were  signs  that  the  second-round  effects  of  these
external shocks were appearing in domestic production prices. The production price index, excluding
crude  oil  and  food  prices,  rose  steeply  from  3,2  per  cent  in  November  1999  to  5,7  per  cent  in
September 2000. And the Committee also warned that this could indicate that CPIX inflation would be
affected  indirectly  by  external  factors  in  the  following  months  since  increases  in  production  prices
usually  precede  increases  in  consumer  price  inflation.  The  influence  of  those  factors  on  consumer
prices,  the  Committee  said,  would  depend  on  competitive  forces  in  the  economy  and  would  be
tempered in the medium term by prudent fiscal and monetary policies.
Conclusion
5.
On occasions such  as these, it  is  important  for  us  to  re-focus  our  attention  on  the  Reserve  Bank(cid:146)s
central objective and the framework under which our mandated objectives are to be achieved. To put it
another  way,  it  is  important  to  place  the  Reserve  Bank(cid:146)s  actions  in  context.  Let  me  reiterate:  our
overriding monetary policy objective is to achieve price stability and we aim to achieve this through the
framework of targeting inflation. I will stress what many of you have heard me say before: although we
monitor a number of variables to extrapolate their potential impact on inflation, it is the rate of inflation
that we target.
The Reserve Bank(cid:146)s objectives are enshrined in the Constitution and in the laws of the land. The two
elements  of  financial  stability  -  price  stability  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  sector  -  are  closely
related. If we fail in one area, this will result in uncertainty in the other. We regard financial stability as
an  important  precondition  for  sustainable  high  growth  and  employment  creation.  Conversely,  high
rates of inflation can distort the allocation of resources and it can lead to the unequal distribution of
wealth.
It is against this background, then, that we place our conduct of monetary policy squarely within the
objective of price stability and within the framework of inflation targeting.
Kea leboga.
BIS Review 19/2001
5
