Ian Macfarlane: Economic developments at home and abroad
Speech  by  Mr  I  J  Macfarlane,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Joint  Australian
Business Economists and Economic Society (New South Wales Branch), Sydney, 10 July 2001.
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  again  talking  to  the  Australian  Business  Economists  and  the  Economic
Society. On occasions like this, I often feel it would be nice to be able to speak in a detached way on
some  interesting  public  policy  or  historical  topic.  But  in  periods  where  the  domestic  and  world
economies are evolving quite quickly, current economic developments keep pushing their way to the
front. So I will have to save my more scholarly piece for another day, and confine my remarks tonight
to some observations on recent economic events here and abroad.
I would like to take as my starting point the way we viewed the economic outlook for Australia about a
year ago, that is, as we were entering the 2000/01 financial year. At that time, there were two main
components to our view of the economic outlook. The first was a view on the medium-term cyclical
development of the economy, which was predominantly optimistic. The second was a view about the
effect  of  "once-off"  events  such  as  the  introduction  of  the  GST  and  the  Sydney  Olympics  on  the
financial year 2000/01; here, the tone was one of uncertainty. I would now like to spell out how these
two overlapping views have fared in the light of unfolding developments.
The medium-term cyclical outlook
1.
For some years now, we have pointed to the prospect of achieving a longer economic expansion if the
economy can be managed in a way which avoids the type of imbalances that have brought about our
downfall in the past. By the middle of last year, we were able to point out that it had already happened,
in that the present expansion was already longer than its predecessors. But we were saying more than
this – we were saying that, even though it was longer, it still had not shown any of the imbalances that
characterised the latter stages of earlier expansions:
 
although inflation of goods and services prices had risen, it was not by enough to threaten
our medium-term objective;
asset price inflation of either shares or property had not become a problem;
wages growth remained moderate;
there  had  not  been  excessive  physical  investment  with  its  attendant  risk  of  over-capacity;
and
the current account deficit was not high by the standards of the past 20  years, and falling
quickly.
  For  these  reasons  (and  for  others  that  I  will  come  to  later),  we  always  felt  optimistic  about  our
medium-term economic prospects. This does not mean that we felt that the strong expansion of the
1990s  could  continue  indefinitely  at  the  average  growth  rate  we  were  then  recording.  We  were
conscious that the business cycle, whether domestic or international, has not been eliminated, even
though it may have been ameliorated. This meant that slower growth was to be expected as the cycle
unfolded.  But  we  did  feel  that  there  was  no  domestic  reason  why  the  economy  should  undergo
anything  more  serious  than  a  moderate  slowing  phase  within  the  general  context  of  continued
expansion.
Of course, we recognised that we were not immune to developments in the rest of the world. To the
extent  that  there  was  a  risk  of  something  more  serious  than  a  moderate  slowing  of  the  Australian
economy,  we  identified that risk as coming from  overseas.  But  even  here  there  was  an  element  of
optimism in that we felt that in the event of a world downturn, we would be affected less and later than
most other countries because of the resilience of our economy I have just outlined. I now turn to the
second component of our view referred to earlier.
BIS Review 63/2001
1
"Once-off" developments in 2000/01
2.
Everyone knew that developments in 2000/01, particularly the first half, were going to  be  difficult to
forecast and interpret. This was because economic statistics would be very "lumpy" as they reflected
the  introduction  of  the  GST  on  1  July,  and  the  holding  of  the  Olympic  Games  at  the  end  of  the
September quarter. The introduction of the GST, and associated changes to other taxes, was a major
event – structural changes of this type are likely to occur only once in a decade, or even once in a
generation, and so are always difficult to forecast. Economists had very little to go on in assessing the
likely effects, but we all tried to do so by looking at the experience of other countries that had made a
similar change. This was not a lot of help, and no-one could be confident what the main effect would
be. Judging from the questioning I received during this period, the most likely effect was thought to be
on inflation, with shifts in consumption being the other factor most often mentioned. I am not aware of
anyone  who  thought  that  house-building  would  be  the  main  area  affected,  although  everyone
expected a decline.
What happened?
3.
In the event, the major transition effect of the GST was to bring about a fall in house-building in the
second  half  of  2000  that  was  much  bigger  than  anyone  had  forecast  or  we  had  ever  previously
experienced (Graph 1). While house-building only comprises 5 per cent of GDP, its fall of 37 per cent
in  two  quarters  was  enough  to  outweigh  reasonably  healthy  growth  in  the  other  95  per  cent  of  the
economy, and so produce a contraction in GDP for the half-year.
There were other factors at work as well, for example, the rising oil price, and there were other parts of
the economy that were affected, for example, the labour market. But the figures clearly show that the
fall in house-building subtracted 2.2 percentage points from the half-year’s GDP  growth, and hence
accounted for the overall contraction in economic activity (Graph 2).
2
BIS Review 63/2001
This was a transition effect of the GST, which would soon reverse, and therefore should, in principle,
have no effect on our average prospects over the medium term. The problem with transition effects,
however,  is  that  they  can  affect  people’s  confidence  and  their  expectations  because  at  the  time
no-one can be sure they are transitory. This happened on this occasion as business confidence fell,
although not precipitously, over the second half of 2000.
When the decline in GDP was revealed in early March, confidence took a sharper turn for the worse.
Not only did business confidence fall further, but consumer confidence and the exchange rate joined
in, and the share market did not escape without damage. This was a period of considerable gloom,
when some observers went so far as to suggest that Australia might talk itself into recession. In terms
of the two components of our view, the second seemed to have completely eclipsed the first, and you
could be forgiven for believing that there was no longer any substance to the first view.
What we now know is that at precisely the time that confidence was reaching its low point – the March
quarter of 2001 – the transitional effects were dropping out of the calculations and the economy was
returning to reasonable growth. The March quarter national accounts show this clearly, and a range of
other indicators show a distinct improvement from their March low point (Graph 3).
 
Consumer sentiment, although declining in the second half of 2000, had remained above its
long-term  average  until  it  fell  sharply  in  March.  It  has  now  regained  a  level  above  its
long-term average.
The share market has been generally very buoyant by world standards, but fell by 6 per cent
in March before recovering in April and May.
The exchange rate reacted to the weak economic activity news and reached a low point in
early April. It subsequently rose by 7 per cent against the US dollar and in trade-weighted
terms.
There  is  evidence  from  a  number  of  business  survey  responses  to  questions  about  the
economic outlook that confidence has improved.
   Where does that leave us?
4.
My assessment is that we are now back in a position where the first view represents a good summary
of  our  position.  The  major  threat  to  our  future  growth  prospects  now  comes  from  the  international
economy, not from domestic factors. The list of domestic factors which provided underlying resilience
BIS Review 63/2001
3
a year ago still applies. And we could add to that list the fact that monetary policy and fiscal policy
have both moved in an  expansionary  direction since then, and that the exchange rate  continues  to
provide stimulus to the internationally traded sector.
Before  moving  on  to  discuss  the  world  economy,  I  would  like  to  touch  on  one  further  question
pertaining to the domestic economy. The question is the following: Does the fact that we had such a
poor second half of 2000 put us in a worse or a better position to handle any future weakness in the
world economy? On the surface of it, you might be inclined to say that it has made things more difficult
for  us  because  it  has  given  us  a  weaker  starting  point.  On  the  other  hand,  you  could  mount  a
defensible case that it may help us in the medium term. First, we  have  now  got some of the usual
cyclical  contractionary  forces  behind  us,  which  in  a  more  normal  business  cycle  we  might  still  be
facing. The housing contraction is the most obvious of these, but the inventory cycle has also been
probably  brought  forward  and  therefore  may  be  already  half  completed.  Second,  the  greater  and
earlier-than-expected weakening of the domestic economy focussed the attention of policy makers on
the need for easing somewhat earlier in the process than if the cycle had had a more normal shape.
On monetary policy it is hard to be definite on this point, because other important factors were also at
work – for example, the recognition that the international cycle was turning and that inflation remained
low – but, at the margin, the weakness in the second half of 2000 contributed to an earlier easing. On
fiscal  policy,  the  increase  in  the  first  home  buyers’  grant  is  an  example.  Finally,  the  perception  of
weakness in the Australian economy probably contributed to holding down the value of the Australian
dollar.  I  do  not  want  to  make  too  much  out  of  these  arguments,  other  than  to  point  out  that  some
clouds do have silver linings.
The international economy
5.
When we think of the international economy, or its leading member – the US economy – we tend to
remember  that  there  has  been  a  reasonably  pronounced  business  cycle  over  recent  decades.
Recessions occurred in the mid seventies, the  early eighties and the early  nineties.  A lot of people
think  in  terms  of  a  relatively  regular  cycle,  and  hence  think  we  are  due  for  another  US  and  world
recession now. We cannot summarily dismiss this simple approach, and I find it hard to argue against
the view that economies contain some unavoidable element of cyclicality in their path of development.
The  issues  are:  Does  a  cycle  necessarily  involve  a  recession,  and  are  there  characteristics  of  the
current cycle that make it different to its predecessors? I think these can be answered together.
The current international cycle is different to its predecessors in one extremely important respect – the
expansion phase  did not culminate in an  excessive rise in inflation. In fact, the rise  in  inflation  was
quite  modest.  This  had  two  important  consequences.  First,  because  the  rise  in  inflation  was  small,
interest  rates  did  not  need  to  rise  by  very  much  during  the  relatively  short  period  that  they  had  to
perform their anti-inflationary task. (Table 1 looks at the peak in inflation and interest rates at the end
of various expansions.) Second, monetary policy could be eased much earlier in the slowing phase of
the  cycle  than  in  the  past.  Thus,  to  the  extent  that  the  cycle  is  the  result  of  changes  in  monetary
conditions and monetary policy, it should unambiguously be more muted on this occasion. Similarly, to
the extent that major downturns are the result of financial fragility, the situation should be better on this
occasion as financial intermediaries in virtually all western countries are in much sounder shape than
a  decade  ago.  Thus,  in  the  areas  dear  to  a  central  banker’s  heart  –  monetary  and  financial
stability – the situation is appreciably better on this occasion than earlier ones.
Table 1: Inflation and interest rates
OECD inflation
(year-ended)
G3 nominal policy interest rate
1970s peak
1980s peak
early 1990s peak
2000 peak (a)
(a) Excluding Japan
14.8
13.1
5.7
3.2
10.6
14.1
8.4
5.8
4
BIS Review 63/2001
It would be very reassuring if this were the end of the story for the world economy, but it would be too
simple. There clearly are some important imbalances we still have to contend with, particularly in the
United States. The most often mentioned of these are high share prices, the high US dollar and an
overhang of capital expenditure, particularly in technology. It is worth looking a little more closely at
them.
When share prices were on the way up, and setting new highs for the price-earning-ratio, many people
were  expecting  that  this  would  eventually  be  followed  by  a  crash  like  1987,  if  not  one  of  1929
proportions. That scenario seems less likely now that we have about 15 months of correction behind
us. While the fall in the NASDAQ was large enough (70 per cent) to warrant the term "crash", and its
preceding rise the term "bubble", the share market as a whole has retreated in a more orderly fashion.
The fall in the broad indices such as the S&P 500 or the Wilshire has been about 20 per cent over the
past 15 months, and the price-earning-ratio has come down from a peak of 36 to 26. Now, I do not
want to get into the business of forecasting future share prices – the only point I wish to make is that
the risk of a fall severe enough to frighten people into stopping spending must be smaller now that we
have some of the correction behind us, than when we had none.
The high level of the US dollar, and the fact that it is still tending to rise, cannot be helpful to the US
economy. It must be harming US exporters and those who compete with imports, and no doubt is one
of the reasons why US manufacturing output has fallen for each of the past eight months. But these
effects  on  trade  flows,  while  unhelpful  to  the  United  States,  must  be  helpful  to  its  trading  partners
including ourselves. So it is hard to see the trade effects of the strong US dollar being harmful to the
world economy as a whole. Where the rising dollar is harmful is in reinforcing the widely held view that
you cannot go  wrong in buying US assets –  if  their  value  goes  down,  at  least  you  will  gain  on  the
exchange rate. This sort of thinking does distort capital flows and can lead to misalignments in asset
markets.
The area where I think a US imbalance is having unfortunate consequences both inside and outside
the United States is in physical investment. In the year to June 1999, equipment investment grew by
13 per cent, and by 16 per cent in the year to June 2000. In the same two years, investment in high
technology products grew by over 23 per cent and 27 per cent. Whenever there is an extremely fast
growth of investment, there is always the danger that excess capacity has been put in place and that
the necessary correction will involve a period of sharply declining investment. That is happening now
with US equipment investment declining by 2.3 per cent in the most recent quarter, and investment in
technology by 10 per cent. These cutbacks have had a big effect on Asia where exports of electronic
equipment have fallen by 25 per cent, which helps explain why Asian GDP growth has flattened out
over recent quarters. Of course, this is a  purely cyclical event,  and  will reverse in time, but  it  is  an
important channel whereby a US imbalance transmits itself to the world economy.
While there are obvious imbalances in the US economy as outlined above, I would judge them to be
smaller in aggregate than at a similar stage of earlier cycles, particularly if we give a lot of weight to
inflation and financial stability. Japan is in a weak state as it has been on several occasions over the
past decade and its outlook is not improving. Europe has also slowed, but no obvious imbalances of
the US type have emerged. We are presently in a period of sub-par growth for all three areas, and this
is inevitably a time of great uncertainty. Even though I expect the world economy to do better than it
did  a  decade  ago,  we  can  probably  expect  to  hear  some  more  bad  news  before  the  better  news
arrives.
Conclusion
6.
I hope what I have said tonight has been reasonably even-handed. While I note that money markets
have recently become more optimistic about our outlook, I think for most people the main unanswered
question is still whether the world economy is going to face something materially worse than a period
of slow growth over the coming year. The substance of what I have said tonight is that, while such an
outcome  cannot  be  ruled  out,  its  likelihood  is  lower  than  it  appeared  at  the  turn  of  the  year,  or  as
recently as March this year. When these downside risks were mounting earlier in the year, we were
prepared to ease monetary policy reasonably quickly and by a significant amount. If the outlook I have
sketched comes to pass, further such decisive action may not be necessary. If the alternative occurs
and significant downside risks re-emerge, we will not hold back from further action.
BIS Review 63/2001
5
