Christian Noyer: The stability-oriented monetary policy of the ECB
Luncheon  speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
conference organised by HSBC CCF Securities, Paris, 6 September 2001.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am very grateful for your invitation to speak today in Paris on the occasion of the forum organised by
HSBC. As a contribution to today's discussion of strategies, I should like to explain the design of the
monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  ECB  and  how  it  helps  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  in  its
monetary policy deliberations and the communication with the public. Then, I should like to discuss the
current monetary and economic situation and its implications for monetary policy. Finally, I would like
to give you some information on the introduction of the new banknotes and coins.
Let  me  turn  to  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  ECB.  The  primary  objective  of  the  ECB  is  to
maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  This  objective  has  been  chosen  because  price  stability
supports  higher  living  standards  through  a  number  of  channels.  It  enhances  the  transparency  of
relative  prices  and  thereby  fosters  competition.  Inflation  risk  premia  that  would  be  asked  for  by
investors in the presence of uncertainty  about  inflation  are  minimised.  Firms  and  individuals  do  not
need to heavily invest in hedging against inflation and deflation, and thus can allocate their resources
to productive uses. In an environment of price stability possible distortions of tax systems are reduced.
The  related  improvement  in  the  efficient  allocation  of  production  factors  may  help  to  enhance  the
production potential of the economy. Also from a social point of view, inflation is not welcome. It leads
to  a  'random'  redistribution  of  wealth  between  economic  actors,  to  the  detriment  of  the  most
vulnerable.
Since  the  start  of  1999,  the  ECB  applies  its  monetary  policy  strategy,  which  is  centred  around  a
quantitative definition of price stability and the analysis of risks to price stability. This monetary policy
strategy  has  helped  the  Governing  Council  to  derive  and  explain  monetary  policy  decisions.  It  has
contributed a lot to the successful mastering of this task and has triggered academic debates whether
elements of this strategy should be introduced by other monetary authorities.
The key element of the ECB's policy framework is the precise quantitative definition of price stability. It
clarifies  that  the  Governing  Council  aims  to  keep  annual  increases  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of
Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area below 2%. Moreover,  the Governing Council announced
that price stability according to this definition shall be maintained over the medium term. Thereby, it
provides the public with clear guidance for inflation  expectations. In  addition, the ECB's transparent
framework facilitates the process of accountability of the ECB by providing a yardstick against which
its performance can be assessed.
The  statement  that  "price  stability  is  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term"  acknowledges  the
existence of short-term volatility in prices, resulting from non-monetary shocks to the price level such
as the effects of indirect tax changes or variations in international commodity prices. There are good
economic reasons why monetary policy should be oriented towards the medium term. Monetary policy
affects prices with "long and variable lags", so that a policy of fine-tuning the economy is, in practice,
neither  a  viable  nor  a  desirable  option.  It  is  evident  that  the  ECB  cannot  be  held  responsible  for
short-term  shocks  to  the  price  level,  since  it  has  little  control  over  them.  Rather,  assessing  the
outcome of the monetary policy of the ECB over the medium term ensures a meaningful and genuine
accountability.
Having a well-defined goal is vital. In addition, the ECB, like any other central bank, also requires an
analytical  framework  which  facilitates  the  achievement  of  this  goal.  The  ECB's  strategy  recognises
that, in an environment of change and uncertainty, no single model or view of the world is likely to be
fully adequate to capture the ongoing economic processes and the implications for price stability.
The need to adopt a diversified approach to analysing and assessing information in an uncertain world
was  a  main  reasoning  behind  the  adoption  of  the  ECB's  two-pillar  strategy.  The  distinct,  yet
mutually-reinforcing perspectives of a complex and changing environment provided by the two pillars
are  the  best  tools  with  which  the  ECB  can  distil  and  master  the  information  relevant  for  monetary
policy-making.
BIS Review 76/2001
1
Under  the  first  pillar,  the  ECB  assigns  a  prominent  role  to  money.  A  broad  array  of  aggregates,
ranging from M3 to its components and counterparts, notably credit, are analysed in order to assess
threats  to  price  stability.  Assigning  a  prominent  role  to  money  guarantees  that  the  fundamentally
monetary origins of inflation will not be neglected in the analysis driving monetary policy decisions.
The prominent role of money is signalled by the announcement of a reference value of 4½% for the
annual growth of the broad aggregate M3. This reference value defines the rate of growth of M3 which
is consistent with price stability over the medium term. The ECB has from the start explained that it will
not  react  mechanistically  to  deviations  of  M3  growth  from  the  reference  value.  Rather  monetary
developments always have to be analysed carefully  in order to assess the  information content  they
have  for  future  inflation.  This  is  because  the  money  -  price  link  is  in  essence  a  medium-term
relationship,  whereas short-term movements in monetary aggregates  always  have  to  be  interpreted
carefully.
In  parallel,  a  wide  range  of  other  economic  and  financial  indicators  is  assessed  under  the  second
pillar,  in  order  to  extract  additional  information  which  is  not  contained  in  monetary  data,  and  to
cross-check  the  evidence  obtained  from  assessing  monetary  developments.  Analysis  within  this
second framework is intended to reveal the impact of a host of factors on price developments in the
short to medium term, such as wage developments, fluctuations in commodity prices and exchange
rates, confidence among consumers and producers, etc.
Under the second pillar, macroeconomic projections based on conventional models also play a role as
a tool for organising and summarising existing information. In the light of the ECB's commitment to
being  a  transparent  institution,  the  ECB  has  published  the  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic
projections since last December. However, the analysis carried out under the second pillar does not
only involve the production of projections. The staff projections cannot, in practice, include the latest
developments in all economic indicators. It is therefore useful to monitor individual indicators in parallel
with producing the projections, not least because such analysis also provides an insight into the forces
driving the projections. Moreover, under the second pillar of the ECB's strategy, the Governing Council
also evaluates indicators of financial market expectations derived from financial yields and prices. The
Governing Council also looks at forecasts for the euro area produced by international organisations
and the private sector. All this information is assessed simultaneously by the Governing Council under
the second pillar, and is complemented by the monetary analysis under the first pillar.
In the discussions leading to its policy decisions the Governing Council systematically incorporates the
analyses  conducted  under  both  of  the  complementary  pillars  underlying  the  ECB's  monetary  policy
strategy. It should be regarded as a strength of the strategy that multiple frameworks are embodied
and  the  resulting  need  for  decisions  which  are  robust  across  different  models  of  the  economy
becomes obvious.
A good understanding of the ECB's monetary policy in public enhances the effectiveness and fosters
the credibility of the ECB's monetary policy. Experience collected over the time since the start of Stage
Three  of  EMU  suggests  that  the  anti-inflationary  credibility  of  the  ECB  is  high.  Indeed,  long  term
inflation expectations have remained in line with price stability since early 1999.
Finally, let me briefly explain the Governing Council's assessment provided under the two pillars of the
ECB's monetary policy strategy.
As regards the first pillar, growth in monetary aggregates has somewhat picked up in recent months.
In the period  May to July, the three-month moving average of M3  growth  was  5.9%.  However,  this
figure needs to be corrected for the upward distortion related to non-euro area residents' holdings of
money market paper and short-term debt securities by non-residents of the euro area. According to
preliminary estimates, these factors explain around three-quarters of a percentage point of annual M3
growth.  Furthermore,  the  recent  move  in  this  figure  is  driven  very  much  by  the  effects  on  money
demand of some factors which are likely to remain temporary. First, the increase in the rate of growth
of M3 over the past few months reflects a relatively flat yield curve and the recent weakness in stock
markets, both of which made the holding of short-term deposits and marketable paper included in M3
attractive.  Second,  as  it  also  reflects  the  fact  that  consumers  needed  a  higher  level  of  transaction
balances to finance the past rise in energy and food prices, recent increases in M3 growth may be
transitory  and,  hence,  do  not  necessarily  have  implications  for  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.
Lastly, the annual rate of growth of loans to the private sector,  although still high, has continued to
decline over recent months.
2
BIS Review 76/2001
lower 
inflationary  pressure, 
As regards the second pillar, there are clear signals of lower inflationary pressure from the demand
side. Recent data on economic activity indicate that real GDP growth in 2001 will most likely be lower
than was expected a few months ago. The deceleration reflects both the global slowdown, which has
affected  euro  area  exports,  and  weaker  than  expected  consumption  growth  owing  to  losses  in  real
disposable income related to past increases in consumer prices. All these factors also had a negative
impact  on  investment.  This  notwithstanding,  over  time,  the  expected  decline  in  consumer  price
inflation, to which the strengthening of the exchange rate has contributed, should support the growth
of domestic demand. Further positive effects on euro area economic growth are expected from the full
impact of tax reductions in several euro area countries and the favourable financing conditions.
Turning to price developments, annual consumer price inflation in the euro area, as measured by the
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), declined to 2.8% in July, from a peak of 3.4 % in May.
A  concern  with  regard  to  the  outlook  for  price  stability  in  the  coming  years  has  been  the  possible
emergence of second-round effects, via wages, on the current level of consumer price inflation. The
information available shows that wage moderation prevailed in the first quarter of 2001. At the current
juncture,  two  factors  support  the  view  that  this  downward  trend  will  continue  in  future.  First,  the
slowdown in economic activity may contribute to containing inflationary pressure stemming from the
labour market. Second, there are encouraging signs, such as those coming from data on consumer
and producer prices, which confirm that the increase in consumer price inflation was temporary. In the
absence of further unfavourable price shocks, it is likely that price stability will be restored in the not
too distant future.
Against  the  background  of 
the  Governing  Council  decided  on
30 August 2001  to  lower  the  minimum  bid  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  and  the  interest
rates  on  the  marginal  lending  facility  and  the  deposit  facility  by  25  basis  points  respectively.  It
emphasised that it considers the  new  level  of  interest  rates  as  compatible  with  the  maintenance  of
price stability over the medium term, which at the same time, is an essential contribution to creating a
favourable environment for sustainable economic growth.
At this juncture, let me also make  some  remarks  about  recent  discussions  on  fiscal  policy.  For  the
euro  to  be  successful,  governments  need  to  adhere  strictly  to  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and
achieve  a  budget  position  in  balance  or  surplus.  Under  the  present  circumstances,  the  automatic
stabilisers  should  only  be  allowed  to  work  fully  in  those  countries  whose  budget  positions  have
achieved this sustainable level. Let me emphasise that a medium-term perspective is essential for the
conduct  of  fiscal  policies  in  all  euro  area  countries.  Short-term  discretionary  measures  aimed  at
strengthening  domestic  demand  risk  having  an  unwelcome  impact  on  the  economy,  not  least  on
account  of  time  lags.  In  addition,  if  such  measures  are  not  consistent  with  the  Pact,  they  may
undermine the credibility of the consolidation process.
Let me turn to the introduction of the euro. With the forthcoming introduction of euro banknotes and
coins,  it  is  sometimes  forgotten  that  Europe  has  had  a  single  currency  since  1  January  1999.
Therefore, let me recall that today most cash-less transactions in the euro area involve the euro as a
currency (with the exception of retail  payments). The euro is present on all major financial  markets
around the globe. Currency trading in euro has been going on for two and a half years. Shares are
denominated  in  euro  on  most  European  stock  exchanges.  The  next  and  final  step  will  be  the
introduction of euro-denominated banknotes and coins on 1 January 2002.
The introduction of the new euro banknotes and coins is the final step which completes the creation of
the single currency. With this changeover, the considerable benefits of the single currency will become
apparent to European citizens. A natural advantage of the single currency is that it reduces transaction
and information costs in the euro area. It enhances the function of money as a medium of exchange
by lowering the costs typically associated with market transactions. Generally speaking, money is an
important  component  of  any  market  economy.  In  a  complex  exchange  economy,  money  is  an
important means of achieving decentralised co-ordination between the plans and actions of economic
agents  across  time  and  space.  The  function  of  money  as  a  medium  of  exchange  is  significantly
enhanced by enlarging the area in which a single currency is used as legal tender not least since this
eliminates exchange rate uncertainty within the currency area.
The  introduction  of  the  new  euro  banknotes  and  coins  in  the  euro  area,  which  comprises  around
300 million  citizens,  is  in  many  respects  a  huge  challenge.  First,  the  launch  of  the  euro  banknotes
requires an initial supply of about 14.25 billion banknotes – representing a value of around €641 billion
– to be available by a fixed deadline. Second, the banking sector, security carriers, retailers and the
cash-operated  machine  industry  are  closely  involved  in  the  preparations  at  an  early  stage,  as  a
BIS Review 76/2001
3
smooth  cash  changeover  can  only  be  achieved  in  a  short  period  of  time  by  systematic  and
co-ordinated interaction on the part of all the main participants. Third, the successful introduction of
euro  cash  is  preceded  by  a  goal-oriented  information  campaign  to  prepare  the  general  public  and
professional cash handlers in Europe for the new currency. The President of the ECB launched this
campaign  on  30 August  and  at  the  same  time  presented  the  details  of  the  new  banknotes  to  the
public. This new currency which will be in some 100 days' time in our pockets, is our money, a tangible
reality  and  a  symbol  of  European  integration  in  every  sense  of  the  word.  The  euro  banknotes  are
produced  with  state-of-the-art  security  standards  and  combine  many  of  the  highly  effective  security
features already used in the national banknotes of the euro area Member States together with some
additional  features.  Finally,  a  series  of  legal  and  organisational  measures  is  being  taken  to  ensure
both a successful currency changeover and unimpeded circulation in the future. Production of the euro
banknotes  started  in  July  1999.  The  euro  banknotes  are  currently  being  produced  by  15  different
printing works throughout Europe, including the printing works of a number of national central banks
(NCBs).
The role of the ECB can be  described as that  of a central co-ordinating, controlling and  monitoring
body, focusing in particular on the timely production of the euro banknotes and on the organisation of
the  changeover.  Let  me  emphasise  that  both  production  and  delivery  of  euro  banknotes  are  on
schedule.  In  most  countries  frontloading  and  sub-frontloading  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  has
already started and is well under way. Frontloading is the advance distribution of euro banknotes and
coins  to  those  credit  institutions  that  are  counterparties  for  monetary  policy  operations  within  the
Eurosystem.  Credit  institutions  can  then  sub-frontload  euro  banknotes  and  coins  to  professional
groups (retailers, cash-in-transit companies, the cash-operated machine industry) provided that certain
conditions are fulfilled. The most important condition is to guarantee that the euro banknotes will not
be put into circulation before 1 January 2002.
Thank you for your attention.
4
BIS Review 76/2001
