David Clementi: Current Threats to Global Financial Stability - a European View
Speech  by  Mr  David  Clementi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  British-American
Chamber of Commerce, New York, on 22 January 2001.
 Introduction
It is a great pleasure to be here in New York. I was last at a British Chamber of Commerce meeting
towards the end of 1998 when I talked about the readiness of London for the arrival of the euro. My
message then - that while the UK might be outside EMU, the City of London was very much part of the
Euro  area  -  has  been  borne  out  by  events.  London  remains  by  far  the  largest  financial  centre  in
Europe and the most international. Nowhere has a larger concentration of foreign banks, or greater
daily turnover in foreign exchange and derivatives or trading in foreign shares. And much of the new
business in euro  is conducted through London. The majority of euro-denominated  debt  is  issued  in
London;  and  more  than  a  third  of  deals  on  the  London  Stock  Exchange  take  place  in  euro.  US
financial organisations, many of them represented here tonight, make a significant contribution to this
success.
This  evening  I  would  like  to  address  two  rather  different  subjects.  The  first  is  to  reflect  on  recent
developments in the US economy and the potential impact this has for the UK and for the stability of
the financial system more generally. I would then like to say a few words about the proposed revisions
to the capital requirements for international banks, announced last week by the Basel Committee; not
just because it is topical but also because these capital requirements are central to the stability of the
system and its capacity to withstand shocks; and as cautious central bankers it is important to take
stock from time to time.
US & UK Economic Ties
As a very open economy, and one with close trade and investment links with the US, especially in the
financial sector, the UK is a keen observer of events here.
While much has been made in recent  years of globalisation, the  links between  the US  and UK  are
long-standing  and  deep-rooted,  not  least  in  the  financial  sector.  For  many  years  US  financial
institutions have been among the biggest players in the City. US firms take the top three positions in
London  as  bookrunners  in  international  bond  and  equity  issues,  and  as  arrangers  of  syndicated
credits. Through their dynamism and innovation, US firms also play a major role both in maintaining
London's pre-eminence as an international financial centre and as a potent force for strengthening the
competitiveness of the UK's own financial institutions. Our interest in the continued financial strength
of US firms is thus clear.
Foreign  banks  are  similarly  active  in  US  markets.  For  example,  they  account  for  40%  of  the  US
syndicated loan market regularly surveyed by the Fed. UK banks, in particular, have sizeable direct
investments in the US and large cross-border exposures to US banks and corporates. Cross-border
exposures  to  US  non-bank  borrowers  stand  at  around  $62  bn,  more  than  50%  higher  than  the
equivalent exposures to the rest of Europe, while the total exposure of UK banks to the US amounts to
$110 bn, or 8% of UK GDP. Close ties in financial markets parallel the strong links in other sectors.
Whether  it  is  Grand  Met  seizing  the  Pilsbury  Doughboy  or  Ford  making  off  with  Jaguar  and  Aston
Martin, there has been a significant and increasing flow of direct investment in both directions across
the Atlantic. The close correlation between movements in the FTSE and Dow is testament to the links
between the US and UK corporate sectors.
Given the strength of these ties, UK banks and investors are inevitably vulnerable to a US slowdown.
The  scale  of  UK  exposures  to  the  US  helps  to  give  some  dimension  to  the  scale  of  this  risk.  An
analysis  based  on  the  market  ratings  of  borrowers  suggests  that  the  statistically  expected  annual
losses on UK bank's exposures to the US are likely to be around $1bn or about 1% of UK exposure. In
principle,  banks  should  have  fully  anticipated  these  losses  in  their  loan  pricing  and  general
provisioning.  But  bank  capital  is  there  primarily  to  absorb  unexpected  losses,  for  example  the
consequences of an unexpectedly deep US recession. I will return to banks' capital adequacy later but
BIS Review 4/2001
1
first I want to say a few words about our perception of the US economy and the implications for the
UK.
US Economy: Soft or Hard Landing?
The dramatic improvement in US economic performance through the 1990s, in terms of growth and
productivity,  gave  rise  to  a  sharp  increase  in  expected  returns  to  investment  and,  as  a  result,
increased domestic and foreign demand for US assets. Investment has been particularly concentrated
in  ICT  (information,  computers  and  telecommunications),  much  of  it  financed  by  borrowing  on  the
strength of projected future profits.
However, growing uncertainty over the size and permanence of these productivity  gains,  and  about
the long run growth of GDP and profits, has fuelled the recent increase in market volatility. In addition,
there have been more immediate worries about the impact of a cyclical downturn in productivity and
earnings.
Another area for debate has been the implications of any reversal in capital flows. As I have noted,
buoyant earnings expectations drove up equity prices and encouraged high rates of investment. But
alongside  the  rapid  rise  in  the  market  value  of  US  household  wealth  in  relation  to  income  came  a
sharp fall in domestic savings. The gap between savings and investment - manifested in an external
current account deficit which has risen to an unprecedented rate of 4½% of GDP - has been filled by
large  capital  inflows.  One  of  the  major  questions  in  the  current  environment  is  whether  foreign
investors will continue to finance the current account deficit given the current uncertainties about the
conjuncture. If not, there will be important consequences for the US and world economies.
A powerful lesson from recent problems in Japan and East Asia has been the debilitating impact of
weak balance sheet structures. The need by both borrowers and lenders to put overstretched balance
sheets  on  a  sustainable  footing  reduces  the  potential  of  expansionary  monetary  policy  to  restore
investor confidence and so can lead to a deeper and more prolonged downturn in domestic demand
and economic activity. The issue in that case for the rest of the world would be where an increase in
domestic demand in their own countries would come from to fill the gap left by the weaker domestic
demand in the US.
So it should come as no surprise that, in the latest issue of the Bank of England's Financial Stability
Review published in December, the strength of the dollar over the last few years, the size of the US
current account deficit and its counterpart in the personal and corporate sector deficits were identified
as amongst the most significant issues in the global conjuncture. A reversal of foreign inflows, leading
to a correction in both the dollar and US domestic asset prices, would have an impact far wider than
the US.
The fact that the US has enjoyed an unparalleled period of strong and continuous growth during the
nineties owes a great deal, of course, to the policies of the US authorities. They have had to steer a
difficult path between maintaining conditions conducive to growth while not being seen to underwrite
the risks of "irrational exuberance" in security markets or lax lending standards by banks. This balance
became especially difficult to strike towards the end of last year in the face of sharply lower corporate
earnings projections and widening spreads on higher risk borrowings. As some lower-rated companies
found  access  to  the  capital  markets  increasingly  difficult,  and  as  banks  tightened  credit  standards,
liquidity  fears  for  some  borrowers  intensified.  These  factors,  together  with  a  sharp  downturn  in
business optimism and mixed economic data, added to growing fears of a recession this year.
Such a climate of uncertainty calls for clear signals from the authorities and over the past two months
the Fed has responded in a decisive fashion. The adjustment in the policy bias and recent cut in rates
have increased the probability of a soft landing and will, from an international perspective, reduce the
risk of a sharp reversal of capital flows into US markets. The combination of a slower growing - but still
expanding - US economy and a weaker dollar should provide a more sustainable pattern of current
accounts  and  capital  flows,  reducing  the  risk  of  instability  in  financial  markets  in  both  the  US  and
abroad.
The direction of some of the trends we have seen in the last few weeks is not unwelcome, in particular
the stronger euro and  weaker dollar, and  the  reduction  in  oil  prices;  and  a  soft  landing  looks more
likely as a result. But the speed of the adjustment remains a cause for concern. It is important that the
irrational exuberance that marked the run-up in equity prices to their peak last year should not give
way to irrational despondency. The view among central bank governors meeting recently in Basel was
2
BIS Review 4/2001
that while the next few months may be difficult, for the year as a whole the US economy will continue
to grow, by perhaps 2-3%, and the overall world economy - helped by steady growth in the euro area -
would grow again this year above  its long-term average. No doubt this is a slowdown compared to
recent rates of growth and a downward revision of earlier expectations of growth for the year, but it is
not  a  downturn  in  the  sense  of  contracting  activity.  A  soft  landing  in  the  US  with  the  associated
benefits for the global economy still therefore seems to me the most likely outcome.
Implications for the UK
Turning to the UK, the need to avoid irrational despondency is even more apparent. While a slowdown
in the US will have some impact on the UK, the direct trade affect will be relatively small. The UK is
more dependent on growth prospects in the euro area, which is the market for more than two thirds of
UK  exports.  If  there  is  an  impact,  it  is  more  likely  to  come  via  some  other  effect  such  as  financial
contagion or financial constraints on the UK affiliates of US companies. There is no doubt that a sharp
correction in US equity prices would be felt in the UK but with a US soft landing the effects should be
more  limited,  confined  perhaps  to  some  reduction  in  income  from  US  direct  investment  or  slower
growth in financial and business services.
After all, the two economies are in different positions. The reasons the Fed gave to explain their recent
cut  do  not  apply  to  the  UK.  The  Fed  pointed  to  further  weakening  of  sales  and  production;  tight
conditions  in  some  segments  of  financial  markets  given  lower  consumer  confidence;  and  higher
energy prices. Current conditions in the UK are more robust. Consumer confidence measures were, if
anything, higher in the fourth quarter than the third; household demand has remained relatively strong;
consumer  credit  numbers  are  strong;  and  in  the  pipeline  are  planned  increases  in  government
expenditure, though the outlook  for  the  public  finances  remains  strong.  However  it  is  clear  that  the
balance of risks has changed in the last couple of months, with the recent slowdown in world demand,
signs of an easier labour market and the latest inflation numbers comfortably below target. All this will
make the next meeting of the MPC interesting, particularly since the February meeting will include our
quarterly review of the two year MPC Inflation Forecast, in which we will try to calibrate the effects of
the various changes I have mentioned.
Proposed Revisions to the Basel Accord
Compared  to  the  last  US  recession  in  the  early  1990s,  a  source  of  strength  to  the  global  financial
system as the US  economy  slows  is  the  much  stronger  capital  position  of  most major  international
banks.
The  1988  Basel  Accord  and  its  market  risk  amendment  were  intended  both  to  set  a  floor  to  the
capitalisation of the world's major banks, and to smooth out competitive inequalities between banks
from different countries. Bank capital ratios have increased significantly in the last decade. Between
1988 and the end of the 1990s, the ratio of capital to risk-adjusted assets of major banks in the G-10
rose on average by around 3 percentage points. Of course, introduction of the Accord was not the only
factor involved but studies agree it played a significant role in rising bank capital.
However,  by  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  it  became  apparent  that  the  Accord  required  a  radical
overhaul to take account of changes in the nature of banking business and risk management since
1988. One concern has been that in some countries, various forms of regulatory arbitrage have diluted
the level of capital relative to the true risks being run by banks
Last week, the Basel Committee, chaired by Bill McDonough, President of the New York Fed, unveiled
its 'Second Consultative Package' which sets out the details of a new Accord. The intention is that this
should be agreed by around the turn of the year, in order to allow implementation by 2004.
We warmly welcome the new proposals and have played a major part in their negotiation alongside
the  UK  Financial  Services  Authority  and  other  G10  central  banks  and  regulators.  We  particularly
support the proposed use of banks internal ratings to calculate capital. Banks should know more about
the riskiness of their individual borrowers than, for example, external rating agencies or supervisors
and the new Accord will provide them with the proper incentive to do so.
The  new  Accord  also  recognises  that  in  today's  complex  banking  markets,  a  focus  on  capital
adequacy alone is not enough. This has to be reinforced by a rigorous review of banks' internal risk
management  processes,  and  also  by  greater  transparency  and  market  discipline.  Together,  these
BIS Review 4/2001
3
three mechanisms - which are intended to be mutually reinforcing - are known as the three 'Pillars' of
the New Accord.
A fundamental change within the first Pillar - capital levels - compared to the original Accord is that
improved  risk  management  in  banks  has  allowed  the  proposed  new  Accord  to  incorporate  greater
sensitivity  of  credit  risk  capital  charges.  There  will  be  a  menu  of  approaches,  depending  on  the
sophistication of the bank. A 'standard' approach differentiates between credit exposures on the basis
of  external  ratings.  A  'foundation'  internal  ratings  based  approach  will  allow  banks  to  differentiate
between credit exposures on the basis of their internal estimates of borrower default probabilities; and
an 'advanced' approach allows other inputs required to assess credit risk also to be provided by the
bank, rather than the regulator. In addition to all this, there will be for the first time an explicit capital
charge for operational risk.
Systemic Implications of the Revised Accord
What I have described so far is how the Accord is intended to be applied to individual banks. But given
the Bank of England's responsibilities for the stability of the financial system as a whole, our principal
concern is with the overall impact on the system.
The Basel Committee has said that the new Accord is intended broadly to deliver the same level of
bank capital on average across banks as at present. How should we assess the adequacy of this from
the viewpoint of overall financial stability?
As I suggested  earlier,  the role  of bank capital  is to provide a buffer sufficient to cover unexpected
losses. So it seems sensible to link minimum capital requirements to a confidence level. In its work,
the  Basel  Committee's  approach  has  been  to  set  those  requirements  equivalent  to  an  investment
grade rating.
It is important that this rating level is maintained. First there is growing evidence that without it a large
bank  would  have  insufficient  freedom  of  operation  as  their  counterparties'  limits  on  unsecured
exposures stemming from interbank, swap and FX transactions to the bank concerned would be too
small. Second, the frequency of banking crises does  not suggest  that the current minimum  level  of
regulatory capital is too high: four out of the G-10 countries have suffered a banking crisis over the last
decade.
Another important issue is the possible impact of any new capital requirements on the business cycle.
It has been argued that capital requirements can potentially contribute to a credit crunch because in a
period of severe downturn, they can become binding should write-offs and loan loss reserves reduce
the  amount  of  capital  which  a  bank  has  available  to  back  new  lending.  If  banks  are  insufficiently
forward-looking in their assessments of risk, more risk-sensitive capital requirements could lead to an
added pro-cyclical effect to the extent that capital requirements would increase in recessions as the
average riskiness of  borrowers  rose.  It  is  therefore  essential  that  banks  take  a  longer  term  view  of
creditworthiness.
We think, however, that such fears of procyclicality are exaggerated and are more than matched by
the  other  benefits  from  the  new  regime  -  in  particular,  the  reduced  opportunities  for  regulatory
arbitrage and the incentives given to banks to strengthen their risk management.
Moreover, a number of factors seem likely to mute the impact of the new proposals on the cycle. First,
many  banks  have  a  buffer  of  capital  well  above  the  regulatory  minimum.  Second,  in  a  recession,
demand for bank credit may anyway fall. Third, to the extent that banks (and ratings agencies) assign
assets  to  risk  categories  in  a  forward  looking  manner,  it  should  be  possible  to  avoid  wholesale
reclassifications to lower credit-risk categories during cyclical downturns, particularly those of normal
amplitude.
Conclusion
The  new  Accord  will  make  a  significant  contribution  to  strengthening  the  international  system.  But
even under the current Accord, banks should find themselves better placed than in the past to deal
with  any  sudden  downturn.  A  soft  landing  for  the  US  still  seems  the  most  likely  outcome  but  the
system  is  in  far  better  shape  now  than  a  decade  ago  to  absorb,  if  necessary,  a  somewhat  harder
bump. I am not complacent and you can rely on the Bank of England to remain vigilant, whatever the
outcome.
4
BIS Review 4/2001
