Otmar Issing: The European Monetary Union in a globalised world
Speech by  Professor Otmar Issing, Member of the  Executive  Board of the European Central  Bank,
delivered  at  the  Second  Vienna  Globalization  Symposium,  Institut  für  den  Donauraum  und
Mitteleuropa, Wirtschaftskammer Österreich, Vienna, 11 May 2001.
 Introduction
1.
The  role  of  the  European  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  in  an  increasingly  globalised  world  is  a  rather
challenging topic for many reasons but not least because it requires also addressing another important
element of international integration, namely "regionalisation". After all, the creation of the euro area is
not  only  tied  in  with  the  wider  process  of  globalisation  but  is  also  part  and  parcel  of  the  European
regional integration process.
Some  see  European  integration  as  a  defensive  reaction  to  globalisation,  with  the  European  Union
(EU) as a fortress attempting to shut out the challenges and uncertainties of globalisation. In my view,
this reasoning is extremely dangerous. First, the "fortress Europe hypothesis" fails to take into account
that  the  process  of  European  integration  started  more  than  half  a  century  ago,  i.e.  well  before  the
phenomenon  of  globalisation  became  apparent.  Second,  its  aims  go  well  beyond  the  realm  of
economics, since it is also politically motivated. Third, even large economic entities such as the euro
area and the EU can not prosper in the long run if they become inward-looking and close their doors to
the  rest  of  the  world.  It  is  therefore  much  more  useful  to  emphasise  the  positive  links  between
European integration and globalisation. Economic integration will enhance growth and competition in
the  euro  area,  which  in  turn  will  result  in  more  trade  and  greater  capital  flows.  Furthermore,
fast-growing  and  competitive  economies  are  likely  to  be  less  responsive  to  possible  calls  for
protectionism.  In  short,  progress  on  regional  integration  can  support  rather  than  impede  the
globalisation process, to the advantage of all concerned.
I would like to begin this speech by taking a "regional" perspective, presenting to you some of the key
features of EMU: first, focusing on the euro area itself and, second, on the European Central Bank.
After that,  I  will take a look  at  the  role  of  the  euro  as  an  international  currency  and  I  will  finish  my
remarks by reviewing some of the current challenges for EMU. More specifically, I will sketch what the
euro area can do for the outside world and the policy reforms that are still needed in order to ensure a
high level of sustainable growth.
The euro area
2.
Measured in terms of population, the euro area is one of the largest economic entities in the world,
with a total of around 302 million inhabitants. By comparison, the populations of the United States and
Japan are 272 million and 127 million, respectively.
The  GDP  of  the  euro  area,  including  Greece,  was  just  below  EUR  6.250  billion  in  1999.  This  is
equivalent to 16.2% of world GDP: 5.7 percentage points less than the share of the United States but
more than twice the share of Japan.
Given  that  trade  between  the  individual  euro  area  Member  States  is  no  longer  recorded  as
international trade, at least from the point of view of the euro area, its openness vis-à-vis the rest of
the world appears to be limited. Whereas the average ratio of goods exports to GDP for the individual
euro  area  countries  was  around  35%,  the  share  of  euro  area  goods  exports  to  GDP  (adjusted  for
intra-euro area trade)  was only about 12.9%  in  1999. Nevertheless, the euro  are  is  still  more  open
than the world's other two major economies. In 1999 euro area exports of goods and services made
up 18.9% of world exports, compared with 15.2% for the United States and 9.1% for Japan.
EMU is also having dynamic effects and is acting as a catalyst for the further integration of the euro
area economy. This is particularly obvious in the case of euro area financial markets. Even in the run-
up to EMU, there  was a marked decline  in financial transaction costs. Since the introduction of  the
euro  on  1  January  1999  this  decline  has  accelerated..  Furthermore,  trading  activity  has  expanded,
particularly  in  segments  such  as  the  private  bond  markets.  As  a  result,  it  is  easier  for  market
participants to carry out large transactions within a short period of time and with lower costs. Hence,
BIS Review 38/2001
1
not only bid-ask spreads but also other indicators point towards an increase in the depth and liquidity
of euro area financial markets.
Progress on financial market integration is also apparent  in recent structural developments in stock
markets. In 1999 and 2000, a vast array of initiatives were launched by stock exchanges with a view to
forming alliances or merging activities. These initiatives, also involving exchanges located in non-euro
area countries, notably the United Kingdom and the United States, reflect increasing financial market
integration as well as "technological" factors such as the increased potential for economies of scope
and scale resulting from new information and communication technologies (ICT).
The European Central Bank
3.
Let me now turn to the euro and the European Central Bank itself, its mandate and its strategy. Given
the  importance of credibility for  central  banking  it  is  crucial  for  the  success  of  EMU  that  the  Treaty
establishing  the  European  Community  –  which  I  will  refer  to  as  the  "Treaty"  –  provides  a  sound
institutional framework for an effective monetary policy.
It is not my intention to review the provisions of the Treaty in any detail, but it is worth recalling that the
Treaty clearly establishes the maintenance of price stability in the euro area - i.e. the internal stability
of the euro - as the primary objective for the single monetary policy. This takes into account that the
best contribution that the ECB can make to the economic and social wellbeing of the euro area is to
focus  on  maintaining  price  stability.  Without  prejudice  to  its  primary  objective,  the  single  monetary
policy  shall  also  support  the  general  economic  policies  of  the  European  Community.  However,  the
means and the responsibility for ensuring other objectives, such as a high level of employment and
output growth, lie primarily at the national level and, to some extent, at the level of EU institutions. The
allocation of tasks and objectives to different policy-makers in the euro area is thus very clear, which in
turn ensures efficiency, transparency and accountability in economic governance.
Furthermore,  the  Treaty  ensures  the  independence  of  the  ECB.  In  this  way,  potential  political
pressures must be resisted and European citizens can be assured that the ECB will take a long-term,
euro area-wide perspective in pursuing its mandate of maintaining price stability.
The design of the monetary policy strategy of the ECB was guided by the recognition that monetary
policy will always have to cope with a changing and imperfectly known world. In addition, it had to be
borne  in  mind  that  the  creation  of  EMU  and  the  establishment  of  the  ECB  marked  a  historical
discontinuity, with potentially profound implications for economic behaviour and measured structural
relationships.
In these circumstances, the Governing Council of the ECB chose to announce a quantitative definition
of price stability and to equip itself with an internally consistent and at the same time comprehensive
and suitably flexible approach to policy analysis.
The  definition  of  price  stability  as  "a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer
Prices of below 2%", along with the emphasis on the medium term, is designed to enhance clarity, to
anchor expectations and to provide a yardstick against which the new independent institution can be
held accountable.
Likewise, our two-pillar monetary policy strategy is intended to guarantee that no piece  of evidence
relevant to monetary policy decision-making is excluded from the Governing Council's information set.
The  prominent  role  assigned  to  money,  as  the  first  pillar  of  our  strategy,  ensures  that  monetary
developments receive the attention that they deserve, given the monetary nature of inflation beyond
the  short-term  horizon.  The  second  pillar  of  the  strategy  ensures  that  other  ways  of  analysing  the
outlook for inflation, such as the investigation of the interplay between supply and demand and cost-
push  dynamics,  are  also  incorporated  into  the  policy  process.  Together,  the  two  pillars  ensure  that
information and analysis produced on the basis of one methodological perspective are always cross-
checked against information and analysis produced on the basis of the other.
Looking back over the first two and a half years of the ECB, it is fair to say that the comprehensive
analytical framework of the ECB's monetary policy strategy has served our decision-making process
well.  Furthermore,  its  analytical  framework  has  provided  the  basis  for  a  thorough  explanation  of
monetary policy decisions to the general public.
Critical observers may point towards the fact that the annual rate of change in the Harmonised Index
of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area has been above 2% for some time now. In 2000 HICP
2
BIS Review 38/2001
inflation stood on average at 2.3%, with the highest monthly rate being recorded in November (2.9%).
In March 2001 HICP inflation stood at 2.6%.
However, monetary policy has to have a medium-term perspective and cannot guarantee that the rate
of change of the HICP is below 2% at all times. Short-term volatility of prices cannot be controlled and
monetary  policy  should  not  try  to  correct  it.  In  fact,  the  unexpected  peak  in  HICP  inflation  in  2000
resulted  mainly  from  external  price  pressures,  in  particular  developments  in  oil  prices  and  the
exchange rate of the euro. The increase in energy prices, for example, contributed on average more
than 1 percentage point to overall inflation in 2000 and our main concern was that this should not lead
to second-round effects in the domestic economy. Fortunately, this has generally been avoided so far.
In contrast to external developments, domestic costs, such as unit labour costs, generally remained
subdued in 2000.
At the current juncture upward risks to price stability have diminished somewhat compared with the
situation a few months ago, but they have not disappeared. Recent downward revisions of forecasts
for world growth  indicate  that the external  environment  has  become  less  favourable,  although  such
forecasts are surrounded by considerable uncertainty. Some indirect effects of past rises in oil prices
and  the  past  depreciation  of  the  euro  on  HICP  inflation  are  likely  to  continue  for  another  couple  of
months,  but  they  should  gradually  diminish  over  time.  Beyond  the  short  term,  the  abatement  of
domestic  upward  pressure  on  HICP  inflation  remains  conditional  on  the  continuation  of  wage
moderation.
The euro as an international currency
4.
Having adopted a more "regional" perspective for the last couple of minutes, I would now like to turn
your attention to a more "global" aspect of EMU, namely the international role of the euro.
Given  the  weight  of  the  euro  area  in  the  world  economy  and  the  legacy  of  the  former  national
currencies which have been replaced by the euro, it is no surprise that the euro is the second most
widely used currency after the US dollar.
As  regards  the  private  use  of  the  euro,  recent  trends  show  that  it  has  been  used  extensively  as  a
financing and instrument currency.  At the end  of 2000  the share of the euro  in  the  overall  stock  of
"truly international" debt securities (i.e. debt securities issued in a currency different from that of the
country in which the borrower resides) reached 26%. This share is 7 percentage points higher than the
combined shares of the former national currencies of the euro area countries at the end of 1998 (at
constant  exchange rates). Furthermore, the share of the  euro  in  international  bank  assets  has  also
increased substantially over the last two years.
Movement in other areas has been less rapid. The share of the euro in settling/invoicing international
trade, for example, is currently estimated to be only around 15% to 17% of total international trade.
This is significantly below the euro area's proportion of world trade in goods and services. By contrast,
the value of international trade settled in US dollars is nearly four times as high as that of US exports.
Furthermore, on a global level the euro does not yet seem to be playing an important role as a vehicle
currency in the foreign exchange markets (i.e. a currency that can be used as a means of exchanging
two other currencies) or as a pricing and quotation currency.
Future developments with regard to the private international use of the euro are likely to be heavily
influenced by two main factors - size and risk. With regard to the size factor, a broad, deep and liquid
euro area capital market may  lead to greater use of the  euro  through  lower  transaction  costs.  This
may,  in  turn,  facilitate  the  development  of  the  euro  as  a  vehicle  currency  for  trade  and  commodity
pricing. In  addition, if  international  investors  and  issuers  consider  the  euro  to  be  a  stable  currency,
they will hold euro assets to minimise risk in their internationally diversified portfolios. Only if investors
outside the euro area are confident that their purchasing power will be preserved over time will they
engage  in  euro-denominated  financial  activities.  Besides  price  stability,  the  current  and  expected
growth performance of the euro area economy is an additional factor behind the attractiveness of the
euro. Sustained non-inflationary growth in the euro area economy is thus also likely to have beneficial
effects on market expectations and encourage the international use of the euro.
Looking at official international uses, the euro is the second most widely used official reserve currency
after the US dollar. The gap between  the  two  currencies,  however,  is  wide.  According  to  the  latest
available data, at the end of 1999 the euro accounted for around 13% of the world's official foreign
currency holdings compared with a US dollar share of around 70%.
BIS Review 38/2001
3
As an anchor currency, the euro plays a role in the exchange rate regime of more than 50 countries
outside the euro area. The solutions adopted  by  these countries range from very close  or even full
links to the euro, such as the formal entitlement to  use the euro as legal tender, to  looser types of
anchoring, such as peg arrangements and crawling fluctuation bands.
It will be no surprise to you to hear that developments in the EU accession countries are of particular
importance for the ECB. After all, these countries are expected to join the  EU  in  a few  years' time.
Furthermore, it is worth recalling that the proper adoption of the acquis communautaire also includes
the provisions relating to Economic and Monetary Union. The central banks of the current candidate
countries will therefore also become candidates for the adoption of the euro at a later point in time.
This  is  reflected  in  the  fact  that  the  existing  close  links  between  the  euro  area  and  the  accession
countries have further intensified. To give just two examples, the euro has inherited from the Deutsche
Mark the role of vehicle currency for exchanging other European currencies in accession countries.
Furthermore,  it  is  worth  pointing  out  that  the  share  of  the  euro  in  the  reserves  of  EU  accession
countries has increased somewhat since 1999 and now actually exceeds the share of the US dollar.
With regard to candidate countries' monetary policy strategies, I find it rather  encouraging that  they
are, in most cases, increasingly similar to that of the ECB. Centred on price stability, the conduct of
monetary policy is being built more and more around the use of indirect and market-based instruments
to control liquidity conditions in the banking system. Accession countries will need to further advance
the process of bringing down inflation rates in the years to come. At the same time, they should not
delay  the  much-needed  relative  price  adjustments  within  the  economy  which  form  part  of  the  real
convergence process.
As  for  exchange  rate  regimes  in  the  period  prior  to  accession  to  the  EU,  there  are  no  formal
requirements. Each country remains responsible for its chosen exchange rate regime, and a plurality
of approaches seems feasible. Such a variety could also be observed with respect to existing Member
States prior to their entry into the EU. In brief, during this phase the consistency of economic policies
and  their  appropriateness  for  the  economic  situation  in  individual  countries  appear  to  be  more
important than the specific choice of an exchange rate regime.
By  way  of  a  conclusion  to  this  brief  overview  of  the  international  role  of  the  euro,  I  would  like  to
emphasise that future developments in this field will first and foremost be the outcome of a market-
driven process. The Eurosystem is neither promoting nor hindering the internationalisation of the euro.
This  neutral  stance  should  not,  however,  be  interpreted  as  implying  that  a  possible  further
internationalisation of the euro would be irrelevant to policy. Indeed, there are good reasons why the
Eurosystem will continue to monitor these developments closely. A further increase in the international
use of the euro might, for example, have an impact on both the transmission mechanism of monetary
policy  within  the  euro  area  and  the  information  content  of  indicators  under  the  monetary  policy
strategy. However, the international use of the euro is not expected to have any effect on the ability of
the  Eurosystem  to  maintain  price  stability,  in  particular  because  the  Eurosystem's  monetary  policy
strategy is well suited to coping with uncertainty and to arrive at a robust assessment of the monetary
policy stance.
The euro area in a globalised world
5.
I  would  like  to  finish  my  deliberations  by  addressing  two  questions.  First,  adopting  an  international
perspective,  what  is  the  appropriate  international  role  of  the  euro  area  for  the  rest  of  the  world?
Second, taking an inward-looking perspective, what domestic policy reforms are needed in the euro
area in order to ensure a higher level of sustainable growth and thereby contribute to the growth of the
world economy?
Looking at the first question, the recent US slowdown has often raised the question as to who might
take  over  from  the  United  States  as  the  "global  growth  engine"?  Given  the  current  state  of  the
Japanese economy, most observers have of course earmarked the euro area for that role. However, I
would  contend  that  the  question  itself  is  totally  misleading.  Indeed,  US  economic  policy  has,  in  my
view, always been conducted, and rightly so, with a clear focus on domestic objectives. It is important
to note in this regard that the periods of sustainable non-inflationary growth experienced in the United
States  have  in  fact  coincided  with  those  periods  when  the  United  States  was  making  a  significant
contribution to both growth and stability the world over.
4
BIS Review 38/2001
In principle, the same logic should also hold for the euro area. As pointed out before, the euro area is
the second largest economic area in the world. Furthermore, relative to its GDP it is the most open of
the  three  large  economies  in  terms  of  trade  in  goods  and  services.  Economic  developments  in  the
euro  area  are  therefore  obviously  of  considerable  importance  for  developments  and  prospects
elsewhere. However, the best contribution which a large economy such as the euro area can make to
supporting  sustainable  non-inflationary  growth  in  the  world  economy  is  to  ensure  macroeconomic
stability  "at  home",  which in turn is fully consistent  with the  mandate  of  the  ECB.  Unduly  ambitious
attempts  by  the  euro  area  to  take  over  the  role  of  "international  growth  engine"  -  however  well-
intentioned they might be - would risk ending in unsustainable euro area growth and, thereby, in an
anything but optimal contribution to stability and growth at the global level.
That  said,  I  very  much  hope  that  the  already  substantial  contribution  of  the  euro  area  to  global
economic growth can increase even further. The extent to which this will be possible depends on the
increase  in  the  euro  area's  growth  potential,  which  in  turn  is  closely  linked  with  ongoing  efforts  to
stipulate further structural reforms in the euro area's goods, labour and financial markets.
Over the last few years a number of structural reforms have already taken place, but in most countries
the current state of affairs is still far from satisfactory. Let me give you a few examples of this, starting
with labour markets. Although the euro area unemployment rate has fallen in recent years, it remains
significantly  higher  than  in  the  world's  other  large  economies.  In  February  2001  euro  area
unemployment  stood  at  8.7%  compared  with  4.2%  in  the  United  States  and  4.7%  in  Japan.
Furthermore, the euro area labour force participation rate of 67.3% in  1999  was considerably  lower
than the participation rate in the United States (77.2%) or Japan (72.4%). At the same time there are
increasing indications of labour market bottlenecks in the euro area, especially in particular countries
and regions and for particular types of jobs. Therefore labour market reforms in the euro area need to
focus on further changes in the tax and benefits systems, with a view to increasing incentives to work.
Furthermore, efforts along these lines, though welcome in themselves, need to be complemented by
reforms that increase the flexibility of labour markets.
As I have already outlined, the integration of euro area financial markets has progressed rapidly over
the last two years. However, there are also areas where the pace of integration has been slower, for
example in the repo market, where progress is being delayed by a combination of technical factors,
such  as  market  infrastructure  and  remaining  differences  in  the  tax  regimes  applicable  to  repo
transactions. Resolving such problems requires a clear political will to proceed with financial market
integration in the euro area and, in fact, in the EU as a whole. The same holds for the implementation
of the recommendations of the "Committee of Wise Men" chaired by Baron Alexandre Lamfalussy on
the  regulation  of  European  securities  markets.  Once  put  into  force,  these  recommendations  should
also provide further impetus for euro area financial market integration.
In the long run further  improvements in the efficiency  of  euro  area  financial  markets  will  result  in  a
better allocation of financial resources, which, in turn, will contribute to a general increase in economic
welfare. In this context it would be well worth taking up the suggestion of the Committee of Wise Men
to prepare a report on the benefits of financial market integration. Such a report could be instrumental
in increasing public awareness of the importance of further progress in this area.
Turning  to  the  involvement  of  the  state  in  the  economy,  the  euro  area  general  government  sector
makes up a substantially larger share of output than in the United States and Japan. In 1999, euro
area government expenditure amounted to 49% of the euro area's GDP. This is in stark contrast with
the  relative  size  of  the  public  sectors  in  the  United  States  and  Japan,  where  general  government
expenditures accounted for less than 32% and 40% of GDP respectively. The difference is mainly a
result of high public employment and overly generous state aid in the euro area. Very high taxes are
required to finance these activities, which in turn result in considerable disincentives to work, save and
invest.  The  euro  area  figure  thus  clearly  suggests  that  there  is  significant  scope  for  a  reduction  of
public involvement in the euro area economy.
During  the  last  couple  of  years  network  industry  reforms  in  telecommunications,  electricity  and  gas
have  proceeded  relatively  rapidly  in  the  euro  area:  the  ECB  has  recently  published  a  study  of  the
effects of regulatory reforms in these sectors. The results show that reforms that succeed in increasing
competition in previously sheltered network industries have considerable general economic benefits.
They are likely to result in permanently lower price levels within the network industries themselves and
to  have  a  temporary  downward  effect  on  inflation  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  In  addition,  these
regulatory reforms have the potential to raise productivity.
BIS Review 38/2001
5
Slow progress in other structural policy areas shows that the policy-makers in this field, in particular
the Member States, should be continuously encouraged to proceed with their reform efforts. After all, a
thorough and speedy implementation of such reforms will not only increase the growth potential of the
euro area but it is also important for ensuring the international competitiveness of the euro area.
Challenges
6.
This last point brings me back to the start of my speech, namely the need for all economies, including
very large ones such as the euro area, to remain outward-looking.  It  is reassuring to know that the
euro area is today better placed than ever to cope with the challenges of international exposure, while
at the same time reaping the benefits of globalisation. In order to do so three elements are needed.
First, the dynamic effects of EMU will deepen the economic integration of the euro area. This in turn is
likely  to  yield general  economic  benefits  such  as  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  resources  within  the
euro  area  economy.  Second,  the  ECB's  stability-oriented  single  monetary  policy  provides  stable
framework conditions for economic agents. With regard to other macroeconomic policy areas, policy-
makers at the national and to some extent the European level, have the same responsibility. Third,
structural reforms in goods, capital and labour markets have to proceed in order to allow the euro area
to  better  exploit  its  growth  potential  in  the  future.  I  am  very  optimistic  about  the  first  two  of  these
elements. EMU is of course in place, economic integration appears to be making good progress, and
the  outlook  for  continued  macroeconomic  stability  is  good.  With  regard  to  the  third  element  the
uncertainties are somewhat greater, but on balance they still justify a fair degree of optimism. In short,
I am confident that the euro area economy is likely to experience sustained non-inflationary growth in
the future, thereby contributing to growth and economic stability on a global scale.
6
BIS Review 38/2001
