Willem  F  Duisenberg:  What  exactly  is  the  responsibility  of  central  banks  of
large economic areas in the current slowdown of the world economy?
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  International
Monetary Conference, Singapore, 4 June 2001.
 The  topic  of  the  introduction  I  have  been  invited  to  provide  at  the  Central  Bankers'  panel  is  both
challenging and welcome. The challenge is to answer a  question  that has been hovering around  in
recent  months:  should  the  euro  area  assume  the  role  of  a  "global  growth  engine"  in  the  current
slowdown  of  the  world  economy?  The  opportunity  to  address  this  issue  directly  is  welcome,  as  it
allows me to elaborate on the role the European Central Bank (ECB) must play in this field. In doing
so, however, I shall start first by briefly recalling the objective of the monetary policy of the ECB, which
provides  an  essential  background  to  the  analysis  of  the  responsibility  and  the  challenges  the  ECB
faces with respect to the current slowdown of the world economy.
The primary objective of the ECB, as the Treaty of the European Union defines it, is to maintain price
stability in the euro area. The Governing Council of the ECB has defined price stability as "year-on-
year increases in the HICP for the euro area of below 2%". Furthermore, it was made clear from the
outset that price stability should be maintained over the medium term. By unambiguously  assigning
the  primary  objective  of  price  stability  to  an  independent  central  bank,  the  Treaty  recognises  that
focusing monetary policy on the maintenance of price stability in the euro area ensures that monetary
policy will make the best possible contribution to improving economic prospects.
This view is rooted in the fact, supported by decades of practical experience and empirical evidence,
that the benefits of price stability for growth are substantial. Without putting forward all the arguments,
allow me to highlight, in particular, that the maintenance of price stability helps to allocate resources
efficiently both across uses and across time. Inflation causes economic agents to confuse transitory
with  permanent  price  changes,  and  therefore  distorts  their  decision-making  process.  In  evaluating
investment  opportunities,  firms  need  to  have  confidence  in  the  signals  conveyed  by  relative  price
changes, and to discriminate between relative price adjustments and general changes in the overall
price level. This process  is  facilitated  in  a  situation  of  overall  price  stability.  Price  stability  therefore
improves the transparency of the relative price mechanism and can promote an adequate environment
to  increasing  the  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  economy.  Moreover,  as  experience  has  shown,
stable prices minimise the inflation risk premium, thereby lowering long-term interest rates and helping
to stimulate investment and growth.
In order to maintain price stability, the ECB has designed a monetary policy strategy wherein risks to
price  stability  are  assessed  on  the  basis  of  two  pillars.  The  first  pillar  assigns  a  prominent  role  to
monetary developments. The second pillar is a broadly based assessment of a wide range of other
economic  and  financial  indicators.  This  all-encompassing  and  systematic  approach  guarantees  that
the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  takes  into  consideration  all  relevant  pieces  of  information  when
assessing the outlook for price stability in the medium term.
All this shows clearly that the  ECB needs to focus on the euro area  when  conducting  its  monetary
policy. Focusing on domestic objectives is, in fact, the mandate of all major central banks in the world,
and  rightly  so.  I  strongly  believe  that  the  best  contribution  that  the  euro  area  can  make  to  world
economic growth is to ensure macroeconomic stability "at home" by pursuing policies which lead to
sustainable non-inflationary growth in the euro area. Given the size of the economy of the euro area, a
stability-oriented  policy  will  help  to  create  a  favourable  environment  conductive  to  non-inflationary
growth at the global level. The mandate of the ECB is fully consistent with this principle. This is the
only reasonable allocation of responsibilities among the large economies in the world. Anything else
risks blurring such responsibilities and diluting accountability, which would in turn distort incentives in a
perverse way.
This  notwithstanding,  the  euro  area  is  not,  of  course,  economically  speaking,  an  island  and  global
developments  do  affect  the  euro  area  economy.  Hence,  let  me  also  stress  that  one  of  the
requirements  of  a  globalised  world  is  a  frequent  exchange  of  information  and  views  among  policy-
makers.  The  ECB  currently  participates  in  the  meetings  of  international  organisations,  such  as  the
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development
(OECD) and the Bank for International  Settlements (BIS),  and  different  fora,  such  as  the  G7.  Such
BIS Review 50/2001
1
exchanges  are important, among other things,  to better  understand  economic  developments  and  to
fully analyse the spillover effects in the economy arising from different policies.
The ECB is not in a position to fine tune economic activity in the euro area, as it does not have the
instruments to do so. Any  attempt to do so  would  prove counterproductive, leading to  an  inefficient
medium-term outcome characterised by higher inflation and lower growth. Two main factors support
this  view.  First,  economic  developments  are  surrounded  by  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty.  This
uncertainty affects the analysis of both the current state of the economy and  its future course.  And
second, monetary policy operates with relatively long lags, having very little effect on the economy in
the  short  run.  Past  experience  has  shown  that  attempts  to  fine-tune  the  economy  might  place  in
jeopardy  the  commitment  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  medium  term,  as  is  essential  for  a  well-
functioning  economy.  Once  inflation  exists  and  inflation  expectations  prevail  in  the  economy,  the
economic  costs  of  the  subsequent  necessary  stabilisation  far  exceed  whichever  temporary  benefits
might have been previously obtained.
Therefore, the ECB needs to remain focused on the maintenance of price stability in the medium term.
The ECB pursues this objective in a consistent and forward-looking manner, ensuring the confidence
of all policy-makers, both within and outside the euro area.
Experience  so  far  suggests  that  the  ECB  has  been  able  to  keep  inflationary  expectations  at  a  low
level.  Although  current  HICP  figures  in  the  euro  area  are  adversely  affected  by  energy  and  food
prices, the current outlook is compatible with the maintenance of price stability in the medium term.
This view is supported by the analysis of bond yields. It is comforting to see that market participants
expect medium-term price developments to remain in line with the ECB's definition of price stability.
Currently available forecasts give rise to the expectation that inflation will again fall below 2% in 2002.
Hence, we appear to be on the right track. However, we must not ignore existing risks to price stability.
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  therefore  always  stresses  that  it  is  vigilant  and  will  take  into
account all new information that might affect the outlook for price stability in the medium term.
Let me now conclude by recalling that, while the ECB cannot be held accountable for growth in the
euro  area,  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area  have  been  relatively  low,  and  cannot,  by  any  means,  be
considered  to  be  an  obstacle  to  growth.  Currently,  although  uncertainty  remains  high,  the  general
expectation is that growth in the euro area will remain at, or slightly above, trend potential growth in
the period ahead.
Having said that, the ECB would welcome an increase of the already substantial contribution of the
euro area to global economic growth. However, this should be achieved in a lasting way, by increasing
the growth potential of the euro area. The growth potential of an economy, however, is determined by
technological and structural factors. Raising its growth potential is an important challenge that the euro
area faces, achievement of which would spread its benefits throughout the world.
While some reforms have already taken place, additional efforts are needed. Ongoing comprehensive
structural  reforms  of  the  labour  and  product  markets  remain  essential  in  order  to  improve  the
functioning  of markets in the  euro  area. Responsibility for these reforms  lies  with  the  governments,
and with the key national economic agents on the side of labour and industry. It is crucial to increase
investment  incentives  through  structural  policy  measures  such  as  deregulation  and  privatisation.
Fiscal policy should continue along the path of diminishing adverse incentives provided by tax, benefit
and  pension  systems,  while  reforms  on  the  expenditure  side  of  the  budget  are  also  needed  for
progress along the way towards the medium-term objective of attaining budgetary positions "close to
balance or in surplus".
To sum up, although monetary policy cannot lift the euro area's growth potential, the benefits of price
stability for growth are evident, as stable prices provide the proper environment for structural reforms
to  work.  While  the  ECB  will  maintain  its  commitment  to  the  maintenance  of  price  stability,  other
policy-makers should assume responsibility for increasing the growth potential of the euro area. This,
in turn, is the best allocation of responsibilities to contributing to sustainable non-inflationary growth in
the euro area and, thereby, also at a global level.
2
BIS Review 50/2001
