Willem F Duisenberg: Developments in international financial markets
Speech  delivered  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
inauguration  ceremony  of 
the  Second  Swedish  National  Pension  Fund,  Gothenburg,
26 September 2001.
 Introduction
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to be here today at the inauguration ceremony of the Second
Swedish National Pension Fund. My comments will  not be  directly concerned  with developments in
Swedish  financial  markets,  but  I  will  focus  on  trends  and  developments  in  the  financial  markets  of
Europe. Although Sweden is not part of the euro area, you should expect to benefit from any efficiency
gains achieved in the capital markets of the euro area, both as a borrower and – perhaps of greater
relevance to the pension fund industry – as an investor. I would like to concentrate my remarks today
on three issues. First, I shall say a few words on the need to reform pension systems in Europe. Then,
I would like to discuss recent developments in euro area capital markets from a global perspective.
Finally,  I  shall  address  the  issue  of  oversight  of  financial  markets  and  recent  institutional  and
regulatory developments.
Need to reform pension systems in Europe
Over the last fifty years we have witnessed an unprecedented era of growth, technological progress,
prosperity and welfare improvement across all generations. Notable demographic changes are taking
place not only in Europe but also across the western world and this raises many important issues. In
particular,  improving  economic  welfare  has  been  associated  with  longer  life  expectancy.  Combined
with  lower  birth  rates,  this  is  leading  to  an  ageing  of  populations,  which  will  have  far-reaching
implications. It raises issues concerning possible resource constraints that may be faced in the future
and questions about the sustainability of prevailing living standards in an environment where current
projections point to a future population decline in Europe. Related to that is the issue concerning the
sustainability of the current pension systems.
As members of the pension fund industry are undoubtedly aware, on current trends the ratio of elderly
people to the working-age population is set to increase significantly. In the euro area, the ratio of over
65 year olds to those between 20 and 64 is forecast to rise from prevailing levels of 27% to around
53% by 2050, with a maximum of 67% in Italy. This is expected to result from a combination of effects.
Most importantly, life expectancy has increased considerably over the last half century and this trend
looks set to continue. At the same time, the number of births has declined substantially throughout the
developed world and even a return to higher birth rates in the future would most likely come too late to
solve the problems faced by many pension systems in the coming decades.
Pension systems in Europe rely  heavily on  state-run  pay-as-you-go  arrangements.  Funded  pension
arrangements,  be  they  publicly  or  privately  managed,  are  generally  less  developed.  Pay-as-you-go
systems are particularly vulnerable to demographic change: with a declining ratio of the labour force
relative to the number of pensioners, the tax base shrinks while the number of recipients increases,
leaving  policy-makers  to  adjust  the  system  through  reductions  in  benefits  and  increases  in
contributions.
It should be noted that debt financing of the gap between pension contributions and pension payments
does not represent a viable alternative. Given the public knowledge of the pension system dynamics,
participants  in  financial  markets  would  anticipate  the  unsustainability  of  delaying  pension  system
reform and require higher risk premia on new debt. In this respect, it is helpful that governments of the
euro area have committed themselves to refrain from excessive public deficits through the Maastricht
Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact.
In order to deal with demographic changes, European governments are moving in several directions.
So-called parametric reforms strive to put the existing pay-as-you-go systems onto a sound financial
footing. They include changes to contributions and benefits, such as adjustments in the indexation of
existing  pensions  and  in  benefit  formulas  for  new  pensioners.  Two  approaches  are  particularly
noteworthy,  and  the  Swedish  pension  reform  has  been  impressive  in  this  respect  The  first  is  the
BIS Review 80/2001
1
introduction  of  longevity  adjustments  in  the  benefit  formula,  which  can  insure  the  system  against
unforeseen  –  but  welcome  –  increases  in  life  expectancy  after  retirement.  The  second  is  the
introduction of a notional defined contribution system which closely links an individual's contributions
to his or her own future benefits. However, parametric reforms have limits: raising contribution rates
would increase distortional taxation of labour with a negative impact on labour markets. Indeed, labour
market reforms are also needed to counter the detrimental effects of the ageing of the population. One
should, for instance, consider measures aimed at stimulating the supply of labour. Moreover, limiting
benefits runs the risk of increasing poverty among the elderly.
An  alternative  and  complementary  route  to  securing  future  pensions  consists  in  systemic  reforms,
namely  a  move  toward  more  funded  systems.  This  would  partially  replace  labour  taxation  with  an
accumulated  capital  stock  as  the  source  of  financing  for  pensions.  Several  countries,  such  as
Denmark  and  the  Netherlands,  use  private  savings  for  future  pensions.  Germany  is  moving  in  the
same direction after its recent pension reform. In Finland, a part of the social security contributions is
channelled into a publicly administered fund. France has decided to create a fund equivalent to 10% of
GDP  by  2020.  Ireland's  public  national  reserve  fund  has  assets  of  7.5%  of  GDP,  and  the  Irish
government is committed to setting aside contributions equal to 1% of GDP up to 2025. Belgium has
set aside revenues from UMTS licenses for such a fund. Sweden is obviously well advanced in this
respect with a pension trust fund equivalent to 25% of GDP.
We should not be afraid of a stronger role for privately managed funded systems. Such systems have
the  advantage  of  efficient  administration  and  an  absence  of  political  interference.  They  may  also
induce increased private savings. But suitable regulation must deter risky investment strategies that
could  jeopardise  living  standards  at  a  vulnerable  stage  in  people's  lives  and  would  discredit  an
increased role for the private sector.
The ageing of the population will also have a profound impact on budgetary policies, not only because
of  the  consequences  of  population  ageing  on  pension  arrangements.  Expenditure  on  healthcare  is
also expected to increase markedly. The potential impact of population ageing on the fiscal position of
countries is an important reason why European countries should not only pursue balanced budgets,
but also a surplus. This would allow them either to reduce their public debt, which would lead to lower
interest payments and more scope for an increase in expenditure relating to population ageing, or to
establish special funds to be used to finance this additional expenditure.
As a final remark on this particular issue, I would like to mention that population ageing is one of the
broad  economic  trends  shaping  the  future  of  financial  markets  in  the  euro  area.  Over  the  coming
years,  together  with  the  liberalisation  of  financial  markets,  population  ageing  will  lead  to  further
demand for long-term investment instruments on the part of pension funds. In addition, the need for
portfolio diversification may drive up the volume of cross-border investments, including investments in
emerging markets with a more favourable demographic structure. These trends are likely to provide
further  impetus  to  the  development  of  suitable  financial  instruments  for  pension  funds,  and  more
generally for savers at the end of the intermediation chain.
Developments in euro capital markets from a global perspective
I will now try to describe recent developments in euro capital markets from a global perspective.
The  launch  of  the  euro  on  1  January  1999  was  an  historic  event.  Eleven  national  currencies  were
converted  into  one  single  currency  overnight.  On  1  January  2001  Greece  became  the  twelfth
European Union Member State to adopt the single currency. The newly created currency area of the
twelve participating EU Member States has a considerable weight in the world economy. It accounts
for around 20% of both world GDP and world exports. The successful launch of the euro, which is a
key element in promoting economic stability and prosperity in Europe, has boosted the integration of
financial markets in the euro area. This process of integration in European financial markets coincided
with a trend towards globalisation and securitisation which was already well underway.
Since its inception, the euro has been the second most widely used currency at the international level.
This  reflects  the  importance  of  the  euro  area  in  the  world  economy.  Recent  trends  in  the
internationalisation  of  the  euro  are  the  result  of  market  developments  and  policies  both  inside  and
outside the euro area.
In capital markets the euro has seen a tremendous development in its short existence. This has been
the case for both the bond and the equity markets.
2
BIS Review 80/2001
The economies of, and the economic processes in, the countries currently within the euro area have
become  increasingly  intertwined  as  we  have  moved  towards  EMU.  This  has  naturally  led  to  the
development  of  more  cross-border  financial  interconnections.  At  the  same  time,  financial  flows
between the euro area and the rest of the world have increased rapidly in recent years. As far as euro
area  financial  markets  are  concerned,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  greater
integration within the euro area, although this process is still far from complete. The improvement in
efficiency which integration is bringing to financial markets in the euro area should be beneficial not
only for euro area residents but also for non-resident borrowers and investors, who are able to access
the  financial  markets  of  the  euro  area  and  take  advantage  of  their  breadth,  depth  and  liquidity.  In
particular, even though euro area financial markets are not yet fully integrated at an area-wide level,
they  are  larger  and  more  accessible  than  any  of  the  markets  that  were  denominated  in  the
predecessor currencies of the euro.
This  has  brought  important  benefits  for  residents  of  the  euro  area,  but  it  also  has  important
implications  for  Sweden.  As  regards  to  the  bond  market,  I  would  like  to  share  a  number  of  more
specific observations with you. The first is that the introduction of the euro created the second largest
bond  market  in  the  world.  The  second  is  that,  while  the  corporate  bond  market  was  of  limited
importance in the euro area before 1998, the launch of the euro seemed to act as a catalyst for the
development  of  a  market  in  which  corporations  could  issue  debt  securities  of  unprecedented  size.
Reflecting this, the amount outstanding of debt securities issued by the non-financial corporate sector
grew by an impressive 17% in 1999.The same growth rate was recorded in 2000 and – in the first six
months of 2001 – growth rates of around14% were observed. The wave of mergers and acquisitions in
the euro area corporate sector seen since the launch of the euro provides just one example of the
increased possibilities offered by the larger and deeper single financial market.
A third observation is the increasing importance of the euro in the overall stock of "truly international"
debt  securities.  What  I  mean  by  "truly  international"  debt  securities  is  those  securities  issued  in  a
currency that differs from that of the country in which the borrower resides. By the end of 2000, the
euro  accounted  for  26%  of  such  securities.  This  share  is  7  percentage  points  higher  than  the  total
share accounted for by the euro's predecessor currencies at the end of 1998. The share of the euro is
even  larger  if  account  is  also  taken  of  the  issuance  of  debt  securities  denominated  in  the  home
currency of the borrower and targeted at the international financial market. Furthermore, by virtue of its
openness and its breadth, the bond market of the euro area has become an important component in
international bond markets and can be expected to develop further in the coming years.
This picture of the euro bond market in terms of size, growth and international participation goes hand
in  hand  with  increased  liquidity  and  efficiency.  Over  the  past  couple  of  years,  this  has  resulted  in
declining  transaction  costs,  as  bid-ask  spreads  have  narrowed.  Furthermore,  we  have  seen  an
increased diversity, due to the arrival of issuers with low credit ratings, which used to be all but absent
in the euro bond market. This has increased the investment possibilities in the euro bond market.
Let me now turn to the stock markets. In the stock markets of the euro area there is also evidence of
further integration. A number of benchmark indices now exist for the euro area as a whole. In addition,
derivatives  markets  have  been  established  which  allow  market  participants  to  shift  from  taking  a
country perspective in their investment decisions to taking a sector perspective across the euro area.
As  a  result,  sectoral  factors  should  play  a  greater  role  than  before  in  determining  share  price
movements over time.
The integration of stock markets at the euro area level means that issuers across the euro area have
privileged access to a large number of investors in a large and open market place. This has paved the
way for new firms and relatively small firms to obtain finance from stock markets that have specialised
in providing funds to young and innovative firms. We have seen an astonishingly large number of new
listings in recent years.
Oversight of financial markets and recent institutional and regulatory developments
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  issue  of  the  oversight  of  financial  markets  and  recent  institutional  and
regulatory developments. The internationalisation of markets is posing new challenges for supervision.
The  new  challenges  posed  by  recent  market  developments  come  mainly  from  two  sources,
technological  advances  and  the  increased  competition  and  market  integration  triggered  by  the
introduction  of  the  euro.  Until  the  1980s,  financial  activity  was  conducted  within  heterogeneous
frameworks.  Each  financial  system  was  characterised  by  a  different  currency,  legislation  and
BIS Review 80/2001
3
supervisory  structure.  In  general,  each  sector  of  the  financial  industry  –  banking,  securities  and
insurance  –  had  its  own  supervisory  agency.  Financial  innovation  has  significantly  blurred  the
distinction  between  products  supplied  by  different  intermediaries,  and  technological  advances  have
had a major impact on the importance of the physical  location  of the market players, since the two
sides of the  transaction  and  the  intermediary need not be close  geographically. The concept of the
market itself has drastically changed, since it has become an entity not clearly identified by a physical
location. For example, a large part of the regulation relates to the definition of a market as a physical
entity. In today's financial systems it is possible to have markets, like the foreign exchange market,
that  do  not  a  have  a  geographical  location.  Public  policies  have  progressively  adapted  to  the  new
market  environment,  increasing  cross-border  and  cross-sectoral  co-operation  between  competent
authorities  and  shaping  new,  less  cumbersome  and  intrusive  regulatory  and  supervisory  tools.  The
introduction  of  the  euro  has  further  eroded  sectoral  and  geographic  segmentation,  thus  initiating
debates in many countries on the most efficient institutional arrangements for prudential supervision
and financial stability.
The single agency approach has recently gained ground as a response to the breakdown of sectoral
distinctions in  the financial  industry.  Sweden and Denmark  within  the  European  Union  and  Canada
and  Norway  outside  it  were  the  first  countries  to  adopt  such  a  model.  This  solution  attracted  even
more attention with the reforms in the United Kingdom establishing the Financial Services Authority.
The developments which have occurred in the market seem to favour the single supervisor approach.
In fact, financial products are now mixed and the same economic function is performed by contracts
supplied  by  firms  belonging  to  different  segments  of  the  financial  industry.  This  implies  that  the
traditional approach of specialised agencies is no longer perceived as satisfactory. On the other hand,
the  problems  related  to  the  creation  and  effective  management  of  a  universal  agency  are  very
complex. Indeed, co-ordination remains necessary, be it between specialised agencies or between the
organisational units within a universal agency.
A second issue involves the role played by central banks. There are three main arguments in favour
and three main arguments against the unification of prudential supervision and central banking. The
arguments in favour are the following. First, there is a potential for exploiting synergies between the
supervisory  function  and  the  core  tasks  of  a  central  bank.  A  thorough  understanding  of  the  proper
functioning of payment systems and of other market infrastructures is essential for the smooth conduct
of monetary policy. Information collected for supervisory purposes may play a significant role in this.
The second argument concerns the need to focus on systemic risk. Central banks have a privileged
position  from  which  to  assess  the  impact  of  macroeconomic  shocks  and  the  financial  stability  of
groups  of  intermediaries.  The  third  argument  concerns  the  independence  from  political  interference
and the technical expertise of central banks.
Similarly,  we  can  identify  three  arguments  supporting  the  establishment  of  a  supervisory  agency
outside  the  central  bank.  The  first  one  concerns  the  alleged  conflict  of  interest  between  monetary
policy  and  prudential  supervision.  Many  authors  have  argued  that  the  body  in  charge  of  monetary
policy cannot be entrusted with supervision,  because the monetary policy stance  would be affected
and it would pose a threat to price stability. A second argument is based on the observation that no
clear  distinction  is  made  between  the  different  financial  products  and  intermediaries  belonging  to
distinct financial sectors. I already discussed this argument earlier when I talked of the technological
advances.  The  third  and  final  argument  concerns  the  need  to  avoid  an  excessive  concentration  of
power in the central bank.
While  it  may  be  a  difficult  and  controversial  exercise  to  weigh  up  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  two
solutions at a general level, without making allowances for the specific environment, in the particular
context of the Eurosystem the balance of the arguments leans in favour of maintaining a strong role for
national central banks in prudential supervision. The reasons for this are twofold. First, the conflict of
interest regarding monetary policy and concentration of power is no longer relevant given the structure
of the Eurosystem, since the introduction of the euro has implied an institutional separation between
the monetary jurisdiction – the euro area – and the supervisory jurisdiction – domestically chartered
institutions in  individual  countries.  Second,  in  a  single  currency  area  in  which  financial  markets  are
increasingly integrated, swift and open communications among supervisors are of vital importance for
crisis prevention and management. The dual nature of national central banks, which are at the same
time both national institutions and part of the Eurosystem, might be a valuable asset when dealing with
cross-border or area-wide issues.
4
BIS Review 80/2001
Conclusions
The  implementation  of  the  single  market  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro  have  strengthened
competitive pressure and increased flexibility in the EU economies. Furthermore, they have also had a
clear impact on global markets, prompting further integration of international financial markets. In other
words, it is clear that developments in financial markets have contributed to a more efficient allocation
of  capital.  This  is  also  to  the  benefit  of  pension  funds.  On  the  other  hand,  the  integration  of  the
financial  markets  and  the  technological  developments  have  substantially  increased  the  risk  of
contagion in the event of a financial crisis. It is necessary therefore for governments and authorities to
continue  to  co-operate  to  create  regulations  and  institutions  for  the  purpose  of  minimising  financial
risk.
Thank you very much for your kind attention.
BIS Review 80/2001
5
