Lee Hsien Loong: Consolidation and liberalisation: building world-class banks
Speech by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary
Authority of Singapore, at the Association of Banks Annual Dinner, Singapore, 29 June 2001.
 Introduction
Two years ago, MAS embarked on the first phase of a programme to liberalise the banking industry.
The  aim  was  to  strengthen  our  local  banks  through  competition,  provide  Singaporeans  with  quality
banking services, and enhance Singapore's position as an international financial centre. We phased in
the liberalisation measures progressively, to give local banks time to upgrade themselves to meet the
competition, and maintain the stability of the financial system.
The first package of measures in 1999 comprised a few main elements. MAS permitted 4 Qualifying
Full  Banks  (QFBs)  to  establish  up  to  10  locations  each,  relocate  their  existing  branches  and  share
ATMs  among  themselves.  We  granted  8  new  Restricted  Bank  licences  to  banks  that  wanted  to
expand  their  wholesale  S$  business.  We  also  gave  Offshore  Banks  more  flexibility  to  lend  in
Singapore dollars and engage in S$ swaps, and even wider leeway to 8 Qualifying Offshore Banks.
These measures marked the start of a major and irreversible process of change. We could not foresee
exactly how the industry would respond and develop. So MAS committed to reviewing progress at the
half-way mark before deciding on further liberalisation measures. We have now completed this review.
Local banks' upgrading and consolidation
Since the first liberalisation package was announced, the local banks have made progress in building
up their capabilities. They have generally strengthened their management teams, and invested heavily
in infrastructure to provide banking services more efficiently, especially via electronic channels. They
have improved their customer relationship management systems, which will allow more effective data
mining of their customer databases and cross-selling of multi-sector products. Local banks have also
been seeking opportunities and expanding their presence in the region.
An important and more visible sign that local  banks are gearing up for competition  is of course the
process of consolidation that is underway. The opening gambit was made on 12 June when OCBC
announced  that  it  was  making  a  voluntary  general  offer  for  Keppel  Capital  Holdings  which  owns
Keppel TatLee Bank. Ten days later, DBS made an unsolicited bid for OUB. And just three hours ago,
UOB made a competing bid after reaching agreement with the controlling shareholders of OUB. All the
local banks are now busy reassessing their positions. It is likely that a new configuration will quickly
crystallise.
MAS  views  this  as  a  very  positive  development  for  the  banking  industry,  and  more  importantly  for
Singapore. If the consolidation is well executed, a stronger group of local banks will emerge, able to
hold their own domestically, provide Singaporeans with better services, and compete in the region. Let
me elaborate.
The importance of consolidation
Economies of  scale  have  become  critical  in  banking  today.  Banks  in  the  developed  countries  have
been merging and consolidating, globally, in search of greater scale and efficiency. Their customers
are demanding faster access to more customised and integrated financial services. Banks can now
deliver  one-stop  service  through  faster  distribution  channels,  and  develop  sophisticated  customer
relationship  systems  to  customise  products.  Technology  has  made  this  possible.  But  the  cost  of
investments in technology is high, and can only be justified and recovered if it is spread over millions
of  customers.  Banks  like  Citicorp  have  spent  tens  of  billions  of  dollars,  developing  IT  systems  to
support their consumer banking services.
Being a big bank is no guarantee of success, as shown by the persistent difficulties of the Japanese
banks over the last decade, which in the 1980s were among the biggest banks in the world. But being
a small bank is definitely a significant handicap. The logic of Singapore’s position is inescapable: if we
want strong banks, then they have to be big banks, and if they are to be big banks, then we must have
BIS Review 61/2001
1
fewer banks. This is the reality in many small countries. Switzerland, with a GDP and population about
twice our size, now has only two big banks – UBS and Credit Suisse – both of which are world-class
players. The Netherlands, four times as big as  Singapore,  has three – ABN-AMRO, Rabobank and
ING, plus Fortis which is partially Belgian. These have become major international players.
Australia,  which  is  slightly  bigger  than  the  Netherlands,  also  has  4  big  banks,  but  they  are  mainly
domestic,  smaller  than  the  Dutch  although  bigger  than  the  Singapore  banks.  The  Australian
government maintains a “Four Pillars” policy, under which it will not allow any of the 4 banks to merge
or take over any of the others, in order to maintain sufficient competition in the domestic market. But
there  is  debate  in  Australia  over  whether  this  “Four  Pillars”  policy  is  sustainable,  or  whether  it  will
cause Australian banks to lose out in the long run, by preventing them from becoming large enough to
be truly viable.
Singapore’s economy is ¼ the size of Australia’s. Singapore cannot afford a “Four Pillars” policy. If we
tried that, our banks would be like bonsai plants, root-bound by the small pots in which they grow. Our
biggest bank – DBS, even after the merger with POSBank, is ranked only 115th in the world by asset
size. In banking size is not everything, but size is important.
If  the  local  banks  fail  to  achieve  enough  scale,  they  will  not  be  able  to  invest  in  cutting-edge
technology  and  management  systems,  or  to  attract  the  talent  necessary  to  compete  with  the  best
players.  Their  service  standards  and  product  range  will  not  be  able  to  keep  up  with  their  foreign
competitors. They will find it difficult to diversify their earnings by competing in fee-based businesses,
like asset management and cash management. Customers, especially the more sophisticated ones,
will take their business to the foreign banks already in Singapore.
The  local  banks  cannot  rely  on  government  protection  forever.  Even  if  we  had  not  liberalised  the
banking  industry,  the  foreign  banks  here  would  still  have  been  able  to  use  technology  and  new
delivery channels to compete for retail business. In fact, the most innovative foreign banks have been
growing  their  market  share  despite  the  restrictions  that  we  have  placed  on  them.  Over  time,  local
banks that cannot compete would become marginalised.
This would not be a good outcome. In the event of a crisis, we  want to be able  to count on strong
institutions with  a major stake in the country,  whose  interests  will  be  aligned  with those of the  long
term interests of the Singapore economy. Banks which are tied more closely to Singapore will be more
likely  to  act  in  support  of  financial  and  economic  stability.  That  is  why  MAS  remains  committed  to
building strong local banks with a significant share of the domestic market.
This is the reality that Singaporeans must understand and accept, as we debate the pros and cons of
bank mergers. If small banks were economically viable, we would not be meeting tonight with every
Singaporean bank either a bidder or a takeover target. The fact that they are bidding and being bid for
proves not just that the smaller local banks are vulnerable, but also that the bigger ones themselves
feel insecure, and rightly so. If the local banks stay small and weaken over time, we will be worse off
for  it.  In  the  longer  term,  stronger  and  larger  local  banks  offer  far  better  assurance  of  Singapore’s
interests.
MAS’ approach to consolidation
While MAS welcomes the process of consolidation, it will remain strictly neutral, and will not seek to
influence the outcome. We have made it known to all the participants that we will allow the local banks
to bid for one another. The new configuration should be determined by the free play of the market.
MAS will leave the banks and their shareholders to decide whom they should merge with or acquire,
subject to five conditions being met:
a. 
First,  the  banks  should  have  the  capability  to  achieve  effective  integration  following  the
merger. The management of the acquiring bank must understand the financial, operational,
and cultural issues involved in integrating two entities and have a credible plan in place.
Second, the merger must not impair the bank's financial soundness. In particular, the bank
must  meet  MAS’  capital  adequacy  requirements  at  all  times.  Consolidation  should  not
compromise the safety and soundness of the bank.
Third,  we  will  consider  the  impact  of  the  merger  on  competition.  Consolidation  should  not
lead  to  the  emergence  of  one  or  a  small  group  of  overly  dominant  banks,  which  are  in  a
position to engage in monopolistic or other anti-competitive behaviour.
b. 
c. 
2
BIS Review 61/2001
d. 
e. 
Fourth, the consolidation should not lead to loss of service for small depositors, for whom
affordable banking services are a necessity.
Fifth, any cross-border partnerships should not result in the foreign partner taking  control of
a Singapore bank.
I will elaborate on these five considerations in turn.
Managing the integration
Consolidation,  whilst  necessary  for  the  local  banks  to  be  competitive,  is  not  in  itself  sufficient  to
produce  strong  banks.  Having  merged,  the  banks  will  have  to  integrate  and  rationalise  different
management teams, information and risk management systems, and internal control procedures. The
reality  is  that  some  mergers  work  while  others  do  not.  Good  execution  of  a  merger  will  produce  a
stronger bank, by yielding the expected synergies and cost savings. Poor execution will only lead to a
more unwieldy and riskier bank.
A  larger  scale  and  wider  range  of  activities  will  demand  stronger  and  more  institutionalised
management.  Singapore  banks  have  benefited  from  having  their  principal  shareholders,  including
family shareholders, play an important role in overseeing the banks, although most no longer run the
management. The controlling families have had the entrepreneurship and business acumen to build
up the banks, and their  long-term interests were substantially aligned  with those  of the banks. This
situation  currently  serves  us  well,  but  is  not  likely  to  endure  over  the  longer  term.  The  ongoing
consolidation,  the  lifting  of  foreign  shareholding  restrictions,  the  separation  of  banking  and
non-banking activities and the process of generational change will result in a reduction in the relative
shareholding of the major shareholders. Succession planning is critical.
The transition from the present framework to the new landscape will need to be carefully managed.
The  banks  have  already  started  taking  steps  to  enhance  corporate  governance  and  professional
management. MAS has also implemented measures to ensure that the Boards and key committees of
the  banks  have  sufficient  representation  of  independent  directors,  and  to  encourage  the  Boards  to
appoint qualified professionals to run the banks. MAS will continue, by moral suasion and prescription,
to encourage the banks to strengthen and institutionalise their managements, especially those merged
banks which emerge from the consolidation.
Safety and soundness
While bigger banks are likely to be stronger and more diversified, they pose a larger risk to systemic
stability  if  they  run  into  difficulties.  MAS  will  intensify  its  supervision  of  the  merged  banks,  placing
stronger  emphasis  on  evaluating  the  banks'  internal  risk  management  processes  and  control
structures. In the US, the Federal Reserve Board installs examiners almost continuously in the large
and  complex  institutions  under  their  purview,  in  order  to  monitor  and  supervise  the  banks  more
closely.  MAS  does  not  expect  to  have  to  do  the  same,  but  more  frequent  inspections  and  closer
supervision of the banks will be necessary.
While MAS will intensify its supervision, the first responsibility for soundness and prudence lies with
the Board and management of the bank itself. Bank management must ensure that they have in place
robust,  group-wide  risk  management  systems  adequate  to  the  new  scale  and  risk  profile  of  the
combined  entity.  This  again  underlines  the  importance  of  top  quality  institutionalised,  professional
management for the banks.
Competition
We should not allow an enlarged bank, or a few banks in a consolidated banking industry, to use their
market power to engage in monopolistic or other anti-competitive practices that raise prices, diminish
consumer choice, or erect barriers to entry by other players. MAS does not think this will happen. It is
unlikely that the largest bank in the system will have an over-dominant share. For example,  if OUB
merges with one of the larger banks, their combined market share of non-bank deposits will be at most
about  30%.  This  will  still  be  significantly  less  than  the  share  of  the  largest  banks  in  other  small
countries, like the Netherlands and Hong Kong.
BIS Review 61/2001
3
Secondly,  the  competition  will  not  just  be  among  the  remaining  local  players.  The  banking
liberalisation  programme  will  continue  to  introduce  greater  competition  from  foreign  banks,  in  the
range and pricing of products they offer and quality of service.
Thirdly, the Government will be vigilant against any abuse of market power. The Competition Act that
MTI is now considering will help us to do that.
Small depositors
Given  the  prospect  of  mergers  and  rationalisations,  it  is  natural  that  many  bank  customers  are
apprehensive  and  worried  about  how  they  will  be  affected.  A  merger  will  result  in  rationalisation  of
branch and ATM networks, which will inconvenience some customers. But overall, customers should
have access to more branches and ATMs after the merger, even though not every existing branch and
ATM can necessarily be retained. And because a larger merged bank can operate more efficiently and
realise revenue synergies, it should be able to provide better service and greater choice to customers.
Of course the bank will have to handle the implementation carefully and sensitively, giving customers
adequate notice of changes and helping them to adjust. It is in the bank’s own interest to do this, and I
am sure they will make every effort to do it well.
Unfortunately this does not mean that as a result of a merger, every bank service will become cheaper
or  free.  This  is  not  possible,  not  because  of  mergers,  but  because  of  competition.  Competition  will
force banks to watch  their bottom lines more closely,  and to make each service  and  product break
even. It will become harder for banks to continue cross-subsidising services that they used to provide
for free or below cost. That was a luxury that they could only afford in a protected and languid market
where profits came easily, a state of affairs which was unsustainable in the long run. DBS is already
facing  this  pressure  –  the  public  is  upset  that  some  branches  have  been  closed,  but  analysts  and
investors are criticising DBS for not rationalising the branch network and extracting cost synergies fast
enough.
Furthermore, as banks focus more on returns, they will tend to concentrate on the middle and upper
segments  of  the  market,  where  they  can  sell  a  wider  range  of  services  and  earn  better  margins.
However,  if  all  banks  neglect  small  depositors,  this  would  cause  a  problem  to  lower  income
Singaporeans, in a society that is increasingly cashless.
Other jurisdictions like the US and Australia also face the same problem, and either have implemented
or are studying requirements for basic banking accounts. In the State of New York, banks are required
by  legislation  to  provide  such  accounts,  while  in  some  other  US  states  the  banks  have  voluntarily
offered such services so as to avoid the heavy hand of legislation.
Banks have to be allowed to recover their costs, just like utilities and public transport companies. But
they should not simply opt out of the responsibility to service the mass market. The Government will
therefore  ensure  that  in  this  competitive  environment,  low-income  Singaporeans  continue  to  have
access to basic banking services at affordable prices.
This is not an immediate problem, even after consolidation among the local banks. DBS already has
an obligation to play a social role, and service the mass market, because that was a condition of the
sale of POSBank to DBS. Most of the local banks also service small depositors. This will continue.
However, over the longer term, the conflicting pressures on banks on the one hand to provide a public
service, and on the other to earn competitive returns for shareholders, will persist and intensify.
ABS  has  encouraged  banks  that  engage  in  consumer  banking  to  provide  affordable  basic  banking
services  to  lower  income  Singaporeans.  MAS  welcomes  this,  and  hopes  that  these  banks  will  find
ways  to  meet  this  need.  MAS  will  monitor  the  situation  closely,  together  with  ABS  and  the  banks.
When it becomes necessary, MAS will require all banks with significant retail operations in Singapore
to provide basic banking accounts with defined minimum features to low income Singaporeans.
Cross-border partnerships
As  the  financial  industry  continues  to  change  rapidly  and  the  global  banks  grow  even  larger,
consolidation  among  the  local  banks  alone  may  not  be  sufficient.  Apart  from  seeking  growth  and
acquisitions abroad, the local banks may also seek out foreign partners. Strategic partners can bring
expertise and market discipline to Singapore banks. MAS has encouraged the local banks to explore
such strategic alliances and is prepared to approve significant stakes by foreign banks, provided three
conditions are met:
4
BIS Review 61/2001
a. 
b. 
c. 
One, the foreign player must be more than a financial investor. It must become a strategic
partner bringing specialised skills, new technologies, or business strategies to the bank. The
outcome must be in the long term interests of the bank;
Two, the strategic partner must be a sound and well-managed entity. The alliance should not
result  in  a  higher  risk  profile  for  the  Singapore  bank  through,  for  example,  increased
contagion and reputation risks; and
Three,  the  Singapore  character  of  the  bank  must  be  retained.  Foreign  parties  cannot
become controlling shareholders, even if the controlling stake is less than 50%. To allow this
would circumvent a key objective of our liberalisation programme, that is to build strong local
banks which can underpin the stability of the banking system.
Some  of  the  local  banks  have  already  had  initial  discussions  with  prospective  foreign  partners,
although  so  far  nothing  has  materialised.  These  proposals  have  not  failed  because  of  regulatory
objections. MAS' stand is clear: as long as the foreign partner is not seeking to take control of the local
bank, we are open to discuss all possibilities.
Banking liberalisation – the second phase
The consolidation being played out among the local banks is a clear indication that they understand
the urgency of strengthening their competitiveness. Overall, the local banks have responded well to
the liberalisation programme, upgraded their capabilities and maintained their market shares. This has
given us confidence to proceed now with the second phase of liberalisation. The second package of
measures  has  three  main  components:  freeing  up  entry  to  domestic  wholesale  banking,  enhancing
competition  in  retail  banking,  and  instituting  prudential  safeguards  necessary  for  a  more  liberal
banking environment.
Freeing up entry to wholesale banking
First, we will significantly broaden participation by foreign banks in the domestic wholesale market. We
have  to  do  more  to  encourage  quality  international  banks  to  use  Singapore  as  their  Asian  base.
Granting  them  more  access  to  corporations  and  high  net  worth  individuals  will  strengthen  their
business case to develop their operations in Singapore.
Opening up the wholesale market to international banks will also benefit industries in Singapore. It will
give  our  industries  better  access  to  world-class  financial  products  and  services  that  will  help  them
develop their businesses.
MAS will make a fundamental shift, towards a licensing regime that distinguishes between retail and
wholesale banks, away from the 3-tier licensing regime of Full, Restricted and Offshore Banks. We will
rename the existing Restricted Bank licence as the "Wholesale Banking" licence to better reflect the
wide  range  of  activities  that  can  be  already  conducted  under  the  licence.  We  will  phase  out  the
Qualifying  Offshore  Bank  and  Offshore  Bank  licence,  and  upgrade  all  existing  QOBs  and  OBs  to
Wholesale Bank status over time. The upgrading will allow these banks to accept S$ fixed deposits
above  $250,000  and  operate  S$  current  accounts.  It  will  also  remove  limits  on  the  amount  of  S$
lending that they otherwise face as offshore banks.
We plan to grant some 20 Wholesale Banking licences over the next two years. Banks will be admitted
to Wholesale Banking status in priority of their financial strength and ability to contribute to Singapore's
financial  industry.  The  8  Qualifying  Offshore  Banks  will  be  given  priority  in  the  upgrading.  Existing
Offshore Banks as well as banks that do not yet hold a banking licence in Singapore are encouraged
to  apply.  After  these  20  licences  are  granted,  we  will  review  the  pace  of  upgrading  the  remaining
Offshore Banks.
Enhancing competition in retail banking
In retail banking, we will maintain the momentum of liberalisation by improving on the first package of
measures. We will take applications for the two outstanding QFB licenses. We will also expand what a
QFB is allowed to do:
a. 
With immediate effect, they will be permitted to establish up to 15 locations (previously 10),
of which up to 10 (previously 5) can be branches, and the rest off-site ATMs.
BIS Review 61/2001
5
b. 
c. 
From 1 July 2002 QFBs will be allowed to provide debit services on an EFTPOS network.
QFBs can negotiate with an existing EFTPOS network such as NETS, Visa or Mastercard,
for access on fair commercial terms. QFBs will then be able to provide debit services such
as debit cards, and cashback at retail outlets. Using the Visa network alone to provide debit
services will open up more than 23,000 terminals to the QFBs. With cashback services, each
EFTPOS  terminal,  whether  run  by  NETS  or  a  credit  card  company,  becomes  a  potential
cash withdrawal point.
Also from 1 July 2002, QFBs may offer Supplementary Retirement Scheme accounts, accept
CPF fixed deposits, and offer agent bank accounts under the CPF Investment and Minimum
Sum Schemes. Liberalising the CPF Investment Scheme alone will open up a large pool of
funds  that  could  be  placed  with  the  QFBs.  About  $62  bn  of  funds  in  CPF  Ordinary  and
Special Accounts are still available for investment under the CPF Investment Scheme.
These measures  will  significantly  enhance  competition  in  retail  banking  in  Singapore. With  6  QFBs
permitted  to  share  ATMs  among  themselves,  the  increase  in  locations  could  result  in  a  QFB  ATM
network  of  90  or  more  locations  across  Singapore.  Together  with  access  to  a  nationwide  EFTPOS
network,  this  provides  QFBs  with  significant  scope  for  expanding  their  presence  in  the  domestic
market. For consumers, these changes will mean more choice and greater accessibility.
The only part of the retail payments system not yet liberalised will be access by the foreign banks to
the local banks' ATM networks. Foreign banks have not been allowed to provide their customers with
ATM services on the local banks' networks. We will maintain this restriction for now.
Safeguards
These changes to the wholesale and retail banking markets represent a substantial opening up of the
industry. We expect foreign participation in Singapore's banking industry to increase as we liberalise.
More people will invest and deposit their money with foreign banks. MAS is therefore looking into two
measures to safeguard depositor interests – subsidiarisation of systemically-important foreign banks
and deposit insurance.
Subsidiarisation of systemically-important foreign banks
Local banks are required to maintain a minimum of $1.5b  in  paid-up capital and meet MAS' capital
adequacy ratio requirements to ensure that they have adequate resources to support and expand their
operations. MAS’ requirement of a minimum of 8 percent Tier I capital and 12 percent Tier I plus Tier II
capital  exceeds  the  international  standards  set  by  the  Basel  Capital  Accord.  However,  QFBs  and
foreign  banks  can  operate  as  branches,  and  accept  retail  deposits  without  any  paid-up  capital  in
Singapore.
This has led local banks to complain that the playing field was tilted against them. It was tenable in the
past when individual foreign banks had a small share of the domestic market and we placed greater
reliance on the home supervisor. But as we open up further, we need to make sure that the prudential
safeguards that apply to foreign banks are commensurate with their increased role in the retail deposit
market.
MAS  is  considering  requiring  systemically-important  foreign  banks  with  a  large  retail  presence  to
subsidiarise their operations in Singapore. This means that the foreign bank will have to incorporate in
Singapore  and  meet  MAS'  minimum  paid-up  capital  of  $1.5b,  as  well  as  MAS’  CAR  requirements.
Subsidiarisation  will  provide  greater  clarity  and  certainty  in  supervision.  A  subsidiary  is  a  separate
legal entity from the parent. It will have its own assets and will have to maintain its own capital. This
will  allow  us  greater  flexibility  to  ringfence  the  subsidiary,  and  minimise  contagion  arising  from
problems that may emanate from the bank's home market or global operations, especially where the
home jurisdictions have laws which favour depositors in the parent bank over depositors in overseas
branches.
Subsidiarisation  will  not  turn  the  subsidiary  into  a  local  bank.  The  foreign  parent  bank  will  in  most
cases own 100% of the subsidiary and want full control over its activities. MAS will continue to treat
the  subsidiary  as  a  foreign  bank,  and  will  exempt  it  from  a  requirement  placed  on  local  banks  to
maintain a majority of Singapore citizens or permanent residents on their board of directors.
6
BIS Review 61/2001
MAS  is  studying  this  issue  and  will  make  a  decision  later  this  year.  We  would  not  be  the  only
jurisdiction with a subsidiarisation requirement. Several reputable jurisdictions, such as Australia, the
US, and Canada, go even further and require that in order to accept any retail deposits at all, foreign
banks  must  incorporate  locally  and  meet  the  minimum  capital  requirements  imposed  on  locally
incorporated banks.
Deposit insurance
We will study the need for a deposit insurance scheme in Singapore. Unlike most countries, Singapore
does not have a deposit insurance scheme. In the past, sound management and conservative practice
by the local banks, coupled with strict regulation and supervision by MAS, helped to avoid problems in
our  banking  system.  On  the  few  occasions  when  a  foreign  bank  has  run  into  difficulties,  MAS  has
managed  to  ring-fence  the  banks'  Singapore  operations  in  time  –  as  we  did  during  the  Asian
crisis – so that Singapore depositors did not suffer losses.
However, as we liberalise, foreign banks will gain market share. Local banks will also venture abroad.
The  safety  and  soundness  of  both  local  and  foreign  banks  will  increasingly  be  affected  by  factors
beyond our control. We have seen how in other countries even well-run international banks supervised
by highly-regarded authorities can nevertheless run into financial trouble. Even as we strengthen MAS
supervision, we cannot expect our supervisors to always be in time to pre-empt any difficulties that the
bank has not prepared itself for.
No government can promise to bail out depositors whenever a bank runs into trouble. If a government
did  so,  depositors  would  lose  the  incentive  to  seek  out  sound  banks,  and  banks  would  lose  the
incentive  to  lend  prudently,  knowing  that  even  if  they  run  into  trouble  their  downside  risks  will  be
absorbed by the government. This is what bankers call moral hazard. However, in the absence of a
deposit insurance scheme, there will be an implicit expectation, both by depositors and banks, that if
something  goes  wrong,  particularly  with  a  large  bank,  the  government  will  be  there  to  pick  up  the
pieces. And should a mishap happen, the government may come under strong political pressure to do
so. This can be destabilising.
Deposit insurance makes clear where depositors stand:  depositors know exactly  how much of  their
money  will  be  protected  if  a  bank  fails.  Government  statements  that  it  will  not  bail  out  depositors
beyond  the  insured  amounts  become  more  credible.  However,  deposit  insurance  is  not  without  its
downside. If its coverage is too broad, or it insures too large a proportion of deposits, it can cause the
same problems as a government guarantee. A poorly designed deposit insurance scheme may make
the  banking  system  less  rather  than  more  stable.  These  problems  can  be  mitigated  if  the  deposit
insurance scheme only insures small deposits, or sets premiums in line with the relative riskiness of
banks, or discriminates between banks and subsidiaries that are incorporated here from those that are
not. These are complex issues that need careful study, which MAS has begun.
Conclusion
This liberalisation package will provide further impetus for upgrading and progress in the local banks
and Singapore's financial sector development. We will review the progress made in another 2-3 years,
before deciding on further moves.
Consolidation and continued liberalisation are important in building strong banks. But they are not in
themselves sufficient. Banks must press on to upgrade their capabilities. They must keep abreast of
international best practices, new products, technological developments and new ways of doing things,
while retaining the support and confidence of consumers. ABS can play a part to help the banks do
this.  The  government  will  do  its  best  to  maintain  a  sound  regulatory  framework,  conducive  to
competition and innovation. But finally, success will depend on the quality and passion of the people in
the financial industry. Together we have to build the skills, develop the businesses, and enhance the
regulatory framework to make Singapore the premier financial centre in Asia.
BIS Review 61/2001
7
