Ishrat Husain: Why do perceptions about the Pakistani economy differ?
Address by Dr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, to the English Speaking Union
in Karachi, 5 July 2001.
 An extremely important question has been raised by several commentators and observers of Pakistan
economy: Why  is it  that the external  donors believe that Pakistani economy  is  doing  well  while  the
public  and  press  in  Pakistan  think  otherwise?  This  question  needs  to  be  analysed  carefully  and
dispassionately in order to identify the factors responsible for such differing perceptions. I have dwelt
on this subject earlier also but I thought I should deal with it at some length once again.
We  should  begin  by  specifying  the  initial  expectations  of  the  two  groups.  The  external  donors  had
concluded  that  successive  Pakistani  Governments  had  entered  into  agreements  during  the  last
10 years with promises of serious structural reforms but failed to deliver on most of these promises. In
their  view  Pakistan  suffered  from  a  serious  credibility  gap  and,  until  and  unless,  the  present
Government  demonstrated  a  strong  commitment  and  delivered  most  of  those  unfulfilled  promises
upfront, there was no way Pakistan could qualify for any medium-term assistance. Pakistan, therefore,
was asked to prove its seriousness by first completing all those actions the previous governments had
promised but not fulfilled. These actions covered the entire range of economic activities and sectors
and affected every segment of the population. There were many actions which were required to be
taken and I have spelled them out elsewhere and will therefore not repeat them here.
It is not implied that these actions did not make any economic sense or were not justified in Pakistan’s
own economic interests but the important point to note is that all these actions had to be completed
within a period of 12-15 months in order to qualify for the Stand-by-Arrangements (SBA), balance of
payments support loans from ADB and World Bank and rescheduling of external debt owed to bilateral
creditors. The timing, sequencing and phasing of these reforms were not necessarily those which the
Pakistani authorities would have preferred had they complete say in the matter.
The Government of Pakistan has either completed or is implementing most of the above actions. This
has established a favorable track record and restored the country’s credibility among the international
financial community and bilateral donors. IMF has already released two tranches under the SBA and
the  third  tranche  is  likely  to  be  released  by  mid-July.  The  World  Bank  has  released  the  Structural
Adjustment Credit which would add $ 350 million to the country’s foreign exchange reserves. The ADB
has so far provided $ 333 million. The country has been able to reschedule $ 2.8 billion which it had to
pay to external creditors this year. Despite this relief, it maybe pertinent to mention that the country still
had to pay $ 4 billion in cash foreign exchange out of its own resources to service its external debt.
The  Pakistan  Development  Forum  gave  a  resounding  endorsement  to  the  reforms  Pakistan  is
undertaking.  Credit  rating  of  Pakistan  has  improved.  Overall,  there  is  a  perceptible  and  positive
change  in  Pakistan’s  standing  with  the  international  financial  community.  This  is,  therefore,  the
genesis for the improved perception of external donors about Pakistan’s economy.
In  addition  to  the  IMF  program  implementation  there  are  some  key  reforms  this  Government  has
embarked on its own – survey and documentation of the economy to widen the tax net and improve
tax  compliance,  devolution  of  power  to  the  grass  root  level  whereby  the  common  people  are
empowered  and  the  old  bureaucratic  system  is  dismantled;  accountability  of  those  who  had  looted
national  wealth  in  the  past;  recovery  of  bank  loans  from  defaulters,  utility  bills  and  evaded  taxes.
These measures, on the top of others implemented as part of the IMF program, have created  their
own dynamics and shaken the foundations of the rent seeking culture prevalent in the economy for
such a long time. But the sad part is that the rent seekers, who  were keeping the overall economy
buoyant have withdrawn from the scene. Consumption expenditures emanating from the rent-seeking
class are much lower than what they used to be in the past. Their investment activities have come to a
halt. Most of them are trying to find safe havens abroad for their wealth.
While the Group of external donors is pleased that the country had taken all the tough decisions which
were  postponed  by  the  previous  governments  for  such  a  long  time  the  same  decisions  and  other
measures  adopted  by  the  Government,  have  created  hardships  domestically  for  several  classes  of
economic agents. What were the expectations of the various domestic classes? It may be pertinent to
recall that the expectations from the present Government were quite high as the country had faced an
atmosphere  of  uncertainty  and  despondency  for  a  long  time  and  the  Military  was  considered  as  a
BIS Review 64/2001
1
savior of the economy. The urban educated unemployed felt that new employment opportunities will
be created to absorb them. The fixed income groups thought that the wages, salaries and pensions
frozen since 1994 will be raised. The traders and service sectors were looking for a higher demand for
their goods and services translated into higher incomes for them. The rural income groups wanted the
prices of their agriculture output raised. The large  industrialists clamored for more concessions and
exemptions in order to expand their operations.
As far as the press was concerned a number of those who write on economic issues are either retired
government officials subsisting on pensions and income from National Savings Schemes Certificates
or  those  earning  salaries.  Their  incomes  have  remained  fixed  and  thus  eroded  in  real  purchasing
power terms while the burden of higher expenditure particularly the utility bill charges hit them hard.
These columnists and reporters extrapolate their own experiences and those of their peers to depict
the adversity hitting the common man. They are therefore unsympathetic and unconvinced about any
good emanating from this reform package.
Against  these  expectations  what  were  the  ground  realities  and  what  options  were  available.  The
preceding  five  year  period  had  resulted  in  stagnant  per  capita  incomes,  no  new  large  scale
investment,  rising  unemployment  and  underemployment,  worsening  incidence  of  poverty,  declining
public  expenditures  and  expanding  fiscal  deficits,  an  exceptionally  high  debt  servicing  burden,  and
dysfunctional  public  sector  corporations  hemorrhaging  public  finances.  Under  these  conditions,  the
new Government was faced with two choices. The first option was to adopt a populist approach and
use  large  scale  public  expenditures  to  create  new  employment  opportunities,  contracts  for  private
sector, raise the level of aggregate demand and subsidise electricity, petroleum and gas prices so that
the consumers are protected from increase in prices. In order to do so, an expansionary fiscal policy
and  an  accommodating  monetary  policy  were  required  to  be  pursued.  In  the  short-term  this  set  of
policies would have won the applause from all classes domestically. From the viewpoint of the present
Government,  which  was in office for three  years, this  would  have been an  attractive  and  expedient
solution  because  the  disastrous  consequences  of  these  actions  over  the  medium  term  would  have
been faced by their successors and not by them.
What  would  have  been  the  consequences  of  following  this  policy  option?  The  country  would  have
been forced to default on its external debt, fiscal deficit would have been around 10 per cent of GDP
financed by borrowing, inflation rates would have hit the roof hurting the poor more than any one else,
external and public debt burdens would have escalated, and private investors would have found an
environment of macroeconomic instability. The international financial institutions would have shunned
Pakistan as a pariah economy and Pakistan would have been isolated from global economy.
But  this  Government  instead  chose  the  second  but  more  difficult  option  as  it  felt  that  strong
fundamental  structural  reforms  had  to  be  put  in  place,  the  institutional  decay  had  to  be  arrested
through  better  governance,  transparency,  and  debt  relief  had  to  be  obtained  from  international
creditors to revive the economy on a sustainable basis and to reduce dependence on the International
Monetary Fund in the 3-5 year time horizon. The country can reassert its economic sovereignty and
get  out  of  the  stranglehold  of  the  IMF  programs  by  adopting  a  strategy  in  which  it  can  generate
sufficient resources to take care of its financing needs over this period. What are the elements of this
strategy? First, we must establish our credibility, secure some fiscal space to undertake employment
generating development expenditure, avoid contracting short-term expensive debt, and augment our
foreign exchange earning. The rulers were also of the opinion that the benefits of economic revival
should be shared by a wide majority of the population and not by a chosen few. This simultaneous
pursuit of macroeconomic stabilization, structural reforms, improvement in economic governance and
poverty  alleviation  required  a  course  of  action  for  which  the  rescheduling  of  external  debt  and
assistance from the international financial institutions was a sine qua non.
The tough measures taken by the present government, though quite right  and desirable, are hardly
expected to be welcomed. How can the simultaneous burden of higher utility prices, rising petroleum
prices, increase in prices of imported goods due to depreciating exchange rate and lowering of returns
on National Savings Scheme be borne by a class whose household incomes are at a standstill? Thus
the reaction of the wage earners, salaried class, the pensioners and other fixed income groups who
form the bulk of our middle class is quite understandable and their perception about the economy is
quite different from those of the outsiders. To the educated  youth, who were expecting  the  present
government to revive the economy quickly so that employment opportunities could become available
to  them,  the  curtailing  of  development  expenditure  for  attaining  the  fiscal  deficit  target  was  a
disappointment.  Neither  the  employment  opportunities  through  higher  public  expenditures  could  be
expanded nor the crowding-in of private investment could take place.
2
BIS Review 64/2001
But  the  more  troubling  aspect  is  that  those  who  are  engaged  in  spreading  and  disseminating  the
negative  perception  and  sentiments  about  the  economy  are  the  interest  groups  who  were  the
beneficiaries of the old system and are likely to be big losers, if the proposed structural reforms are
fully implemented and take hold. The main line of resistance comes from these particular groups. Let
us  examine  how  their  interests  are  going  to  be  compromised.  Most  of  the  “people”  who  are  vocal
against  the  current  reforms  belong  to  the  class  populated  by  politicians,  bureaucrats,  business
leaders,  land  owners,  traders  and  professionals.  It  should  be  clarified  that  we  are  not  including  all
persons  who  pursue  these  professions  but  only  those  who  have  been  the  beneficiaries  of  the  old
system of the past. Each one of this vested group is hurt by the deep-rooted structural reforms which
the present government is attempting to undertake. This group of politicians and bureaucrats strongly
believe that their power and privileges will be eroded if the devolution to district  governments takes
place  according  to  the  plan.  Some  of  the  former  and  prospective  members  of  the  provincial  and
national assemblies consider the nazims and deputy nazims as their potential rivals in which the latter
are likely to have more administrative and financial authority and will thus divert the public attention
and importance away from the MPAs and MNAs. The award of development projects and government
contracts, the postings and transfers of key officials which they could easily manipulate with the active
connivance  of  a  few  bureaucrats,  will  no  longer  be  possible.  The  Deputy  Commissioners  and  their
class are unhappy that they had joined the civil service to wield undivided authority over the population
in their jurisdictions. It is unpalatable to them to take orders from half literate elected nazims – many of
whom would have had difficulty in getting an appointment from the Deputy Commissioner under the
existing  set-up.  The  officials  of  other  13  departments  who  will  now  formally  report  to  the  District
Coordination Officer are resentful that they will no longer be able to evade responsibility which they
presently can under the loose and undefined supervisory arrangements in place.
Those business leaders, who had amassed wealth not by dint of hard work, enterprise or innovation
but by evading taxes, defaulting on bank loans, stealing electricity and getting SROs issued to favour
them selectively have indeed stopped “investing”. But to think of it, was it real investment or a hand
out  from  the  public  exchequer  to  chosen  few  which  was  then  invested  in  their  own  names.  Those
chosen under one political set up had to wait out for a couple of years while other chosen few availed
of their turn. The accountability, tax survey and recovery of loans and utility bills are pinching them for
the first time. They are being forced to part with some of the ill-gotten gains they had made and their
reaction is that of wrath and hostility.
The  big  landlords  have,  also  for  the  first  time,  been  unsuccessful  in  thwarting  the  imposition  of
agriculture  income  tax.  The  avenue  for  leakages  in  non-agriculture  income  tax  has  been  closed  by
clubbing the incomes from both sources. So this is a double whammy for a very influential group which
has so far enjoyed the corridors of power without any restraint on their wealth accumulation or sharing
it with the State.
The traders and professionals in the service sector are unhappy because they have also been brought
under the tax net through GST. But it is not the GST, which they can pass on to the consumers in full
that  is  bothering  them,  but  the  disclosure  of  their  sales  and  profits  upon  which  income  tax  can  be
levied.  If  you  have  gotten  away  by  not  paying  any  taxes  for  that  long,  won’t  you  resist  this  new
dispensation.
Thus  it  is  obvious  that  the  losers  from  the  structural  reforms  underway  are  identifiable,  alive  and
kicking while the winners are to emerge in some distant future provided these reforms are continued
and  sustained  over  an  extended  period  of  time.  For  example,  several  thousand  workers  will
immediately lose jobs as a result of the restructuring and downsizing of the nationalized commercial
banks.  The  benefits  to  the  economy  will  occur  over  time  when  the  lending  and  deposit  rates  are
improved and service standards upgraded. The difficulties and problems the businesses are facing in
relation to tax administration will be resolved when the reforms pertaining to the restructuring of CBR
are completed. This will take some time to show results but the exporters are facing liquidity problems
today.  The  limited  efforts  to  target  the  poor  through  rural  and  urban  Khushali  Program,  the  Food
Support  Program,  the  Micro-credit  Bank  and  Zakat,  are  so  diffused  and  wide  spread  and  their
beneficiaries are so disorganized and inarticulate that they do not make any perceptible difference.
It must be conceded that there are adverse consequences of these perceptions held by the domestic
constituents.  Private  sector  investment  and  consumption  spending  will  not  resume  until  businesses
and  households  change  their  perceptions  and  regain  confidence.  Unfortunately,  exogenous  factors
such as severe drought and consequential slump in agriculture production, high international prices of
petroleum products and decline  in unit prices of textile exports  have  made  the  situation  even  more
difficult. A less than 3 per cent rise in GDP is hardly inspiring to regain confidence in the economy.
BIS Review 64/2001
3
How can the perceptions of these two groups be ever reconciled or would they continue to differ? No
Government  –  Civilian  or  Military  –  can  afford  to  ignore  the  genuine  aspirations  of  its  domestic
constituents. But there is a transition period before which the new goal of shared and equitable growth
can be achieved. In a society where sifarish, connections and exchange of favors have propelled the
governance of the country for such long time it is very difficult to change the mind set or the prevailing
value system. Equally difficult is to convince that any ruling class can take decisions  which are  not
based on their personal interests. For the next three to five  years, Pakistan has to stay the course,
continue  on  the  reform  path  it  has  set  for  itself  steadfastly  and  bring  about  fundamental  structural
changes  in  our  governance  and  institutional  structure.  This  hard  struggle  is  the  only  sure  way  to
reduce  our  vulnerabilities  and  dependence  on  the  IMF.  Why  can’t  this  be  done  now  or  earlier?
Because  the  resource  generation  capacity  of  the  economy  is  still  and  will  remain  below  the  debt
servicing obligations for several years. Once we have attained the stage where our fiscal and external
accounts are  no  longer  in  such  a  state  of  chronic  imbalances  as  they  are  today  we  will  be  able  to
attain our economic sovereignty. This will provide the Government ample fiscal space for increasing
development expenditures, expanding infrastructure facilities and thus enabling the private sector to
reduce  its  cost  of  production  and  distribution,  and  most  importantly  allow  public  sector  to  invest  in
technology, skill development, training and other aspects of high level manpower upgradation which
will  help  our  competitiveness  in  global  market  place.  At  the  same  time,  the  rules  of  game  for  the
private sector have to be changed where privileges, protection and pampering of a chosen few should
give  way  to  a  level  playing  field  for  all  where  work  ethic,  enterprising  behavior  and  productivity
enhancement are rewarded. The community and non-government organizations should also engage
along with the local governments in promoting primary education, basic health services, potable water
supply and sanitation to the vast majority of the population. This public-private-community partnership
will  lead  Pakistan  into  the  era  of  self-reliance,  economic  growth  and  social  stability  and  poverty
alleviation.
There are those who argue that alternative solutions which gives primacy to growth should have been
adopted. As an economist I am not quite sure  as to  how  this  can  be  done  on  a  sustainable  basis.
Economic  management  involves  trade  offs  and  choices  among  various  competing  demands.
Government  can,  of  course,  inject  a  lot  of  money  to  give  a  jump  start  the  economy  and  create
employment  throughout  the  country.  This  was  indeed  done  until  the  mid  1990s  and  what  were  the
results  –  burgeoning  fiscal  deficits,  increased  domestic  and  foreign  borrowing,  inefficient  and
dysfunctional institutions and inability today to service our debts fully. Is this what we want again?
We  can  insulate  the  consumers  of  electricity,  gas  and  petroleum  by  freezing  the  prices  they  pay.
Again, the utility companies  will have  no funds to invest in expansion, modernization, maintenance.
We  will  have  outages,  shortages,  shutdowns  at  a  much  larger  scale  hurting  our  agriculture  and
industry. Alternatively, the Government may have to provide subsidies out of the budget. But given the
fact  that  it  can  hardly  meet  its  current  expenditures  out  of  its  revenues,  it  will  have  to  borrow  and
increase our indebtedness. Is this a good choice for the country?
To sum up, the differing perceptions have arisen due to mismatch in timings of reforms undertaken by
the  present  government.  The  international  financial  community  is  pleased  that  we  have  undertaken
within  a  short  span  of  time  all  those  tough  measures  which  were  committed  by  the  previous
governments but were never implemented. Thus our credibility in their eyes has been restored. But
the impact of these measures in an environment of stagnant incomes, declining investment for past
several years and limited fiscal space was quite severe on domestic economic agents. This has been
further exacerbated by some other fundamental structural reforms which have hurt the interests of the
traditional  rent-seeking  classes  in  the  country.  The  benefits  from  these  reforms  will  accrue  after  a
lapse  of  at  least  3-5  years.  The  losers  are  visible  right  now  but  the  gainers  will  emerge  in  distant
future. The perception of the people and press in Pakistan should, therefore, be viewed in this context.
4
BIS Review 64/2001
