Villy Bergström: Monetary policy in an uncertain world
Speech by Mr Villy Bergström, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Sparbanksstiftelsen
Nya, held at the Gävle concert hall, 14 May 2001.
 Following several years of very strong GDP growth, we are now seeing a slowing down in the Swedish
economy. It is necessary for the growth rate to slow down over the next few years to avoid a long-term
threat to price stability. While there  was a  plentiful supply of free resources, GDP could grow more
quickly  than  the  long-term  productivity  growth  and  labour  force  supply  allowed.  Now,  however,  the
resources  are  running  out  and  production  needs  to  be  adapted  to  a  slower  rate  that  is  more
sustainable  in  the  long  term. When  the  Riksbank  raised  its  repo  rate  by  25  points  to  4  per  cent  in
December last year, the decision was based on assessments that demand would continue to increase
to such an extent that the shortage of resources would lead to the inflation target being exceeded. The
interest rate was raised despite the fact that the inflation rate was then only 1.4 per cent. This shows
the pedagogical and practical problems the Riksbank faces when making such decisions. Monetary
policy  decisions  are  based  on  assessments  of  the  inflation  rate  a  couple  of  years  ahead  and  are
aimed at achieving the inflation target in this time horizon. This means that we are often forced to raise
the rate, despite the fact that the inflation rate is below the target at the point in time when the decision
is made. Conversely, interest rate reductions may be motivated even when the inflation rate is above
the target level.
As we all know, since the end of last year, the unexpectedly severe slowdown in the US economy has
led to a downward revision in the assessment of Swedish production growth over the next two years.
However,  according  to  the  assessment  published  by  the  Riksbank  earlier,  the  most  serious
consequence of the slowdown will be that almost all of the resources within the Swedish economy will
be occupied. If this  is realised, one could say that the USA-led economic slowdown  is,  in a  way, a
welcome development in Sweden.
The information on the Swedish and international economies that has been received in recent months
does not give reason to change the assessment of the economic slowdown in Sweden. However, the
signals are rather mixed and there is still considerable uncertainty. The downside risks with regard to
international growth still remain. Despite the fact that growth has so far developed largely in line with
our earlier assessments, price increases have been slightly greater than we had estimated. The krona
has also continued to develop weakly. However, the wage agreements that have been signed so far
appear to be in line with the earlier assessments. In the light of these developments, the Executive
Board decided at its monetary policy meeting on 26 April to leave the repo rate unchanged at 4 per
cent.
I would like to spend the rest of my time here discussing the conditions for economic growth in the
near future – both here in Sweden and abroad.
The American economy is a decisive factor
There is still great uncertainty over how quickly confidence in the American economy will return and
what spread effects this will involve for the rest of the world.
The  slowdown  in  the  American  economy  was  preceded,  as  we  know,  by  a  long  and  pronounced
economic boom. Great optimism over future growth prospects, based mainly on expectations of gains
in efficiency from IT, led to a substantial increase in investment, a strong growth in consumption and
rising  share  prices  over  several  years.  The  growth  in  investment  and  rise  in  share  prices  were
particularly  strong  in  IT-related  sectors.  The  high  level  of  domestic  demand  could  not  be  met  with
American goods and services, but spilled over to create a considerable deficit on the current account
over several years. At the same time, there was a strong expansion of credit. Both households and
companies have greatly increased their level of indebtedness, while rising asset prices have increased
household  wealth.  This  development  has  been  reflected  in  a  considerable  deficit  in  savings.  The
deficit in savings in the private sector amounted to approximately 7 per cent of GDP at the end of last
year, with both households and companies contributing to this figure.
BIS Review 39/2001
1
Despite the strong demand, inflationary pressure has been only moderate. The dollar exchange rate
was  strengthened  by  widespread  inflows  of  capital  from  foreign  investors  who  bought  American
shares and a strong growth in productivity has had the effect of subduing prices.
What characterises periods with a build-up of financial imbalances?
The development of the American economy bears some similarity to the development that has usually
preceded the financial crises that have affected many countries in recent decades. Characteristic for
the development of countries that have suffered financial crises has been than an optimism, which has
later proved to be unwarranted, has been reflected in rising asset prices, over-investment, excessively
high consumption and a strong expansion in credit. It has rarely or never been possible to determine
in advance when a realistic optimism has passed into over-optimism and in its turn pushed up asset
prices, investment, consumption and indebtedness. It has rarely been possible to judge, for instance,
whether  a  large  build-up  in  indebtedness  has  expressed  an  adaptation  to  realistically  based
expectations  of  future  growth  prospects  or  whether  the  build-up  in  debt  is  based  on  exaggerated
expectations.
In addition, the target that has been used to guide monetary policy has rarely been able to signal early
enough that imbalances were being built up, regardless of whether monetary policy was aimed at a
fixed exchange rate or towards a price stability target. To simplify, one can say that the result of an
exaggerated optimism in countries with a fixed exchange rate has been that the build-up of financial
imbalances was expressed in rising inflation without any depreciation pressure on the currency. It has
not  been  possible  to  subdue  inflationary  pressure  through  raising  interest  rates  while  optimism
regarding the country's economy and confidence in the fixed exchange rate regime have remained, as
a more stringent monetary policy would have reinforced the nominal exchange rate. At the same time,
increases in consumer prices have been kept down by the strong currency, temporary  increases in
productivity, or by demand being aimed towards, property, shares and land – assets whose prices are
not included in the central bank's target function. There has thus been no reason for monetary policy
to counteract the emergence of financial imbalances.
When the financial bubble has actually burst, the country has often suffered a deep and long-lasting
recession  caused  by  adaptations  to  the  imbalances  that  have  been  built  up.  A  high  level  of
indebtedness,  falling  asset  prices  and  unprofitable  investments  have  subdued  demand  for  a  long
period of time. Households have chosen to increase their savings to reduce their debts. Companies
have  been  unable  or  unwilling  to  invest  as  a  result  of  earlier  investment  mistakes  and  poorer
prospects for the future. The banks have suffered severe credit losses, which has further intensified
the  recession,  as  their  capacity  to  provide  new  credit  has  been  limited.  The  situation  becomes
particularly serious when losses have led to acute bank crises, which has often been due to the banks
being greatly exposed to a particular sector. For instance, it was an overheated property market with
banks  strongly  exposed  to  this  sector  that  was  one  of  the  main  reasons  behind  the  bank  crises
afflicting several countries – including Sweden – at the beginning of the 1990s. Adaptations to large
financial  imbalances  have  also  put  a  burden  on  central  government  finances  and  increased
uncertainty. This has in itself prolonged and intensified the crisis. Japan is a well-known example of
what can follow in the tracks of a serious financial crisis if confidence cannot be recreated in economic
policy and future growth potential.
The consequences of financial imbalances have proved particularly serious in countries with a fixed
exchange  rate,  partly  because  interest  rates  need  to  be  kept  high  when  confidence  in  the  fixed
exchange rate policy declines, and partly because there has often been a large foreign currency debt.
When the fixed exchange rate has to be abandoned and the country's own currency is weakened, the
burden of debt increases.
Should the central bank then concern itself with asset prices?
Following the dramatic 1990s in the USA (and Sweden), with soaring prices on shares and property,
many people began to think that perhaps the central banks should keep an eye on asset prices and
react to these, even if there were no sign of rising inflation.
Overrated share prices and/or property prices lead sooner or later to an adjustment in asset prices. If
this adjustment is dramatic, the effect could be an economic downturn, with rising unemployment and
a  slowdown  in  prices.  The  extreme  valuing  of  certain  shares  in  the  IT  and  telecom  sectors  on  the
2
BIS Review 39/2001
American stock exchange, Nasdaq, should perhaps have warranted more stringent monetary policy a
few years ago, according to the international debate on monetary policy.
One argument put forward as to why the central banks should not merely look to forecasts regarding
consumer prices when making decisions on monetary policy, but should also monitor the development
of asset prices, is that ownership of shares is much more widespread now. Thus, changes in asset
prices probably have much greater significance for household expenditure now than they did before.
Deregulation, liberalisation and globalisation have increased the importance of the capital markets for
economic  developments  and  made  them  more  volatile.  Assets  with  market  prices  now  comprise  a
much  greater  share  of  households'  balance  sheets  than  before.  This  is  thus  claimed  to  be  a  good
reason for monetary policy to take into account developments in asset prices.
In  the  worst  case,  falls  on  the  stock  exchange  that  correct  overvaluations  can  lead  to  financial
instability,  if share prices have been  driven by pledged shares and  if  the  market  participants  are  in
some cases unable to pay back their loans. This can result in panic sales, exaggerated falls in prices
and credit institutes facing difficulties as a result of exposure to households and institutions that have
become insolvent. This result risks leading to large fluctuations in the real economy.
Critics  of  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the  USA  claim  that  when  Alan  Greenspan  coined  the  phrase
"irrational exuberance" in 1996, it was clear that prices on the stock exchange had risen too much and
that this development should have been counteracted. Nothing was done and the rise in share prices
continued until March 2000. Since then the stock exchanges have fallen, Nasdaq by 70 per cent, and
the  fall  on  the  stock  exchange  risks  pulling  the  USA  down  into  a  recession  that  could  have  been
avoided.
However, comes the objection; is  it really  possible  to  realise  when  a  stock  exchange  has  risen  too
much? The answer is that prices on the stock exchange must have some relation to the underlying
development of productivity in trade and  industry, to company profits and  to  the  market's  pricing  of
risks.
Of course, it is not possible to determine precisely when the stock market has risen too much or when
it is undervalued. However, it should not be too difficult to detect obvious deviations. The problem is
similar to the central banks' analyses of the output gap, which indicates whether there is an inflationary
risk in the economy as a result of an excessively high level of activity or a risk of deflation. The output
gap  is  calculated  routinely  by  central  banks  around  the  world,  and  these  calculations  estimate  the
sizes  that  would  be  included  in  a  calculation  of  over-valuation  or  under-valuation  on  the  share
markets.  It  can  hardly  be  easier  to  calculate  potential  growth  for  the  entire  economy  than  the
fundamental value of the stock market, according to critics of US monetary policy.
It should be possible, at least in the case of major deviations from fundamental economic conditions,
to detect imbalances on the asset markets, exaggerated valuations that could potentially give rise to
monetary policy measures being necessary, even if the target for consumer prices is being followed
fairly well.
This is how the international discussion runs, caused by stock market developments, primarily those in
the USA, with the current fears that the large downturn on the stock exchange will be followed by a
deep recession.
For a small, open economy like Sweden's, the possibility of affecting share prices through monetary
policy restraint should be limited. The Swedish stock market is strongly correlated with that in the USA,
partly  because  many  of  the  companies  listed  on  the  Swedish  stock  exchange  are  multinational.  In
principle, however, there is good reason for taking action if we assess that large financial imbalances
are being built up. This is partly  because these can  cause  instability  in  both  the  real  economy  and
prices  when  the  bubble  bursts  and  partly  because  the  stability  of  the  banking  system  could  be
threatened. Measures to avoid financial imbalances being built up are thus motivated on the basis of
both  of  the  Riksbank's  objectives;  to  maintain  price  stability  and  to  promote  a  safe  and  efficient
payment system. However, the question is how effective the interest rate is as a weapon – perhaps
other means can be utilised. Examples of such measures are monitoring the financial institutions and
making capital adequacy requirements of them. The analyses made by the Riksbank in its Financial
Stability  Report  are  also  aimed  at  drawing  the  attention  of  the  banks  and  other  authorities  to  any
problems and they thus play a role in this context.
BIS Review 39/2001
3
How great are the problems created by the imbalances in the USA?
Is  there  a  risk  that  the  imbalances  in  the  American  economy  are  so  great  that  the  process  of
adaptation back towards a balance will dramatically intensify and prolong the economic slowdown? It
can be noted that none of the ten major economic analysts of the American economy assesses that
the USA will suffer a recession during the next few years.
Firstly, it is probable that the growth potential that can be created by developments in technology is far
from  exhausted.  There  should  thus  be  good  reason  for  at  least  some  of  the  optimism  that  has
comprised a basis for earlier developments. When confidence in the American economy returns and
investment  growth  takes  off,  there  is  every  indication  that  productivity  will  continue  do  develop
favourably.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  long-term  growth  path  indicated  earlier  by
developments  in  share  prices  and  demand  will  be  realised.  Secondly,  it  seems  that  the
over-investment has mainly taken place in the IT sector, where financing has been largely via the risk
capital market. The depreciation period for IT investments is often short, which means that investment
mistakes do not affect the willingness to invest in the long term. The bank system does not appear to
be  particularly  strongly  exposed  to  the  IT  sector  and  the  risk  spread  among  the  banks'  assets  is
assessed  as  good.  There  would  thus  appear  to  be  little  risk  of  problems  in  the  banking  sector
reinforcing the slowdown to any great extent. Finally, there is scope to use fiscal and monetary policy
to stimulate the economy, if necessary. The American central bank has utilised part of this scope and
lowered interest rates by a total of 2 percentage points since the beginning of the year. The central
government finances are in good condition. For several  years now the public sector – unlike earlier
periods of large American current account deficits – has shown a surplus in savings.
All in all, there are thus many factors indicating that confidence in the American economy can quickly
be recovered. If this is true, the economic decline will not last very long. The most likely situation is
therefore  that  although  the  high  level  of  indebtedness,  the  large  deficit  in  savings  in  both  the
household  and  corporate  sectors,  combined  with  over-investment  in  certain  sectors,  will  subdue
growth for a time, there will be no dramatic or prolonged economic recession.
However,  in  order  to  increase  saving  in  the  economy  and  thus  correct  the  constant  deficit  on  the
current account, it is necessary that growth is not primarily driven by increases in consumption. Net
export  and  investment  should  instead  be  the  motors  behind  growth  to  a  larger  extent  than  before.
Bringing about this state of affairs requires a weaker dollar exchange rate. One can therefore look with
scepticism on the idea that tax cuts will bring the American economy out of its decline.
How will Sweden be affected?
The American economy affects developments in the rest of the world through many different channels,
with  exports  to  the  USA  as  the  most  direct  channel  and  the  one  where  the  effects  are  easiest
measured.  However,  exports  to  the  USA  are  only  responsible  for  a  couple  of  per  cent  of  GDP  in
Sweden  and have  a  similar  significance  for  the  euro  area.  Spread  effects  via  the  expectations  that
largely govern consumption, investments and the stock market are probably much greater, although
more difficult to measure. Nevertheless, there are numerous indications that the Swedish economy is
more  sensitive  to  developments  in  the  USA  than  the  economies  in  the  euro  area.  For  instance,
shareholding  is  more  widespread  among  Swedish  households  and  many  of  the  major  "Swedish"
multinationals – in which Swedes have invested a substantial part of their shareholdings – are very
dependent, directly or indirectly, on developments in the USA.
Developments in the Swedish economy in recent years have shown many similarities to developments
in  the  USA.  Rapidly  rising  share  prices,  a  strong  GDP  growth  driven  by  both  investment  and
consumption and an increase in indebtedness is a description that fits both the Swedish and American
economies in recent years. However, the increase in economic activity began later in Sweden and has
not really had the same speed as that in the USA. Moreover, the rise in Sweden was preceded by a
period  where  adjustments  following  the  crisis  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  had  forced  down
investment and consumption considerably and where both the household and corporate sectors had
reduced their level of indebtedness. Saving in both of these sectors was therefore at a high level and
indebtedness fairly low when growth in the Swedish economy picked up. Now that economic activity is
slowing down, the private sector's indebtedness is not particularly high, from a historical perspective.
Furthermore, the lower  interest  rates  will  mean  that  interest  expenditure  comprises  a  much  smaller
burden  for  borrowers  now  than  previously.  Although  the  surplus  in  saving  in  the  private  sector  has
declined gradually in recent years, it only became a slight deficit towards the  end of last  year. This
4
BIS Review 39/2001
applies to both the household sector and the corporate sector. There is thus a substantial difference
here from developments in the American economy,  where saving in  the  private  sector  at  the  same
point  in  time  amounted  to  almost  7  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  risk  of  widespread  financial  imbalances
having built up here in Sweden is therefore slight. Growth in Sweden thus need not be hampered to
any large degree by indebtedness in the household and corporate sectors or by investment mistakes
in Swedish companies. At the same time, central government finances have been consolidated and
the  central  government's  established  ceiling  for  expenditure  and  its  targets  for  the  current  account
balance have reduced uncertainty over central government finances in the near future. The support for
and confidence in the inflation target are yet another fundamental factor helping to create favourable
conditions for growth in the Swedish economy.
To summarise, the Swedish economy is in good condition. This speaks in favour of the slowdown in
GDP growth being moderate and production now entering a growth path that is at a level more easily
sustainable in the long term. The uncertainty stems mainly from the outside world and particularly from
the risks arising from financial imbalances in the American economy. However, there are also many
indicators  there  that  confidence  will  return  fairly  soon  and  that  the  economic  decline  will  not  be
dramatic.
BIS Review 39/2001
5
