Svein Gjedrem: The global economy and Norwegian monetary policy
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Norges Bank, at the Southern Norway Conference,
Kristiansand, 6 March 2001.
 Introduction
Over  the  past  few  centuries,  Norway  has  been  transformed  from  one  of  the  poorest  countries  in
Europe to one of the richest, thanks to its profits from international trade. Foreign capital was important
for the utilisation of Norwegian natural resources.
Cross-border  capital  flows  have  increased  sharply,  particularly  in  recent  years.  The  chart  shows
Norwegian inward and outward direct investment. These are strategic investments involving ownership
interests  of  10  per  cent  or  more,  unlike  portfolio  investments  that  normally  involve  small  stakes.
Norwegian companies’ direct investment came to NOK 74 billion last year. The figures were boosted
by  substantial  acquisitions  abroad  by  Telenor  and  Norske  Skog.  Over  the  past  two  years  foreign
companies’ investment of this type in Norway came to around NOK 100 billion. Over time, Norwegian
acquisitions abroad and foreign acquisitions in Norway are more or less balanced.
BIS Review 19/2001
1
The  state  is  accumulating  substantial  foreign  assets  through  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund.  As
result of these investments, Norway is in a net asset position vis-(cid:224)-vis abroad. In addition Norwegian
insurance companies and securities funds have markedly increased their foreign investments in recent
years.  At  the  same  time,  Norwegian  banks  finance  a  large  share  of  their  lending  through  foreign
capital,  and  foreign  investors  are  steadily  increasing  their  share  of  Norwegian  securities  holdings.
What we are seeing is a sharp increase in private holdings of assets both in Norway and abroad. This
constitutes the core of globalisation. Capital finds its way to the highest return irrespective of national
borders.
Challenges posed by a global capital market
The Norwegian capital market is part of a Nordic market, which is being increasingly integrated into an
international capital market. Capital markets are a very efficient tool for channelling funds from savers
to  investors.  Capital  markets  act  as  a  catalyst  for  restructuring  and  growth,  but  also  for  financial
bubbles and crises. This places new demands on economic policy.
If a country is to benefit from a free capital market, it must draw up legislation providing for regulations
and  supervision  that  ensure  stability.  Countries  with  poorly  developed  capital  markets  may  benefit
from some limitations. They should exercise some caution in opening these markets too suddenly. The
flow of capital is like electricity. Adequate insulation should be in place before it is turned on.
When  the  Nordic  countries  liberalised  credit  markets  in  the  1980s,  we  experienced  considerable
problems because supervision and rules were not adequate. The same was witnessed in the crisis in
Asia and Russia a few years ago. Inadequate and ineffective legislation and supervision resulted in
weak control of financial sectors in the beleaguered countries.
The liberalisation of the capital market within a country requires national regulations and supervision.
The liberalisation of capital movements across national borders requires coordination and regulation at
an international level.
Countries on the European continent have a regional approach to this. They have drawn up a set of
laws and rules that govern a common European market, the single market. Norway also participates in
this  market  by  virtue  of  the  EEA  Agreement.  European  Monetary  Union  effectively  removes  the
possibility  of  speculation  between  the  currencies  of  the  countries  involved,  thereby  increasing  the
stability of the financial system in Europe.
International  rules  for  economic  relations  with  other  countries  are  important,  particularly  for  small
countries. Cooperation within the framework of the WTO and GATT agreement on trade in goods and
services  are  examples  of  this.  The  OECD  Capital  Code,  which  provides  a  framework  for  member
countries(cid:146) laws and regulations on capital movements is another example. Initiatives have been taken
by both the International Monetary Fund and the Bank for International Settlements to create a new
international regulatory framework and system. The aim of this work is to reduce the risk and effects of
serious financial crises.
One  solution  that  will  not  be  effective  is  the  reimposition  of  direct  capital  controls,  given  the  vast
increase  in  technological  capabilities  to  evade  them.  The  business  sector  is  already  international.
Capital controls are disadvantageous to the business sector in the countries that introduce them.
International developments
Turnarounds  in  the  international  economy  are  often  abrupt.  1998  was  marked  by  pessimism.  The
crisis-hit  countries  in  Asia  were  struggling.  Russia  was  faced  with  severe  economic  problems.  Last
year, only two years later, growth in the world economy reached the highest rate recorded in 15 years.
Global economic developments are marked by the turnaround in the US economy. The US accounts
for about 20 per cent of the world economy. The turnaround in the world’s largest economy will have
an  impact,  also  in  Europe.  The  question  is  how  severe  the  turnaround  will  be,  and  how  strong  the
impact will be on European economies.
2
BIS Review 19/2001
The US economy expanded  by  5 per cent  last  year. The upturn in  the  US  has  spanned  almost  10
years - the longest cyclical upturn ever. The chart shows OECD forecasts and actual developments
over the past five years. As we can see, growth has been stronger then expected every year in this
period. At the same time, inflation was moderate and unemployment declined.
Many observers attribute the prolonged period of strong growth to the new economy, which features
three main aspects:
• 
The  labour  market  had  become  more  flexible.  While  earlier  experience  implied  an
acceleration in the rate of increase in wages and prices at an unemployment rate of six per
cent, unemployment fell to four per cent without triggering higher inflation.
Productivity growth increased in both the IT sector and in other industries. The forecasts for
the annual growth potential of the US economy were revised up substantially to around 4 per
cent.
Equity prices for technology stocks advanced sharply, with more than a sixfold increase in
the Nasdaq index from the beginning of 1995 to the peak in March 2000.
  Strong  productivity  growth  and  low  wage  growth  led  to  a  sharp  increase  in  corporate  profitability.
Expectations  of  a  continued  rise  in  profits  spurred  sharp  growth  in  investment.  At  the  same  time,
advancing equity prices boosted household wealth. Households could reduce their current saving and
still increase wealth, allowing them to use a growing share of income for consumption.
BIS Review 19/2001
3
But imbalances heightened. The fall in the household saving ratio was based on gains  in the stock
market,  which  after  a  time  reflected  unrealistic  expectations  of  future  earnings.  Corporate  debt
increased sharply and current account deficits grew larger.
In spring last year, equity prices declined. The Nasdaq index showed a particularly strong decline. The
index continued to fall through autumn and winter, with the overall decline nearing 60 per cent. The
more broad-based stock indices have also shown a decline, albeit a more moderate one.
Growth has been expected to slow this year for some time. In spite of this, the turnaround in the US
economy was surprisingly strong and came faster than expected. Consumer and business confidence
indicators have shown a marked fall.
The  Federal  Reserve  has  sought  to  counter  the  downturn.  Interest  rates  were  lowered  by  1
percentage  point  in  January.  The  Government  has  announced  substantial  tax  cuts.  This  may
moderate  the  downturn,  but  hardly  bring  it  to  a  halt.  Consolidation  in  the  household  and  business
sector may imply lower consumption and investment for a period. In 2001, we expect the US economy
to expand by less than half the rate recorded last year.
Growth in the Japanese economy is also sluggish, but the downturn in Japan has continued for ten
years.
4
BIS Review 19/2001
At  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  the  financial  bubble  burst,  following  a  sharp  increase  in  stock  and
property values in the preceding years. The banking industry faced serious problems, which have still
not be solved.
In addition, government debt has increased sharply in recent years, but neither strong growth in public
spending nor near-zero interest rate levels has sufficed to boost growth in the Japanese economy.
BIS Review 19/2001
5
Growth in Europe was weak in the mid-1990s. The situation has shown a substantial improvement,
particularly from 1997. Growth has picked up and unemployment has declined in an environment of
moderate price and wage inflation.
The  US  and  Japan  account  for  close  to  a  third  of  the  world  economy.  When  their  economies
deteriorate,  the  question  is  whether  the  upturn  in  Europe  is  sufficiently  robust  to  maintain  its
momentum.
Historically, there has been a close correlation between developments in the US and  Europe.  Slow
growth  in  the  US  economy  will  also  now  have  an  effect  on  demand  for  European  goods,  but  the
effects via financial markets are likely to be more important. A turnaround in the US could feed through
to European stock markets and may also trigger financial unrest.
Thus far developments in the US have not resulted in a corresponding turnaround in Europe. Share
prices  in  Europe  have  been  relatively  stable  so  far  this  year,  and  European  economies  are  still
showing solid growth.
The effects on the Norwegian economy
There  are  no  signs  of  unrest  among  economic  agents  in  Norway.  Households  and  enterprises  still
expect growth in future income. If oil prices fall, the situation may be different.
The chart shows the probability of various oil prices ahead. The curve is based on prices in the options
market  for  contracts  maturing  in  December.  The  vertical  axis  shows  that  market  participants  have
priced in a 10 per cent probability that oil prices will be below USD 18 per barrel in December 2001
and a 10 per cent probability that oil prices will be higher than USD 35.5 per barrel in December this
year. This would suggest considerable uncertainty.
6
BIS Review 19/2001
The chart shows that high oil prices and petroleum production are generating large current account
and budget surpluses, with an attendant increase in Norway’s disposable income. The current account
surplus came to about 14 per cent of GDP last year, which is one of the highest surpluses recorded in
an OECD country in the  post-war period. In addition, government budget surpluses have increased
sharply and reached 14 1/2 per cent of GDP.
The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  shall  serve  as  a  buffer  against  short-term  fluctuations  in  oil
revenues. As large portions of the revenues from oil activities accrue to the state, fluctuations in oil
prices and oil revenues will primarily result in changes in allocations to the Petroleum Fund. Since all
of the capital in the Petroleum Fund is invested abroad, such changes will in principle not influence the
level of activity in the economy. This makes the Norwegian economy more robust to fluctuations in oil
prices and thus less dependent on oil, even in the short run.
Nevertheless, the mainland economy is not completely protected from fluctuations in the oil price. A
fall  in  oil  prices  will  influence  petroleum  investment  and  may  thereby  have  a  direct  impact  on
employment in some industries. Household and business income expectations may also be affected.
A  shift  in  international  developments  may  also  have  a  direct  effect  on  the  Norwegian  economy  via
financial markets.
An international turnaround with a decline in equity prices could influence enterprises’ possibilities for
financing investment. Household wealth may also decrease. Norwegian households’ direct ownership
in enterprises is still smaller than in many other countries, which suggests that the effect on domestic
demand via equity prices will be limited.
Perhaps the most important transmission channel is the foreign exchange market. The experience of
recent years shows that international financial market developments can have a short-term impact on
the krone exchange rate. Heightened uncertainty and unrest in foreign exchange markets can lead to
higher risk premia on small countries’ currencies. Developments in 1998 are one example, when the
krone came under growing pressure as a result of the sharp fall in oil prices, turbulence in international
capital market in the wake of the Russian crisis and imbalances in the Norwegian economy.
Monetary policy
The  long-term  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  provide  the  Norwegian  economy  with  a  nominal
anchor - domestic price stability, and thereby the basis for a stable krone. Nominal stability is the best
contribution monetary policy can make to economic growth and prosperity. A nominal anchor is also a
necessary  precondition  for  stable  financial  markets  and  property  markets.  High  inflation  and  wide
swings  in  the  exchange  rate  impair  the  function  of  prices  as  an  information  vehicle.  This  leads  to
booms  followed  by  busts  and  an  arbitrary  redistribution  of  income  and  wealth.  Inflation  therefore
poisons the economy. By linking movements in the krone to the euro, we have chosen to follow the
same standard for nominal stability in the economy as set by the euro area countries.
BIS Review 19/2001
7
Since 1997, inflation has been higher in Norway than in the euro area. The difference partly reflects a
period of strong growth in Norway, while the level of activity in Europe has been low. But the relatively
high inflation rate in Norway cannot continue as this will undermine the basis for stability in the krone
exchange rate and weaken confidence in monetary policy.
Short-term capital inflows and outflows are probably the most important factor determining movements
in the krone exchange rate from day to day, from week to week and from one quarter to the next. They
are  governed  by  expectations  concerning  future  returns.  Changes  in  expectations  concerning  the
future value of the krone can trigger extensive capital movements.
As a rule, Norges Bank does not intervene in foreign exchange markets with a view to influencing the
krone exchange rate. The krone  is  floating,  and  the  value  of  the  krone  fluctuates  in  periods  by  the
same magnitude as exchange rates in other open economies. Nevertheless, the prevailing stability of
the krone is largely a reflection of confidence that inflation in Norway will be kept at a low level.
Our experience is that changes in the Norwegian interest rate level only have a predictable effect on
the  krone  exchange  rate  when  the  change  in  interest  rates  also  contributes  to  stabilising  inflation.
However, the relationship between interest rates and price and cost developments is uncertain. The
setting of interest rates thus requires the use of professional judgement and discretion. The basis for
exercising  discretion  is  subject  to  limitations,  however.  Should  any  doubt  arise  as  to  whether  the
interest rate is oriented towards nominal stability, this would trigger substantial capital movements.
Interaction with income formation
A precondition for a stable krone exchange rate  against  European currencies is that price and cost
inflation  in  Norway  must  over  time  not  exceed  the  corresponding  aim  for  inflation  of  the  European
Central  Bank  (ECB).  The  ECB  orients  monetary  policy  to  maintain  price  stability,  which  has  been
defined as inflation of less than 2 per cent.
8
BIS Review 19/2001
In  recent  years,  cost  inflation  in  the  euro  area  countries  and  among  trading  partners  has  been
relatively low. Growth in labour costs in Norway has been roughly 11 percentage points higher than in
the euro area and 10 percentage points higher than among trading partners for the past three years.
A number of other small, open economies have recorded a decline in unemployment and lower growth
in labour costs than Norway. In Sweden, unemployment has shown a substantial decrease over the
past five  years and  wage growth  is below 4 per cent. Three-year  wage  agreements  are  now  being
concluded, underpinning the basis for low cost inflation. In the Netherlands, unemployment has fallen
to  a  very  low  level.  Wage  growth  has  picked  up,  but  is  lower  than  in  Norway.  In  Denmark,
unemployment has come down without an increase in wage  growth. In Finland, unemployment has
fallen sharply from the high level that took hold in the 1990s, and wage growth has slowed. In the euro
area, unemployment has dropped without an increase in wage growth. In Norway, the high growth in
labour costs may be a source of rising unemployment.
Interaction with fiscal policy
It  is  important  that  the  annual  budgets  are  based  on  a  long-term  strategy  that  takes  into  account
possible fluctuations in oil revenues from one year to the next. With large and, to some extent, varying
budget revenues, the basis for determining central government expenditure and taxes from one year
to the next may easily be impaired. If budget spending is allowed to vary in step with oil prices, the
Norwegian  economy  may  experience  abrupt  shifts  and  instability.  Changes  in  oil  prices  may  then
quickly  influence  wage  and  price  expectations,  the  exchange  rate  and  long-term  rates.  In  addition,
short-term rates would have to be changed frequently and sharply.
BIS Review 19/2001
9
In recent  years, central government real  underlying spending  growth has  accelerated  somewhat.  In
2000 and 2001, spending growth has been higher than 2 per cent, which is higher than normal growth
in the mainland economy. At the same time, direct and indirect taxes have increased. Fiscal policy has
thus  had  a  virtually  neutral  effect  on  domestic  demand  for  two  years  while  wage  growth  has  been
substantially higher than in other countries.
A  possible  interpretation  of  this  development  is  that  it  is  more  demanding  to  use  the  government
budget to dampen cyclical fluctuations during an upturn than during a downturn. The willingness and
ability  to  pursue  a  counter-cyclical  policy  may  in  itself  be  cyclical.  Another  interpretation  is  that  a
neutral fiscal stance this  year,  with  a strong increase in government financial  wealth,  is  a  balanced
approach to using the budget to stabilise the economy while phasing in an increase in financial income
in the economy.
Conclusion
The  Norwegian  economy  is  fragile  and  vulnerable.  As  long  as  oil  prices  are  high,  the  Norwegian
economy is fairly sheltered. Many central banks are now reducing their key rates. As our economy is
affected  to  a  lesser  extent,  the  differential  between  short  rates  in  Norway  and  abroad  may  widen.
Thank you for your attention.
10
BIS Review 19/2001
