Ernst Welteke: Trends in international banking
Address  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  International  Arab
Banking Summit held in Frankfurt, 19 June 2001.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would like to welcome you to the International Arab Banking Summit 2001 in Frankfurt, the City of the
Euro. Frankfurt is home not only to the Bundesbank and the European Central Bank but also to as
many  as  340  banks,  including  more  than  130  foreign  banks.  It  is  the  leading  financial  centre  in
Germany and the euro area.
The  heart  of  the  Eurosystem  is  the  right  place  to  discuss  trends  in  international  banking,  such  as
electronic banking, as well as questions regarding a deepening of the Euro-Arab partnership.
I
The success of the common currency in the European Monetary Union has rung in a new phase of
debate about monetary unions. This holds for all continents, for North and South America, for Asia as
well as the Arab countries. The decision to adopt further steps leading towards a common monetary
union by the Gulf Cooperation Council at the end of last year attracted a lot of attention.
Clearly,  the  process  of  integrating  different  economies  is  an  arduous  one,  involving  not  only  the
surrendering of a national monetary policy but also a process of integrating the real economy.
In Europe this process took almost half a century, from the first pro-European declaration to the full
integration  of  monetary  policy  in  the  European  monetary  union.  Harmonising  tariffs  and  creating  a
single European Market with free movement of goods, services, capital and labour created the basis
for a common monetary  policy.  In  addition  the  convergence  process  caused  macroeconomic  policy
and data to converge to such an extent that the abolition of national monetary policy would no longer
cause major distortions.
The Arab countries face similar problems in terms of tariffs and trade barriers. Clearly, the basis for a
common  monetary  policy  is  a  single  market  for  the  real  economy,  the  financial  system  and  labour
markets. Even within the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) there is still a long way to go.
There are, however, some encouraging characteristics in the GCC for integration. The similarity of the
economies is a striking feature. All depend to a large extent on energy exports. The price of crude oil
is  by  far  the  single  most  important  factor  determining  the  business  cycle.  In  addition  to  the  similar
sectoral  structure  of  the  economies  the  common  language  represents  an  integrating  element.  The
same holds true for the common culture, religion and the similar geography.
To  reach  the  goal  of  an  Arab  Monetary  Union,  particularism  has  to  be  overcome,  and  factors
promoting  integration  have  to  be  supported.  Overcoming  particularism  would  foster  communication
within the region and with partners in other regions.
All Arab countries are endeavouring to develop their economies towards a more balanced structure.
This ongoing modernisation in many Arab countries offers chances for the Arab countries and the rest
of the world alike. Sectoral diversification forms the basis for growing intra-regional trade. It will reduce
reliance  on  energy  exports  and  create  a  more  self-sustaining  Arab  economy.  The  world  economy
would clearly benefit from Arab industry playing a more lively and active role.
Strengthening the domestic financial sector in Arab countries seems to me to be a necessary step in
this direction. The quick adoption of modern instruments like electronic banking and the coming revival
of the important financial centre in the 60s and 70s  – Beirut –  are  only  two  examples  of  promising
developments in this region’s financial markets.
The  Arab  banking  sector  has  successfully  embarked  on  the  current  global  trends  in  this  industry.
Based on its generally sound profitability it meets the challenges of globalisation, concentration and
electronisation.
BIS Review 55/2001
1
Modernization and diversification of the real economy will cause the need for banks to deal with the
demand and risks of non-oil-business. The dependence of the whole economy on the price of oil will
decrease, and so will the dependence of the financial sector. As a compensation a greater diversified
economy  provides  for  an  easier  risk  distribution.  In  addition,  liberalization,  a  more  competitive
environment and the trend towards lesser state control will require a more active role of bankers.
I have no doubt that the Arab banks will prove their success in dealing with a changing environment
and in reorganizing their business. They have impressively proven their creativity in dealing with the
growing field of islamic banking. Maybe western banks can learn from this field for the growing venture
capital markets.
Another challenge for Arab banks is electronic banking. However, the late but very quick adoption of
internet banking and the high acceptance of this new medium provide for a good starting point.
The European experience on electronic banking in a nutshell is: Banks will become “bricks and clicks
banks”. Many services can be digitalized and provided electronically, but not all. The combination of
digital and personal services seems to be the successful strategy at present.
The overall outlook for Arab banks hinges on the overall economic perspectives. These give rise to
hope. Growth is picking up, inflation rates are kept relatively low and modernization of the economic
structure is proposed by leading businessmen and politicians. This will be supported by the relatively
“young” population – in many Arab countries more than 50 per cent of the population are younger than
20. This in itself provides for a rising competiveness and creativity in the economy.
II
Having this in mind Europe may be of special interest for Arab countries for two reasons: First, as a
potential partner for economic cooperation and second, as an example of successful integration.
The main development for financial markets in Europe has been the launch of a new currency, the
Euro.  The  financial  sector  in  Europe  benefits  to  a  large  extent  from  the  monetary  union  and  the
evolution of a single European financial market. That implies greater transparency, more competition
and more liquidity.
Germany  as  a  financial  centre  benefits  from  this  –  in  everyone’s  interests.  Functioning,  liquid  and
sound  financial  markets  steer  capital  towards  those  areas  of  the  real  economy  where  it  brings  the
highest  yield. In this  way, they contribute  to  improving welfare, strengthen  the  economy  and  create
jobs.
The ECB, as a constituent part and the centre of the European System of Central Banks, is domiciled
here in Frankfurt. This has positive implications for Germany as a financial centre. It does strengthen
the  self-confidence  of  the  credit  institutions  located  in  Frankfurt,  and  –  at  least  every  fortnight  –  it
draws the attention to Frankfurt when the meetings of the Governing Council of the European Central
Bank take place. This is where European monetary policy decisions are taken.
The  direct  advantages  of  the  monetary  union  are  increasingly  being  appreciated.  It  is  no  longer
possible  for  exchange-rate  fluctuations  to  distort  competition.  There  is  no  longer  a  need  for  the
economy  to  engage  in  hedging  activities  in  cross-border  trade  and  foreign  direct  investment.
Transaction costs in the markets have diminished, and prices are directly comparable.
These are advantages not only for the economy, but also for every citizen – advantages which make
themselves felt for every transaction, every trading operation, every trip abroad.
The question arises as to whether the introduction of the single currency has led to the development of
a single, enlarged European financial market. It is precisely in this area that much was expected from
the euro – when compared with the US financial market.
Regarding the money market, these expectations have undisputedly been met. The individual national
money markets in the euro area have rapidly combined to form a single euro money market.
The capital markets are changing somewhat more slowly. On the capital markets the euro is not the
only  factor  promoting  change.  The  trends  towards  globalisation  and  deregulation  as  well  as  new
developments  in  technology  are  also  playing  a  major  role.  The  markets  have  become  more  liquid,
larger, deeper and more complex.
2
BIS Review 55/2001
It  is  true  that  on  the  way  towards  a  single  European  capital  market  more  work  has  to  be  done.
Institutional, technical and legal barriers are hampering the process of integration. The fact that there
is no single sovereign issuer, but rather 12 different government issuers, undoubtedly contributes to
the  certain  degree  of  fragmentation  that  still  exists.  In  this  context,  the  benchmark  position  of  the
German Bund is something of which we can be particularly proud. The great diversity of issuers will,
for the time being, remain a characteristic feature of the European capital market.
The same is true for the large number of stock exchanges and exchange-like trading systems as well
as  the  different  clearing  and  securities  settlement  systems.  This  does  not,  however,  rule  out  the
possibility that the individual capital markets will become progressively closer to each other in terms of
their  economic  organisation.  This  is  something  the  institutional  investors  themselves  are  already
taking care of.
There are many signs  that  a  more market-oriented  financing  structure  is  evolving  in  the  euro  area.
Enterprises are increasingly meeting their financing needs directly through the capital markets, that is:
by means of negotiable paper.
The  dynamism  of  this  disintermediation  process  may  be  gauged  by  the  development  of  the  equity
market: the degree of market capitalisation has increased significantly. This is a reflection not only of
higher  equity  prices  but  also  of  the  steadily  rising  total  number  of  enterprises  listed  on  the  stock
exchange.
A  major  contribution  to  this  development  has  been  made  by  the  Neuer  Markt  (new  market)  of  the
Frankfurt stock exchange. This is where young, innovative enterprises obtain access to risk capital. In
terms of the Neuer Markt, Germany has the top position among European growth markets – even if
some investors may have overlooked the fact that this is a market for risk capital.
In addition, the market for corporate bonds is on the advance. Alongside the introduction of the euro
itself, a major driving force has been the continuing restructuring of the corporate landscape.
However, changes are not restricted to the financial markets themselves. The entire financial sector,
including the whole range of financial intermediaries and financial institutions, is affected by them. As
a result of the loss of the “home-field advantage” represented by the Deutsche Mark, at the start of
monetary union the German credit institutions entered into competition with all the other banks in the
euro area. All of them are now selling the same basic product: in other words, the euro. Besides that,
credit institutions are faced with increasing competition from direct banks, online  brokers, insurance
companies, free investment companies, and so on.
Possible  responses  to  the  new  competitive  situation  are  either  consolidation  –  including  hostile
takeovers – or specialisation. As we have had to learn from some examples from the recent past, the
merging of long-established banks is not an easy undertaking: at the time when the mergers are to be
implemented, at the latest, there is a clash of different corporate cultures, and problems could emerge.
This applies all the more in the case of cross-border mergers.
At present, consolidation in the financial sector is taking place mainly at the national level. However,
the  situation  may  well  change  in  the  future.  The  euro  has  the  effect  of  promoting  competition.  It
ensures transparency and makes comparisons within the euro area easier.
Those  involved  in  the  legislative  process  in  Germany  are  nowadays  aware  that  the  underlying
statutory and regulatory conditions are crucial to a financial centre’s success. Since the early nineties,
the German legislature has passed three special acts for promoting the financial market. A fourth is to
enter into force in this legislative period. So far, the main points of emphasis of the legislation have
been  the  reorganisation  of  stock  exchange  supervision  and  the  establishment  of  the  Federal
Supervisory  Office  for  Securities  Trading  here  in  Frankfurt.  In  particular,  the  Securities  Trading  Act
provides the Federal Supervisory Office for Securities Trading with instruments for investigating insider
offences.
The  Fourth  Financial  Market  Promotion  Act  is  intended  to  strengthen  further  the  integrity  of  the
financial  markets  and  broaden  the  scope  of  action  available  to  stock  exchanges  and  investment
companies.
The  supervisory  system  for  financial  markets  in  Germany  and  some  other  European  countries  is
reformed to  meet  the  challenges  of  globalisation  and  securitisation.  In  addition  the  trend  towards  a
more capital market orientation will be met by the requirements for banking supervision as set up in
the Basle II agreement.
BIS Review 55/2001
3
Overall, the financial sector in Europe and Germany as a financial centre are well equipped to face the
challenges and make use of the opportunities that the euro presents.
Moreover the European Monetary Union has led to a region of stability unprecedented in European
history. Currently,  the  area  of  stable  money  goes  from  the  Atlantic  Ocean  to  the  Aegean  Sea,  and
from the Strait of Gibraltar to the Arctic Ocean.
Inflation  as  well  as  interest  rates  have  gone  down  to  levels  hitherto  unexperienced  in  many
participating  countries.  Growth  and  stability  in  the  euro  area  will  be  promoted  by  the  common
currency. Many changes in the political and structural conditions in Europe are yet to come. Europe is
a  region  departing  for  more  integration  and  a  brighter  future.  This  makes  it  particular  attractive  for
potential partners.
III
The  long  history  of  fruitful  European-Arab  partnership  leaves  us  with  a  unique  legacy  and  forms  a
basis for us today to revive our commercial, cultural and political links. Especially the traditionally good
German – Arab relations of the past are a call to improve the current cooperation between these two
regions. 300 million Europeans and about 350 million Arabs, including all people in the Middle East,
need to cooperate closely. A united Europe may include east and south-east European states within
the foreseeable future. By then, the Middle East would be a direct neighbour of the euro area. Clearly,
good neighbourly relations – marked by peace, fairness and much closer economic interrelationships
than today – should be in the interests of both regions.
Both regions have a lot to offer. The Arab region is still gaining in importance for international stability
and energy supply. Its large role in international finance, not only by the recycling of petrodollars, is
being  acknowledged.  Within  a  couple  of  years  the  Arab  countries  will  probably  also  be  better
represented  in  international  organisations  and  better  integrated  in  world  politics  and  the  global
economy.
I do know that the European Union is seen as a highly instrumental – or even natural – partner in the
process of modernisation which Arab countries are undergoing at present. Therefore, the process of
cultural and economic convergence between these two regions should be accelerated. Economic and
technological  integration,  cultural  respect  and  political  necessity  have  been  identified  as  its
characteristics.
Conferences like this offer a great opportunity to enhance mutual understanding. May this conference
also pave the way for mutual beneficial cooperation.
4
BIS Review 55/2001
