The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: The convergence of financial systems
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Oesterreichische
Nationalbank Economics Conference held in Vienna, 31 May 2001.
 The  theme  of  this  session  is  convergence  of  financial  systems,  within  the  context  of  the  overall
conference theme of "The single financial market – two years into EMU". What I propose to do this
morning is to ask, first, what are we – or should we be – looking for from our financial systems; then to
ask,  secondly,  what  are  the  major  driving  forces  that  have  been,  and  are,  affecting  our  financial
systems  –  including  but  not  confined  to  EMU;  and,  finally,  to  offer  some  thoughts  on  how  those
systems might continue to evolve.
So let me begin by asking what should we look for in our financial systems. In answering that question
I suppose I could give you a long list of particular payments and savings services as well as credit,
investment and insurance services, provided to individuals, to private organisations and businesses of
all kinds, and to various levels of government. But that would be simply a description of our financial
systems which do still  differ in many respects as a result of history and  tradition,  of  particular  local
needs, and of the state of evolution in individual countries. We are more interested in the essential
purpose  of  our  financial  systems.  And  at  the  very  heart  of  that  is  their  capacity  to  bring  together
financial resources not currently needed by their owners for expenditure on consumption or physical
investment, and to channel those resources to wherever they can be most productively used – always
allowing for risk.
The free movement of capital, like free trade in goods and services, is an immensely powerful means
of promoting efficient resource allocation nationally, regionally and globally, and as such it can make a
major  contribution  to  improving  economic  welfare  –  reducing  poverty  and  raising  living  standards  –
which is, of course, what we all want to see. Certainly the free movement of capital, like free trade,
needs  to  be  governed  by  rules  designed  to  minimise  distortions  and  unfairness,  and  to  reduce  the
risks of intermediaries being unable to honour their commitments or of broader, systemic, instability. I
don't pretend for a moment that it works perfectly in practice:  we could  all  well do  without the  well-
publicised institutional failures of recent  years, for example, or the  volatility  which  characterised  the
Asian  financial  crisis  or  the  more  recent  "tech  stock"  bubble.  But  it  is  certainly  the  most  effective
means  of financial  resource  allocation  that  we  have  so  far  discovered.  The  challenge  is  to  make  it
work more effectively – more efficiently, both in terms of intermediation costs, and crucially in terms of
the  direction  of  the  flow  of  resources  –  but  also  more  reliably  and  securely  for  both  savers  and
borrowers.  This  is  largely  down  to  financial  markets  themselves.  But  it  is  a  challenge,  too,  for  the
financial  authorities  who  need  to  balance  the  need  for  market  competition  with  the  maintenance  of
minimum  prudential  and  business  behavioural  standards  by  individual  financial  institutions,  and  the
need  to  preserve  overall  macro-level  financial  stability.  How  far  we  are  succeeding  in  meeting  this
challenge  is,  to  my  mind,  the  essential  criterion  against  which  we  should  seek  to  assess  the
development of our financial systems.
Against that background let me now try to identify some of the main drivers of change that have been,
and are, affecting all our financial systems to varying degrees.
The first is financial deregulation, that is to say the relaxation of controls designed to override market
forces in either an overall macro-economic or a directional sense. In the case of the UK this extends
back very importantly to the abolition of exchange controls and direct controls over bank lending over
twenty  years  ago,  to  enabling  building  societies  (our  principal  mortgage  providers)  to  extend  their
range  of  financial  services  activities,  to  the  opening  up  of  membership  of  the  Stock  Exchange  and
broader capital market intermediation and so on.
Deregulation in this sense was both encouraged by, and in turn contributed to, increasingly  intense
competition within the financial services industry, including a blurring of traditional distinctions between
different types of financial institution. They were accompanied by what I think of as "re-regulation" that
is  to  say  more  formal  and  structured  regulation  of  both  the  prudential  behaviour  and  standards  of
conduct of virtually all financial services activity targeted more specifically at both institutional stability
and consumer protection but, subject to that, leaving the market to do its job. Such regulation in the
UK  has  now  been  consolidated  in  a  single,  over-arching,  financial  services  regulator,  the  FSA
(Financial  Services  Authority).  The  Bank  of  England  remains  responsible  for  macro-prudential
BIS Review 48/2001
1
oversight, that is to say the stability of the financial system as a whole, including oversight of payments
systems. But we are no longer responsible for prudential banking supervision at the micro-level.
The  re-regulation  process,  of  course,  conforms  with  the  access  provisions  of  the  WTO  and  with
internationally-agreed  standards  agreed  within  the  IMF.  It  incorporates  the  minimum  standards  of
banking supervision agreed (and now subject to revision) under the Basel Accord. It incorporates, too,
those measures that have so far been agreed at the regional, European, level relating to a wider range
of financial services activity in the context of progress towards the single financial market.
Whether or not these initiatives lead over time towards greater "convergence" of our financial systems
in  some  structural  sense  –  as  they  may  –  taken  together  with  national  deregulation  they  should  at
least  contribute  to  greater  competition,  including  cross-border  competition,  and  help  to  improve  the
effectiveness  of  our  financial  systems  in  terms  of  the  key  criterion  which  I  suggested  earlier  in  my
remarks.
That  is  particularly  true,  at  least  potentially,  of  the  steps  proposed  to  advance  the  European  single
financial market, as set out in the Commission's Financial Services Action Plan, because of its broad
scope. But progress has so far been painfully slow. In that context I welcome the recent emphasis on
closer and more active co-operation between financial regulators within Europe, regardless of national
regulatory structures. And I particularly welcome the proposals put forward by Alexandre Lamfalussy
and his "Wise Men" for accelerating progress on measures that would encourage greater efficiency in
Europe's securities markets. But there is clearly a great deal more that we can do in this whole area.
Such changes in national financial services regulation, and related international and regional actions,
taken together with increasing awareness in many parts of the world of the potential advantages of
opening national financial markets to international competition, provide an encouraging environment
for  a  second  main  driver  of  change  in  our  financial  systems  –  globalisation.  It  is  a  process  we  are
particularly conscious of in London where major financial institutions from all over the world, including,
of course, from elsewhere in Europe, have long been predominant players, especially in international
wholesale market activity. But international ownership of banks (including newly privatised banks) and
other financial institutions has increasingly become a common characteristic of financial systems in a
wide  range  of  other  countries.  I  will  not  comment  further  on  globalisation,  which  is  certainly  very
familiar to  you, except  perhaps  to  say  that  I  have  often  been  teased  by  people  who  talk  about  the
Wimbledonisation  of  the  City  of  London  –  meaning  that  we  provide  the  tournament  venue  but  the
prizes  are  mostly  carried  off  by  competitors  from  overseas.  I  think  that  many  of  those  people  now
increasingly  understand  that  it  is  activity  rather  than  nationality  of  ownership  which  creates  a
competitive market place, and in turn provides employment and income and tax revenue, which are
the things that really contribute to the macro-economy. As a broad generalisation the wider the range
of participants the more efficient the market place.
A  third  major  driver  of  change  in  our  financial  systems  –  as  elsewhere  in  our  economies  –  is,  of
course,  information  technology.  This  has  clearly  transformed  transactions  processing,  putting  a
premium on throughput, and encouraging some forms of specialisation and consolidation. It has made
possible entirely new – and typically much cheaper – means of delivering financial services making it
easier  for  new  entrants  to  contest  existing  franchises.  It  has  facilitated  the  development  of  new
financial instruments and investment strategies, and it has radically changed trading mechanisms. It
should also have made it easier for both financial institutions and their regulators to measure, monitor
and manage risk. But the electronic revolution, as it applies to our financial systems, has clearly had a
very positive impact on the efficiency of all our financial markets and no doubt still has a long way to
go.
Other  major  drivers  include:  the  effects  of  rising  living  standards  and  the  associated  increase  in
financial wealth; and the consequences of ageing populations in many of our countries with a related
emphasis on private pension provision. They include also the impact of fiscal policies which are now
typically directed to limiting budget deficits and reducing public sector debt and of monetary policies
directed at consistently low inflation as a necessary condition for sustainable economic growth. Many
of these trends seem likely to encourage a continuing relative shift in savings and investment patterns
towards private sector capital market intermediation, although such intermediation will often be carried
out by banks or within banking groups. I've no doubt that you can all think of other important drivers of
change in our financial systems.
And all of this before we even come to EMU!
2
BIS Review 48/2001
Now, let me be clear, I agree with those who argue that the single currency – by eliminating exchange
risk within the participating countries – can make a significant contribution to increasing the depth and
liquidity  of  financial  markets  and  reducing  transactions  costs  within  the  Eurozone.  And  indeed  it
already  has had that  effect, particularly  in  money  and  bond  markets,  especially  the  corporate  bond
market. It has no doubt also been a factor encouraging the tendency to, mostly national, consolidation
as  financial  institutions  prepare  for  greater  competition  from  other  euro-based  institutions  in  their
national  markets.  All  of  this  is  very  positive  for  the  competitive  efficiency  of  Euro-zone  financial
systems both nationally and within the Eurozone as a whole. It is in fact one of the two main potential
economic  benefits  of  the  single  currency,  the  other,  of  course,  being  the  positive  effect  of  nominal
exchange  rather  certainty  within  the  Eurozone  on  trade  flows  of  goods  and  other,  non-financial,
services and its impact in more efficient resource allocation. It is also the field in which the UK, through
London,  has  been  able  to  make  a  positive  contribution  to  the  development  of  the  Euro  even  from
outside the Eurozone.
So I do not at all underestimate the contribution that the euro has made, and is making, to improving
the efficiency of the Eurozone financial systems. But the point I have tried to emphasise this morning
is that it is just one important factor among a number of others affecting our financial systems, so that
one should not perhaps expect that it would have had a dramatic overall impact – certainly not in so
short a period of time. And my message is that there are many other things beyond the introduction of
the  single  currency  that  we  can  and  should  do,  whether  from  inside  or  outside  the  Eurozone  to
improve the functioning of our financial systems.
Nationally,  certainly  within  the  UK,  apart  from  continuing  to  try  to  find  the  right  balance  generally
between  competition  and  necessary  regulation,  we  need  also  –  through  the  authorities  and  the
financial markets working together – to continue working to ensure that the financial system reaches
those  parts  of  the  economy  that  are  traditionally  most  difficult  to  get  at,  including  particularly  the
encouragement of smaller and medium-sized businesses and new enterprises as well as community
development and regeneration.
Regionally, within Europe, as I said earlier, we need to work away at developing the single financial
market,  pressing  on  with  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan.  Most  immediately,  in  line  with  the
Lamfalussy  recommendations,  we  need  to  address  some  of  the  regulatory  obstacles  to  greater
integration  of  securities  markets.  And  we  need  to  encourage  the  markets  to  find  more  efficient
solutions to trading, clearing and settlement systems, particularly in securities markets, but also more
generally.
The main driver in this last context, certainly from the point of view of those who use these systems, is
the  wish to reduce costs. It is often pointed  out that  there are thirty plus exchanges in  Europe  and
probably at least as many settlement systems – which are linked to a greater, but often to a lesser,
degree,  which  operate  under  different  legal  and  regulatory  regimes  and  which  all  incur  their  own
running and development costs. The fragmentation also means that market participants incur indirect
costs because it is harder for them to manage their liquidity and collateral efficiently. So the general
message, which commands wide support, is that some serious consolidation would be in order. The
question however is how to bring this about.
I  will  not  go  into  the  technical  debate  about  horizontal  versus  vertical  integration,  nor  into  the
distinctions – which are nevertheless important – between trading, clearing and settlement. And there
are other, less technical, influences too, including perceptions of national interest. But  whatever the
reasons it is proving difficult for the markets to make real progress in these areas. In the face of this,
there are those who argue for some outside party to intervene and enforce consolidation. The outside
party some seem to have in mind is the authorities in one guise or another. I have to say that I have
doubts about the wisdom of such an approach. There is little reason to suppose that the authorities
are  likely  to  be  any  better  than  the  private  sector  at  finding  the  way  forward.  Nor  is  it  obvious  that
national  authorities  have  the  locus  or  leverage  to  insist  on  a  particular  model.  Much  the  same
reservations  would  apply  to  any  European  level  intervention.  That  said,  what  the  public  sector  can
contribute, in this area as in financial markets more generally, is a removal of barriers to competition,
requirements on the provision of information and the easing of constraints on the effective functioning
of the market. If consolidation does indeed take place, the public authorities may also have a role in
ensuring that heavily concentrated market infrastructure providers do not exploit their position. But at a
European level we are at present still some way from this situation.
And  internationally  we  need  to  work  together,  within  the  WTO  and  the  IMF,  as  well  as  within  the
various  international  regulatory  and  professional  bodies,  to  promote  the  global  free  movement  of
BIS Review 48/2001
3
capital, because in this context – as in the case of free trade – the potential benefits are not confined
to national or even regional boundaries but increase within wider international participation.
Mr Chairman, we have come a long way in improving the effectiveness of our financial systems, and
there  are  powerful  forces  at  work  pushing  us  in  the  right  direction  –  including,  within  Europe,  the
introduction of the euro. But we still have a very long way to go. I have no doubt that the effort will
prove to be worthwhile.
4
BIS Review 48/2001
