Hermann Remsperger: Aging: is this really a relevant issue for a central bank?
Speech by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at
the Bundesbank 2001 spring conference, Eltville 4 May 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I  would  like  to  warmly  welcome  you  to  the  third  Bundesbank  spring  conference,  which  introduces
some innovations.
It is the first time that we are staging a spring conference jointly with an academic institution, namely
the Burch Center of Berkeley University and its Director Alan Auerbach. I am very pleased about this
“joint venture” and would like to thank Alan for his cooperation.
Another  innovation:  this  year’s  spring  conference  is  being  held  at  the  Bundesbank’s  training  centre
here in Eltville. I am sure that the somewhat longer route to Eltville will prove to be both interesting and
productive. The inventor of printing, Johannes Gutenberg, is said to have operated one of the very first
printing presses in Eltville. So this is an ideal place for communicating important messages.
The topic  which  we have chosen for this  year’s conference is  by  no means new. A whole string  of
conferences on aging have been held in the recent past. Nevertheless, the topic chosen represents an
innovative step for us. Why innovative? – because we wish to discuss a problem whose relevance to
monetary  policy  is  not  as  clear-cut  as  were  the  subjects  of  our  previous  conferences.  In  1999  we
considered the monetary transmission process, and last year we discussed the investment process in
Europe.
So far, the debate on aging has focused on the challenges which it poses to the labour market and the
social security system. Thus the pay-as-you-go system in Germany is to be complemented in future by
funded components in the form of company-based pension schemes and private pension plans. In my
view this is an absolutely necessary step.
In Germany, for example, the ratio of the over-sixties to people aged between 20 and 60 will rise from
just over 40 % to around 75 % by the middle of this century. Similar tendencies in the age structure of
the population will also occur in other European countries as well as in Japan and – although not quite
so  dramatically  –  in  the  United  States.  Increased  life  expectancy,  declining  birth  rates  and  earlier
retirement are the factors behind this trend.
This gives rise to the following key question: In the context of an aging society, how can one ensure a
rate  of  economic  growth  that  permits  a  sufficient  income  transfer  from  the  working  population  to
pensioners which does not cause the “inter-generational contract” to collapse under its own weight?
Looked at from the  perspective  of monetary  policy,  the  questions  are  more  specialised,  but  just  as
fundamental. First, I ask myself whether the aging process in society is bound to change the indicators
for central bank policy.
Second, we need to consider whether the economic consequences of the aging process will also have
direct or indirect implications for the monetary transmission process.
And third, you could even ask whether the shifts in the age structure are at all relevant for the central
banks’ objectives.
Let me illustrate the first complex, namely the indicators, using the example of monetary policy in the
Eurosystem.
As you know, the European Central Bank follows a two-pillar strategy. Under the first pillar it defines a
reference  value  for  monetary  growth.  The  comparison  between  actual  monetary  growth  and  the
reference value is a key guide to assessing the medium-term outlook for price risks.
The reference value for monetary expansion is derived from the trend rate of real GDP, the trend in
the velocity of money and an inflation rate that appears acceptable under stability considerations.
BIS Review 36/2001
1
Other things being equal, if the working population grows more slowly or declines, this will eventually
dampen potential output. However, an increasing amount of savings and a larger capital stock could
counteract the effects of a shortage of labour.
Countervailing effects could also be generated by technical progress. On the one hand, a shortage of
labour may stimulate technical progress.1 On the other hand, the aging population may constitute an
obstacle to technical progress. At any rate, my children certainly surf the Internet a lot more skilfully
than their aging father!
I would  add  that the velocity  of money may  likewise be affected by the consequences of the aging
process. Thus both inside and outside Europe wealth has been found to affect money demand, or the
velocity of money.2 If the aging of a society leads to more capital-intensive production and to increased
asset accumulation, the relationship between wealth and income should also change, and this in turn
might have an impact on the trend rate of the velocity of money.
Concerning the ECB’s analysis of the second pillar, I would like first to draw your attention to labour
market conditions.
The impact of a changing age structure on the labour market has been debated very intensively in the
United States. However, the institutional conditions in the USA are very different from those in Europe.
In  the  USA  in  the  1990s  the  unemployment  rate  declined.  One  of  the  reasons  was  that,  by  the
nineties, the baby boomers were already well integrated into the labour market. Therefore, the level of
unemployment among active job seekers was low. Normally search unemployment is high whenever a
large cohort enters the labour market.3
In  Germany  we  have  a  situation  where  early  retirement  very  often  is  preceded  by  a  period  of
unemployment. It may thus be assumed that here the non accelerating inflation rate of unemployment
is relatively high because a large cohort is close to retirement age. Conversely, this rate should fall if
the rules which currently encourage pre-retirement unemployment are changed. It is estimated that in
Germany around one fifth of total unemployment is the result of old-age including the early-retirement
regulations.
The range of factors which the ECB covers in its second pillar includes changes in current account
balances and exchange rates. Here, too, changing age structures could have a significant impact. It
may be supposed that savings exceed investment during phases when a “baby-boom” generation has
entered  the  workforce.  Consequently,  a  current  account  surplus  would  be  “normal”  during  such  a
period. An opposite movement should be expected in an aging society. Economic policy makers have
to take these shifts in the current account into consideration.4
In the context of its second pillar the ECB also looks at asset prices as an indicator of monetary policy.
This indicator is influenced by the age structure of the population – for instance if pensioners reduce
their assets in order to maintain their level of consumption. I am sure that we will return to this subject
in greater detail in the course of our conference.
And I hope that we will have enough time to discuss the question whether the aging of the population
influences the monetary transmission process.
If  a  greater  funded  component  is  introduced  into  old-age  pension  systems  in  the  future,  that  will
certainly have repercussions on the financial system. As a rule, countries where the pension system
has  a  greater  funded  component  also  have  different  financial  systems  than  countries  in  which  the
pay-as-you-go system predominates. Some commentators even refer to the complementarity between
pension systems and financial systems.5 In turn, the structures of the financial systems are important
determinants of the monetary transmission process.
                                                     
1  See, for example, D. Cutler, J. Poterba, L. Sheiner, L. Summers: An aging society: opportunity or challenge? BPEA, 1990,
pages 1 – 73.
2  See, for example, B. D. Gerdesmeier: The role of wealth in money demand, Bundesbank Discussion Paper, 1996 and the
literature cited there.
3  See L. F. Katz and A. B. Krueger: The high - pressure US-Labor Market of the 1990s, BPEA, 1999, pages 1 – 81.
4  See also OECD: Maintaining prosperity in an aging society, 1998.
5  See  M.  Tyrell/R.  Schmidt:  Pensions-  und  Finanzsysteme  in  Europa:  Ein  Vergleich  unter  dem  Gesichtspunkt  der
Komplementarität, Working Paper Series: Finance and accounting, Frankfurt University, Feb. 2001.
2
BIS Review 36/2001
If the financial system changes with the aging of the population, the monetary transmission process is
likely to change, too. This is an area in which a great deal of research still has to be done.
In  this  connection  –  and  by  way  of  illustration  –  it  is  perhaps  useful  to  say  something  about  the
relationship between monetary policy and consumption – without, of course, wishing to ignore the link
with  investment decisions.6 In the past,  empirical  studies  in  a  number  of  countries  showed  that  the
life-cycle  theory  is  valid  to  a  limited  extend  only.  Interest  rates  play  a  smaller  role  than  this  theory
would suggest. Disposable income plays a greater role.
This  result  has  been  ascribed  not  least  to  liquidity  constraints  on  imperfect  financial  markets.  If,
however,  households  accumulate  more  assets  for  their  old-age  provision  and  the  financial  markets
become more perfect, it is likely that interest rate effects will have a greater impact on consumption
than before – and that shocks will have a smaller impact on disposable income. In this respect the age
structure of the population plays a role as well. Old people normally hold more assets than the young.
Now  I  would  like  to  briefly  consider  the  question  of  whether  central  bank  objectives  may  also  be
sensitive to the age structure of the  population. This could  be relevant for the controversy “inflation
targeting versus price-level targeting”. But it also has implications for the level of price increases that is
considered to be consistent with price stability. And, finally, it also raises the question of the relative
weights  which  deviations  from  the  inflation  or  output  target  should  have  in  a  central  bank’s  loss
function.
As inflation rates have fallen in recent years, a growing debate has been generated as to whether a
central bank should rather pursue an inflation target or a price-level target. In this context I would like
to quote a remark made by Lars Svensson, which seems to hit the nail on the head: “... the advantage
of price-level targeting is reduced long-term variability of the price level. This should be beneficial to
long-term nominal contracts and intertemporal decisions ...”.7 If this is a true for an economy in which
people must save more to ensure an adequate retirement income, this could be seen as an argument
for devoting more research to price-level targets. I am fully aware, however, that the age-factor is just
one of many arguments in the debate on price level versus inflation targeting.
The  discussion  about  what  constitutes  an  acceptable  rate  of  inflation  has  been  very  strongly
influenced by possible measurement problems with price statistics. As a rule, central banks accept a
certain degree of measured inflation as a hedge against pursuing a deflationary policy. We should not
forget,  however,  that  these  measurement  problems  change  with  the  composition  of  the  baskets  of
goods and services. In turn, the baskets of goods and services may change with the age structure of
the population.
For example, as a society grows older, spending on health care services is likely to increase. Despite
all improvements such costs are not yet captured completely by the Harmonised Index of Consumer
Prices.  If  these  costs  grow  at  a  faster-than-average  pace,  the  measured  rate  of  price  increases
understates actual inflation. Consider, on the other hand, a country in which the cost-of-living indices
include  this  part  of  the  basket  of  goods  and  services.  In  this  case  it  is  possible  that  qualitative
improvements  in  health  services  are  not  taken  fully  into  account  because  it  is  extremely  difficult  to
measure quality in this field.
Particular problems also arise, however, in measuring the baskets of goods and services of a mainly
young  society.  You  only  need  to  think  of  spending  on  education,  with  the  enormous  measurement
problems which that entails. It is very hard to quantify the scale of the distortions in the areas I just
mentioned – which is an excellent reason for carrying out more research in this field.
Last but not least, I would like to briefly touch the question of a central bank’s loss function. Take the
standard formulation used in the literature: it implies that deviations from the output and inflation target
cause losses. It may well be that the relative weights of these two components are seen differently by
the  working  population  on  the  one  hand  and  by  pensioners  on  the  other,  especially  if  pensioners’
incomes are not protected against inflation. And if that is the case, the ECB’s focus on price stability
can be seen from another important angle: It reduces one of the potential problems an aging society is
confronted with.
                                                     
6  See Deutsche Bundesbank (ed): Investing today for the world of tomorrow, 2001.
7 
L. Svensson: Price level targeting versus inflation targeting, JMCB, 1999, pages 277 – 95 (here: p. 278).
BIS Review 36/2001
3
Ladies and gentlemen, for those among you who were already convinced that aging is an important
issue for a central bank, I hope I have reinforced your views. And for those of you who are sceptical
about this subject, I hope it pays to stay.
4
BIS Review 36/2001
