European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and
Mr Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference,  held  in
Frankfurt am Main, 30 August 2001.
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  here  to  report  on  the  outcome  of  today's  meeting  of  the  Governing
Council of the ECB, which was also attended by Mr. Reynders, President of the EU Council, and Mr.
Solbes from the European Commission.
Following  its  regular  examination  of  monetary  and  economic  developments  and  analysis  of  their
implications for the maintenance of price stability in the euro area, the Governing Council decided to
lower  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points.  The  Governing  Council  considers  that  the
available evidence points to an improvement in the outlook for price developments. This is particularly
apparent from the information under the second pillar of the ECB's monetary policy strategy, while that
related to the first pillar remains consistent with a favourable outlook for price stability in the medium
term.
Let me elaborate somewhat on the assessment provided under the two pillars of the monetary policy
strategy of the ECB.
With regard to the first pillar, the three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3 was 5.9% in
the period from May to July 2001. However, this figure needs to be corrected for holdings of money
market paper and short-term debt securities by non-residents of the euro area,  which, according to
preliminary  estimates,  have  contributed  around  three-quarters  of  a  percentage  point  to  annual  M3
growth.
The increase in the rate of growth of M3 over the past few months must be interpreted carefully. It
reflects the relatively flat yield curve and the recent weakness in stock markets, both of which made
the holding of short-term deposits and marketable paper included in M3 attractive. As it also reflects
the  fact  that  consumers  needed  a  higher  level  of  transaction  balances  to  finance  the  past  rise  in
energy  and  food  prices,  recent  increases  in  M3  growth  may  be  transitory  and,  hence,  do  not
necessarily  have  implications  for  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  In  addition,  the  annual  rate  of
growth of loans to the private sector, although still high, has continued to decline over recent months.
Regarding the second pillar, there are clear signals of lower inflationary pressures from the demand
side. Recent data on economic activity indicate that real GDP growth in 2001 will most likely be lower
than was expected a few months ago. This is due in  part to external  demand,  which  has remained
weak  and  below  expectations,  owing  to  slow  growth  in  economic  activity  in  the  United  States  and
persistent  economic  weakness  in  Japan,  which  have  spilled  over  to  other  regions  of  the  world.  In
addition,  consumption  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  been  dampened  by  losses  in  real  disposable
income related to past increases in consumer prices. All these factors also had a negative impact on
investment.
This  notwithstanding,  over  time,  the  expected  decline  in  consumer  price  inflation,  to  which  the
strengthening of the exchange rate has contributed, should support the growth of domestic demand.
Further  positive  effects  on  euro  area  economic  growth  should  stem  from  the  full  impact  of  tax
reductions in several euro area countries and from the fact that financing conditions in the euro area
are favourable.
A  concern  with  regard  to  the  outlook  for  price  stability  in  the  coming  years  has  been  the  possible
emergence  of  second-round  effects,  via  wages,  of  past  increases  in  consumer  price  inflation.  The
information available shows that wage moderation prevailed in the first quarter of 2001. It is essential
that  this  trend  continues  and,  at  the  current  juncture,  two  factors  support  the  view  that  this  should
indeed be the case. First, the slowdown in economic activity which I just mentioned may contribute to
containing  inflationary  pressure  stemming  from  the  labour  market.  Second,  there  are  encouraging
signs,  such  as  those  coming  from  data  on  consumer  and  producer  prices,  which  confirm  that  the
increase in consumer price inflation was temporary and that, in the absence of further unfavourable
shocks,  it  is  likely  that  price  stability  will  be  restored  in  the  not  too  distant  future.  The  downward
movement in import prices which has gradually been taking place over the past few months should
support this process. The falling trend in consumer price inflation will contribute to containing inflation
BIS Review 74/2001
1
expectations of economic agents, thereby influencing price and wage-setting behaviour. This view is
confirmed by  bond  yields, which  indicate that financial  markets  expect  inflation  developments  to  be
well in line with price stability in the medium term.
Overall, as several indicators are pointing to an abatement of inflationary pressures, the new level of
interest rates is compatible  with  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  which,  in
turn, is essential to create a favourable environment for sustainable economic growth.
At this juncture, I should like to express concern about the impact that slower growth may have on the
determination of the governments of some countries to adhere strictly to the Stability and Growth Pact
in the context of their existing stability programmes. Under the present circumstances, the automatic
stabilisers should only be allowed to work fully in those countries whose budget positions are close to
balance or in surplus. Let me emphasise that a medium-term perspective is essential for the conduct
of fiscal policies in all euro area countries. Short-term discretionary measures aimed at strengthening
domestic  demand  risk  having  an  unwelcome  impact  on  the  economy,  not  least  on  account  of  time
lags. In addition, if such measures are not consistent with the Pact, they may undermine the credibility
of the consolidation process.
In their efforts  to  set  the  conditions  for  further  expanding  the  production  potential  of  the  euro  area,
governments  should  also  give  more  impetus  to  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms.  Selective
fiscal  reforms,  including  those  related  to  pension  reforms,  should  provide  the  correct  incentives  to
economic agents. Labour and product market reforms will be beneficial to employment growth in the
euro area and improve the resilience of the euro area economy to adverse shocks in the future.
Finally,  I  should  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  a  press  release  that  was  issued  today  on  the  ECB
Decision  on  the  denominations,  specifications,  reproduction,  exchange  and  withdrawal  of  euro
banknotes.
2
BIS Review 74/2001
