Otmar Issing: Monetary policy and financial markets
Speech by Professor Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the ECB Watchers Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 18 June 2001.
 In my remarks today I would like to discuss the conduct of monetary policy and its interaction with the
financial markets. As we know, monetary policy is effective by working through financial markets and
therefore the markets are a key part of the transmission process. The smooth conduct of monetary
policy  is  therefore  supported  by  well  functioning  financial  markets.  Thus  one  major  challenge  for
monetary  authorities  is  to  interact  with  the  financial  markets  in  a  way  which  fosters  the  effective
conduct of monetary policy in pursuit of its objective of price stability.
My  remarks  will  be  concentrated  on  three  main  aspects  of  the  relationship  between  the  monetary
authority and the financial markets.
 
Firstly, I will begin by addressing the question of whether it is financial markets that should
react  to  the  monetary  authority  or  the  monetary  authority  that  should  react  to  financial
markets. Perhaps not surprisingly, I  will  argue that leadership  on the  part of the monetary
authority is key in order to ensure price stability over the medium term. However, it should be
clear  –  to  paraphrase  Alan  Meltzer  –  that  when  policy  is  conducted  in  the  context  of  a
consistent strategy it leads to a systematic decision-making process that uses information in
a consistent and predictable way.
This links to my second point when I will review the evidence from the financial markets on
the predictability and credibility of ECB policy since the start of Stage 3. I shall argue that the
evidence  strongly  suggests  that  ECB  policy  has  been  credible  throughout  and  –  by  and
large – also predictable.
Thirdly, I shall discuss the motivation behind the decision to cut official interest rates on the
10th of May this year as I believe that this offers an interesting example of when surprising
the markets is unavoidable.
  In the discussion of the interrelationship between monetary policy and financial markets one can see
two  distinct  strands  in  the  argument.  The  first  is  that  the  monetary  authority  leads  the  financial
markets. In this case monetary policy  leads by signalling  its intentions to  – and  impacting  on  –  the
financial markets. In the case of the ECB our intentions are clearly signalled to market participants via
our stability oriented monetary policy strategy. The commitment to price stability over the medium term
and a systematic analysis of all the available information should induce ‘rule like’ behaviour on behalf
of market participants. This leads them to react to new developments in a manner consistent with the
monetary policy strategy, thus aiding the smooth conduct of monetary policy. For example, where the
markets correctly anticipate  that a new  piece  of  information  will  lead  to  a  change  in  official  interest
rates they will do ‘much of the work’ themselves through a change in the term structure.
In such an environment, communication by the monetary authority is of the utmost importance and is
directed  towards  informing  the  markets  of  its  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  stability  and
preparing the markets for future policy moves, thereby avoiding unnecessary volatility and supporting
the smooth conduct of policy.
Another idea is that the financial markets lead and the monetary authority follows. In such a world, the
monetary  authority  will  seek  to  satisfy  the  expectations  of  financial  markets  –  in  the  extreme  case:
whatever they are – by never surprising them. If the monetary authority does not do what is expected
the financial markets will ‘punish’ it – for example by demanding higher risk premia to cover the greater
uncertainty. An important point to bear in mind here is that it can sometimes appear that the financial
markets are leading the monetary authority when in fact the reverse is true. This is because the ‘rule
like’  behaviour  I  mentioned  earlier  will  lead  the  markets  to  correctly  anticipate  monetary  policy
decisions  and  hence  to  react  in  advance  of  the  monetary  authorities.  Nevertheless,  it  is  still  the
monetary policy strategy of the monetary authority that determines the reaction.
As I have already indicated I do not support the  idea that the monetary  authority should  ‘follow the
markets’.  To  explain  why  I  will  rely  on  a  quote  from  Allan  Blinder,  who  puts  the  argument  very
succinctly:
BIS Review 55/2001
1
“...Following  the  markets  may  be  a  nice  way  to  avoid  unsettling  financial  surprises,  which  is  a
legitimate end in itself. But I fear it may produce rather poor monetary policy, for several reasons. One
is that speculative markets tend to run in herds and to overreact to almost everything. Central bankers
need to be more cautious and prudent. Another is that financial markets seem extremely susceptible
to fads and speculative bubbles, which sometimes stray far from fundamentals. Central bankers must
inoculate  themselves  against  whimsy  and  keep  their  eyes  on  the  fundamentals.  Finally,  traders  in
financial markets – even those for long-term instruments – often behave as  if they have  ludicrously
short  time  horizons,  whereas  maintaining  a  long  time  horizon  is  the  essence  of  proper  central
banking.”
Obviously  there  are  few  people  who  would  argue  that  it  makes  sense  for  monetary  authorities  to
slavishly follow the expectations of financial markets. Nevertheless, it is clearly desirable for policy to
be  predictable  in  order  to  reduce  uncertainty  and  volatility  in  financial  markets.  So,  why  does  the
monetary authority not always satisfy the expectations of financial markets? There are a number of
possible explanations that I would like to highlight. However, before doing so, there is one point that I
would like to emphasise most strongly. This is that there can be no interest in the monetary authority
deliberately aiming to surprise the financial markets. It is sometimes suggested that central bankers
occasionally set out to ‘trick’ the markets into expecting one policy outcome and then deliver a quite
different  one.  Let  us  be  quite  clear  that  a  monetary  authority  which  did  this  would  merely  increase
volatility in the financial markets and damage its own credibility. It would do nothing to aid the smooth
conduct of monetary policy and the pursuit of price stability.
Turning to more  plausible  reasons  why  financial  markets  can  sometimes  be  surprised  by  monetary
policy decisions, the first point I would like to highlight is that of informational asymmetry between the
markets  and  the  monetary  authority.  More  specifically,  the  monetary  authority  has  some  piece  of
information at its disposal which market participants do not. With the rapid and effective methods of
information dissemination  that  are  now  available  this  is  not  a  situation  that  is  likely  to  emerge  very
often. Nonetheless, as I shall discuss a little later, asymmetric information can sometimes explain why
market expectations are not fulfilled.
The  second  point  is  that  –  even  with  the  same  information  sets  –  the  monetary  authority  and  the
financial  markets  may  not  share  the  same  assessment  of  the  economic,  financial  or  monetary
situation. There may simply be a difference between the dominant view in the markets and the view of
the  monetary  authority  with  regard  to  the  significance  of  new  pieces  of  information  and  their
implications for the conduct of monetary policy. The occasional emergence of such differences of view
is inevitable and may lead to the central bank surprising markets with its policy moves.
A third reason relates to credibility – perhaps the financial markets do not believe that the monetary
authority is deciding policy according to its announced decision making framework. Maybe they think
that it is vulnerable to outside pressure which may lead it to deviate from its stated objectives.
One way of addressing all of these points is through good communication with the markets. This leads
to the fourth reason why the monetary authority may sometimes surprise markets – that there is some
form  of  communication  problem  between  the  monetary  authority  and  the  markets.  Perhaps  the
financial  markets  do  not  fully  understand  the  decision  framework  used  by  the  monetary  authority
and/or its assessment of current and prospective economic, monetary and financial developments. I
would argue that some ‘teething problems’ in communication with financial markets are inevitable for a
new institution. The ECB is still learning about how best to communicate its message to the markets.
The financial markets are still learning – from our track record – about the application of the ECB’s
monetary policy strategy.
I will now turn my attention to the evidence on the extent to which ECB monetary policy has been both
credible and predictable in the eyes of the financial markets.
A key indicator of credibility of ECB monetary policy comes from expectations of inflation implied by
the differences between the returns on real and nominal bonds. In this regard, the break-even inflation
rate  French  index  linked  bonds  has  been  consistently  been  in  line  with  the  ECB’s  quantitative
definition of price stability, indicating a persistently high degree of credibility for ECB monetary policy.
Moving  to  the  question  of  predictability  it  seems  fair  to  say  that  policy  moves  have  generally  been
anticipated  by  the money markets. This can be seen  if  one  looks  at  the  implied  short  term  interest
rates  and  the  subsequent  official  interest  rate  moves  which  seem  to  exhibit  a  high  degree
correspondence.  According  to  work  undertaken  by  Gaspar,  Perez-Quiros  &  Sicilia  (2001)  who
examine  the  behaviour  of  overnight  interest  rates,  the  markets  do  not  appear  to  make  systematic
2
BIS Review 55/2001
errors  with  respect  to  monetary  policy  announcements.  Furthermore,  developments  in  the  volatility
implied  by  options  on  3-month  EURIBOR  futures  indicate  that  the  degree  of  uncertainty  among
investors with respect to future developments in short-term interest rates generally declines following
an interest rate change by the ECB. Indeed, the extent of this uncertainty around the time of interest
rate changes seems to have diminished in magnitude over time. This is consistent with the notion that
investors  have  become  more  confident  in  their  forecasts  of  future  short-term  interest  rate
developments prior to ECB monetary policy announcements.
Nevertheless,  one  could  not  claim  that  on  every  single  occasion  policy  has  always  been  well
anticipated by the money markets. This can be seen in the fact that on two occasions this year – on
the  21st  and  22nd  of  February  and  the  12th  and  17th  of  April  –  there  was  underbidding  in  the
Eurosystem’s Main Refinancing Operations. It appears that most market participants were expecting a
reduction  in  interest  rates  and  therefore  preferred  not  to  participate  in  the  auctions.  When  these
expectations were not fulfilled there was a shortage of liquidity in the market.
Policy moves also seem to have been generally well anticipated in the bond markets. Since the start
of  Stage  Three  of  EMU,  official  ECB  interest  rate  changes  appear  to  have  had  only  a  limited
immediate impact on nominal bond yields as measured by the average yield on 10-year government
bonds issued in the euro area.
Furthermore, ECB rate changes do not appear to have induced any noticeable additional volatility in
the  break-even  inflation  rate  on  French  index  linked  bonds.  This  would  seem  to  suggest  that  the
monetary policy actions of the ECB have not brought about any significant revisions among investors
with respect to the objectives of the ECB. In this sense, the actions by the ECB appear to have been
transparent  to  the  markets.  Bond  market  volatility  has  also  declined.  Implied  volatility  on  10-year
German Bund futures fell markedly during the course of 2000 and has subsequently stabilised.
In sum, I would argue that the evidence from the financial markets supports the idea that since the
start of the Stage 3, ECB policy has always been credible and has usually been predictable. By and
large the communication strategy with the markets has worked surprisingly well for a new institution.
Nevertheless, it is occasionally necessary for central banks to surprise the markets. As I have already
mentioned, some recent monetary policy decisions have  attracted attention because  it  was felt  that
they were not well anticipated by the markets. Most notably the decision to lower official interest rates
on the 10th of May this year came as a surprise to financial markets.
The decision to make a 25-basis-point rate in interest rates was seen by the ECB as an adjustment of
the level of interest rates to somewhat lower inflationary pressure over the medium term. As regards
the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy, it was felt that monetary developments no longer posed
a risk to price stability. As regards the second pillar, it was felt that upward risks to price stability over
the medium term had diminished somewhat.
The change in assessment of the risks to price stability under the first pillar provides an interesting
illustration of the problems faced by a central bank in communicating policy through financial markets.
However,  the  circumstances  of  this  monetary  policy  decision  were  unusual  because  the  change  in
assessment  came  after  it  became  possible  to  quantify  significant  upward  distortions  in  M3  money
supply  growth.  For  some  time,  there  have  been  indications  that  the  monetary  growth  figures  are
distorted upwards by non-euro area residents’ purchases of negotiable paper included in M3. Around
the time of the preparation for the Governing Council meeting, it became clear that the magnitudes of
this  distortion  were  both  significant  and  higher  than  previously  expected.  As  regards  holdings  of
money  market  fund  units/shares  by  non-euro  residents  the  distortion  has  become  greater  in  recent
months and currently amounts to around 0.5 percentage points in the annual growth rate of M3. There
have also been non-negligible distortions to the annual rate of growth of M3 as a result of non-euro
area residents’ holdings of other marketable paper included in M3. Precise statistical information on
this is still being developed. Nevertheless, preliminary evidence indicates that this distortion may have
been similar in size to that related to non-resident holdings of money market fund units/shares.
Given the magnitude of these distortions it was clear that such information needed to be placed in the
public domain without delay. However, this created a dilemma – whether to release such information
and  consider  the  policy  implications  immediately  or  to  give  financial  markets  time  to  ‘digest’  the
information before reappraising policy.
If the information had been released first then the  ECB may  not  have surprised the markets with a
subsequent  policy  move.  However,  imagine  the  press  conference  following  the  Governing  Council
BIS Review 55/2001
3
meeting when the revised M3 data were released. You can be sure that one of the first questions to
the President would have been: ‘Against the background of this new and important information – why
did you not act today? Was it impossible to reach a consensus?...etc, etc’.
Market participants may –  quite reasonably –  have  wondered  why the  ECB  had not reacted to  this
new information. They may even have drawn erroneous conclusions as to the relative importance of
the  first  pillar  in  the  ECB’s  monetary  strategy.  There  would  have  been  weeks  of  uncertainty  and
speculation about the likelihood of a policy easing and how large such an easing might turn out to be.
Another risk from delaying would have been the possible re-emergence of underbidding.
To conclude, I would argue that it is not always possible or desirable for a monetary authority to satisfy
the expectations of financial markets. Nevertheless, the evidence from the financial markets indicates
that  ECB  monetary  policy  has  always  been  credible  and  also  –  for  the  most  part  –  has  been  well
anticipated by the markets. There is also some evidence that volatility in financial markets at the time
of interest rate decisions has been declining over time.
The ECB has, on occasions, been forced to surprise markets with policy decisions. However ‘surprise’
is  never  the  goal  or  deliberate  intention  of  monetary  policy.  Nevertheless,  as  indicated  by  the
monetary policy decision of the 10th of May this year, when new and important information becomes
available it is sometimes necessary to act in a way which was not expected by market participants.
4
BIS Review 55/2001
