Bank of Japan’s June report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, 18 June 2001
 The Bank’s view2
Adjustments in economic activities are gradually intensifying, as production is declining substantially
reflecting a fall in exports.
With regard to final demand, the recovery in private consumption continues to be weak as a whole, but
there  are  somewhat  positive  signs  in  some  indicators.  Housing  investment  is  declining.  Public
investment is increasing. On the other hand, net exports (real exports minus real imports) continue to
decrease, reflecting not only a slowdown in overseas economies such as those of the United States
and East Asia but also sluggish demand for information technology (IT) related goods. Business fixed
investment is starting to decrease while exporting conditions continue to deteriorate.
Industrial production continues to decline sharply, reflecting such developments in final demand and a
further  buildup  of  excess  inventories  of  electronic  parts  and  some  materials.  The  environment
surrounding corporate profits is becoming more severe in line with the substantial decline in exports
and production, and business sentiment is worsening particularly in manufacturing. Income conditions
of  households  have  not  yet  deteriorated,  but  the  decline  in  production  is  starting  to  affect  the
household sector mainly through the decrease in hours worked.
As for the outlook, public investment is likely to continue increasing for the time being but is expected
to start declining in the near future. Net exports, however, are likely to continue decreasing for a while
amid the deceleration in overseas economies and ongoing inventory adjustments in IT-related goods
worldwide. Judged from leading indicators and investment plans of firms, business fixed investment is
projected to follow a downward trend. In addition, inventory adjustments in goods such as electronic
parts  and  materials  will  continue  for  the  time  being.  Industrial  production  is,  therefore,  expected  to
follow  a declining trend. In these  circumstances,  corporate  profits  are  likely  to  start  decreasing  and
thus household income is expected to weaken gradually.
Overall,  the  adjustments, mainly  in  production,  are  likely  to  continue  for  some  time.  Among  factors
affecting exports, it is generally thought that inventory adjustments in IT-related goods are expected to
finish  by  early  fall  and  overseas  economies,  particularly  the  United  States,  will  follow  a  gradual
recovery trend from around the end of this  year. In this case, exports are expected to  underpin the
economy once again. However, a prolonged deceleration of overseas economies could yield the risk
of  economic  adjustments  spreading  further.  Also,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  risk  of  a  negative
impact  on  the  economy  induced  by  developments  in  foreign  and  domestic  capital  markets  via
corporate and household confidence.
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  rising,  mainly  reflecting  the  rebound  in  crude  oil  prices  in
addition to the prior depreciation of the yen. Domestic wholesale prices are declining mainly due to the
decrease in prices of electrical machinery. Consumer prices continue to be somewhat weak owing to
the decline in prices of imported products and their substitutes. Corporate service prices continue to
decrease.
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the prior yen depreciation is exerting upward
pressure  on  prices.  However,  with  the  ongoing  adjustments  in  economic  activities,  the  balance
between supply and demand in the domestic market is likely to exert downward pressure on prices.
Furthermore,  in  addition  to  the  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  caused  by  technological
innovations,  the  decreases  in  the  prices  of  goods  and  services  reflecting  deregulation  and  the
streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain price developments. Overall, prices are
expected  to  be  weak  for  the  time  being.  Moreover,  given  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding
future economic developments, the possibility that weak demand will intensify downward pressure on
prices warrants careful monitoring.
                                                     
1
This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on
June 14 and 15, 2001.
The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on June 14 and 15 as the basis for monetary policy decisions.
2
BIS Review 55/2001
1
In  the  financial  market,  the  overnight  call  rate  is  basically  moving  at  about  0.01  percent  under  the
guideline for money market operations to maintain the current-account balance at the Bank of Japan
at around 5 trillion yen.
Interest rates on term instruments are level on the whole. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds recently  decreased to 1.1-1.2  percent  after remaining flat at
1.2-1.3 percent. The yield spreads between private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) and
government bonds are mostly unchanged or contracting somewhat.
Stock prices continue to be weak, reflecting the somewhat more cautious views of market participants
toward future corporate profits.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen appreciated against the U.S. dollar toward early June, but has
weakened thereafter and is currently being traded in the range of 120-123 yen to the U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans, mainly
to blue-chip companies, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved. However, there are some
signs indicating that the lending attitude of financial institutions perceived by small firms is becoming
slightly  more  cautious.  Meanwhile,  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  in  the  markets  for  such
instruments as corporate bonds and CP are improving further owing to the decline in market interest
rates and the more active stance of investors to take credit risks.
On  the  other  hand,  credit  demand  of  private  firms  continues  to  lack  momentum  as  the  level  of
corporate expenditures such as business fixed investment remains below firms’ cash flow. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result,
credit demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In  view  of  this,  the  underlying  tone  of  private  banks’  lending  remains  sluggish.  The  growth  rate  of
amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is slightly below 2 percent year-on-year. The amount
outstanding of CP issued is well above that of the previous year and marking the highest level to date,
reflecting the favorable environment for issuing CP.
The growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) in May was higher than that of the previous month due
mainly to the inflow from postal savings.
Funding costs for firms are on a declining trend reflecting developments in market interest rates.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing
conditions remain easy as a whole. For the time being, attention should be paid to the effects of the
monetary easing measures taken by the Bank, while careful monitoring is required for the effects of
stock price developments and corporate profit conditions on the behavior of financial institutions and
the fund-raising conditions of firms.
2
BIS Review 55/2001
