Lars Heikensten: Reforming a central bank
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the CEPR/SNS
Roundtable, Stockholm, 8 June 2001.
 Thank you for inviting me this evening and for the opportunity of addressing you all. I should like to
begin by stressing how much we value the cooperation with CEPR. Creating arenas for an exchange
of ideas in Europe is an important task to which CEPR is making a valuable contribution.
Today  you  have  been  considering  a  variety  of  issues  and  this  evening  I  want  to  raise  yet  another,
namely how a central bank can be reformed. I do so against the background of the major changes that
are  currently  taking  place  in  our  national  economies  and  financial  markets.  These  changes  clearly
have consequences for the work at central banks. The challenges we in Europe face are particularly
great, above all now that EMU is a reality and the single currency imposes new requirements.
Work on changes at the Riksbank has been very intensive in recent years and I should like to tell you
something about it. What I have to say will no doubt be familiar to many of you in managerial positions
in  either  the  private  or  the  public  domain.  The  operations  of  central  banks  are  really  not  all  that
different from those of other enterprises.
Issues recur but methods have changed a lot
Sveriges Riksbank is the world's oldest central bank. Threadneedle Street's Old Lady is our younger
sister.
When I last addressed a similar assembly I mentioned that we take great pride in our Bank's history. I
noted that we are answerable to the Swedish Parliament, which took charge of our operations for fear
that otherwise the king would be too profligate. He was in fact spending too much by waging war on
the  Continent.  So  besides  being  a  time-honoured  institution,  the  Riksbank  is  an  early  example  of
independence.
My account was immediately challenged, however. Perhaps my English opponent was piqued by the
Riksbank's  seniority;  in  any  event,  according  to  him  we  were  not  taken  over  by  Parliament  and
nationalised  in  order  to  gain  control  over  the  monarch.  It  was  a  question  instead  of  the  nobles  in
parliament  redeeming  their  pledges  and  getting  the  Treasury  to  carry  the  future  losses  they  were
otherwise likely to incur.
So there's truly no new thing under the sun. Many of our problems recur, though today we solve them
differently, with other methods.
Studies show that in recent decades the work of reforming central banks has tended to follow a clear
pattern. A report from BIS, the central bank of the central banks, notes the following characteristics.
 
The move to greater independence and the commitment to price stability entail a desire to
focus on core operations and a deeper analysis. There is also a greater need to operate and
communicate in ways that are effective and enhance confidence.
Internationalisation also has effects, not least financial integration. For Sweden there is also
membership of the European Union and possibly of EMU.
Analytical  requirements  are  heightened  in  general.  Matters  are  becoming  increasingly
complex. Another factor here is the new technologies with electronic payment systems, for
example.
In our case there is also the crisis in the early 1990s and the lessons we have tried to learn
from it.
   I  shall  now  say  something  about  the  work  we  have  done  in  recent  years  in  three  respects:
Concentrating on cores activities; Strength and security; and Management with an executive board.
BIS Review51/2001
1
Concentrating on core activities
A good performance presupposes that we concentrate our resources to what is really important. The
starting-point here is,  of course, our main statutory functions, namely to maintain price stability and
promote a safe and efficient payment system.
For three hundred years the Riksbank has owned a paper mill and a note-printing works in Tumba and
a mint in Eskilstuna. These are largely manufacturing operations. Through the Tumba works, in the
past decade the Riksbank has been active in export markets and produced banknotes on behalf of a
number of countries. Besides manufacturing notes and coins, we distribute them. Like McDonalds and
the food chains, we send our products, wrapped in plastic though not deep-frozen, to everywhere in
Sweden. In our case the security requirements are, of course, considerably higher.
But is this really something we should be doing? At the Riksbank we decided it was not. Our job is to
concentrate in the first place on monetary policy and the difficult systemic questions in the financial
world. We have  therefore  decided to sell the Tumba works. In our opinion, the enterprise deserves
owners  that  are  more  professional  than  the  Riksbank.  Moreover,  our  distribution  system  has  been
transformed into a limited company, Pengar i Sverige AB (PSAB), literally, Money in Sweden Limited.
A major reconstruction has been completed and we now count on being able to sell the company at a
good price.
All in all, the focus on our core activities has enabled us to cut the number of employees, which at
present  is  about  450.  This  can  be  compared  with  a  figure  between  15,000  and  16,000  for  the
Bundesbank or the Banque de France. In relation to the population, the corresponding number for the
Riksbank would be almost 2,500. Bear in mind, too, that many of our functions have little or nothing to
do with the size of the population.
Strength and security
As  a  newcomer  I  found  that  in  certain  respects  the  Riksbank  resembled  a  traditional  Swedish
industrial estate. Those establishments were stable and often highly professional in their field, which
might be high-grade steel or paper; but they also tended to be run autocratically and resist change.
Central banks have also lived a closed existence, with a corporate spirit that was both good and bad.
This is something that has to be renounced to enable us to perform our tasks properly and both attract
and  retain  the  best  university  graduates.  An  open  internal  dialogue  with  management  is  needed  to
promote  an  informal  exchange  of  ideas.  Taking  responsibility  and  meeting  deadlines  must  also  be
rewarded.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  some  mistakes  are  acceptable  provided  things  get  done  but  that
attitude is by no means customary in a central bank. Last but not least, we must have an open attitude
to the outside world, accept impulses and explain what we are doing.
So what have we done in recent years to make the Riksbank a more modern place to work in? Here
are some examples:
 
We have aimed for a better organisation by making it flatter and delegating more to heads of
department  and  division.  That  in  turn  means  that  general  objectives  and  tasks  must  be
formulated clearly for all concerned so that everyone is aware they are not just piling stones
on top of each other but actually helping to build a cathedral.
We  have  accentuated  the  analytical  and  academic  profile.  Our  advisers  are  world-class
academics and members of the staff have access to further education in Sweden as well as
abroad. We have also made the basic operations more efficient.
Another aim has been to give staff a more flexible working life. Working from home should
be  simple  and  everything  should  function  properly  even  when  a  senior  official  is  at  home
looking after children. Staffing therefore has to be arranged with this in mind. We are also
having  a  drive  for  more  women  in  managerial  posts.  Last  year  we  started  a  mentor
programme for female administrators with a view to broadening the base for the recruitment
of new managers.
Besides  altering  the  ways  in  which  we  communicate  monetary  policy  in  order  to  reach  a
wider  public,  during  these  years  we  have  run  an  educational  programme  for  upper
secondary  teachers  and  developed  an  Internet  game  called  Stargold.  At  present  we  are
working on an idea for a competition in civics between classes in Sweden's upper secondary
schools.
   2
BIS Review 51/2001
Evaluating all this is not an easy matter, particularly when one is fully engaged in it. I believe, however,
that our efforts to make the Riksbank more transparent have worked well. To use the terminology of
the BIS report, we have certainly become more "outward-looking". It has been more difficult to break
what  the  same  terminology  refers  to  as  "upward-looking".  It  is  not  so  easy  to  build  up  an  efficient
cooperation and sense of responsibility, unencumbered by prestige, throughout our organisation.
It is gratifying that  among students in  our subject,  we are the most popular  workplace  in the public
sector.  In  the  league  of  all  workplaces  in  Sweden,  we  rose  seven  pinholes  last  year  to  fourteenth
place.  But we are not content with this and aim for a further improvement. The tasks as such, the
proximity  to  economic  policy  and  the  international  dimension  should  be  sufficiently  attractive.  If,  in
addition, we can create an environment in which people can grow and feel they are an important part
of the organisation, then I believe we can do still better.
There are many connections between an open, clear relationship with the outside world on the one
hand and our internal work on the other. Distinct goals have helped to focus internal operations and
tighten the analysis. By making things less hush-hush we have also made it possible to include more
people  in  a realistic discussion of monetary policy, for example. We  are  now  open  to  criticism  of  a
sharper and more specific nature and that has been good for us. The Riksbank's motto, Hinc robur et
securitas (Hence strength and security), which used to allude to our earlier functions as the producer
of  notes  and  coins,  for  example,  now  refers  at  least  as  much  to  our  analytical  competence,  the
accuracy of our analyses and our efficiency as an authority.
Management with an executive board
One  consequence  of  the  new  Riksbank  Act,  effective  from  the  beginning  of  1999,  was  that  a  new
Executive Board, consisting of six members, is collectively responsible for all the Bank's operations.
This was a clear break with the earlier arrangement where the management was closer to that of a
conventional  company  with  a  managing  director  and  a  board  that  exercised  control  and  took  the
overriding  decisions.  I  should  like  to  conclude  with  some  remarks  on  the  challenges  this  change
involved.
As regards monetary policy,  it  was  not  all that difficult. In the  light  of experience  from  the  German,
British and American central banks, for example, we had drawn up proposals for working procedures
which we have largely adhered to. Our internal process is very open and the staff are deeply involved.
The minutes of the Executive Board's monetary policy discussions are published, which dispels any
sense  of  mystery.  At  the  same  time,  a  better  foundation  is  hopefully  provided  for  a  discussion  of
monetary policy in society in general.
The matter of internal control has been trickier. One alternative would be to treat the Executive Board
as a board of directors; that, however, would have meant working with as many as 18 chief executives
in  the  form  of  the  heads  of  department.  Another  possibility  would  be  to  see  ourselves  as  chief
executives  but  that,  too,  has  its  pros  and  cons;  few  organisations  have  six  chief  executives,
presumably for very good reasons. Perhaps the closest parallel is the board of a group with a number
of subsidiaries.
In practice we have adopted a variety of approaches. We have tried to delegate more matters more
specifically to the heads of department, leaving them to run the operations and provide continuity and
competence.  At  the  same  time,  the  number  of  departments  has  been  reduced  so  as  to  have  an
organisation  that  is  less  top-heavy.  The  Executive  Board's  responsibilities  have  been  shared  out
among the members. That does not mean that we are to manage day-to-day operations, which is a
matter for the department heads. Our task is to act instead as a source of support and dialogue.
The  internal  management  and  the  way  we  handle  monetary  policy  are  interconnected.  An
arrangement with reservations and so on could lead to a polarised picture in the media and that in turn
could have repercussions on the internal work. Even though we do not see any differences of opinion
as  something  unnatural,  others  may  do  so  and  that  might  make  it  difficult  to  avoid  splits  in  the
organisation.  In  this  respect  I  think  we  have  been  broadly  successful.  At  times  the  media  have
presented a dramatic scene with major differences of opinion but with the passage of time we seem to
have  become  less  and  less  newsworthy.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  handled  the  system  rather
carefully and abstained from arguing with each other. That I thing is wise because the system is rather
fragile.
BIS Review51/2001
3
Let  me  conclude  by  referring  back  to  my  opening  remarks.  The  financial  markets  are  becoming
increasingly integrated, banks are crossing more and more boundaries and so on. All this is affecting
the Riksbank to a high degree. The same is true of the rapid technical innovations, with increasingly
complex payment systems. Add to this the possibility of EMU and you can see the future does not lack
challenges.
Apropos of what  I have been talking  about today, a  while ago one of my  American colleagues,  Bill
McDonough, said something to this effect: we should be pleased if we are better today than we were
yesterday at the same time as we are not yet as capable as we will be tomorrow. I think that's about
right.
4
BIS Review 51/2001
