Alan Greenspan: Semi-annual monetary policy report to the US Congress
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the  US Federal Reserve
System,  on  the  occasion  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  semiannual  monetary  policy  report  to  the
Congress, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, 18 July 2001.
 I  appreciate  the  opportunity  this  morning  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve's  semiannual  report  on
monetary policy.
Monetary  policy  this  year  has  confronted  an  economy  that  slowed  sharply  late  last  year  and  has
remained weak this year, following an extraordinary period of buoyant expansion.
By  aggressively  easing  the  stance  of  monetary  policy,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  moved  to  support
demand  and,  we  trust,  help  lay  the  groundwork  for  the  economy  to  achieve  maximum  sustainable
growth.  Our  accelerated  action  reflected  the  pronounced  downshift  in  economic  activity,  which  was
accentuated  by  the  especially  prompt  and  synchronous  adjustment  of  production  by  businesses
utilizing  the  faster  flow  of  information  coming  from  the  adoption  of  new  technologies.  A  rapid  and
sizable easing was made possible by reasonably well-anchored inflation expectations, which helped to
keep underlying inflation at a modest rate, and by the prospect that inflation would remain contained
as resource utilization eased and energy prices backed down.
In addition to the more accommodative stance of monetary policy, demand should be assisted going
forward by the effects of the tax cut, by falling energy costs, by the spur to production once businesses
work  down  their  inventories  to  more  comfortable  levels,  and,  most  important,  by  the  inducement  to
resume  increases  in  capital  spending.  That  inducement  should  be  provided  by  the  continuation  of
cost-saving  opportunities  associated  with  rapid  technological  innovation.  Such  innovation  has  been
the driving force raising the growth of structural productivity over the last half-dozen years. To be sure,
measured productivity has softened in recent quarters, but by no more than one would anticipate from
cyclical influences layered on top of a faster long-term trend.
But the uncertainties surrounding the current economic situation are considerable, and, until we see
more concrete evidence that the adjustments of inventories and capital spending are well along, the
risks would seem to remain mostly tilted toward weakness in the economy. Still, the FOMC opted for a
smaller policy move at our last meeting because we recognized that the effects of policy actions are
felt with a lag, and, with our cumulative 2¾ percentage points of easing this year, we have moved a
considerable distance in the direction of monetary stimulus. Certainly, should conditions warrant, we
may need to ease further, but we must not lose sight of the prerequisite of longer-run price stability for
realizing the economy's full growth potential over time.
Despite  the  recent  economic  slowdown,  the  past  decade  has  been  extraordinary  for  the  American
economy.  The  synergies  of  key  technologies  markedly  elevated  prospective  rates  of  return  on
high-tech  investments,  led  to  a  surge  in  business  capital  spending,  and  significantly  increased  the
growth rate of structural productivity. The capitalization of those higher expected returns lifted equity
prices, which in turn contributed to a substantial pickup in household spending on a broad range of
goods and services, especially on new homes and durable goods. This increase in spending by both
households  and  businesses  exceeded  even  the  enhanced  rise  in  real  household  incomes  and
business earnings. The evident attractiveness of investment opportunities in the United States induced
substantial inflows of funds from abroad, raising the dollar's exchange rate while financing a growing
portion of domestic spending.
By early 2000, the surge in household and business purchases had increased growth of the stocks of
many  types  of  consumer  durable  goods  and  business  capital  equipment  to  rates  that  could  not  be
sustained. Even though demand for a number of high-tech products was doubling or tripling annually,
in some cases new supply was coming on even faster. Overall, capacity in high-tech manufacturing
industries,  for  example,  rose  nearly  50 percent  last  year,  well  in  excess  of  its  already  rapid  rate  of
increase  over  the  previous  three  years.  Hence,  a  temporary  glut  in  these  industries  and  falling
short-term prospective rates of return were inevitable at some point. This tendency was reinforced by
a more realistic evaluation of the prospects for returns on some high-tech investments, which, while
still  quite  elevated  by  historical  standards,  apparently  could  not  measure  up  to  the  previous
exaggerated hopes. Moreover, as I testified before this Committee last year, the economy as a whole
BIS Review 66/2001
1
was  growing  at  an  unsustainable  pace,  drawing  further  on  an  already  diminished  pool  of  available
workers  and  relying  increasingly  on  savings  from  abroad.  Clearly,  some  moderation  in  the  pace  of
spending was necessary and expected if the economy was to progress along a more balanced growth
path.
In  the  event,  the  adjustment  occurred  much  faster  than  most  businesses  anticipated,  with  the
slowdown  likely  intensified  by  the  rise  in  the  cost  of  energy  that  until  quite  recently  had  drained
businesses  and  households  of  purchasing  power.  Growth  of  outlays  of  consumer  durable  goods
slowed  in  the  middle  of  2000,  and  shipments  of  nondefense  capital  goods  have  declined  since
autumn.
Moreover, weakness emerged more recently among our trading partners in Europe, Asia, and Latin
America.  The  interaction  of  slowdowns  in  a  number  of  countries  simultaneously  has  magnified  the
softening each of the individual economies would have experienced on its own.
Because the extent of the slowdown was not anticipated by businesses, some backup in inventories
occurred,  especially  in  the  United  States.  Innovations,  such  as  more  advanced  supply-chain
management and flexible manufacturing technologies, have enabled firms to adjust production levels
more  rapidly  to  changes  in  sales.  But  these  improvements  apparently  have  not  solved  the  thornier
problem of correctly anticipating demand. Although inventory-sales ratios in most industries rose only
moderately,  those  measures  should  be  judged  against  businesses'  desired  levels.  In  this  regard,
extrapolation  of  the  downtrend  in  inventory-sales  ratios  over  the  past  decade  suggests  that
considerable imbalances emerged late last year. Confirming this impression, purchasing managers in
the manufacturing sector reported in January that inventories in the hands of their customers had risen
to excessively high levels.
As a result, a round of inventory rebalancing was undertaken, and the slowdown in the economy that
began  in  the  middle  of  2000  intensified.  The  adjustment  process  started  late  last  year  when
manufacturers  began  to  cut  production  to  stem  the  accumulation  of  unwanted  inventories.  But
inventories  did  not  actually  begin  falling  until  early  this  year  as  producers  decreased  output  levels
considerably further.
Much of the inventory reduction in the first quarter reflected a dramatic scaling back of motor vehicle
assemblies.  However,  inventories  of  computers,  semiconductors,  and  communications  products
continued  to  build  into  the  first  quarter,  and  these  stocks  are  only  belatedly  being  brought  under
control.  As  best  we  can  judge,  some  progress  seems  to  have  been  made  on  inventories  of
semiconductors and computers, but little gain is apparent with respect to communications equipment.
Inventories of high-tech products overall have probably been reduced a bit, but a period of substantial
liquidation of stocks still seemingly lies ahead for these products.
For all inventories, the rate of liquidation appears to have been especially pronounced this winter, and
the available data suggest that it continued, though perhaps at a more moderate pace, this spring. A
not inconsequential proportion of the current liquidation undoubtedly is of imported products, and thus
will  presumably  affect  foreign  production,  but  most  of  the  adjustment  has  fallen  on  domestic
producers.
At some point, inventory liquidation will come to an end, and its termination will spur production and
incomes. Of course, the timing and force with which that process of recovery plays out will depend on
the behavior of final demand. In that regard, the demand for capital equipment, particularly in the near
term, could pose a continuing problem. Despite evidence that expected long-term rates of return on
the  newer  technologies  remain  high,  growth  of  investment  in  equipment  and  software  has  turned
decidedly  negative.  Sharp  increases  in  uncertainties  about  the  short-term  outlook  have  significantly
foreshortened the time frame over which business are requiring new capital projects to pay off. The
consequent heavier discounts applied to those long-term expectations have induced a major scaling
back  of  new  capital  spending  initiatives,  though  one  that  presumably  is  not  long-lasting  given  the
continuing inducements to embody improving technologies in new capital equipment.
In  addition,  a  deterioration  in  sales,  profitability,  and  cash  flow  has  exacerbated  the  weakness  in
capital  spending.  Pressures  on  profit  margins  have  been  unrelenting.  Although  earnings  weakness
has been most pronounced for high-tech firms, where the previous extraordinary pace of expansion
left oversupply in its wake, weakness is evident virtually across the board, including most recently in
earnings of the foreign affiliates of American firms.
Much of the squeeze on profit margins of domestic operations results from a rise in unit labor costs.
Gains in compensation per hour picked up over the past  year or so, responding to a long period of
2
BIS Review 66/2001
tight labor markets, the earlier acceleration of productivity, and the effects of an energy-induced run-up
in consumer prices. The faster upward movement in hourly  compensation, coupled with the cyclical
slowdown in the growth of output per hour, has  elevated  the rate  of increase  in unit labor costs. In
part, fixed costs, nonlabor as well as labor, are being spread over a smaller production base for many
industries.
The surge in energy costs has also pressed down on profit margins, especially in the fourth and first
quarters. In fact, a substantial portion of the rise in total costs of domestic nonfinancial corporations
between  the  second  quarter  of  last  year  and  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  reflected  the  increase  in
energy costs. The decline in energy prices since the spring, however, should be contributing positively
to margins in the third quarter. Moreover, the rate of increase in compensation is likely to moderate,
with inflation expectations contained and labor markets becoming less taut in response to the slower
pace of growth in economic activity. In addition, continued rapid gains in structural productivity should
help to suppress the rise in unit labor costs over time.
Eventually, the high-tech correction will abate, and these industries will reestablish themselves as a
solidly  expanding,  though  less  frenetic,  part  of  our  economy.  When  they  do,  growth  in  that  sector
presumably will not return to the outsized 50 percent annual growth rates of last year, but rather to a
more sustainable pace.
Of course, investment spending ultimately depends on the strength of consumer demand for goods
and services. Here, too, longer-run increases in real incomes of consumers engendered by the rapid
advances in structural productivity should provide support to demand over time. And thus far this year,
consumer spending has indeed risen further, presumably assisted in part by a continued rapid growth
in the market value of homes, from which a significant amount of equity is being extracted. Moreover,
household disposable income is now being bolstered by tax cuts.
But there are also downside risks to consumer spending over the next few quarters. Importantly, the
same pressure on profits and the heightened sense of risk that have held down investment have also
lowered equity prices and reduced household wealth despite the rise in home equity. We can expect
the  decline  in  stock  market  wealth  that  has  occurred  over  the  past  year  to  restrain  the  growth  of
household spending relative to income, just as the previous increase gave an extra spur to household
demand.  Furthermore,  while  most  survey  measures  suggest  consumer  sentiment  has  stabilized
recently, softer job markets could induce a further deterioration in confidence and spending intentions.
While  this  litany  of  risks  should  not  be  downplayed,  it  is  notable  how  well  the  U.S.  economy  has
withstood the many negative forces weighing on it. Economic activity has held up remarkably in the
face of a difficult adjustment toward a more sustainable pattern of expansion.
The economic developments of the last couple of years have been a particular challenge for monetary
policy.  Once  the  financial  crises  of  late  1998  that  followed  the  Russian  default  eased,  efforts  to
address Y2K problems and growing optimism – if not euphoria – about profit opportunities produced a
surge in investment, particularly in high-tech equipment and software. The upswing outstripped what
the nation could finance on a sustainable basis from domestic saving and funds attracted from abroad.
The shortfall of saving to finance investment showed through in a significant rise in average real long-
term corporate interest rates starting in early 1999. By June of that year, it was evident to the Federal
Open  Market  Committee  that  to  continue  to  hold  the  funds  rate  at  the  then-prevailing  level  of
4¾ percent in the face of rising real long-term corporate rates would have required a major infusion of
liquidity  into an  economy already threatening  to overheat. In  fact,  the  increase  in  our  target  federal
funds rate of 175 basis points through May of 2000 barely slowed the expansion of liquidity, judging
from the M2 measure of the money supply, whose rate of increase declined only modestly through the
tightening period.
By summer of last year, it started to become apparent that the growth of demand finally was slowing,
and seemingly by enough to bring it into approximate alignment with the expansion of potential supply,
as indicated by the fact that the pool of available labor was no longer being drawn down. It was well
into  autumn,  however,  before  one  could  be  confident  that  the  growth  of  aggregate  demand  had
softened  enough  to  bring  it  into  a  more  lasting  balance  with  potential  supply.  Growth  continued  to
decline to a point that by our December meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee decided that
the time to counter cumulative economic weakness was close at hand. We altered our assessment of
the  risks  to  the  economy,  and  with  incoming  information  following  the  meeting  continuing  to  be
downbeat, we took our first easing action on January 3. We viewed the faster downshift in economic
activity, in part a consequence of the technology-enhanced speed and volume of information flows, as
BIS Review 66/2001
3
calling for a quicker pace of policy adjustment. Acting on that view, we have lowered the federal funds
rate 2¾ percentage points since the turn of the year, with last month's action leaving the federal funds
rate at 3¾ percent.
Most  long-term  interest  rates,  however,  have  barely  budged  despite  the  appreciable  reductions  in
short-term  rates  since  the  beginning  of  the  year.  This  has  led  many  commentators  to  ask  whether
inflation  expectations  have  risen.  Surely,  one  reason  long-term  rates  have  held  up  is  changed
expectations in the Treasury market, as forecasts of the unified budget surplus  were revised  down,
indicating that the supplies of outstanding marketable Treasury debt are unlikely to shrink as rapidly as
previously  anticipated.  Beyond  that,  it  is  difficult  to  judge  whether  long-term  rates  have  held  up
because  of  firming  inflation  expectations  or  a  belief  that  economic  growth  is  likely  to  strengthen,
spurring a rise in real long-term rates.
One measure often useful in separating the real interest rates from inflation expectations is the spread
between rates on nominal ten-year Treasury notes and inflation-indexed notes of similar maturity. That
spread rose more than three-fourths of a percentage point through the first five months of this year, a
not insignificant change, though half of that increase has been reversed since. By the nature of the
indexed  instrument,  the  spread  between  it  and  the  comparable  nominal  rate  reflects  expected  CPI
inflation. While actual CPI inflation has picked up this year, this rise has not been mirrored uniformly in
other broad price measures. For example, there has been little, if any, acceleration in the index of core
personal  consumption  expenditure  prices,  which  we  consider  to  be  a  more  reliable  measure  of
inflation. Moreover, survey readings on long term inflation expectations have remained quite stable.
The lack of pricing power reported overwhelmingly by business people underscores the quiescence of
inflationary pressures. Businesses are experiencing the effects of softer demand in product markets
overall,  but  these  effects  have  been  especially  marked  for  many  producers  at  earlier  stages  of
processing, where prices generally have been flat to down thus far this year. With energy prices now
also moving lower and the lessening of tautness in labor markets expected to damp wage increases,
overall prices seem likely to be contained in the period ahead.
Forecasts of inflation,  however, like all  economic  forecasts,  do  not  have  an  enviable  record.  Faced
with  such  uncertainties,  a  central  bank's  vigilance  against  inflation  is  more  than  a  monetary  policy
cliché; it is, of course, the way we fulfill our ultimate mandate to promote maximum sustainable growth.
A central bank can contain inflation over time under most conditions. But do we have the capability to
eliminate  booms  and  busts  in  economic  activity?  Can  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  acting  at  their
optimum  eliminate  the  business  cycle,  as  some  of  the  more  optimistic  followers  of  J.M.  Keynes
seemed to believe several decades ago?
The  answer,  in  my  judgment,  is  no,  because  there  is  no  tool  to  change  human  nature.  Too  often
people are prone to recurring bouts of optimism and pessimism that manifest themselves from time to
time in the buildup or cessation of speculative excesses. As I  have noted in  recent  years,  our  only
realistic  response  to  a  speculative  bubble  is  to  lean  against  the  economic  pressures  that  may
accompany a rise in asset prices, bubble or not, and address forcefully the consequences of a sharp
deflation of asset prices should they occur.
While  we  are  limited  in  our  ability  to  anticipate  and  act  on  asset  price  bubbles,  expectations  about
future  economic  developments  nonetheless  inevitably  play  a  crucial  role  in  our  policymaking.  If  we
react  only  to  past  or  current  developments,  lags  in  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  could  end  up
destabilizing the economy, as history has amply demonstrated.
Because accurate point forecasts are extraordinarily difficult to fashion, we are forced also to consider
the probability distribution of possible economic outcomes. Against these distributions, we endeavor to
judge the possible consequences of various alternative policy actions, especially the consequences of
a policy mistake. We recognize that this policy process may require substantial swings in the federal
funds rate over time to help stabilize the economy, as, for example, recurring bouts of consumer and
business optimism and pessimism drive economic activity.
In reducing the federal funds rate so substantially this year, we have been responding to our judgment
that a good part of the recent weakening of demand was likely to persist for a while, and that there
were significant downside risks even to a reduced central tendency forecast. Moreover, with inflation
low  and  likely  to  be  contained,  the  main  threat  to  satisfactory  economic  performance  appeared  to
come from excessive weakness in activity.
4
BIS Review 66/2001
As  a  consequence  of  the  policy  actions  of  the  FOMC,  some  of  the  stringent  financial  conditions
evident late last year have been eased. Real interest rates are down on a wide variety of borrowing
instruments.  Private  rates  have  benefited  from  some  narrowing  of  risk  premiums  in  many  markets.
And  the  growth  of  liquidity,  as  measured  by  M2,  has  picked  up.  More  recently,  incoming  data  on
economic activity have turned from persistently negative to more mixed.
The period of sub-par economic performance, however, is not yet over, and we are not free of the risk
that economic weakness will be greater than currently anticipated, and require further policy response.
That weakness could arise from softer demand abroad as well as from domestic developments. But
we need also to be aware that our front-loaded policy actions this year coupled with the tax cuts under
way should be increasingly affecting economic activity as the year progresses.
The views of the Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank Presidents reflect this assessment.
While  recognizing  the  downside  risks  to  their  current  forecast,  most  anticipate  at  least  a  slight
strengthening of real activity later this year. This is implied by the central tendency of their individual
projections, which is for real GDP growth over all four quarters of 2001 of 1¼ to 2 percent. Next year,
the comparable figures are 3 to 3¼ percent. The civilian unemployment rate is projected to rise further
over the second half of the year, with a central tendency of 4¾ to 5 percent by the fourth quarter and
4¾  to  5¼  percent  four  quarters  later.  This  easing  of  pressures  in  product  and  labor  markets  lies
behind the central tendency for PCE price inflation of 2 to 2½ percent over the four quarters of this
year and 1¾ to 2½ percent next year.
As  for  the  years  beyond  this  horizon,  there  is  still,  in  my  judgment,  ample  evidence  that  we  are
experiencing  only  a  pause  in  the  investment  in  a  broad  set  of  innovations  that  has  elevated  the
underlying growth in productivity to a rate significantly above that of the two decades preceding 1995.
By  all evidence,  we are  not yet  dealing  with maturing technologies that, after having sparkled for  a
half-decade, are now in the process of fizzling out. To the contrary, once the forces that are currently
containing  investment initiatives  dissipate,  new  applications  of  innovative  technologies  should  again
strengthen demand for capital equipment and restore solid economic growth over time that benefits us
all.
BIS Review 66/2001
5
