Pierluigi Ciocca: Supervision: one or more institutions?
Remarks by Mr Pierluigi Ciocca, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, to the Conference on
“The new structures of financial markets: how should supervision be organized?” held in Bologna, 4
May 2001.
 Introduction
The question of the allocation of responsibilities in banking and financial supervision is not a purely
economic question, nor can it be solved merely on the basis of economic theories. Until quite recently
Milton Friedman was the only great economist to have addressed the issue, and even then as part of
the broader problem of money and its management.
Many other aspects are involved, however, including:
•
the “legal experience” of a country, and hence the constitutional and institutional framework
within which the question is set;
how  supervision  has  been  and  is  performed,  in  terms  of  the  resources,  reputations  and
independence of the institutions concerned;
the opinion of the markets in the light of their changeable “conventions”.
•
The foregoing considerations suggest that the question should be approached, if not pragmatically, at
least with prudent humility. The subject does not offer academic recipes suited to every context. One
may nonetheless have opinions, based on arguments that have been worked out to a greater or lesser
extent. I shall set out my own here, in the most generalized form I can achieve.
 The international picture
These  considerations  regarding  method  are  matched  by  an  empirical  observation.  In  recent  times
there  has  been  no  clear  tendency  for  any  one  solution  to  predominate.  Basically,  there  are  three
alternatives:  extreme  centralization  (rare),  extreme  decentralization  (less  rare)  and  intermediate
solutions (the most common).
The  United  States  has  remained  faithful  to  a  division  of  responsibilities  in  which  the  types  of  body
entrusted with supervision are highly diversified, with 6 for banking supervision1 (with 357 local offices
and around 15,000 employees) and another 6 for financial supervision2 (covering markets, insurance
companies  and  pension  funds  with  137  local  offices  and  some  8,000  employees).  In  addition,  it  is
necessary  to  consider  the  self-regulatory  bodies  of  the  9  most  important  financial  markets.  The
overlapping  of  powers  is  accepted,  desired,  in  view  of  the  “dialectics”,  the  “competition”,  it  ensures
between the various institutions and because it avoids monopoly. The number of persons engaged in
supervision is huge. In the banking field it is about fifteen times the figure for the Bank of Italy (about
1,000), even though the US banking system (at current prices and exchange rates) is only five or six
times as big as Italy’s, while the GDP ratio is seven to one (on a purchasing-power-parity basis).
At the other extreme the United Kingdom is implementing the decision taken suddenly in May 1997 to
bring all the supervisory powers — except that concerning “systemic stability”, which has been left in
the  hands  of  the  central  bank  —  together  in  a  newly-created  organization,  the  Financial  Services
Authority (FSA). Japan has adopted a similar solution. The FSA has a head office with a staff of 2,300
(of  whom  no  less  than  450  deal  with  authorizations  and  consumer  relations),  no  special  body  for
on-site examinations and an annual budget of just 500 billion lire. With these resources, the FSA is
expected to supervise a financial industry that, in terms of volume of funds, is about one quarter that of
the United States and three times as big as Italy’s. It is true that with 841 banks Italy has more than
                                                     
1
The  Federal  Reserve  System,  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  the  National  Credit  Union  Administration,  the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision and the Banking Department of each of the fifty
states.
The  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  The  Securities  Commission  of  each  state,  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading
Commission, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, each state for insurance matters, and the Pension and
Welfare Benefits Administration of the Department of Labor.
2
BIS Review 39/2001
1
twice  as  many  as  the  United  Kingdom,3  but  the  combined  human  and  financial  resources  of  the
various  Italian  supervisory  authorities  are  not  very  different  from  those  of  the  FSA  (moreover,  in
addition to a body of inspectors, the Bank of Italy has a network of branches that monitor their “local”
banks and markets).
Although  the  United  Kingdom  and  Japan  are  major  economies,  the  similar  architectures  they  have
adopted for supervision have not established a trend, for several reasons. The choice was influenced
by  the  failure  of  their  earlier  architectures,  with  serious  and  unexpected  failures  of  individual
intermediaries in London and the structural crisis of the whole financial industry in Japan. It was made
when the central bank was relatively weak in both countries. It does not reflect the great difference
between the two countries’ political and constitutional traditions.
The solutions to be found in the euro area lie somewhere between the extremes represented by the
United  States,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  United  Kingdom  and  Japan,  on  the  other.  The  changes
introduced  recently  in  the  Netherlands,  Portugal  and  Belgium  increased  coordination  among  the
existing  authorities  (including  the  central  bank),  which  nonetheless  remained  separate  entities  with
each  having  specific  powers.  In  Germany,  Ireland,  Finland  and  Austria  proposals  aimed  more
specifically at consolidation are under discussion. In some cases they have met fierce opposition. The
question  has  become  the  subject  of  widespread  debate.  Some  commentators  believe  that  the
monetary unification of Europe must be matched by some concentration of supervisory tasks.
Why centralize?
There  are  basically  two  general  reasons  that  may  lead  to  the  decision  to  centralize  supervisory
powers:
•
the possibility of obtaining an overall view, accompanied by economies of scale and hence
lower costs for the intermediaries subject to supervision;
the  changes  in  the  operational  and  geographical  boundaries  between  intermediaries,
markets and financial instruments, owing, among other  things,  to  the  emergence  of  “large
and complex financial institutions”.
 The importance of these reasons increases with the degree to which finance is — or the authorities
wish  it  to  be  —  concentrated  in  a  single  centre  (London  accounts  for  about  one  third  of  all  UK
employment  in  banking  and  finance  and  produces  16  per  cent  of  the  country’s  GDP)  and  with  the
“smallness”  and  “openness”  of  the  economy  (on  the  assumption  that  international  coordination  is
easier to achieve among a few supervisory authorities).
Two qualifications should be noted in the case for centralization:
•
that it should not take place at the central bank, which is required to perform monetary policy
tasks that are deemed to be in conflict with those of supervision;
that the promotion of competition in the banking and financial sector should not be combined
with the protection of stability, since these two functions are also deemed to be incompatible.
 Why decentralize?
On  the  other  side  there  are  several  reasons  for  decentralizing  supervision,  for  adopting  a  solution
somewhere between monopoly and extreme fragmentation.
Here are some:
•
the  switch  from  some  degree  of  decentralization  —  the  most  common  solution  —  to  a
centralized configuration inevitably involves costs and risks during the transition period;
technical specialization in the exercise of supervision continues to have a value even when
the  internal  boundaries  within  the  world  of  finance  are  being  eroded;  banking  risk,  for
example, continues to be different  from  insurance  risk  and from  the  risk  affecting  pension
funds;
                                                      
3
In the United Kingdom there are 377 banking businesses subject to supervision by the FSA (186 UK incorporated banks, 67
building societies and 124 branches of non-EU banks; the 118 branches of EU banks are subject to home-country control).
2
BIS Review 39/2001
   contact  with  the  intermediaries  and  markets  subject  to  supervision  —  closest  where
supervision is carried out by means of a network of “local” offices, as in the United States
and Italy — gives supervisory authorities access to information and a power to discourage
improper conduct;
avoiding an accumulation of administrative power in an extremely delicate field limits the risk
of its being abused or supervision being used, de jure or de facto, for political ends — the
classical lesson of Montesquieu.
in performing supervision  it is  important not to confuse the  spheres  of  technical  discretion
and formal control of the conduct of business.
The last reason needs to be clarified a little.
Disclosure,  transparency  and  correctness  fall  largely,  although  not  exclusively,  within  the  second
sphere. Ensuring their respect implies, first and foremost, that rules must be detailed  in  advance in
legislation  and  then  that  they  must  be  enforced.  It  consists  in  administrative  activities  that  are
concerned  less  with  the  exercise  of  a  natural  and  necessary  technical  discretion  than  with  the
discharge of a responsibility oriented primarily towards the control of legitimacy.
Competition, efficiency and proper risk control — i.e. stability — fall within the first sphere. The need to
distinguish  in  a  crisis  between  illiquidity  and  insolvency,  assess  the  probability  of  contagion,  and
choose how and  when to  act so as to  achieve  maximum  effectiveness  and  minimum moral  hazard
often requires supervisory discretion and hence the independence of the body responsible for carrying
out what amounts to a form of economic policy.
Independence is inherent in the management of money and credit, which is entrusted to central banks.
They are accustomed to exercising this independence in accordance with priorities they establish on
the basis of the resources available. Independence is the cornerstone of central banking. An additional
reason  for  entrusting  so-called  stability-oriented  supervision  to  the  central  bank  is  the  scope  for
synergy between this function and the monetary policy function. Far from being incompatible, these
two functions are complementary, in at least three respects: staff’s experience and professional skills
in  the  monetary,  banking  and  financial  fields;  the  two-way  flow  of  information;  and  the  risks  facing
individual intermediaries and the system as a whole.
One  last  consideration  concerns  stability-oriented  supervision  and  antitrust  action  in  the  banking
industry. There is absolutely no trade-off between these two activities. Competition is a necessary but
far from sufficient condition for the solidity of the banking system. Without competition, there cannot be
efficiency. Without efficiency, there cannot be stability — true and long-lasting stability, in contrast with
the false and temporary stability produced where survival is guaranteed by the state. Defending and
fostering competition are an integral, indispensable part of banking supervision. They must guide the
use  of  the  instruments  of  supervision,  regardless  of  whether  there  is  an  antitrust  law.  This  is  the
approach followed by the Bank of Italy, both before and after the approval  of antitrust legislation in
1990. If the law entrusts the task of defending and fostering competition to the supervisory authority
(as in the United States and in Italy since 1990), the latter’s position is strengthened.
The need for and shortcomings of coordination
A  reasonable  degree  of  decentralization  implies  coordination  of  the  various  supervisory  authorities.
The blurring of the segmentations within the world of finance and financial globalization call for forms
of closer coordination.
This  need  has,  or  is  being,  met.  It  is  being  met  in  Italy,  autonomously  and  in  response  to  specific
statutory  provisions,  through  coordination  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  the  companies  and  stock  exchange
commission  (Consob),  the  supervisory  authority  for  the  insurance  industry  (Isvap),  the  supervisory
authority  for  pension  funds  (Covip)  and  the  antitrust  authority.  It  is  being  met  in  Europe  and  at
international  level  through  formal  and  informal  bilateral  agreements  and  through  participation  in
multilateral  fora,  including  the  newly  established  Financial  Stability  Forum  (in  both  cases  with
reference to common standards, such as those developed by the Basel Banking Committee).
Coordination  nonetheless  suffers  from  potential  shortcomings,  including  the  risk  of  confusion
concerning responsibilities and the possibility of overarching that amounts to a surreptitious form of
total centralization.
BIS Review 39/2001
3
Conclusions
The present set-up in Italy is based on a reasonable allocation of supervisory responsibilities in terms
of the aims to be pursued and the institutions to  be supervised. The basic criterion is a  division by
goals — stability on the one hand, correctness on the other — supplemented by a division by category
of institution (banks, markets, insurance companies and pension funds).
These  arrangements  appear  satisfactory  in  the  light  of  the  principles  I  have  expounded.  Above  all,
they  appear  satisfactory  in  the  light  of  experience,  amply  documented  in  the  reports  and  analyses
published by the Bank of Italy and the other supervisory authorities. Thanks at least in part  to their
action and cooperation, the  Italian financial system has improved considerably  in  the  last  twenty  or
even ten years: it is now more widely diversified; more competitive, more efficient and more stable; it is
in  a  better  position  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  economy.  “Better”  does  not  mean  “the  best”,  which,
assuming  it  is  definable,  would  require  the  contribution  of  supervision  to  be  achievable.  These  are
issues which go beyond the scope of my remarks and which I have addressed elsewhere.4
                                                     
4
P. Ciocca, La nuova finanza in Italia. Una difficile metamorfosi (1980-2000), Bollati Boringhieri, Turin, 2000.
4
BIS Review 39/2001
