Urban Bäckström: The current situation for Swedish monetary policy
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors and President of the Bank for International Settlements, before the Swedish Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Finance, Stockholm, 27 March 2001.
 First a word of thanks to the Committee for the invitation to have a stimulating discussion about the
current situation for monetary policy.  An  open  discussion  of  these  matters  is  important  for  people’s
perception  of  the  Riksbank’s  legitimacy.  I  cannot  think  of  a  more  suitable  forum  than  you  as
representatives of our principal, the Riksdag.
Risk of a slowdown after a series of years with strong economic growth
We can look back on a series of years with strong economic growth in Sweden, accompanied by low
inflation. As far as can be judged at present, one explanation for this combination is that the Swedish
economy  is  functioning  more  efficiently.  To  some  extent,  however,  it  has  also  been  a  cyclical
phenomenon. After the economic crisis that ravaged Sweden in the early 1990s, there were plenty of
unutilised resources to draw on and therefore less risk of rising production hitting the ceiling at an early
stage.
Sooner  or  later,  however,  demand  growth  that  is  excessively  rapid  and  persistent  will  generate
imbalances in the economy and that normally pushes the rate of price and wage increases up. Such a
course of events is liable to result in a recession, with falling output and rising unemployment.
A  monetary  policy  that  is  guided  by  an  inflation  target  is  basically  concerned  with  adapting  the
development of demand to the economy’s long-term growth. That is not easy, I can assure you, and
our  chances  should  not  be  exaggerated.  Towards  the  end  of  last  year,  however,  activity  in  the
Swedish economy did begin to slow to a growth rate that can result in a stable long term development.
The last time we met, early in October, we discussed the situation in these terms and I concluded that
if the strong economic upswing were to continue, it would be necessary to raise the repo rate.
Other  central  banks  around  the  world  had  been  facing  a  similar  situation  for  some  time.  The  U.S.
Federal Reserve, for example, had raised its instrumental rate successively during 1999 and 2000 to
6.5 per cent. Last  year the European Central Bank raised its rate to 4.75 per cent and the Bank of
England’s rate was increased to 6.0 per cent.
I recall that last year many observers counted on relatively large interest rate hikes in Sweden as well.
They thought they saw signs that the Swedish economy was on the way to becoming overheated and
argued rather vigorously that the Riksbank therefore ought to act quickly — starting in the autumn of
1999  and  continuing  with  further  steps  up  to  last  summer  —  in  order  to  avert  the  threat  they  saw
looming on the horizon.
The Riksbank, however, saw things differently and chose a more cautious approach to the question of
interest rate increases. In our opinion, the relatively favourable inflation prospects and the approaching
global economic slowdown simply did not warrant a tighter monetary stance last year.
But in December we did take what I would describe as the precautionary measure of raising the repo
rate 0.25 percentage points, from 3.75 to 4.0 per cent. Let me try to explain the economic situation in
terms  of  a  motoring  simile  I  often  use.  At  that  time  the  Swedish  economy  was  approaching  a
crossroads, with the risks that entails for someone who is driving a car. It is then only natural to take
one’s foot off the accelerator. Now that we have negotiated the crossroads, the question is rather how
steep will be the hill we may have to climb on the road ahead. Are we cruising at the right speed or
does the engine need less or perhaps still more petrol to keep us going at a stable rate?
What this amounts to is that in the work on the present Inflation Report the Riksbank has had to judge
whether global economic activity is slowing down to such an extent that demand growth in Sweden is
undergoing a self-adjustment, as it were, down towards the long-term trend. As I mentioned earlier,
such an adjustment is essential for maintaining a stable economic course with low inflation. If world
economic  activity  had  remained  strong,  it  would  have  been  reasonable  to  count  on  the  Riksbank
continuing to raise the repo rate.
BIS Review 26/2001
1
A look at the threats we perceived in December as being liable to push inflation up above our forecast,
shows that they have become less troublesome. At the same time, the clouds that were gathering over
the U.S. economy have thickened and darkened. To date this  year the Federal Reserve has cut its
interest  rate  a  total  of  1.5  percentage  points.  The  first  cut,  announced  in  January  in  between  the
regular monetary policy meetings, surprised the market by its magnitude as well as its timing. Another
cut  came  at  the  end  of  January  and  a  third  last  week,  on  20  March.  There  has  been  a  spate  of
negative  news  about  the  global  economy  in  general  and  certain  companies  in  particular  and
international stock markets have remained turbulent.
US economy difficult to assess
The  focus  at  present  is  on  the  U.S.  economy.  Its  future  path  is  highly  important  for  economic
developments in Sweden. In order to arrive at a clear picture of the situation, we need to judge the
effects of alternative outcomes.
During  the  1990s  the  United  States  experienced  its  longest  economic  upswing  ever  without  any
serious  signs  of  accelerating  price  and  wage  increases.  A  more  efficient  economy,  with  strong
competition and functional product and labour markets, accompanied by advances in computer and
telecom technology, are said to have contributed to a higher rate of potential growth. Even so — or
perhaps as a consequence of this — the euphoria led to growing imbalances. The rapidly rising stock
markets in the late 1990s seem to have stemmed from unduly high expectations of future profits and
incomes. Partly in view of equity capital’s appreciation, households stepped up their expenditure on
consumption in excess of current income. Corporate investment expanded rapidly to meet the growing
demand. High share prices  stimulated  the  procurement  of  venture  capital  and  generated  a  plentiful
supply.
The growth of demand and the expansion of the U.S. economy’s supply side were proceeding  at a
rate that was based on expectations that simply could not be fulfilled. American households pledged
future  incomes  for  current  consumption  to  such  an  extent  that  their  savings  no  longer  sufficed  to
finance corporate investment. The saving deficit grew, as could be seen from the rising deficits on the
current account, and large amounts of capital had to be imported. The apparently unending increase
in  expectations  of  rising  share  prices  on  U.S.  stock  markets  stimulated  the  capital  imports,  which
continued to such an extent that the dollar rose to high levels against other currencies.
Together  with  massive  investments  in  real  capital,  which  involved  considerable  rationalisation,  the
dollar’s  appreciation  held  back  the  price  impulses  that  normally  accompany  growing  pressure  from
wage costs.
The question  is  whether the upward  phase in the U.S. economy  in  the  1990s  represents  a  cyclical
pattern  that  differs  from  earlier  post-war  cycles.  In  the  past,  rising  demand  led  in  time  to  growing
tensions  as  the  supply  side  became  increasingly  strained  and  this  resulted  in  higher  inflationary
pressure. Rising inflation normally functioned as a warning to decision-makers that a tighter economic
policy was called for.
The latest upward phase seems, however, to have been more the harvest of a dynamic interaction of
demand  and  supply.  Technological  advances  have  contributed  to  higher  productivity.  Aided  by  the
new  technology,  gradually  rising  consumer  and  corporate  demand  seem  to  have  generated  an
increasingly  rapid  expansion  of  supply  and  thereby  a  further  stimulation  of  demand  in  a  sort  of
expansive circle. The traditional alarm bell — inflation — has not sounded because the domestic cost
pressure has been countered by the productivity gains and the appreciating exchange rate. But there
have been other alarm bells in the form of asset prices, saving and imbalances.
There  are  a  number  of  historical  examples  where  expectations  of  rising  profits  and  incomes  have
contributed to increased demand and an expansion  of supply,  laying a foundation for an expansive
spiral. The clearest instances seem to have occurred before world war one or in the interval between
this and world war two. The euphoria over an innovative and favourable beginning has usually led, in
the  more  mature  phase  of  the  upswing,  to  fundamental  imbalances  in  the  real  economy  that  have
sometimes taken a long time and considerable efforts to rectify.
It is not yet possible to tell to what extent the U.S. economy will experience a lengthy, more difficult
process  of  adjustment.  That  is  probably  the  background  to  how  the  Federal  Reserve  has  acted  in
recent  years.  A  series  of  interest  rate  hikes  during  1999  and  2000  were  presumably  intended  to
restrain  the  euphoria  and  excessive  expansion. When  a  downturn  then  became  evident,  it  seemed
2
BIS Review 26/2001
desirable to try to limit the mood swing by means of the marked interest rate cuts we have seen this
year.
It  is  precisely  the  Federal  Reserve’s  vigorous  action  that  underlies  certain  analysts’  view  that  the
current economic slowdown  will  be fairly mild  and  brief. If international activity  were to move into  a
recovery, most things suggest that demand in the Swedish economy would start rising rapidly again.
The  earlier  capacity  restrictions  would  then  return  to  the  agenda,  with  the  attendant  risk  of  an
accelerating rate of inflation.
So the situation is difficult to assess and I grant that the judgements our Executive Board has had to
make in connection with the present Inflation Report have been more difficult than usual. While the
difficulty in predicting the future is admittedly a truism, the present international economic situation is
perhaps the trickiest for a decade.
Growth with a balanced picture of inflation
The main scenario we have adopted in the Inflation Report envisages weaker real economic activity in
the rest of the world, with the slowdown in the United States in the foreground. GDP growth in Sweden
slackens from the annual rates of 3 to 4 per cent in recent years to around 2.5 per cent in the coming
years. The GDP figure for Q4 last year suggests that a fall-off has already begun. Some observers talk
of a soft landing. Most things point to a downward adjustment of demand to the long-term trend rather
than a regular downturn with the risk of a recession.
In  this  situation  it  is  a  help  that,  after  a  number  of  years  with  good  growth  and  price  stability,  the
Swedish economy is soundly balanced and that the public finances are also in a comparatively good
state.  Combating  inflation  effectively  and  consolidating  the  government  budget  have  increased  the
freedom  of  action  in  economic  policy  and  made  an  economic  slowdown  relatively  less  difficult  to
handle.
The adjustment we now foresee will occur through a variety of channels. Slacker international activity
implies a slowing  of  exports.  The  decreased  order  inflow  and  less  pronounced  capacity  restrictions
tend in turn to dampen investment. With falling share prices and less optimism among households, the
growth of private consumption becomes more subdued. Moreover, stock adjustments this year imply a
temporary  lowering  of  demand.  In  the  labour  market,  the  number  of  new  job  vacancies  is  already
levelling off, which shows that the growth of employment will be slower in the coming years.
This picture of the real economy in the main scenario gives a relatively stable development of inflation
around the 2  per cent  target in the  years ahead, both  in terms of the consumer  price  index  and  of
indexes of underlying inflation.
The  risks  surrounding  the  main  scenario  are  chiefly  concentrated  to  two  alternative  scenarios  that
point in different directions.
One alternative scenario has to do, of course, with the risk of a deeper global economic slowdown
with  further  stock-market  falls.  The  Swedish  economy  would  be  affected  via  lower  export  market
growth and more subdued demand from households and firms. That would keep inflationary pressure
in Sweden down compared with the main scenario. However, the downside risk for inflation in Sweden
would be somewhat limited in that the exchange rate  would remain  weak as a consequence  of the
lower international activity and concern about its effects on the Swedish economy.
The  other  alternative  scenario  concerns  a  risk  of  higher  domestic  inflation.  The  current  round  of
wage negotiations is still in progress and several of the signals in this respect are not encouraging. If
the  remaining  settlements  were  to  be  above  the  levels  that  have  been  agreed  to  date,  inflationary
pressure may grow, both as a direct result of the high outcomes and indirectly through a greater risk of
compensatory wage drift. It is also conceivable that productivity growth will be lower than assumed in
the main scenario, leading to rising pressure from costs. A further risk is that the krona’s depreciation
may persist even if activity becomes stronger. That could generate inflationary impulses.
All  in  all,  however,  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  considers  that  the  spectrum  of  risks  is
asymmetric, so that inflation somewhat below the main forecast is more probable than a higher rate.
With the risks taken into account, inflation in the coming years is forecast to be around two tenths of a
percentage point below the targeted level of 2 per cent. At the same time, the margins are so small
that we have decided not to adjust the repo rate at this time. In this context it is worth recalling that in
the  initial  position  the  repo  rate  is  already  lower  than  the  instrumental  rates  in  many  other
BIS Review 26/2001
3
industrialised countries, at the same time as the krona is very weak. That makes it advisable to wait
somewhat longer to see in which direction developments appear to be moving.
Next monetary policy meeting on 26 April
In conclusion it can be noted that the picture of both real economic tendencies and price movements
that is described in the main scenario seems to be relatively favourable. After a rapid expansion for a
number  of  years,  an  adjustment  is  now  foreseen  that  involves  a  levelling  off  with  low  and  stable
inflation.
But while it may seem that we consider everything is fine in the Swedish economy, it must be said that
prospects  for  the  U.S.  economy  are  difficult  to  assess.  Real  economic  changes  may  occur,  with
repercussions on the Swedish economy as well as on international capital and currency markets that
cannot be predicted at all accurately at present. This is also something that has to be followed and
analysed closely, which the Riksbank intends to do this spring.
We are ready to act if action is called for and when the picture becomes clearer. We will be returning
to these matters with an analysis of the situation and a discussion of monetary policy a month from
now, on 26 April.
4
BIS Review 26/2001
