TT Mboweni: Central banking, competition and concurrent jurisdiction
Address by Mr TT Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Annual Competition
Conference, Johannesburg, 29 March 2001.
 Introduction
1.
Good  evening  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  thank  you  for  inviting  me  here  this  evening  to  address  this
conference at a time when competition policy and enforcement are rapidly increasing in prominence
throughout the world. This is indeed a stimulating time for you as you grapple with the challenges that
confront you. It is perhaps unusual for a central banker to be addressing an anti-trust conference such
as this one. At first glance, the worlds occupied by the Reserve Bank and the competition authority are
at  opposite  ends  of  the  economic  policy  spectrum.  Whereas  the  central  bank  is  characteristically
identified  as  the  guardian  of  macro-economic  stability,  the  competition  authority  is  concerned  with
regulating  micro-behaviour.  This  includes  investigating  and  adjudicating  business  practices  and
ensuring that the structure of the economy promotes competition and facilitates access.
The  importance  of  the  microeconomic  sphere  cannot  be  under-estimated.  I  have  mentioned  in  the
past  that  microeconomic  reforms  are  important  in  driving  the  South  African  economy  forward.
President Thabo  Mbeki  noted  in  his  address  at  the  opening  of  parliament  earlier  this  year,  that  we
have reached the necessary level of macroeconomic balance and stability. He observed that the time
was right to focus on the critical microeconomic issues, more particularly the public sector.
Complementary functions
2.
A  deeper  look  at  the  functions  and  broad  objectives  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  competition
authorities reveals that  we share more than  is apparent at first glance. We use significantly  distinct
instruments,  but  we  share  a  common  objective  to  be  attained  through  our  regulatory  functions  and
regulatory tasks – that of promoting growth and enhanced economic opportunity.
Since the central bank cannot realise its key objective of securing financial stability in the absence of
soundly functioning financial markets, it has a critically important regulatory function. The Bank has to
ensure that the institutions that play a central role in the financial markets understand and abide by the
rules that are necessary for the effective functioning of the market.
A case in point was three years ago, when the international economy was hit by the Asian crisis. Many
policymakers  and  analysts  insisted  that  the  economic  fundamentals  of  some  of  the  worst-hit  Asian
countries  were  sound  and  bolstered  by  strong  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  Interestingly,  some  of
these  countries  had  experienced  high  growth  and  strong  foreign  capital  inflows  up  to  the  crisis.
However,  upon  deeper  scrutiny,  it  became  apparent  that  the  authorities  responsible  for  macro-
economic  policy  had  neglected  their  regulatory  role.  It  is  now  widely  recognised  that  inadequately
framed  and  enforced  rules,  what  are  now  widely  called  governance  problems,  and  an  inadequate
regulatory  structure  underpinned  the  crises  in  the  countries  that  once  earned  the  title  of  the  Asian
Tigers. From this conclusion, it is obvious to see why the International Monetary Fund’s reaction was
to  focus  on  regulatory  reform  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  and  significantly,  this  focus  continues
today.  The  most  recent  example  is  Turkey,  where  an  economic  crisis  has  highlighted  the  pressing
need for the restructuring of state banks, a point the authorities are taking in hand and acting upon.
The  rules  monitored  and  enforced  by  both  the  central  banks  and  the  competition  authorities  are
amongst  the  key  pillars  of  the  regulatory  framework  which  are  necessary  to  ensure  the  effective
functioning  of  an  economy.  The  competition  authorities  and  the  financial  regulators  are  mutually
responsible for regulating the structure of markets and the behaviour of the market participants. While
we  both  respect  the  markets,  we  also  realise  that,  like  all  other  institutions,  they  require  clear  and
predictable rules for their effective functioning and they require an agency that is able and willing to
enforce those rules. The criteria that we use in our regulating function naturally diverge because our
BIS Review 30/2001
1
immediate  objectives  are  different.  But  many  of  the  features  that  are  essential  to  the  effective
functioning of a central bank are equally necessary for an effective competition authority.
Pre-requisites for effective functioning
3.
Two of these shared features are technical competence and independence. Anybody who has worked
in  a  regulatory  agency  –  be  it  a  central  bank,  a  competition  authority  or  a  sector  regulator  –  will
recognise the immense technical complexity of the work these agencies undertake. We need to attract
the kind of staff and inculcate the kind of ethos that produce work of the highest technical quality. If our
decisions are to provide certainty  to  investors  and  confidence  to  the  society  at  large,  they  must  be
rooted in solid and reliable data reinforced by cutting edge analysis. The pressure to produce state-of-
the-art regulation is intensified by the fact that regulators should never imagine that one rule, or one
mode  of  interpretation,  is  good  forever.  Regulators  work  in  a  dynamic  and  rapidly  evolving
environment and their work and policies must be able to reflect this. Regulators must ensure that their
rules are respected but they must take care not to become too rule-bound, and in so doing lose sight
of  the  purpose  served  by  the  rules.  It  is  relatively  easy  to  provide  either  certainty  or  flexibility:  to
provide both presupposes unusual levels of competence and confidence on the part of the regulator.
Regulators also need to be able to take decisions fearlessly and independently. Much is said about
the importance and the necessity of central bank independence. Those who worry about this seem to
be primarily concerned about the central bank’s relationship with government. They are concerned to
ensure that the central bank should not deploy the powerful levers at its disposal simply to assure the
short-term  popularity  of  the  government  of  the  day.  The  Constitution  determines  that  the  Reserve
Bank, in pursuit of its primary object, must perform its functions independently and without fear, favour
or prejudice.
Although  the  instruments  of  a  competition  authority  are  less  direct  in  their  effect  than  those  at  the
disposal of a central bank, the authority will also have to maintain a necessary distance from the public
authority  if  it  is  to  carry  out  its  regulatory  task  successfully.  But  it  is  also  important  -  maybe  more
important - to maintain independence from the powerful private interests that would seek to influence
the way in which a competition authority exercises its functions. I will not review the shortcomings of
some of the previous behaviours in the area of banking and financial market regulation – they are well
known and we are still grappling with the fall-out. Suffice to say that we are both dealing in an area
where  powerful,  well-resourced  private  interests  will  spare  no  expense  in  attempting  to  sway  their
regulator. This is a complex area because one must certainly be willing to listen to the regulated; but
listening to them should not compromise the ability to make independent decisions.
The proposed merger between Standard Bank Investment Corporation and Nedcor
4.
I will now turn to a recent example that shows both the dynamic environment in which the Reserve
Bank  and  the  competition  authorities  operate  and  the  interaction  between  the  two  bodies.  The
proposed merger between two of the country’s four biggest commercial banks, Nedcor and Standard
Bank Investment  Corporation,  provides  such  an  example.  However,  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  the
situation  exposed  what  may  be  called  a  regulatory  gap  in  the  regulatory  frameworks  of  the  two
agencies. This gap is subsequently being addressed.
The Reserve Bank received an application from Nedcor to acquire a majority shareholding in Standard
Bank Investment Corporation on 30 November 1999. In this situation, as in others, the regulator must
remain objective and not act as a matchmaker or precipitate a trend. In section 37 of the Banks Act
the  application  for  a  merger  and  the  framework  of  merger  considerations  are  subject  to  a  formal
process which aims to remove as much of the subjectivity as possible. The duty to consult with other
regulatory bodies is of paramount importance.
In  any  application  of  this  sort,  section  37  of  the  Banks  Act  requires  a  decision  to  be  made  by  the
Minister  of  Finance,  after  the  Registrar  of  Banks  has  made  a  recommendation,  subsequent  to
consultation  with  the  Competition  Commission.  The  Registrar  also  has  to  engage  the  two  banks  in
discussions, consult with other domestic and international regulators, and consult with the Governor
and Deputy Governors of the Reserve Bank. Further, the Banks Act prescribes that the competition
authorities must be consulted on competition issues in an application of this nature. However, prior to
the amendments to the Competition Act, which came into effect in February this year, the Act did not
apply to applications "subject to or authorised by public regulation". Further, section 54 of the Banks
2
BIS Review 30/2001
Act  says  that  no  arrangement  involving  a  bank  and  no  arrangement  for  the  transfer  of  the  bank’s
assets and liabilities, or a part of them, can be legally executed unless the consent of the minister of
finance  is  conveyed  through  the  Registrar.  This  section  does  not  contain  a  provision  requiring
consultation with the Competition Commission.
In applications like these, the Minister of Finance has to be satisfied that the proposal is not contrary to
the interests of the public, the depositors, and the bank concerned or to its controlling company. The
Minister of Finance rejected Nedcor’s bid  based  on  the  grounds,  among  others,  that  South  Africa’s
already  highly  concentrated  banking  sector  would  be  compounded  by  the  merger;  the  size  of  the
merged bank would affect the banking authorities’ ability to contain systemic crises; and the potential
social  costs,  such  as  job  losses,  outweighed  the  efficiency  gains  of  the  merger.  The  Minister  of
Finance  took  into  account  the  recommendations  of  the  Registrar  of  Banks  and  the  Competition
Commission, which had both opposed Nedcor’s bid on the grounds of pub lic interest.
In this case, the Supreme Court of Appeal ruled that the Registrar and the Minister of Finance had
sole jurisdiction over share acquisitions in banks and banking mergers. As a result of this judgement,
the Department of Trade and Industry made certain amendments to the Competition Act. It deleted the
provision that the Competition Act did not apply to acts authorised by public regulation. Further, the
Minister of Finance has the power to exclude the Competition Commission’s jurisdiction by issuing a
notice.
Concurrent jurisdiction
5.
The  amendments  established  a  concurrent  jurisdiction  between  the  Competition  Commission,  the
Registrar  and  the  Minister  of  Finance.  This  concurrent  jurisdiction  has  to  be  managed  with  an
applicable agreement, according to section 31A, which was inserted into the Competition Act. These
agreements must be negotiated with the various regulatory authorities within the relevant industries to
"coordinate and harmonise the exercise of jurisdiction  over competition matters". But  in the case  of
bank mergers, the Competition Commission’s powers are qualified further with the provision that the
Minister  of  Finance  is,  if  he  deems  it  to  be  in  the  public  interest,  entitled  to  assert  jurisdiction  over
these transactions.
In the light of this regulatory gap and the amendments to the various laws that arose as a result of it,
the Competition Commission and the Reserve Bank’s Bank Supervision Department met on 9 March
this year to begin drawing up a Memorandum of Understanding. This Memorandum would set out how
the  agencies  would  proceed  under  the  concurrent  jurisdiction  framework.  Only  issues  of  broad
principle  were  discussed  but  it  seems  clear  that  the  Bank  Supervision  Department  will  perform  its
duties in terms of the Banks Act as before, including consultation with the Competition Commission.
The  Competition  Commission  would  then  perform  its  duties  in  terms  of  the  Competition  Act.  Share
acquisitions in banks or mergers between two or more banks may legally then only proceed once all
the approvals have been granted. Although the principles of the agreement have been fleshed out, the
Memorandum of Understanding has not yet been finalised and efforts are ongoing to thrash out the
mechanics of the cooperation. We believe this Memorandum of Understanding is a matter of urgency.
This  agreement  is  important  for  a  number  of  reasons.  Among  them,  that  the  operations  of  the
regulatory authorities with jurisdiction over the banking sector must in themselves be regulated. Given
the  importance  of  the  banking  sector  to  the  country’s  economy  and  financial  system,  the  work  and
interaction of the various regulators must be set down in an orderly, predictable fashion, so as not to
compromise the different interests that arise. And of course, the operations of the regulator must at all
times be shaped by the very objectives it is trying to achieve. Among these are to ensure that banks
are safe and sound, to ensure that the bank’s customers have faith and confidence in the bank and
the banking system, and to ensure that banks operate efficiently and effectively.
Competition and the economy
6.
It is of course not only the regulatory function that the Reserve Bank and the Competition Commission
have in common. The competition authorities and the central bank are both concerned with economic
regulation,  with  regulation  that  produces  desired  economic  outcomes.  Whereas  the  Bank’s
interventions  are  at  the  macro  end  of  the  spectrum,  the  competition  authorities  are  concerned  with
interventions  in  the  micro-economy.  But  both  are  essential  and  it  is  an  appreciation  of  this  that
accounts  for  my  frequent  reference  to  the  importance  of  microeconomic  reform.  At  the  risk  of
BIS Review 30/2001
3
oversimplifying the matter, if we at the macro-economic end provide the stable platform without which
growth will not occur, then it is the micro-economic interventions that put in place the key incentives
that guide the investment decisions by individual firms, that ensure that the pattern of investment will
not only be able to realise the necessary commercial returns but that will also ensure optimal social
returns.
Our respective actions and interventions will often be scrutinised against these economic criteria. You
will often be judged publicly by those who believe that what is good for them is good for the economy.
In fact, this is frequently not the case and some of the sternest tests of your independence will come
from  those  cases  where  you  are  forced  to  defend  your  actions  against  those  who  argue  that  your
actions, by undermining the interests of important firms, are, thereby, harming the economy.
In  this  light  I  have  been  interested  to  read  some  of  the  responses  in  the  media  to  the  competition
authorities’  activities.  Some  of  these  critics  are  concerned  that  your  activities  are  not  sufficiently
geared to the need to build ‘national champions’. They are concerned that the price worth paying for
the attainment of international competitiveness is the dominance of world class companies in our small
economy  and  that  merger  regulation  somehow  repels  foreign  investors.  This  is  asserted  time  and
again,  despite evidence  to  the  contrary.  Hence,  we  know  –  and  Michael  Porter’s  work  on  Japan  is
interesting in this regard – that success in international markets is heavily influenced by the extent of
competition  in  the  domestic  market.  It  stands  to  reason  that  companies  that  are  able  to  extract
monopoly profits in their domestic market will have little interest and, often, little ability to face up to the
arduous business of penetrating competitive international markets.
We know that foreign companies find this a difficult market to penetrate precisely because of the high
levels of monopolisation. Surely vigorous merger scrutiny is not likely to hit foreign investors who have
no presence in this market – on the contrary they will be the ones encouraged to invest by anti-trust
merger regulation. In particular, robust anti-trust enforcement will facilitate those previously excluded
by  the  high  levels  of  concentration  and  by  practices  that  have  served  to  reserve  markets  for  the
privileged few.
Competition and prices
7.
The regulator’s role in ordering a market defined by competitive forces is as much a necessity for the
economy and economic stability as is competition itself. Competition enforces a strict discipline on the
price formation process. Random price shocks arising from the dominant position of a single supplier
in the market are largely prevented through increased competition. Although such price shocks are not
inflationary in the strict sense of the word, they do help to perpetuate an "inflation psychosis" because
they influence consumers’ expectations of future inflation. What usually happens in the aftermath of a
one-off price shock, is that the overall price  level rises and that  during the  adjustment process,  the
actual inflation rate is higher than it would otherwise have been. The rands in consumers’ pockets will
buy less as they then experience a decline in their purchasing power, all other things being equal. An
inflation spiral may unfold if they are compensated for this loss in purchasing power by pay rises, for
example.
The immediate price effect of a random shock cannot be controlled by the central bank. For instance,
no level of interest rates will be sufficient if a monopoly supplier lifts the price of its product. However,
such a one-off price increase can have a knock-on effect and drive up the prices of all other goods if
monetary policy-makers are not sufficiently vigilant.
By  raising  the  level  of  competition  in  the  economic  system,  one  important  source  of  random  price
shocks is reduced or eliminated. And a major obstacle in the way of a successful counter-inflationary
monetary policy will be removed. This is  important because, as  you know,  we  adopted the inflation
targeting  framework  for  monetary  policy  in  February  last  year.  This  means  that  we  target  inflation
primarily but must also take into consideration the variables that impact on inflation. In terms of the
target,  CPIX,  which  is  the  headline  consumer  price  index  excluding  mortgage  costs,  must  average
between 6 and 3 percent in the year 2002.
Conclusion
8.
I have made a real effort to speak to diverse constituencies and stakeholders within the economy, to
have them understand why the Bank adopted the inflation targeting framework and why the Bank is
sometimes obliged to take decisions that appear to conflict with some of their short-term interests. I
4
BIS Review 30/2001
firmly believe that we can not carry out our task effectively if the general population is not informed
about the framework of our decisions.
The competition authorities, the Reserve Bank and other institutions must be cognisant of the socio-
economic  factors  that  dominate  the  South  African  landscape  as  well  as  be  guided  by  their  primary
objectives.  I  note  that  your  legislation  allows  for  elaborate  efficiency  defenses  both  in  the  case  of
mergers and even in the case of restrictive agreements. Exemptions are permitted for practices that
can  be  shown  to  promote  exports,  small  business  and  black  economic  empowerment.  These  all
represent critical social and economic goals  and  they may, on a case  by case basis, necessitate  a
departure from strict anti-trust enforcement. But you are entitled to approach requests for exemption
with a certain degree of skepticism – after all the best tonic for export growth and for the promotion of
access to the economy is, in most cases, likely to be competition itself rather than exemptions from the
competitive process.
I wish you well. Thank you.
BIS Review 30/2001
5
