Bank of Japan’s July report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, 16 July 2001
 The Bank’s view2
Adjustments in economic activities are intensifying, as production is declining substantially reflecting a
fall in exports.
With regard to final demand, private consumption remains flat on the  whole. Housing investment is
declining  and  public  investment  is  also  about  to  decrease  since  the  implementation  of  the
supplementary budget for fiscal 2000 has peaked out. Net exports (real exports minus real imports)
continue to decrease, reflecting not only a slowdown in overseas economies but also sluggish demand
for  IT-related  goods.  Business  fixed  investment  has  started  to  decrease  while  exporting  conditions
continue to deteriorate.
Industrial production continues to decline sharply, reflecting such developments in final demand and a
further  buildup  of  excess  inventories  of  electronic  parts  and  some  materials.  Corporate  profits  and
business sentiment are also worsening particularly in manufacturing. Income conditions of households
have not yet deteriorated, but the decline in production is starting to affect the household sector mainly
through the decrease in hours worked.
As for the outlook, public investment is expected to follow a declining trend. Net exports are likely to
continue decreasing for a while amid the deceleration in overseas economies and ongoing inventory
adjustments in IT-related  goods  worldwide. Judged from leading indicators and investment  plans  of
firms,  business  fixed  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  downward  trend.  In  addition,  inventory
adjustments in goods such as electronic parts and materials will continue for the time being. Industrial
production  is,  therefore,  expected  to  follow  a  declining  trend.  In  these  circumstances,  a  decline  in
corporate  profits  seems  inevitable  for  the  time  being  and  thus  household  income  is  expected  to
weaken gradually.
Overall,  the  adjustments, mainly  in  production,  are  likely  to  continue  for  some  time.  Among  factors
affecting exports, it is generally thought that inventory adjustments in IT-related goods will have come
to an end by early fall and overseas economies, particularly the United States, will follow a gradual
recovery trend from around the end of this  year. In this case, exports are expected to  underpin the
economy once again. However, a prolonged deceleration of overseas economies could yield the risk
of  economic  adjustments  spreading  further.  Also,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  risk  of  a  negative
impact  on  the  economy  induced  by  developments  in  foreign  and  domestic  capital  markets  via
corporate and household confidence.
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  mostly  unchanged.  Domestic  wholesale  prices  are  weak
mainly  due  to  the  decrease  in  prices  of  electrical  machinery.  Consumer  prices  continue  to  be
somewhat weak owing to the decline in prices of imported products and their substitutes. Corporate
service prices continue to decrease.
As for the conditions surrounding price  developments, the past  yen depreciation is exerting upward
pressure  on  prices.  However,  with  the  ongoing  adjustments  in  economic  activities,  the  balance
between supply and demand in the domestic market is likely to exert downward pressure on prices.
Furthermore,  in  addition  to  the  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  caused  by  technological
innovations,  the  decreases  in  the  prices  of  goods  and  services  reflecting  deregulation  and  the
streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain price developments. Overall, prices are
expected  to  be  weak  for  the  time  being.  Moreover,  given  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding
future economic developments, the possibility that weak demand will intensify downward pressure on
prices warrants careful monitoring.
                                                     
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on
July 12 and 13, 2001.
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on July 12 and 13 as the basis for monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review 64/2001
1
In  the  financial  market,  the  overnight  call  rate  is  basically  moving  around  zero  percent  under  the
guideline for money market operations to maintain the current-account balance at the Bank of Japan
at around 5 trillion yen.
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  are  basically  level  on  the  whole.  The  Japan  premium  remains
negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds rose after moving at around 1.15-1.2 percent until the end of
June and are  recently  moving  around  1.3  percent.  The  yield  spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank
debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  are  mostly  unchanged  or  contracting
somewhat.
Stock prices are declining due mainly to the decrease in U.S. stocks.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen is depreciating against the U.S. dollar and is currently being
traded in the range of 124-126 yen to the U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans, mainly
to blue-chip companies, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved. However, there are some
signs indicating that the lending attitude of financial institutions perceived by small firms is becoming
slightly  more  cautious.  Meanwhile,  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  in  the  markets  for  such
instruments as corporate bonds and CP continue to improve owing to the decline in market interest
rates and the more active stance of investors to take credit risks.
On  the  other  hand,  credit  demand  of  private  firms  continues  to  lack  momentum  as  the  level  of
corporate expenditures such as business fixed investment remains below firms’ cash flow. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result,
credit demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish. Meanwhile, the growth
rate  of  amount  outstanding  of  corporate  bonds  issued  is  recently  rising  slightly.  The  amount
outstanding of CP issued is well above that of the previous year and marking the highest level to date,
reflecting the favorable environment for issuing CP.
The growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) in June was higher than that of the previous month due
mainly to the inflow from postal savings.
Funding costs for firms are on a declining trend reflecting developments in market interest rates.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing
conditions remain easy as a whole. For the time being, attention should be paid to the effects of the
monetary easing measures taken by the Bank, while careful monitoring is required for the effects of
stock price developments and corporate profit conditions on the behavior of financial institutions and
the fund-raising conditions of firms.
2
BIS Review 64/2001
