The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: Challenges confronting central banks
Speech  by  The  Rt  Hon  Sir  Edward  George,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Centre  for
Financial Studies Seminar, Frankfurt, 13 September 2001.
 I thought that what I might do this evening is to talk about the challenges confronting central banks - in
the US, Japan, the eurozone and the UK in particular - and what can and what can't realistically be
expected of them in the face of those challenges.
But I'd like to begin by discussing what it is that we are all trying to do. Let me start with our statutory
mandates.
The Federal Reserve's marching orders are to "maintain long-run growth of the monetary and credit
aggregates  commensurate  with  the  economy's  long-run  potential  to  increase  production,  so  as  to
promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest
rates". The Bank of Japan Law prescribes that "currency and monetary control shall be aimed, through
the pursuit of price stability, at contributing to the sound development of the national economy". The
primary  objective  of  the  ESCB  "shall  be  to  maintain  price  stability";  but,  without  prejudice  to  that
objective, the ESCB shall support the general economic policies in the Community, which, in turn are
designed  (inter  alia)  "to  promote  …  sustainable  and  non-inflationary  growth  …  and  a  high  level  of
employment". And the Bank of England is similarly mandated to pursue "price stability as defined by
the (symmetrical) inflation target, and without prejudice to that objective to support the Government's
economic policy, including its objectives for growth and employment".
Now the exact words of these mandates differ - to varying degrees. What's more we all have our own
procedures and processes - in terms of the composition of our decision-making bodies for example, or
the form and frequency of our policy meetings, or of our arrangements for public accountability. And
our  approaches  to  fulfilling  our  mandates  vary  from  one  central  bank  to  another  -  some  of  us,  for
example, have a more precise target, or tolerance range, for inflation, or some provide a more explicit
role for monetary aggregates within the analytical framework and so on. And much is sometimes made
of these various differences. One can in fact spend many  happy  hours  debating  the  finer  pros  and
cons of one formulation as against another, and that can be a productive thing to do in pointing up the
issues,  though  I  think  in  the  end  my  own  conclusion  is  that  circumstances  alter  cases  -  there's  no
unique best buy.
But I think that we need in any event to be careful that in pointing up the differences between us we
don't exaggerate them. Because I have to say that in my experience - at a more fundamental level -
we are all trying to do the same thing.
The essential instrument of monetary policy - control over short-term interest rates operates, through a
number of different channels, certainly - on the demand side of our economies - primarily on domestic
private  sector  demand.  There  is  very  little  that  monetary  policy  can  do  directly  to  influence  the
supply-side capacity of our economies to meet that demand over time, which is what determines the
rate of growth that we can hope to sustain.
Improving  supply-side  performance  is  therefore  fundamentally  important  and  hugely  more  complex
than  overall  macro-economic  management  of  which  monetary  policy  is  a  very  important  part.  Our
supply-side performance is affected by the whole range of public policy decisions. It  is affected, for
example, by the extent of free trade and market competition both nationally and internationally; by all
forms of regulation, which have an important bearing among other things on the flexibility of goods and
labour  markets.  It  is  affected  by  the  level  and  structure  of  taxation  on  the  one  hand  and  of  public
expenditure  on  the  other.  And  perhaps  most  fundamentally  it  is  affected  by  the  attitudes,  and  the
technical  and  entrepreneurial  skills  of  the  workforce  and  management  which,  in  turn,  depends
importantly  on  education  and  training.  Decisions  in  these  areas  often  involve  difficult  political
judgements on how to strike the  right  balance  between  social  and  economic  considerations.  I  shall
have no more to say about supply-side issues in my remarks, except to thank my lucky stars that I was
born a central banker and not a politician.
What in practice central bankers everywhere have to do is to try to keep aggregate demand growing
consistently over time broadly in line with the underlying, sustainable, rate of growth of supply. And
consistently low inflation is essentially the measure of our success in achieving that. Yes, we are all
BIS Review 76/2001
1
aiming  for  effective  price  stability,  certainly.  But  that  is  not  simply  a  doctrinaire  end  in  itself  -  as  is
sometimes suggested, though not often here in Germany. It is a reflection, if you like, of our broader
aim of achieving macro-economic stability in the much wider sense of a sustainable balance between
aggregate demand and underlying supply. Insofar as we succeed in that aim we can hope thereby to
moderate  rather  than  aggravate  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  economy,  and  to  remove  much  of  the
nominal uncertainty and related short-termism from economic decision-making. To that extent we can
help  indirectly  to  improve  the  supply-side  performance  of  our  economies.  This  is  essentially  the
thought  that  underlies  the  universal  central  banker's  mantra  that  "Price  stability  is  a  necessary
condition  for  sustainable  growth",  not  to  mention  sustainable  high  levels  of  employment  and  rising
living standards, which are, of course, the really good things of macro-economic life.
Now it is relatively easy to explain in these terms what we are trying to do. Actually doing it is a good
deal harder!
For a start we cannot directly observe or measure what is happening in an underlying sense on the
supply side with any great precision. We may become aware of short-run shocks relatively promptly,
and we are able to draw inferences from partial information over time. But we can't be confident we
know just where the "target" is, and we will often need to approach it somewhat tentatively. And there
are equally uncertainties on the demand side as to just what is happening currently, or even more as
to what is likely to happen in the period ahead. Nor can we know at all exactly just what the size of the
impact of monetary policy action will be, or the timescale over which it will have its full effect, in the
particular circumstances of any given situation. It has often been said that monetary policy is more of
an art than a precise science even though we all bring to bear as much economic science as we can
muster.
There are particular difficulties in interpreting movements in asset prices, including exchange rates, let
alone seeking to manage them through monetary policy. And even if we have a view about the asset
prices we might like to see in the broader context of our monetary policy objectives, it is often very
hard  to  predict  even  the  direction  in  which  they  might  move,  over  even  relatively  long  periods,  in
response  to  changes  in  interest  rates.  We  necessarily  take  asset  prices  into  account,  both  in  our
forecasts and in our policy decisions, but insofar as we cannot influence them directly we have to be
satisfied  with  seeking  to  offset  their  effects  on  demand  and  inflation  through  other  channels  of  the
transmission mechanism. And the same is true, in a broader sense, of external demand shocks, which
national  or  regional  central  banks  cannot  themselves  directly  affect,  so  that  they  must  try  to
compensate for them through offsetting changes in domestic demand growth. What all this means, in
turn, is that the most monetary authorities can hope to achieve is to maintain overall macro-economic
stability; we cannot pretend that this means stable conditions for every sector of the economy, still less
every individual producer.
Now let me be clear, I'm not pleading impotence! Monetary policy can have very powerful effects on
overall macro-economic stability. But it is important that the limitations of monetary policy - what it can
and  what  it  can't  hope  to  achieve  -  are  clearly  understood.  Otherwise  expectations  are  likely  to  be
disappointed,  and  disappointed  expectations  may  lead  to  building  pressure  for  alternative  policy
actions, which may not in the event be in our longer-term economic interest.
Against  that  -  rather  long-winded  -  background  I  turn  to  the  uncertainties  in  the  present  world
economic situation.
The  major  uncertainty,  of  course,  relates  to  the  situation  in  the  United  States  -  the  world's  largest
economy - which had experienced a period of exceptionally strong economic growth with relatively low
inflation until the latter part of last year, which itself played a vital part in buoying up the whole world
economy  through  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  Briefly  -  and  no  doubt  oversimply  -  this  very  strong
performance was made possible by developments on the supply side of the US economy in the form
of  exceptional  productivity  gains,  as  the  application  of  new  information  and  communications
technologies spread through the economy. This development - though extremely difficult to quantify -
promised  a  higher  sustainable  rate  of  growth  in  the  US  economy  and  higher  corporate  earnings
growth. That expectation in turn contributed to a rapid rise in equity prices, especially in the "high tech"
sectors, which helped stimulate both business investment in the US and consumer demand causing
the private sector to move into financial deficit. It also attracted massive direct and portfolio investment
inflows from abroad which over-financed an increasing current account deficit in the US and caused
the dollar to strengthen against other currencies.
But by the first half of last year the US economy was expanding at a rate of around 5%, which even on
the  most  optimistic  view  of  underlying  productivity  growth  was  clearly  unsustainable.  The  pace  of
2
BIS Review 76/2001
demand growth in the US needed to slow down - as of course it has, dramatically, to the point where
growth in the US in recent quarters has pretty well come to a halt.
The big questions now are whether we are at the low point, and what might we expect in terms of the
strength of a recovery. And the reality is that no-one can be confident that they know the answers.
What  we  do  know  so  far  is  that  there  has  been  a  sharp  downwards  inventory  correction  and  a
contraction  of  investment  notably  in  ICT  which  was  so  buoyant  before,  with  associated  declines  in
equity prices and in US imports. Consumption growth, supported by a strong housing market has so
far held up rather better than might have been expected. Looking forward, on the positive side, one
could  point  to  the  strong  monetary  policy  response  to  the  slowdown,  and  to  the  recent  tax  rebate,
which have yet to have their full effect. There were some suggestions in recent capital goods orders
figures  that  the  rate  of  decline  in  investment  spending  may  now  slow.  And  the  rate  of  inventory
liquidation  had  stabilised  pointing  to  a  turn  at  some  point  so  long  as  consumption  continued  to  be
reasonably  well  sustained.  Consensus  opinion,  or  so  it  seemed  to  me,  had  become  modestly
optimistic. At least that was the prospect until Tuesday and the appalling terrorist attacks in New York
and Washington.
The immediate impact of those events was a sharp fall in already weak equity prices worldwide, and
fears that the trauma would undermine confidence -including consumer confidence in the US, already
vulnerable to rising unemployment.
Even before the terrorist attacks, the pessimist could point to the imbalances within the US economy,
including the weakness of private sector savings, the overhang of past investment excesses, and the
US  external  deficit,  which  would,  at  some  point,  need  to  be  corrected.  On  that  view  one  could
envisage a gradual adjustment over time in which case the US might face a protracted period of near-
stagnation;  or  -  if  you  were  really  pessimistic  -  the  adjustments  might  be  more  abrupt,  implying  a
period of negative growth and possible further financial instability. The tragic events on Tuesday will
have encouraged such pessimism.
For what it is worth, while I recognise the downside risks, I remain - perhaps stubbornly - cautiously
optimistic.
On  the  immediate  situation,  I  was  immensely  impressed  that  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  US
agencies  have  been  able  to  keep  essential  payments  and  settlements  services  functioning  as  they
have, which has allowed markets internationally to continue to function. And I  was encouraged that
equity markets in Europe yesterday recovered some of their immediate losses. Of course it is much
too soon to assess the lasting impact of the events of the past two days. But the fundamental forces
affecting the US economy have not changed. And in terms of confidence effects, it would be a mistake
to  underestimate  the  resilience  of  the  American  people  in  the  face  of  adversity.  Either  way  I  can
assure you that the monetary authorities around the world are actively co-operating to minimise the
immediate  damage,  and  that  they  will  certainly  be  monitoring  -  continuously  and  very  closely  -  the
emerging  evidence  of more  lasting  effects.  They  will  react  to  that  evidence  in  the  light  of  the  likely
impact on their own situation.
The  US  slowdown  came  at  a  particularly  bad  time  for  Japan.  Japan  was  already  suffering  from  a
combination of weak domestic demand - particularly consumer demand - and supply-side constraints
reflecting pressures on the banking system, heavily burdened with non-performing loans, as well as an
acknowledged need for restructuring parts of the non-financial sector. Japan has pretty well exhausted
the scope for macro-economic stimulus. Successive fiscal packages focussed on public works, and a
sustained period of attempted monetary expansion, at near-zero interest rates in the face of deflation,
have  failed  to  overcome  a  high  rate  of  precautionary  saving  by  an  ageing  population  facing  an
uncertain economic future. The policy emphasis of the new Japanese administration appears to have
shifted  towards  firmer  action  to  bring  about  supply-side  reform  in  the  belief  that  this  will  help  to
engender  greater  business  and  consumer  confidence.  The  danger  is  that,  to  the  extent  that  more
aggressive restructuring results  in  bankruptcies  and  higher  unemployment  in  the  short  term,  that  in
itself might tend to weaken consumer demand for a time before the benefits of the restructuring come
through. It is not clear to me at least that one can realistically expect much additional demand stimulus
from monetary policy in these conditions, though no doubt the Bank of Japan is doing all that it can.
Here at home the euro area economy seemed comparatively well placed to withstand the effects of
the US slowdown. For most of last year it had performed relatively strongly, with overall output growth
at above its longer term trend rate and unemployment in the area as a whole falling from its earlier
high peaks.
BIS Review 76/2001
3
A problem, of course, was the recurrent weakness of the euro in foreign exchange markets, despite
apparently strong "fundamentals" in terms of any conventional analysis. This euro weakness seemed
to  be  explained  by  an  outflow  of  capital,  much  of  it  drawn  into  the  US  by  the  strong  attraction  of
prospective corporate earnings growth. I would be only too delighted if anyone here this evening could
explain  to  me  why  the  euro  has  not  recovered  more  strongly  than  it  has  in  the  wake  of  the  US
slowdown!
The euro's weakness in foreign exchange markets gave rise to widespread criticism of the European
Central Bank - not least  in the  British press, but also in some quarters here on the  continent.  That
criticism  in  my  view  was  wholly  unjustified.  It  was  a  classic  example  of  expecting  too  much  from
monetary policy. The role of a central bank is - as I said earlier - essentially to maintain overall macro-
economic stability, and the measure of its success is consistently low inflation. On that criterion the
ECB  has  been  substantially  successful.  The  Euro  area  economy  grew  at  above  trend  with  core
inflation nevertheless remaining within the ECB's tolerance range of 0-2%, even though the headline
measure of inflation, influenced by rising energy and food prices which were essentially shocks on the
supply  side,  and  by  the  weakness  of  the  exchange  rate,  moved  above  that  range.  Had  the  ECB
attempted during this period to target the exchange rate, presumably by raising interest rates, it is not
at all obvious to me that it would have succeeded; and even if it had, the likelihood is that it would
have put the internal stability of the euro-zone economy at risk.
More recently the ECB has sometimes been criticised as slow to respond to the weakening of the US
economy. Implicit in that criticism no doubt is a strong conviction about the extent and duration of the
US slowdown and its likely  impact on the euro  area. As I  have said there  is in fact a great deal of
uncertainty about that.
But the ECB has had to take account, too, of domestic demand pressures within the euro area, and of
the fact that, even on the core measure, Euro area inflation was moving up gradually to the top of the
ECB's 0-2% range. Frankly I don't see how anyone can be confident whether the ECB had it precisely
right  or  wrong  -  it  is  perfectly  normal  for  even  the  best-informed  people  to  disagree  on  these
judgements, as anyone who reads our own Monetary Policy Committee meeting minutes will tell you.
But  I  am  wholly  confident  that  the  ECB  is  sensitive  to  the  issues  surrounding  those  judgements,
including the downside risks in the US, as indeed it demonstrated a fortnight ago.
So,  too,  are  we  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  our  case,  we  again  enjoyed  relatively  steady  overall
economic growth through last year, combined with a further fall in unemployment to its lowest rate for
over  25  years.  Inflation  meanwhile  continued  to  run  below  the  Government's  2½%  target  -  and  is
currently running at around 1½% on the eurozone measure of inflation. This relatively low inflation rate
was  partly  a  result  of  the  dampening  effect  of  sterling's  surprisingly  persistent  strength  against  the
euro. The problem for us - and it is a real problem which has been with us for some time now - is the
sectoral (and associated regional)  imbalance  within  our  overall  economy.  The  domestically-oriented
sectors have, for the most part, been doing relatively well, whereas those sectors that are exposed to
international  competition,  particularly  within  or  from  the  Euro  area,  have  been  under  considerable
pressure. And that pressure on the internationally exposed sectors has of course intensified with the
slowdown both in the US and in the euro area.
Understandably in these circumstances we too have been criticised, by many in the suffering sectors,
for  being  slow  to  respond.  They  point  to  the  fact  that  inflation  has  been  consistently  below  what  is
intended to be a symmetrical target for the past two years, and they assume that had interest rates
been lower over that period so, too, would the exchange rate. They sometimes, also, find it difficult to
understand why, when our inflation rate is lower than in the Eurozone, and the US, our interest rates
are higher.
In fact, the undershoot of the inflation target has been marginal over the past two years - averaging
less than ½% and we tend to argue that - given all the uncertainties - it is unrealistic to suppose that
we  could  get  much  closer  to  the  target  than  that;  we  point  out,  too,  that  sterling  has  actually
strengthened  against  the  euro  since  the  beginning  of  the  year  even  though  we  have  reduced  our
interest rate relative to that of the ECB. Our higher level of interest rates we explain as a reflection of
the fact that we continue to operate closer to capacity than elsewhere and with a tighter labour market.
I'm not sure that our critics are convinced,  let  alone mollified! But I do find  it encouraging that they
continue for the most part to support the policy objective of continuously low inflation even if from their
perspective we are too rigorous in our pursuit of that objective!
We have in fact reduced interest rates by ¼% on four occasions so far this year. What is disappointing
- both to us and our critics - is that while we have been able to compensate for the dampening effects
4
BIS Review 76/2001
of external factors - the exchange rate and the global economic slowdown - by encouraging stronger
domestic consumption, we have not been able to alter the external environment itself, which is what
our critics in the suffering sectors would really like to see. We have in effect increased the sectoral
imbalance rather than reducing it. That may seem like second best but it is as much as anyone can
reasonably ask of monetary policy.
Mr Chairman, I have gone on for too long and perhaps you will think that I have been overly-defensive
both of myself and of my central banking colleagues. That was not my intention.
My  intention rather  was  to  explain  what  can  and  what  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  of monetary
policy in the present world economic situation. There are no easy or quick answers to the problems we
are  facing  -  and  I'm  tempted  to  say  that  if  anyone  thinks  that  there  are  then  they  probably  don't
understand the questions! But I am confident that persisting in our parallel attempts to maintain macro-
economic  stability  in  our  respective  currency  areas  provides  the  best  way  forward  for  the  world
economy as a whole. But it may be a somewhat bumpy road.
BIS Review 76/2001
5
