Urban Bäckström: Sweden’s economy and new information technology
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors and President of the Bank for International Settlements, arranged by the Ministry of Industry,
Employment and Communications, held in Stockholm, on 7 February 2001.
 First I want to express my thanks for the invitation to discuss Sweden’s economic development with
you in a wider perspective. I am delighted to do so. Today I shall be leaving monetary policy a little to
one  side  and  looking  beyond  the  economic  fluctuations  of  a  short-term  nature  that  are  usually  the
centre  of  attention.  Thus,  I  do  not  intend  to  talk  about  current  monetary  policy.  Instead,  I  want  to
discuss  economic  developments  in  a  longer  perspective.  I  shall  also  be  taking  a  look  at  economic
policy through the driving mirror to see what lessons we can draw from the past. First, however, there
is the matter of the new economy, which only six months ago was such a ubiquitous topic.
What happened to the discussion about the new economy?
There has been much talk of the new economy in recent years, in Sweden as well as elsewhere. It is
not entirely clear what the term stands for and its meaning tends to vary with the speaker. But it often
refers to new information technology  in general and  the  internet  in  particular.  It  has  been  used,  for
example, to explain and sometimes justify rapidly rising share prices for companies in the domain of
information technology, known for short as IT companies. It has also featured, however, in the view
that the economic laws under which we live have ceased to apply, leaving our economies in a state of
bliss. Constantly accelerating productivity growth should lead to an unending boom, so that we central
bank  governors  can  sit  back  and  stop  worrying  about  the  tensions  that  strong  growth  usually
generates between supply and demand, with the risk of rising inflation.
Reality, however, does not seem to have kept pace with these notions. Share prices for IT companies
have fallen steeply. In the course of last year the average value of the Nasdaq exchange, perhaps the
prime indicator of the  aggregate  value  of  international  IT  companies,  was  almost  halved.  IT  shares
have also fallen markedly on the Stockholm exchange as well as elsewhere. Moreover, a number of
new companies in this sector have collapsed.
Developments  in  the  U.S.  economy  are  a  reminder  that  time-honoured  relationships  do  still  apply,
even  in  a  phase  of  rapid  transformation  with  major  technical  innovations.  An  economy  that  is
expanding  rapidly  will  ultimately  generate  imbalances  and  rising  prices.  That  was  why  the  Federal
Reserve  had to tighten the monetary stance so that the  high growth  in  the  United  States  would  be
subdued.
My attitude to talk about a ‘new economy’ or a ‘new economic era’ has been sceptical for a number of
reasons. One is that I had difficulty in accepting the idea that economic relations we have observed for
decades,  perhaps  even  centuries,  could  suddenly  cease  to  hold.  Technologies  do  change,  very
quickly at times, but the fundamental economic relationships are not easily overturned. Another reason
is that history shows that talk of a new economy tends to coincide with periods of strong economic
speculation.1
Information technology will be a major engine for growth
The fact remains, however, that in recent decades we have seen notable technological breakthroughs
with far-reaching economic impacts. To understand what this has meant, we need to go back further
than  to  the  birth  of  the  internet.  The  crucial  advance  occurred  perhaps  in  the  1970s,  when  it  was
suddenly  possible 
tiny  chip  -  a  microprocessor.
Microprocessors in turn were the fruit of development work lasting several decades. Today computers
have innumerable applications, partly because they have become so much cheaper. In the past four
decades computer prices have dropped by an average of around 20 per cent a year. So a computer
with a price tag of 10,000 kronor today would have cost almost 50 million kronor in the early Sixties.
to  construct  a  complete  computer  as  a 
                                                     
1
See Shiller, J. (2000), Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press, Chichester, West Sussex.
BIS Review 10/2001
1
the 
to  do  with 
This has paved the way for computerisation in a wide variety of fields, besides involving something of
a revolution in methods of production and patterns of consumption.
Some  observers  draw  parallels  with  earlier  revolutions  in  economic  history,  for  example  the
introduction  of  steam-engines  in  manufacturing  in  the  18th  century  and  the  breakthrough  for  the
combustion engine and electric motors in the late 19th century.
A closer look at these two earlier industrial revolutions shows that in Sweden the impact of the steam-
engine  was  delayed.  Developments  here  had  more 
transformation  and
commercialisation  of  farming  in  connection  with  land  reforms.  It  simply  took  time  to  build  up  the
institutional  arrangements  that  made  a  widespread  use  of  steam-engines  possible.  Sweden  did  not
begin  to  participate  in  the  first  industrial  revolution  until  the  middle  of  the  19th  century,  when  the
construction  of  railways  gave  steam  locomotives  a  crucial  part  to  play  in  the  new  form  of
communication.
At  the  time  of  the  second  industrial  revolution,  however,  when  the  conditions  for  production  were
changed again by the petrol engine and the electric motor, Sweden was in a better position to reap the
benefits. In that the social structure was more suited to adopting and utilising the new technology, the
pace  of  modernisation  was  faster.  Production  became  increasingly  efficient  as  the  industrialised
society took shape. Electrification, motor vehicles and aviation all left their mark on developments in
much of the 20th century.
At the same time, it was probably not the new inventions as such that provided the conditions for the
rapid economic growth in the 19th and 20th centuries. It was rather their economic applications and
how  they  spread  -  thereby  altering  patterns  of  production  and  consumption  -  that  determined  the
magnitude of their impact on long-term growth. Bringing about such a development involves ensuring
that  it  is  supported  by  the  ways  in  which  various  parts  of  our  society  function.  Economists  talk  of
society’s institutions or a market economy’s infrastructure. This refers to everything from the structure
of  government  and  the  degree  of  economic  stability  to  how  the  judicial  system  functions,  with
ownership playing  a  major  role,  the  quality  of  education  and  the  structure  of  taxation.2  As  I  said,  a
major cause of Sweden’s earlier difficulties in utilising steam-engines was that various social systems
were  not  able  to  latch  onto  the  new  technology  and  use  it  productively.  Sweden  simply  lacked  the
conditions for this initially.
A historical view of transformation and development
One of several possible approaches to an analysis of economic developments connected with various
industrial revolutions was put forward by the Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter in his theory of
development clusters and long cycles. This approach has been developed in Sweden by economists
and  economic  historians  such  as  Erik  Dahmén,  Johan  Åkerman,  Lars  Magnusson  and  Lennart
Schön.3
Changes in technology are often cited as a basic cause of the long cycles. Technical innovations tend
to  be  developed  in  clusters  that  play  a  central  part  in  the  transformation  of  manufacturing.  These
concepts are not all that easy to define but roughly speaking it is a matter of new technology leading to
extensive  changes  in  the  business  community,  as  well  as  in  society  in  general.  The  economy  is
launched into a process of transformation — a sort of struggle between old and new. New products
are introduced as well as new forms of production. Patterns of consumption also change and so does
the demand for education. Growth shifts to other parts of the country. The new demand stimulates the
growth of capital markets. All these developments influence the public debate and the political system.
Bit by bit, the entire economy responds to the new technology. That is what happened in many parts of
the world when the steam-engine was successfully developed in the late 18th century. It also occurred
after new sources of motive power led to the electric motor and the combustion engine in the late 19th
century.
                                                     
2
See e.g. Myhrman, J. (1994), Hur Sverige blev rikt (How Sweden became prosperous), SNS Förlag, Stockholm.
See Magnusson, L. (1996), Sveriges Ekonomiska Historia (Sweden’s economic history), Tiden Athena, Stockholm; Schön,
L. (2000), En Modern Svensk Ekonomisk Historia (A modern Swedish economic history), SNS Förlag, Stockholm; Åkerman,
G.  (1932),  Om  konjunkturväxlingarnas  nödvändighet  och  grundorsak  (On  the  necessity  and  basic  cause  of  economic
fluctuations),  Ekonomisk  Tidskrift  1.  For  a  survey  of  Erik  Dahmén’s  work  and  contributions  to  economic  research,  see
Eklund,  K.  (1986),  Springtime  for  Dahmén.  A  Renaissance  for  Schumpterianism  in  Sweden,  Skandinaviska  Enskilda
Banken Quarterly Review 2.
BIS Review 10/2001
3
2
This phase gives way in time to a process of rationalisation. The new technology is standardised and
spreads  to  more  and  more  segments  of  the  economy.  Growing  competition  makes  the  business
climate  tougher.  Certain  investments  may  turn  out  to  have  been  mistaken.  The  struggle  to  survive
makes rationalisation necessary. Excessively large capital stocks begin to shrink.
The various phases may be accompanied by economic setbacks and even full-blown crises. History is
full of examples. Seen from this angle, the crises in the late 1840s, early 1890s, early 1930s and mid
1970s were of a structural nature.4
By the same token, the run-up to the crisis in the  1970s can be briefly  described as follows:  in the
wake of the second industrial revolution, heavy industries such  as iron, steel, coal and cement had
contributed to the emergence of a new infrastructure in the industrialised world. The growth of these
industries  had  been  particularly  strong  in  the  decades  after  world  war  two.  In  a  sense,  this
infrastructure can be said to have originated in the development clusters that fed off the introduction of
electric motors and combustion engines at the end of the 19th century and led successively to new
social developments in the first half of the 20th century. By the late 1960s the industrialised countries
were moving into a phase of rationalisation. There was a great deal of surplus capacity, particularly in
the major iron and steel sector. Together  with  the  oil crisis and the collapse of  Bretton  Woods,  the
post-war international currency system, this plunged many industrial countries into an acute structural
crisis. The extent of the crisis was, of course, influenced by economic policies; I say that as a reminder
that the development I have described is not predetermined.
The crisis for this former development cluster is sometimes seen as being connected  with  what  we
could  accordingly call the third industrial revolution, namely the  coming  of  the  microprocessor.  This
has launched a new phase of transformation as the emergence of a new development cluster leads
economic developments in new directions.
Temporary setbacks not unusual when times are changing
The setbacks, however, are not necessarily confined to traditional industries. Other types of economic
reversals may also occur in periods of structural change. They may take the form of financial problems
of varying severity. During the transformation process, investors and creditors perceive new profitable
opportunities. Share prices rise and banks are willing to lend to new enterprises and novel projects.
However, as share prices and the supply of credit are governed by expectations of future gains, undue
optimism  may  sometimes  cause  them  to  rise  too  fast.  Sooner  or  later,  such  bubbles  based  on
expectations will burst and this tends to be associated with problems in the banking sector. The years
1907, 1920 and 1990 are three examples of this. For a number of decades in the middle of the 20th
century  there  was  a  notable  absence  of  serious  bank  crises;  one  explanation  may  be  that  credit
markets were tightly regulated. But the regulations also created other problems, though it would take
too long to go into that here.
Around  the  1890s,  when  the  Swedish  economy  took  a  great  leap  forward,  new  banks  were
established  in  quick  succession  and  credit  expanded  rapidly.  This  was  followed  by  massive  price
increases for shares and real estate. The bank crisis that occurred when the boom finally peaked in
1907 had far-reaching consequences: four banks closed, five were reconstructed and fifteen smaller
banks were taken over by larger establishments.
After world war one there was a new wave of speculation. The prospect of large profits and the inflow
of capital contributed to a stock-market boom when bourses achieved a breakthrough as suppliers of
venture  capital.  In  1918  the  Stockholm  Exchange  reached  a  turnover  that  at  constant  prices  was
unrivalled  until  the  late  1980s.  Another  factor  behind  the  flourishing  stock  markets  was  that
commercial  banks  lent  more  and  more  extensively  with  shares  as  collateral.  The  trend  ultimately
peaked and the mood became less optimistic, as sooner or later it always does. When the high value
of the risky assets that had served as collateral fell, a crisis was precipitated in the banking system as
well as in the economy as a whole.
The bank crisis in the early 1990s is still such a recent event that I shall not dwell on it here. But it is
worth noting that there was a similar crisis in the 19th century. As early as 1857 the government was
obliged  to  intervene  to  safeguard  the  payment  system  in  connection  with  a  bank  crisis:  Skånes
Enskilda  Bank  was  threatened  and  finance  minister  Gripenstedt  came  to  its  rescue.  Barely  two
                                                     
4
See Lennart Schön, ibid.
BIS Review 10/2001
3
decades later, in 1878, another bout of excessive optimism and unduly strong credit growth led once
more to a bank crisis when the boom was over. On that occasion the crisis hit Stockholm in particular.
Stockholms Enskilda Bank was most vulnerable, having increased its commitments in private railroad
construction in the 1870s. Government efforts saved the bank by establishing a fund in the National
Debt Office so that the bank could mortgage its illiquid railroad bonds.
These examples illustrate how excessive optimism is liable to lead to things getting out of hand and
resulting  in  imbalances.  The  course  of  economic  developments  may  then  be  checked  for  the  time
being  but  once  the  problems  have  been  overcome,  a  new  expansive  phase  begins.  I  leave  you  to
draw  your own parallels  with the previous rapid price rise for  IT  shares  and  last  year’s  subsequent
correction. The bursting of what some have called an IT bubble in the stock market is thus not the end
of  the  new  information  technology’s  era.  It  is  rather  a  symptom  of  what  might  possibly  be  termed
‘temporary growing pains’. It remains to be seen  how serious this setback will  be,  above  all for the
U.S. economy, but sooner or later the transformation will pick up speed again.
How far have we come in the IT revolution?
Turning now from history to our own time, the question of how far we have come is obviously not an
easy one to answer. It has been calculated that the economic impact of technical advances such as IT
takes forty to fifty years to materialise in full.5 If the microprocessor’s breakthrough in the early 1970s
constitutes the starting point, then it will presumably be another couple of decades before any sizeable
economic  effects  are  discernible.  Counting  instead  from  the  invention  of  the  computer  in  the  mid
1940s, however, means that we could already be in the beginning of a phase of rising productivity and
growth.  Nevertheless,  I  believe  it  is  till  early  to  be  able  to  provide  an  unequivocal  answer  to  this
question.
What  is  clear  is  that  electronics  and  microprocessors  have  revolutionised  telecommunications  and
household appliances such as TV sets, videos and music equipment. We give little thought to the fact
that microchips are now to be found in the simplest kitchen appliances. They are a part of our daily
round. Bear in mind, moreover, that there are no doubt applications that have not yet been exploited
with the more powerful and, above all, cheaper capacity of new computers.
Electronic techniques were used in the 1970s to produce  electronic components  and equipment. In
the  1980s,  computer  hardware  and  programmes  were  developed,  along  with  various  services  that
made  it  possible  to  incorporate  computers  in  many  fields.  The  pressure  for  change  has  shifted  to
software and know-how. In the 1990s software became more standardised and attention focused on
attempts to create new infrastructure, for instance by extending the internet. The new  infrastructure
has  enabled  globalisation  to  take  a  large  step  forward.  A  good  example  of  a  field  where  the  new
technology has been utilised for strong growth is the financial sector. No one now dwells on the fact
that the financial sector largely stands or falls with the new technology; it has become commonplace.
TV satellites and the internet have paved the way for new and better means of communication. That in
turn has provided a base for the growth  of many new types  of services. Many people  now  use the
internet  for  bank  transactions.  Buying  and  selling  goods  on  the  internet  is  still  fairly  limited  but  is
growing. Today, most people in Sweden have access to news and entertainment from all parts of the
world. Firms have had to adapt to new markets and new conditions for distribution. New enterprises
and new rules follow in their wake.
As the new technology becomes cheaper, it also becomes available for more and more applications.
One  example  is  biotechnology,  where  the  conditions  for  research  and  product  development  have
changed completely.
New  companies  are  now  being  established.  Swedish  enterprises  have  quickly  gained  a  leading
position in the new fields. Sweden can be said to act as something of a European centre for the new
information  technology.  Even  the  older  companies,  such  as  large  state-owned  enterprises,  are
adapting to the new technology.
The ability to transform a small, open economy is again proving feasible. The key to growth has been
the  capacity  to  introduce  innovations  and  get  the  whole  economy  to  expand  on  a  wide  front  in
connection  with  the  historical  ‘revolutions’.  But  as  I  have  shown,  growth  is  not  just  a  matter  of  the
innovations as such; it also involves their spread. In other words, an invention by itself is not enough.
                                                     
5 Greenwood, J. & Yorukoglu, M. (1997), 1974, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, June, pp. 49–95.
4
BIS Review 10/2001
A country must also possess or create the appropriate structures that can enable growth to really get
going.  Perhaps  one  of  the  principal  driving  forces  is  knowledge,  as  Alfred  Marshall,  the  father  of
modern political economy, already pointed out in the late 19th century.
Remember that a long time usually elapses before these changes occur in earnest. Railways existed
as a technical innovation  well before the construction of railroads took off. The automobile  saw  the
light  of  day  long  before  the  era  of  motoring.  So  the  development  of  new  systems  and  new
infrastructure takes time — in some cases a long time. Basically it is a matter of societal changes and
they do not happen overnight.
At the same time, these periods of change are crucially important for economic development. In the
centuries before the 1800s economic growth measured as GDP per capita averaged only 0.1 to 0.2
per cent a year. At that rate, doubling the standard of living took roughly 500 years. The change was
obviously hardly noticeable to a single generation. In the first half of the 19th century, when agriculture
was transformed in Sweden, GDP growth per capita averaged 0.4 per cent a year. Even at that rate,
standards of living did not improve dramatically. From 1850 up to  the  present, however, per capital
GDP has grown at an average annual rate of about 2  per cent, leading to  a notable change  in our
living conditions. With that rate, the standard  of  living  doubles  every  35  years,  which  means  that  a
marked improvement has been experienced by each generation.
Concluding remarks
The points I have tried to make in the light of the historical perspective can be summarised as follows:
•  Despite  falling  prices  for  IT  shares  and  the  economic  slowdown  in  the  United  States,  the  IT
revolution has come to stay. In fact it has only just started.
•  The development of the new information technology will continue in the coming decades and bring
about  considerable  changes  in  many  walks  of  life.  This  refers,  of  course,  to  new  production
processes, new products, new forms of consumption and new consumable goods and services.
This may affect the location of production and thereby employment. But everything suggests that
the  new  technology  will  also  give  rise  to  new  lifestyles,  affecting  culture  and  perhaps  even  the
political  system  and  economic  policy.  All  this  will  happen  in  ways  we  cannot  predict  today,
although certain historical patterns are perhaps discernible.
•  Future economic developments will suffer setbacks, either milder or more troublesome than those
in the past, depending not least on the general direction of economic policy in each period. The
setbacks will probably mean that the economy moves backwards one step after already taking two
steps forwards.
•  The  forcefulness  of  the  economic  advance  will  probably  also  depend  on  the  extent  to  which
various institutions in society manage to support rather than obstruct the transformation; in other
words,  how  well  the  educational  system,  taxation  and  various  social  security  systems,  for
example, are suited to the new era’s inherent requirements.
•  To conclude with some words about the role of the central bank in the environment I have just
described, I should say that it involves promoting the payment system’s stability and efficiency in
the face of fluctuations in expectations and production. One way of doing this is to combat both
inflation and deflation. Another is to ensure that banks and other financial enterprises do not take
undue risks. In these ways it is hopefully possible to mitigate the effects over time of the setbacks
that tend to be associated with a process of rapid transformation.
BIS Review 10/2001
5
