Stephen Grenville: The Australian economy
Notes  for  a  talk  by  Stephen  Grenville,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  ABN
AMRO Australia Day Conference, held in Tokyo on 23 March 2001.
 After nine years of excellent growth, the Australian national accounts recorded a fall in the December
quarter. I want to put this in context, saying something about what happened and what it might mean
for the future. Australia's record of growth in the 1990s was not a fluke or coincidence - it was a result
of good fundamentals: that has not changed, and so our prospects are still good.
What happened?
With the benefit of hindsight, the fall in the December quarter might be seen this way:
• 
in the first half of the year, there was an upsurge in residential construction, with a very substantial
"pull forward" of  work to avoid the GST. This "pull forward", mechanically,  left a  big hole  in  the
second half of the year;
in a low inflation world - where producers pass on price increases only with some trepidation - the
threefold sources of pressure on prices (GST, exchange rate and oil) squeezed cash-flows and
profits.  When  this  is  combined  with  the  disruption  and  general  choler  associated  with  the
introduction of the new tax regime, small and medium business confidence took a hit,
 •  policy settings operated in an environment where cost-push price pressures were very strong.
Let  me  say  a  bit  more  about  each  of  these  aspects  -  the  cause  of  the  GDP  fall;  the  short-term
temporary  shocks  which  the  economy  experienced  in  the  second  half  of  2000;  and  the  stance  of
policy.
(a) The construction sector
It may seem improbable that a sector accounting for only 5 per cent of the economy should bulk so
large in this story. So I will have to ask your patience while I give the detail.
Residential construction was, even without the GST, reaching the mature phase of its usual cycle as
the  economy  entered  2000.  Such  was  the  frenzy  to  get  construction  done  before  the  GST,  that
avoiding the tax became an end in itself: people were paying more than 10 per cent extra in order to
attempt to complete work ahead of a 10 per cent tax. We heard few complaints from the construction
sector, but many stories of seven-day working weeks and very significant pressures on construction
contract prices, as builders attempted to ration the demands on their capacity. It was to be expected -
indeed it was inevitable - that this frenzy had to end in the second half of the year, with the reversal
coinciding with what was probably the natural inflection-point of the building cycle. This conjuncture
gave rise to the sharpest quarterly fall in housing activity ever recorded in the Australian statistics (and
2
BIS Review 23/2001
the  largest  half-yearly  fall  too  -  by  a  large  margin).  Overall,  the  September  quarter  was  hard  to
evaluate,  because  of  the  effect  of  the  Olympics  -  where  sports-crazed  fans  added  to  demand  by
spending their money on getting to the Games, and subtracted from it by staying at home to watch on
TV. If we take out dwellings and a crude adjustment for the Olympics, we note that the remaining 95
per cent of the economy was growing at a rate of a little under 4 per cent through 2000 (in fact, a little
faster in the second half than in the first).
You might say that the profile of residential construction should have been predicted (and in its broad
outline was certainly foreseen). What was not foreseen was, first, the size of this fall and, second, the
degree of confidence-sapping annoyance with the administration of the GST. The basic point here is
clear: without the "tail" of the construction sector wagging the dog of GDP, any slowdown would have
been moderate, thus continuing the economic performance of the 1990s.
 (b) Cost pressures
Business  confidence,  particularly  that  of  small  businesses,  was  falling  well  before  the  GDP  figures
were  made  public.  Part  of  this  was  clearly  related  to  the  decline  in  the  housing  sector  and  part  to
difficulties  which  small  business  was  having  in  adapting  to  the  administration  of  the  GST.  But,  by
January 2001, there was another piece of data pointing to an additional factor. Paradoxically, it was
the unexpectedly good performance of the CPI in the December quarter. The second half of the year
had seen three strong cost-push inflationary pressures - the GST adding 10 per cent to many prices;
an  exchange  rate  which  had  fallen  15  per  cent  over  the  first  ten  months  of  2000;  and  a  world
petroleum price which was 87 per cent higher (in terms of Australian dollars) than eighteen months
earlier.  The  cost-push  pressures  from  oil  and  the  exchange  rate  were  showing  quite  clearly  in
producer prices, with input prices for manufacturing rising by almost 20 per cent during the calendar
year.  Faced  with  these  cost  pressures,  it  looks  as  though  many  producers  (particularly  in
manufacturing) found it difficult or impossible to pass on these price increases quickly, particularly in
an environment where low inflation was well established, competition was vigorous and there was a
fair bit of "moral suasion". Quantifying this price squeeze is quite difficult, and assessing its role in the
slowdown more difficult still, because the starting point of profits was so strong. And, of course, there
were some sectors (notably exports) where profits were substantially boosted by the lower exchange
rate. But there is little doubt that some businesses felt squeezed, and this had a general dampening
effect on their animal spirits.
(c) Policy setting
It  is  hard  to  argue  that  the  downturn  was  caused  by  tight  macro-policy  settings.  The  GST  was
accompanied by a reduction in income tax which was designed to be larger than the GST effect - i.e.
there  was over-compensation for the GST. While the budget continued to show a surplus,  it  was  a
surplus smaller than the previous year, which in macro-policy terms is expansionary. Official interest
rates were raised by 150 basis points between November 1999 and August 2000, starting from a low
point established during the Asian economic crisis. Not only is it hard to believe that monetary policy is
anything like that powerful (particularly as the last of the increases - in August - had so little time to
BIS Review 23/2001
3
have effect), but the proximate cause of the sharp slowing is clearly found elsewhere. This is not to
claim that monetary policy has no effect on the economy - I am hardly going to do that. But it is to
assert that - with lending rates lower (in nominal and real terms) at their recent peak than at the low
point of the mid 1990s and with demand for credit still strong at these interest rates - the setting of
monetary policy cannot be seen as a principal actor.
Could the economy have successfully negotiated the period of robust growth, and rising inflation, in
the first half of 2000, in the face of strong downward pressure on the exchange rate, with interest rates
maintained at 43/4 per cent? That setting would, of course, have been well below the United States
and we would have been the only country in the developed world not to raise interest rates. The policy
environment in the second half of 2000 was no easier. Among the three price shocks (GST, exchange
rate  and  oil  prices),  only  the  last  was  a  pure  textbook  "supply-side"  shock.  But,  together,  they  had
many of the same characteristics - cost-push pressures on prices. As it became clear, with the CPI
result in January, that these cost pressures were well contained, policy responded quickly and half the
increase has been reversed.
Why was it unexpected?
One  answer  would  be  to  acknowledge  the  imprecision  of  forecasts  -  one  of  the  few  certainties  of
forecasting  is  that  outcomes  will  differ  from  forecasts.  After  a  lifetime  of  observing  the  economy,  a
sage concluded that "nothing is certain; anything is possible; and everything depends on everything
else". And of course this is part of the story. But a  powerful element in this story is simply  that the
economic  fundamentals  were  (and  are)  so  good,  that  it  is  still,  even  now,  hard  to  accept  that  an
economy  without  imbalances,  which  has  capacity  to  grow  further,  and  with  accommodative  policy
settings should change direction so suddenly.
Contrast  the  state  of  the  economy  in  2000  with  the  history  of  post-WWII  cycles.  The  grand,  if
depressing, tradition was that Australian expansions came to a halt either because they ran into an
external  constraint  (in  the  pre-1984  world,  a  current  account  crisis),  or  because  there  was  a
wages/inflation break-out. Policy could not offset these imbalances in a subtle or gentle way, so strong
use of the policy levers was often also "present at the scene of the crime". Hence the characterisation
of policy as "stop/go". How different was the world of 2000: an improving external position (improving,
uncharacteristically,  despite  good  growth);  inflation  well  contained  both  currently  and  in  prospect
(reflected in bond yields, where the $A bond yield has remained just a few tenths of a per cent higher
than  the  US$  bond);  wages  growing  at  a  moderate  pace;  a  budget  continuing  in  surplus  but
nevertheless able to provide offset to the GST and overall macro stimulus. Moreover, the economy
itself was in good shape. Fifteen years of reform (on tariffs, privatisation, labour market, competition
and policy framework) had produced productivity growth during the nine-year expansion of the 1990s
better, even, than the much-vaunted US performance. Productivity brought with it the virtuous circle of
strong  profits  and  non-inflationary  real  wage  increases:  there  were  none  of  the  factor-share
imbalances that hobbled growth in the 1970s.
One further point is worth making.
4
BIS Review 23/2001
to 
like 
technology  was  where 
The  main  criticism  of  the  Australian  economy  during  2000  was  that  we  were  an  "Old"  economy,
unfavourably  contrasting  with  the  "New"  economy  populated  by  companies  which  worked  Click  to
exclusively  in  the  ethereal  world  of  cyberspace.  A  view  larger  procession  of  foreign  business
luminaries  visited  Australia  last  year  (curiously,  those  who  came  extolling  the  virtues  of  the  virtual
economy still found old-fashioned enjoyment in watching the Olympics in the flesh) to promote their
companies,  advising  us 
ignore  our
comparative  advantage  by  following  their
example. We argued that the application of
the  new 
the
productivity  benefits  would  lie,  and  that
Australia  was on the forefront in  exploiting
these - and we had the runs on the board
to prove it.
But  this  was  lost  in  the  paeans  of  praise
and  thunderous  applause  for  the  stars  of
the  cyberworld.  How  a  year  of  collapsing
NASDAQ  can  change  perceptions!  As
Warren  Buffett  has  observed:  "nothing
sedates  rationality 
large  doses  of
effortless  money",  but  eventually  reality
returns.The 
productivity-enhanced  Old
Economy is looking rather better (would we
want to be competing with Korea and Taiwan to produce computer chips, whose price is falling even
faster  than  the  NASDAQ?).  It  was  Buffett  who  reminded  us  all,  several  years  ago,  that  being  "first
mover" in a vast and exciting new industry was not a guarantee of success or profits: history records
the  low  survivorship  among  the  pioneer  firms  in  automobiles  and  aircraft.  This  is  not  to  deny  the
enormous benefits of the new technology - just to observe that in history it has been the users of the
technology, rather than the producers, who have benefited most. Just as Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway
has  returned  to  favour  following  several  years  in  the  wilderness  (having  recently  bought  into  such
unfashionable industries as boots, brick-making, carpet-manufacture and insulation), so too the tide of
opinion may turn on Australia's product mix.
Despite the longevity of the expansion, the imbalances which normally characterise the mature phase
of  the  cycle  are  not  present  in  Australia.  I  can  make  this  point  more  vividly  by  contrasting  the
Australian position with that of the United States, where there is a renewed interest in the "trade cycle"
analysis which, in the immediate post-WWII decades, dominated short-term economic commentary. Its
characteristics were:
•  an inventory cycle, where there was over-production during the upswing to meet growing inventory
needs,  followed  by  an  exacerbation  of  the  downturn  as  inventories  adjusted  in  the  opposite
direction;
•  an  investment  boom  which  uses  up  all  the  best  investment  opportunities  and  whose  euphoria
drives investment into marginally profitable projects;
related  to  this,  funding  (particularly  equity  finance)  which  had  been  liberally  given  in  the  early
phase  of  the  cycle  dries  up  as  the  financial  sector  comes  to  recognise  the  degree  of  over-
commitment and attempts to compensate (or over-compensate) for this;
 •  asset prices, driven up by over-optimism about profit potential, spill over into investment decisions;
•  households,  buoyed  by  rising  asset  prices  and  the  general  euphoria,  run  down  their  savings,
leaving them vulnerable to a sudden change in confidence.
All this jerky dynamic seems very relevant to America, and inapplicable to Australia. Let's contrast the
cyclical position in the two countries.
First and foremost is the contrast between the share markets. With no NASDAQ bubble, the Australian
equity market has continued to increase steadily throughout the period, and is currently still close to its
peak, contrasting to, say, the Wilshire which is nearly 30 per cent below. Australia has no stories of
14-year-old  boy-millionaires  who  ramped  their  chosen  shares  via  a  chat-room  canard:  nor,  more
substantively, of entrepreneurs with backwards-facing baseball caps attracting serious funding on the
promise of a rapid "cash-burn". So we didn't get the same degree of distorted investment decisions
and ephemeral wealth-driven consumption.
BIS Review 23/2001
5
Business  fixed  investment  expanded  rapidly  in
America  during  the  1990s,  to  well  above  its
historical  average.  Investment  in  information
technology  and  communications  equipment
surged, with capacity to produce this equipment
expanding by 50 per cent in the past year alone.
In contrast, in Australia business investment has
trended upwards during much of the 1990s, but
in recent years has fallen back a little, to remain
around  its  long-term  average.  There  is  in  no
sense  a  problem  of  over-investment.  Slow  but
steady  wins 
the  race.  Similarly,  Australian
household saving has not followed the American
example into negative territory.
The US financial sector is showing all the signs
of concern about rising risks and lowering profit
expectations in the business sector.
Spreads between yields on US Treasury securities and corporate bonds have widened noticeably. The
data  on  IPOs  shows  that  it  became  increasingly  difficult  during  the  year  to  get  these  away.
Commercial banks became more cautious in  their lending,  particularly  after  the  large  amounts  they
had directed to Telecom companies. By contrast, in Australia there has been no noticeable widening
of risk spreads in the corporate bond market over the past year, and credit has been easily available
from intermediaries,  with no reports  of  significant  changes  in  banks'  lending  attitudes.  The  financial
sector itself is in good shape.
One  of  the  more  interesting  contrasts  is  with
the  exchange 
rate.  The  normal  cyclical
response of exchange rates is to strengthen in
the face of economic expansion. So it was not
surprising to see the strength of the US dollar
over recent  years - only that  it has continued
to  strengthen 
face  of  a  growing
perception  of  a  likely  slowing.  Given  that  the
evidence of the early 1980s pointed to a two-
year  lag  between  exchange  rates  and  their
effect  on  activity  in  the  United  States,  an
exchange  rate  well  above  its  average  of  the
past decade would not seem to provide much
protection  in  the  face  of  a  slowing.  The
Australian dollar, in contrast, has been low in
terms,  providing  a  useful
real  effective 
buffering 
face  of  a  slower  world
economy, as was demonstrated during the 1998 Asian economic crisis.
the 
the 
in 
in 
Looking ahead
Just as the events of the second half of last year look clearer in hindsight, we doubtless have more to
learn about this period, and may well need to add to our current interpretation. But if this analysis is
correct, then the events so far would point to a relatively short-lived slowing. As the temporary once-off
effects  of  GST,  construction  "pull  forward",  the  Olympics  and  the  threefold  price  pressures  pass
through the system, the fundamental health of the economy can reassert itself. This is all the more so
because  the  economy  has  two  significant  forces  of  stimulus  working  on  it  -  the  Budget  and  a  very
competitive exchange rate. Let me say more about these two issues.
I can recall, some years ago, Larry Summers talking very positively about America having "reloaded
the fiscal cannon" - with the clear implication that it was ready, primed and could be used if necessary
for fiscal policy to take its role in supporting activity. The same is clearly the case in Australia, where
several  years  of  good  surpluses  have  created  the  opportunity  to  provide  macro  stimulus  while
maintaining the longer-term credentials of fiscal responsibility.
6
BIS Review 23/2001
the  super-competitive  exchange 
The second clear form of macro stimulus comes
from 
rate.
Central banks are always  uncomfortable  with  a
weakening  exchange  rate,  and 
there  have
certainly been moments of great discomfort over
the past year. But, as usual in economics, it's an
ill wind that blows nobody any good - the super-
competitive  exchange  rate  is  a  sure  form  of
stimulus  for  the  economy,  and  while  there  are
(as  usual)  lags  in  its  operation  -  particularly  on
the export side - there is  little doubt that  it  is a
powerful  effect.  This  is  already  showing  on
imports  and  exports  (where  non-rural  exports
are up 12 per cent in volume terms over 2000),
and in a current account deficit which is running
at  a  little  over  3  per  cent  of  GDP,  and  closing
rapidly.
To make such positive assessments risks being
declared to be another Pollyanna. To provide some balance, let me recall a couple of possibilities that
might make such a satisfactory outcome harder to achieve.
The first caveat that should be registered is the state of the world. The extraordinary period of growth
experienced by America has been a powerful force for good in the world at large, and if America slows
sharply and stays slow (which the earlier discussion of the imbalances there would suggest has to be
more  than  a  mere  possibility),  then,  as  one  of  my  colleagues  said  recently,  it  would  be  hard  for
Australia  to  remain  unaffected  by  this.  What  should  be  said,  at  the  same  time,  is  that  the  good
fundamentals and super-competitive exchange rate give us the best immunisation available: no-one
can do more.
I  spent  some  time  saying  why  Australia  is  not  subject  to  the  old-fashioned  form  of  cyclical  over-
expansion, as is characterised by America. But there is one element of the old textbook cycle which is
both  unpredictable  and  pervasive  in  its  effects  -  animal  spirits.  It  is  a  truism  that  the  path  of  the
economy depends to a large degree on the maintenance of confidence and business optimism.
Conclusion
It is possible, of course, for an economy to "talk itself" into a period of slow growth, and to some extent
we are in danger of doing this. The schadenfreude that comes with being the stoic bearer of gloomy
tidings  -  the  delicious  adrenalin-pumping  frisson  that  accompanies  the  breathless  reporting  of  any
piece of weak data - is an understandable characteristic of human nature. Bad news is always more
interesting  than  good.  Plane  crashes  are  more  noteworthy  than  safe  arrivals.  But  some  clear-air
turbulence shouldn't be a cause for panic. With the fundamentals of the economy in such good shape,
no imbalances, capacity for the expansion to run further and policy settings designed to help growth,
the prospects must be for a relatively quick rebound of activity.
BIS Review 23/2001
7
