David Clementi: Risk sensitivity and the New Basel Accord
Speech by David Clementi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at a Financial Services Authority
Conference:  “Reforming  Capital  Adequacy  for  Banks,  Building  Societies  and  Investment  Banks”,
London, 10 April 2001.
 Introduction
It is a great pleasure for me to be adding my remarks today to those of Bill McDonough and Howard
Davies. I  would first like to congratulate  Bill, as chairman of the Basel Committee,  on  the  very  real
achievement that this new capital framework represents.  Products that  are 'designed by committee'
normally  come  in  for  some  fairly  trenchant  criticism,  but  this  one  represents  a  new  milestone  in
financial regulation, one which I believe will strongly influence how all financial firms, not just banks,
come to be regulated in the future. I know it has been a lot of hard work, and I don't just mean the
shoulder-strain involved in carrying the document onto airplanes! Unfortunately the hard work is not
over yet, both for the authorities and for the banking community - even looking beyond finalisation of
these  proposals,  supervisors  and  banks  will  of  course  have  to  see  through  a  long  and  complex
implementation process. But this is not to underestimate the progress that has been made and it is
certainly a good moment to take stock of the proposals as they stand.
Although  underpinned  by  the  straightforward  proposition  that  capital  requirements  should  be  more
sensitive to risk, the new Basel proposals are frequently referred to as a 'package'. I would describe
the  components  as,  first,  some  very  difficult  technical  thinking,  which  has  addressed  questions
regarding  the  purpose  of  capital  that  were  barely  even  thought  of  back  in  1988.  The  second
component  is,  unsurprisingly,  pragmatic  compromise.  The  result  is,  I  think,  a  reasonably  coherent
whole;  I  know  that  those  involved  have  tried  to  think  about  the  sum  of  the  parts  as  well  as  the
individual parts. And it is this question of the overall, long-term impact of the new Accord that I would
like to focus on today. The Bank of England has  as two  of its three core purposes  maintaining  the
stability of the financial system and seeking to ensure the effectiveness of UK financial services. Both
are  relevant  to  the  discussion  of  capital  adequacy.  The  Bank,  participating  in  the  discussion  of  the
New Accord as a member of the Basel Supervisors Committee, has looked at the proposals, not only
from the perspective of financial stability but also with regard to the efficiency of the banking system.
My  intention  this  morning  is  to  start  by  discussing  how  the  principle  of  risk  sensitivity  has  been
translated into the New Accord. I want then to consider the question of whether the proposals have in
some cases achieved too little risk sensitivity and the implications of this for the level of risk capital in
the system. I would then like to turn to the opposite question: whether in some circumstances the new
proposals  will  achieve  too  much  risk  sensitivity,  and  to  discuss  this  question  in  the  context  of  the
debate about whether internal ratings will amplify procyclicality. I shall also say something about the
implications of this for lending to small and medium-sized companies. Finally I would like to end by
saying a few words about forward-looking provisioning and liquidity. These are, to my mind, important
adjuncts to the regulation of capital and it is important that they are not overlooked in the current focus
on capital adequacy.
Risk sensitivity in the new Accord
The common theme behind the revisions to the Basel Accord is greater risk sensitivity. This is a move
we strongly support; risk insensitive capital requirements lead to some very perverse incentives and
have  contributed  to  a  number  of  real-world  problems.  This  has  been  less  the  case  in  this  country,
where  of  course  the  FSA  supplements  the  crude  minimum  Basel  requirement  with  tailored  capital
ratios, than in some other countries, but we have not been immune even in the UK. Certainly I wonder
if over-investment in highly-speculative real estate development, a common precursor to a number of
banking  crises,  would  have  been  quite  so  prevalent  if  capital  requirements  had  better  reflected  the
often-volatile  nature  of  such  lending.  And  many  commentators  have  expressed  worry  about  the
possible  role  that  the  current,  uniformly  rather  low,  capital  requirements  for  short-term  interbank
lending played in the massive build up of capital flows to Asian countries prior to the 1997/98 crisis.
BIS Review 29/2001
1
In several developed countries, of course, the risk insensitivity of the capital requirements has led to a
whole industry of capital arbitrage, which has swelled to enormous proportions over the past 10 years
or so. It has been estimated that by March 1998, non-mortgage securitisations by the 10 largest US
bank holding companies amounted to around $200bn, or more than 25% of these banks' risk-weighted
loans. A combination of conscientious supervisors, market discipline and relatively benign economic
conditions for much of the past decade has, of course, meant that such arbitrage has not so far led to
any major problems in developed countries, but the issue is not one that the authorities can afford to
ignore. Ultimately, capital arbitrage and capital requirements that do not capture accurately the risks
that banks are actually running mean that we risk tolerating unsound banks and jeopardising financial
stability.
Getting the level of capital requirements right
So  the  move  to  introduce  greater  risk  sensitivity  is  right.  But  determining  the  optimum  level  of  risk
sensitivity for a common set of rules intended to apply to banks in a wide range of different markets,
countries and businesses is more difficult. And so there are two questions I want to go on to explore.
First, have the proposals achieved enough risk sensitivity? And second, do they achieve too much risk
sensitivity, particularly in the context of the debate about whether ratings amplify procyclicality?
As I said earlier, the new Accord has been designed to incorporate some real-world pragmatism. A
major  achievement  of  the  existing  1988  Accord,  and  one  that  we  would  like  to  see  preserved,  has
been its near-universal worldwide acceptance as the minimum standard for banking stability. So, if this
huge advantage is not to be lost, it means that the new Accord has to be adaptable to a wide range of
situations, to accommodate not only differing levels of sophistication amongst banks but also differing
levels of expertise amongst supervisors. The answer, unsurprisingly, is a menu approach. For credit
risk, alongside the greatly more risk sensitive internal ratings based approach, we have the option of a
revised standard approach. This is certainly a step forward from the existing approach, but it remains
a relatively simple framework. In its implementation, for many banks it may prove very simple indeed,
since the large bulk of their loans are likely to have no ratings and so fall into the unrated bucket. The
result will be little change on the existing Accord.
I think this is inevitable. Whilst I would hope that all banks have some form of internal ratings system,
and  whilst  the  Committee's  proposals  are  intended  to  offer  incentives  to  banks  to  upgrade  their
systems  to  the  Committee's  standard  for  recognition,  banks  cannot  be  forced  to  adopt  loan  ratings
systems  that  conform  to  the  Committee's  criteria,  and  nor  is  there  an  unlimited  global  supply  of
supervisors  capable  of  monitoring  such  systems.  In  the  absence  of  external  ratings  -  which  the
Committee is not in the business of promoting - there has to be a simple uniform weighting on unrated
credits.
While this outcome may be inevitable, we do need to think carefully about the possible consequences.
First, given that we have to have a simple alternative to the internal ratings approach, it is important
that the new Accord provides the right degree of capital incentive for banks to progress over time to
using  internal  ratings.  It  is  the  Committee's  firm  intention  to  ensure  that  the  final  Accord  provides
modest incentives for banks to adopt the internal ratings approach. There is a conservative bias in the
standard  approach;  and  internal  ratings  in  measuring  risks  more  accurately  should,  for  lower  risk
business, result on balance in lower capital requirements.
The objective of ensuring some capital incentive for banks to progress to risk sensitive measurement
does, of course, have to be balanced against the objective of roughly maintaining the overall amount
of  capital  in  the  financial  system.  It  would  be  dangerous  to  financial  stability  if  we  gave  so  large  a
capital  carrot  to  banks  to  use  the  internal  ratings  based  approach  that  many  of  the  world's  most
important financial institutions, which account for the  vast  bulk of global and G10  domestic banking
activity, saw  a significant reduction of their regulatory capital requirement. It is the  need  to  balance
incentives with the maintenance of overall capital levels which makes this issue a difficult one. This,
along  with  a  large  number  of  other  questions  about  the  impact  of  the  proposals,  will  be  further
examined  by  the  Committee  in  the  course  of  a  quantitative  impact  study  to  be  carried  out  before
finalising the proposals. The Bank of England has been asked to co-ordinate this work calibrating the
impact of the new Accord on individual institutions and on the system as a whole. I recognise that the
time allowed for this exercise is short, but I hope very much that we can count on the contribution and
co-operation of the banking community.
2
BIS Review 29/2001
Turning to the second possible consequence of maintaining a risk insensitive alternative approach, we
may find that the combination of having some banks on the IRB approach and some on the standard
approach will, perversely, introduce a financial stability risk that is not present with all banks on the
standard approach. This is that the more sophisticated institutions would have to hold more regulatory
capital against weak loans than banks that remain on the standard approach. Over time, therefore, we
could  find  that  the  worst-quality  credits  could  gravitate  to  those  banks  which  are  the  least  able  to
assess,  price  or  monitor  them.  However,  I  do  not  wish  to  suggest  such  a  scenario  without  also
highlighting how we may guard against it.
First, of course, the role of Pillar 2 - individual assessment of banks by supervisors with appropriate
action to follow - will be extremely important in ensuring that all banks, not just those on the internal
ratings  approach,  have  a  level  of  capital  appropriate  to  their  risks.  Secondly,  the  Committee  has
clearly  emphasised  that  the  standard  100%  risk  weight  for  unrated  credits  represents  a  floor.
Supervisors  are  encouraged  to  increase  this  risk  weight  when  warranted  by  the  overall  default
experience in their jurisdiction and for the particular bank concerned for their unrated exposures. And I
hope, taking a prudent approach, that the supervisors will do this. Even with the current Accord, there
are a number of countries, the UK included, that have applied capital requirements in excess of the
minimum risk weights in the Accord  and  this  does not appear to  have made their  banking systems
uncompetitive internationally.
Where  supervisors  do  not  currently  have  the  types  of  data  that  would  enable  them  to  form  a
judgement on the appropriate risk weight for unrated credits, I hope that the disclosure requirements in
Pillar 3 of the new Accord will help them. Corporate bankruptcy rates, bank provisioning and write off
experience, bond yields and default experience, together with data from any banks that are on internal
ratings, could all be used to help the authorities form a view of typical or average credit risk for bank
portfolios in their countries. This sort of overall, aggregate monitoring of the adequacy of the standard
risk weights will be particularly important for developing countries who may initially face some resource
constraints in implementing Pillar 2. It should result in an overall adjustment of the weight on unrated
exposures, if risks appear to be higher than the capital set aside to back them. This would need to be
reinforced  by  supervisors  assessing  for  all  their  standard-approach  banks  individually  whether  their
write-off  rate  is  compatible  with  the  'standard'  100%  capital  weight,  or  whether  a  higher  figure  is
needed.
Credit risk mitigation
So there may be elements in the new Accord that achieve too little risk sensitivity but I think this was
unavoidable and, with Pillars 2 and 3 of the Accord, supervisors have the scope to see that they do
not give rise to problems. However, I do not want to leave this question before touching on one more
issue. This is the extent of the recognition of credit risk mitigation techniques. The new risk sensitive
framework  goes  much  further  than  the  introduction  of  internal  ratings  -  another  area  of  greatly
increased risk sensitivity is the new regime for credit risk mitigation. Again, the Committee's proposals
here represent a considered and careful balance. On the one hand, the objective has been to provide
in the new  Accord a significant expansion,  within  a menu approach, to the recognition of collateral,
credit  derivatives  and  guarantees.  But  this  is  balanced  on  the  other  hand  by  specifying  legal  and
operational  standards  that  must  be  met  before  relief  is  granted  and  setting  capital  requirements
against residual risks. This may - indeed is intended to - lead to much greater incentives to acquire
good  quality  collateral  and  other  credit  insurance.  This  will  be  positive,  provided  the  necessary
operational  standards  including  legal  robustness  are  observed,  and  provided,  as  I  said  on  another
recent occasion, that the processes, volumes, and end results of transfers of credit risk are reasonably
transparent.
I am aware, however, that some initial comment from the banking industry is that the Committee has
not afforded enough recognition to physical collateral, particularly under the standard and 'foundation
IRB' approaches. In this respect they think the Committee achieved too little risk sensitivity. The idea
of a consultation paper is to elicit comment, but there are problems with the recognition  of physical
collateral that need to be considered. One is the difficulty of pinpointing accurate valuations for such
collateral - much of it does not have anything by way of a valuation history. And values for physical
collateral are also likely to be cyclical. When manufacturing companies are in recession, the values of
related  assets  -  plant  and  machinery  or  inventories  -  are  likely  to  suffer  too.  Before  regulators
recognise more physical collateral, the banking industry needs to come forward with ideas on how to
solve this problem.
BIS Review 29/2001
3
Procyclicality of capital requirements
I want now to turn to my second question; whether we might in some sense be introducing too much
risk sensitivity. Under this heading the issue I want to discuss is the danger of 'procyclicality', that is
the  possibility  that  regulatory  capital  requirements  will  reinforce  cyclical  movements  in  the
macroeconomy.  There  was  some  element  of  that  in  the  original  Accord  -  because  in  a  downturn
specific  provisions  and  write-offs  increase,  which  reduces  banks'  capital,  and  may  diminish  their
appetite to make new loans. However, under the new Accord this will be reinforced by the possibility
that, as the condition of borrowers deteriorates during an economic downturn, they will be downgraded
by banks with the consequence that extra capital has to be set aside. On some estimates, bank capital
requirements could as much as double during a cyclical downturn.
This is clearly an issue of major concern to central banks. The risk is not a theoretical one; there is
evidence that external ratings to some degree behave procyclically, while banks' internal ratings are
liable to be even more so. Clearly here again a balance has to be struck between our desire to have
the new framework incorporate and reflect current practice at banks, and ensuring that these current
practices  do  not  lead  to  economic  volatility.  The  Committee's  statement  that  ratings  should  not  be
'point in time' but 'must represent a conservative view of a long run average probability of default for
the  borrower  grades'  attempts  to  introduce  such  a  balance.  Such  ratings  ought  to  be  reasonably
robust  to  the  normal  ups  and  downs  of  economic  activity.  The  Committee  has  backed  this  up  with
requirements  for  minimum  lengths  of  data  histories  to  underlie  the  internal  ratings,  so  helping  to
ensure  that  they  incorporate  some  experience  of  economic  low  points.  Over-optimism  by  banks  in
allocating ratings could also induce procyclicality. The Committee proposes several checks on this. In
particular, supervisors will look at the ratings allocated to some individual loans, and also compare the
distribution of loans across rating bands with those of different banks. Ultimately, of course,  we  will
have to rely on those charged with daily supervision of banks, backed up by the  Pillar  3 disclosure
requirements, to ensure that ratings are not set in a way which risks undue procyclicality.
Impact of the Basel Accord on SMEs
Leaving aside the issue of how the risk sensitive capital requirements will behave over an economic
cycle,  I  would  also  like  to  touch  on  the  question  of  how  they  may  affect  the  supply  and  pricing  of
finance to certain types  of borrower.  If  risk  sensitivity  means  a  greater  distinction  between  different
types  of  borrower,  we  need  to  consider  carefully  whether  the  right  outcome  has  been  achieved.  A
specific concern, which I know has occupied a number of members of the Basel committee, is how
small and medium sized enterprises might be affected, given their importance to economic activity and
their reliance on bank finance. It is not yet clear how the proposed new Accord would affect the pricing
of finance for SMEs. Many factors are relevant, including whether banks are on the standard or IRB
approaches,  what  types  of  collateral  or  guarantees  SMEs  can  offer,  whether  the  borrowers  are
classed as part of the retail portfolio (as very small enterprises will be), whether the regulator sets the
bank's overall target capital ratio (which in the UK is set individually for banks) and how much excess
capital the bank has over that. It seem likely that in the UK at least the overall result for many SMEs
will  be  'no  change',  not  least  because  banks'  economic  capital  and  pricing  is  often  already  risk-
adjusted. But I know that a number of major British banks are concerned about the impact on SMEs,
and the Bank is working closely with them to understand the precise factors behind this, and to ensure
that there is no inadvertent increase in capital requirements for finance to smaller companies.
Ultimately the best guarantee of a stable and reasonably priced supply of credit to SMEs, as to other
borrowers, is a stable and competitive banking industry. In the UK, moves have recently been made to
improve the competitiveness of SME finance; I believe that the new Basel framework could in turn be
a positive contribution to banking stability but we stand ready to monitor developments.
Although  this  conference  is  essentially  about  the  issue  of  banking  capital,  I  would  like  to  end  by
emphasising that capital is only one component of banking stability; many other factors also come into
play.  In  the  field  of  prudential  regulation,  I  would  like  to  highlight  two:  valuation  and  provisioning
frameworks, and liquidity management and regulation. There will be little point to all the Committee's
work  on  risk  sensitive  capital  measures  if  this  is  not  underpinned  by  adequate  loan  valuation  and
provisioning  practices  -  preferably  ones  which  incorporate  a  forward-looking  view  of  risk  and
deterioration  in  loans.  A  lot  of  valuable  work  has  been  done  on  loan  provisioning  by  the  Basel
Committee and other bodies, and I welcome the debate that is currently being sponsored by the IASC
on valuation frameworks.
4
BIS Review 29/2001
Secondly,  adequate  liquidity  is  a  vital  counterpoint  to  capital  for  banks;  the  regulation  of  capital
adequacy and liquidity are interrelated. Rationally, solvency ought to be a guarantee against funding
problems, with customers happy to roll over deposits where they are confident that a bank is soundly
capitalised.  But  reason  does  not  always  prevail,  in  part  because  solvency  is  sometimes  hard  to
ascertain, more often because, swept  along  by  animal spirits, markets can behave emotionally  and
perversely. Capital adequacy and liquidity regulation are thus two sides of the same coin. Just as it
would be impossible or uneconomic to require banks to operate without risk to provide total certainty
of  solvency,  so  liquidity  regulation  is  needed  as  a  form  of  insurance.  The  issue  is  discussed  in  an
article  in  the  December  edition  of  the  Bank's  Financial  Stability  Review.  The  Basel  Supervisors'
Committee has done valuable work in examining issues and techniques in liquidity management and
this work deserves to be carried forward further. For those of you who have already digested the 500
pages of the new Basel Accord we are discussing today and are looking for some more recreational
reading,  over  the  Easter  holiday,  I  thoroughly  recommend  a  re-read  of  the  update  the  Basel
Committee published last year of its sound practices for managing liquidity risk.
In the meantime, thank you for allowing me to address you this morning.
BIS Review 29/2001
5
