Eva Srejber: How do we create stability in financial markets?
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, Second Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a public hearing in
the Riksdag: “Economic policy in a global economy - is the Tobin tax an obstacle or an opportunity?”,
Stockholm, 3 April 2001.
 Thank you for the invitation to come here. This is a subject that I am often asked to discuss in various
parts  of  the  country.  There  is  considerable  interest  in  the  challenges  facing  economic  policy  in  an
increasingly internationalised world.
The  credit  market  is  central  to  a  country's  economy.  Financial  institutes  are  needed  to  mediate
payments  for  households  and  companies,  such  as  wage  and  invoice  payments.  In  addition,  the
institutes mediate capital from savers to borrowers. This can comprise companies making investments
or  households  buying  their  own  home.  All  in  all,  a  well  functioning  financial  sector  is  a  necessary
condition for a country to achieve prosperity. However, mediating payments and lending money also
involves taking risks.
The  international  foreign  exchange  market  in  turn  links  together  the  national  credit  and  payment
markets, so that payments in one currency can be exchanged for payments in another currency. This
enables  trade,  investment  and  foreign  aid  between  countries.  International  capital  flows  enable
savings in countries with a capital surplus, after exchange on the foreign exchange market, to finance
investments  in  countries  with  a  capital  deficit.  Countries  like  Sweden  have  made  use  of  the
international  capital  market  over  the  years,  for  instance,  to  finance  large  investments  in  the
infrastructure. Historically, foreign loans and investment have played an important role in the growth
and development of poor countries.
The financial markets thus perform an important function in society. However, over the years we have
seen that major problems sometimes arise in the financial markets. One example is the Asian crisis
1997-98. It is usually  bank problems, resulting from bad loans,  which  lie  behind such crises. When
confidence  in  the  banking  system  fails,  both  domestic  and  foreign  savers  flee  the  country,  and  a
currency crisis may arise. The social costs of such a crisis are very serious. In the wake of the crises,
there is often a focus on the globalisation process in general, and the international capital markets in
particular. Demands have been made for measures to prevent the emergence of new crises. This has
included renewed discussion of the proposal for a tax on currency transactions, what is known as the
Tobin tax. However, I do not consider the Tobin tax to be the right method to use, as it does not solve
the fundamental problem, namely incorrect assessments of credit and risks and the lack of capital in
the banks to cover losses. Furthermore, I can see a number of risks if this proposal  were  adopted,
although I will return to that later. I would first like to accentuate the widespread and laborious work
carried out for many years, on both a national and international basis, to promote stability and prevent
crises from arising, but without impairing the functioning of the markets.
Experience shows that a necessary condition for avoiding crises is to pursue a fiscal and monetary
policy that  is aimed at creating stability  and  that inspires confidence.  The  common  denominator  for
countries  that  have  experienced  financial  crises  is  that  the  problems  were  based  on  mistakes  in
economic policy and deficiencies in regulatory frameworks. The financial market is often merely the
messenger  illustrating  the  fundamental  problems.  It  is  important  that  the  choice  of  exchange  rate
regime  is  in  line  with  the  economic  policy  pursued  and  with  the  capacity  of  the  economy  to  adapt.
Countries  that  have  experienced  currency  crises  during  the  1990s  have  had  fixed,  but  adjustable,
exchange rates. Today, therefore, an increasing number of countries choose  to have either floating
exchange  rates  with  inflation  targets,  or  completely  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes,  such  as  currency
boards.
Experience  also  shows  that  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  general  regulatory  framework  that  is  applied
properly, and that contains norms and institutions, in order for both national and international financial
markets to function well. Countries therefore cooperate in international organisations, such as the BIS,
the central banks' organisation in Basel, to work together on producing norms for suitable regulations
and norms in various fields important to financial stability. Great progress has been made in this field
BIS Review 27/2001
1
in recent years, both in agreeing on norms and implementing them. For instance, norms have been
produced for payment systems, accounting and auditing, bankruptcy legislation, transparency in fiscal
and  monetary  policy  and  measures  against  money  laundering.  When  I  was  the  Nordic-Baltic
representative  on  the  IMF's  Executive  Board,  we  worked  hard  to  establish  norms  for  correct  and
detailed reporting  of  economic  statistics.  The World  Bank,  the  IMF  and  other  organisations  support
countries wishing to adapt their legislation to meet the norms, by assisting with expert help. Several
Swedish experts take part in this work.
It  is  in  the  interests  of  all  nations  to  apply  these  jointly  agreed  norms,  as  this  reduces  the  risk  of
financial crises. In addition, countries that do not follow the norms will find it more difficult to borrow on
the international capital market, since lending is more risky. Access to capital will therefore be more
restricted and interest rates will be higher.
It is also in the countries' own interests that other countries meet the norms, as financial crises in one
country have a tendency to spread to other countries in similar circumstances. We saw an example of
this  during  the  Asian  crisis  1997-98.  As  Sweden  is  a  small  country  with  an  open  economy  and
therefore dependent on financial stability in the world around us, we contribute experts to the groups
working out the norms. Sweden also gives advice to countries wishing to improve their application of
these norms. Riksbank employees have provided assistance in countries all over the world, including
Latvia, Poland and Sri Lanka.
A good example of internationally agreed norms for increasing stability on the financial markets is the
capital adequacy rules for banks that were developed by the Basel Committee. These rules came into
force  in  1988  and  cover  risks  in  for  example  lending,  interest  rate  trading  and  foreign  exchange
trading. In principle, they require that the greater the risk taken by a bank, the more capital it must
hold.  As  it  costs  money  to  hold  capital,  this  creates  an  incentive  for  the  banks  to  reduce  their  risk
taking.  The  rules  also  increase  the  banks'  opportunities  to  cover  any  losses  they  may  incur.  The
current  rules  are  applied  in  more  than  120  countries.  The  proposal  for  new  capital  adequacy  rules
recently presented makes an even closer connection between the capital requirement and the risks
taken, as well as reducing regulatory arbitrage and increasing the requirement for transparency. While
the  Basel  rules  thus  reduce  excessive  risk  taking,  they  do  not  impair  transactions  made  with  the
purpose  of redistributing risks between banks, enabling a  healthy  level  of  risk  taking  to  be  attained
within  the  respective  institute.  These  transactions  contribute  to  reducing  the  banks'  risk  taking  and
currently comprise a large part of the turnover on the foreign exchange market.
Allow me to give an example of how this works. A Swedish export company with income in dollars, but
paying  out  wages  and  taxes  in  kronor,  must  exchange  dollar  income  for  kronor.  The  company
transfers the foreign exchange risk to the bank, by selling dollars for kronor. This can be done in two
ways: either the company sells the dollars when  it receives them, on the spot market, or it sells its
future dollar income as soon as it receives an order, on the forward market. In both cases the bank
buys dollars and thus takes over the foreign exchange risk. The bank also makes a charge for doing
this. Today the margins in foreign exchange trading are 0.02 per cent. The bank's foreign exchange
risk  thus  increases,  unless  another  client  happens  to  make  an  equally  large  foreign  exchange
transaction  in  the  opposite  direction  at  exactly  the  same  time,  ensuring  that  the  bank's  holdings  of
various currencies remains unchanged. This is, of course, very unlikely. The export company's foreign
exchange  transaction  therefore  gives  rise  to  several  transactions  between  banks,  with  the  aim  of
distributing  the  foreign  exchange  risk  throughout  the  banking  system.  This  means  that  the  clients'
purchases and sales of various currencies and in various banks are matched against one another, to
avoid an increase in the total risk in the banking system. The first foreign exchange transaction will
therefore lead to many new transactions before all of the banks have once again achieved a healthy
level of risk taking.
The same applies to all types of foreign exchanges - for instance, when SIDA exchanges kronor for
foreign  currency  to  provide  foreign  aid,  when  the  pension  funds  buy  foreign  shares,  when  we  buy
foreign insurance policies and when the mortgage institutes borrow abroad. I believe it is important to
be  aware  of  how  the  risk  distribution  between  the  banks  functions.  Transactions  on  the  foreign
exchange  market  do  not  need  to  be  speculative  at  all,  even  if  they  do  not  have  any  direct  link  to
payments for trade, investment or aid between countries. It is not possible to take the total of all cross-
border  payments  for  goods  and  services  and  say  that  all  other  foreign  exchange  deals  are
unnecessary.
Finally, allow me to comment on the  proposal  of  a  Tobin  tax.  Taxes  on  financial  transactions  have
already been tested in a number of countries, including Sweden. At the end of the 1980s, we had a
2
BIS Review 27/2001
securities transaction tax here. The result was that the turnover declined severely. Trade in securities
fell by around 80 per cent. Part of this trade was moved abroad and some ceased altogether. Nor did
the  securities  transaction  tax  manage  to  prevent  the  1990s  crisis.  A  Tobin  tax  would  be  difficult  to
apply, as it assumes that all countries support it. This is unlikely, as the countries that did not apply the
tax  would  benefit,  in  that  a  large  part  of  financial  activity  would  move  there.  And  even  if  it  were
possible, I do not consider the Tobin tax to be a good method of reducing speculation and excessive
risk taking on the financial markets. On the contrary, there could be an increase in risk taking when the
possibilities for insuring oneself against  financial  fluctuations  become  too  expensive  and  the  banks'
opportunities  for  distributing  risks  are  reduced.  Instead,  I  see  the  international  work  already  being
carried  out  into  producing  norms  for  various  areas  as  a  better  means  of  promoting  stability  and
reducing risks.
To summarise, the credit and foreign exchange markets play an important role in society by mediating
payments  and  savings,  both  nationally  and  internationally.  The  best  way  to  prevent  excessive  risk
taking is not to tax transactions, but to ensure that more countries pursue fiscal and monetary policy
aimed towards stability, with a suitable exchange rate regime, and follow the international regulations
and norms that promote stability. These norms must be continuously adapted to developments on the
financial markets and in the rest of the economy, in order to limit the risks in the financial sector.
BIS Review 27/2001
3
