Willem Duisenberg: E-economy: will we still need banks in the future?
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Seventeenth
German Banking Congress held in Berlin, 4 April 2001.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to speak here at the Deutscher Bankentag in Berlin today. It
is a great pleasure to  address so many  bank  leaders  operating  in  the  German  -  and  of  course,  by
implication the European - economy.
One of the most striking economic events of the last years has been the pace and depth of change in
information and telecommunication technologies, of which the development of electronic money is a
good  example.  Some  claim  that  these  developments  in  information  and  telecommunication
technologies have triggered a New  Economy. In my remarks today,  I  would like to first discuss  the
economic opportunities being created by the potential emergence of this New  Economy in the euro
area. In a second part, I will more specifically review the development of electronic finance.
There is no undisputed and  unequivocal  definition of  what should be  understood  by  the  term  "New
Economy". As a central banker, I would like to trace a sharp distinction between a more popular notion
of the New Economy and a more fundamental vision. The more popular notion of the New Economy
that could be mainly found in the press covers a wide spectrum of statements. For example, it was
sometimes  claimed  that  stock  market  prices  had  reached  a  permanently  higher  plateau  and  that
further exceptional rises were to come. Others claimed the death of the business cycle or, in a more
realistic  version,  that  business  cycle  fluctuations  could  now  be  expected  to  be  significantly  and
permanently  dampened  by  the  emergence  of  a  New  Economy.  We  cannot  fully  judge  this  at  the
current stage. And uncertainties regarding global economic developments have more or less pushed
the discussion about the New Economy into the background.
Therefore,  in  my  comments,  I  shall  adopt  a  rather  cautious  approach  and  address  the  more
fundamental  issues  related  to  the  New  Economy.  In  my  interpretation  of  the  debate,  there  are  two
main components in the concept of the New Economy. These relate, first, to the way in which the New
Economy  manifests  itself  and,  second,  to  the  conjunctions  of  particular  events  that  accompany  the
emergence of the New Economy. First, the New Economy is seen as leading to a permanently higher
rate  of  potential  output  growth,  with  productivity  gains  driven  by  technological  innovation  being  the
main  motor  behind  the  upsurge.  The  increase  in  productivity  growth  that  has  been  regarded  as
characterising the New  Economy  is  typically  seen  as  the  result  of  an  underlying  economic  process
which  may  take  some  time  to  bear  fruit  and  therefore  may  clearly  precede  the  emergence  of  the
symptoms of the New Economy in macroeconomic data. Increased investment in computers, software,
peripheral equipment, network infrastructure and other  information  and  communication  technologies
are generally regarded as the most salient driving force behind  what  has been  perceived as  a new
pattern of growth.
Second, the New Economy is seen as being closely associated with the processes of deregulation,
particularly in labour markets and network industries such as telecommunications, and globalisation,
particularly in financial markets.
Other accompanying conditions, such as increased competition and flexibility in domestic goods and
factor markets, as well as a stable macroeconomic environment, are also indispensable components
of  the  same  picture,  if  not  equally  powerful  determinants  of  the  phenomenon.  They  allow  the  full
potential  of  technological  innovation  to  be  exploited  and  ensure  that  a  faster  pace  of  economic
expansion  and  employment  can  be  achieved  on  a  more  sustained  basis  and  without  destabilising
inflationary pressures.
The ECB cannot, however, "create" a New Economy through its monetary policy. The New Economy
depends mainly on technological progress and the liberalisation of markets. However, the ECB can
provide  a  positive  contribution  to  growth  and  employment  prospects  by  safeguarding  price  stability.
Maintaining price stability is the ECB's primary objective. Unfortunately, this is sometimes forgotten. In
the  long  run,  pursuing  this  objective  will  help  the  economy  to  enhance  its  growth  potential.  In  this
context, the Governing Council of the ECB, at its meeting last Thursday, confirmed the "wait and see"
position with regard to the monetary policy stance. In an environment of increased uncertainty about
BIS Review 27/2001
1
the  global  economy  and  its  impact  on  the  euro  area,  the  Governing  Council  is  carefully  assessing
whether and to what extent upward risks to price stability will continue to decline. As far as the first
pillar  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy  is  concerned,  the  decrease  of  money  growth  indicates  that
upward risks to price stability have receded. As for the second pillar, domestic upward price pressures
may decrease as a result of somewhat lower than expected GDP growth in the euro area. However,
due  to  the  risk  of  secound-round  effects  from  past  oil  price  increases,  wage  developments  will  be
monitored carefully, as these might result in upward price pressures.
In the financial sphere, the advances in information and telecommunication technologies have started
to have their effects. This was perhaps even more visible than in the non-financial sphere.
In the banking sector, a development that has attracted considerable attention over recent years is
the emergence of internet banking. The first financial products and services to be distributed over the
Internet were rather standardised ones, in fields such as securities brokerage and payment services.
More  recently,  a  wider  array  of  financial  products  and  services  have  become  available  over  the
internet, which has thus become an important distribution channel for a number of banks. Many banks
in the euro area have already  developed the internet channel to  various degrees. There even exist
some banks with few or no physical branches, which rely on the internet and the telephone as their
main channels of communication with clients.
In general, the development of internet banking appears likely to reduce the franchise value of banks
as it contributes to an intensification of competition in the banking sector. Certain commentators even
consider that competitive pressure may lead to the separation of various banking activities traditionally
performed under the same roof. In the view of these commentators, activities such as deposit taking,
payment  services  and  lending  could  be  split  up  because  Internet  banking  would  diminish  the
traditional synergies between them.
What I would like to bear in mind from the discussion on this issue is that, with new information and
communication  technologies,  business  practices  in  the  banking  industry  can  be  expected  to  evolve
considerably  in  the  near  future.  For  example,  advances  in  data  processing  as  well  as  in  business
models  may  make  it  possible  for  banks  to  make  more  efficient  use  of  information  on  customers'
business habits, and apply e.g. new credit scoring and other methods of analysis.
Customers  are  likely  to  benefit  from  these  developments  in  several  ways.  Thanks  to  intensified
competition,  they  are  likely  to  get  better  and  more  efficient  financial  products  and  services.  In
particular, new technology  such  as  home  banking  should  contribute  to  reducing  the  time  and  effort
spent by customers in purchasing financial products and services. Under the influence of changes in
banking practices, customers may be able to have access to a wider range of financial products and
services. Furthermore, efficiency  gains  will allow products to be offered at  lower prices. In the euro
area,  electronic  finance  thus  compounds  the  effects  of  the  creation  of  the  single  currency,  adding
impetus to progress towards integrated financial markets at an area-wide level.
Monetary policy needs to take account of these developments. In particular, it is important to monitor
the resulting modifications to the financial structure of the economy so as to be able to track changes
in investor behaviour, not least in order to assess the transmission channels of monetary policy.
Moreover, in this context the possibility of excessive risk taking in the banking sector should not be
neglected.  Faced  with  eroding  margins  in  "old  businesses",  banks  may  develop  their  activities  in
heretofore  unexplored  fields,  by  geographical  expansion  or  by  product  development.  In  such
circumstances, some banks may misjudge the risks inherent in the new activities, as a result of a lack
of information, knowledge or skill. In such a situation, the prudential supervision of banks can help by
assessing whether the capital buffers of banks remain sufficient for the banking sector as a whole.
In financial markets, the issues are broadly similar. It is widely recognised that financial markets have
been  significantly  transformed  by  the  emergence  of  on-line  brokers  and  electronic  trading  systems
over  recent  years.  In  general,  these  developments  have  the  potential  to  improve  the  functioning  of
financial markets.
For  example,  on-line  brokers  often  provide  clients  with  detailed  information  regarding  market
conditions  and  the  execution  of  orders.  Greater  transparency  on  the  part  of  brokers  reduces  the
information asymmetry between brokers and customers. As a result, customers may be able to obtain
better  execution  prices,  not  least  because  they  can  more  easily  see  the  prices  quoted  by  various
brokers.
2
BIS Review 27/2001
Although the electronification of financial markets can bring benefits to customers, some risks are also
associated  with  it.  The  first  type  of  risk  is  by  nature  operational.  Advances  in  information  and
telecommunications  technologies  have  made  it  easier  than  ever  before  to  set  up  exchanges  for
financial  products,  for  example  on  the  internet.  In  the  early  stages  of  their  development,  the  new
trading systems need to be thoroughly tested so as to  ensure maximum security. In particular, it  is
important  for  them  to  be  able  to  withstand  turbulent  market  conditions,  including  periods  of
exceptionally  high  trading  activity  and  market  volatility.  The  second  kind  of  risk  arises  from  the
possibility of a disorderly segmentation of financial markets. As new trading systems are developed,
the possibility exists that trading activity becomes spread over a number of exchanges. Competition
between exchanges is generally beneficial. However, customers may, at least over a transitory period,
be  faced  with  some  difficulties  in  accessing  the  new  exchanges.  Until  the  changeover  is  complete,
customers may thus be unable to always obtain the best execution prices. In order to deal with this
problem, it is important that the new exchanges establish clear rules regarding participation and price
quotation as soon as possible in the process of starting their operations.
Finally,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  electronic  money.  E-money  is  still  very  much  in  its
infancy but has the potential to develop. In the euro area, various e-money schemes exist. Although
the  volume  of  e-money  in  circulation  currently  remains  very  low  in  the  euro  area,  the  number  of
devices  already  in  circulation  suggests  that  usage  could  expand  rapidly  ("Issues  arising  from  the
emergence of electronic money", November 2000 edition of the Monthly Bulletin of the ECB, p.49-60.)
In this context, it was important that the regulatory framework was clearly set up at an early stage so
as  to  reduce  uncertainty.  In  my  view,  this  will  encourage  innovation.  I  am  glad  to  say  that  the
framework adopted in the European Union has the advantage of ensuring a high measure of security
for customers, in particular through providing protection against counterfeiting and money laundering.
For  monetary  policy,  there  are  three  main  issues  arising  from  the  emergence  of  electronic  money.
First, it is important that electronic money does not jeopardise the unit of account function of money. In
other  words,  electronic  euros  stored  on  a  payment  card  must  have  the  same  value  irrespective  of
when and by whom the card was issued. This important principle has been safeguarded in European
legislation through the imposition of a redeemability requirement for e-money.
Second, monetary policy must remain able to steer money market interest rates. I believe that this will
continue to be the case as long as money market participants need to have recourse to the central
bank for providing the final means of settlement.
Third, electronic money, as a close substitute for banknotes and coins, needs to be included  in the
definition of monetary aggregates. Therefore, even though e-money currently remains in its infancy,
the ECB has started to collect data on the amounts of electronic money in circulation.
Without  going  into  further  details  on  these  issues,  let  me  emphasise  that  we  are  confident  that
electronic money will not pose risks to the ECB in the pursuit of its objectives.
To conclude my remarks today, I would just recall that, in particular in the financial sphere, remarkable
changes have taken place already. Banks have developed new products and services as well as new
ways  to  commercialise  them.  Financial  markets  have  been  transformed  by  the  emergence  of
electronic trading systems.
These developments can be a source of great benefits since they generally tend to augment the range
of options available to borrowers and investors. This may contribute to a better allocation of financial
resources  in  the  economy  and,  thereby,  eventually  to  higher  economic  growth.  As  in  all  periods  of
rapid change, there are some risks associated with the developments currently underway. However, I
am  confident  that  these  risks  can  be  addressed  satisfactorily,  allowing  the  euro  area  to  reap  the
benefits of e-finance.
BIS Review 27/2001
3
