Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro after two years: European competitiveness in a
globalized global world
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France,  to  the  Swedish  National
Committee of the International Chamber of Commerce, Stockholm, 6 April 2001.
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  a  great  pleasure  and  an  honour  for  me  to  be  invited  to  speak  at  this
meeting  of  the  Swedish  National  Committee  of  the  International  Chamber  of  Commerce,  today  in
Stockholm. I am particularly happy to express my views  on the  already successful existence  of the
euro and Monetary Union, and the conditions and prospects for its further success.
As  you  all  know,  within  nine  months,  on  1st  January  2002,  the  euro  will  become  a  reality  across
Europe as euro banknotes and coins are introduced. This will be the largest monetary change over the
world has ever seen. However, it should be recalled that for all economic, monetary and institutional
purposes, Monetary Union was created on 1st January 1999. Then, a decisive event in the history of
Europe  occurred.  The  euro  was  born  and  the  irreversible  nature  of  this  change  has  convinced  an
increasing number of economic players that the success of the euro is necessary for Europe. It is a
keystone of the European single market, which will ensure prosperity in Europe for the benefit of the
rest of the world.
I would like to draw your attention to why the euro and Monetary Union have been successful from the
outset, and to the conditions and prospects for building on this success.
I.
The euro and monetary union are based on a credible monetary policy and contribute
to an appropriate economic and monetary equilibrium in Europe
A credible, stability-oriented monetary policy
I.1
a/ First of all, let me point out that, from a technical and operational point of view, the launch of the
euro on financial markets has been an indisputable success. In this respect, one has to remember all
the doubts voiced three years ago.
The decentralised organisation of the Eurosystem has achieved the objectives it was assigned in three
important respects:
–
operational efficiency, as is demonstrated by the timely adjustment of banking liquidity and
steering of short-term interest rates;
the security provided by the procedures and systems implemented by the Eurosystem, both
for the execution of its operations and in the field of large-value payments. At the shortest
end of the market, the integration of the interbank market took place in 1999, right from the
start  of  Monetary  Union,  thanks  to  the  setting  up  of  the  Target  system  for  the  transfer  of
large-value  payments  in  real  time  throughout  the  euro  area  and  other  EU  countries.  The
system  now  processes  over  4  million  payments  on  average  each  month,  representing
roughly  1,100  billion  euros  daily,  of  which  40%  are  cross-border  payments.  These  figures
show  a  significant  increase  in  the  use  of  real-time  gross  settlements  in  the  EU  since  the
introduction of the euro;
the smooth functioning of the entire integrated organisation of the Eurosystem, in which the
decision-making  centre  works  in  constant  contact  with  the  national  central  banks  on  the
implementation of operations.
  The  reasons  for  this  achievement  lie  primarily  with  the  in-depth  preparatory  work  conducted  over
several years by the central banking community and private financial market operators.
BIS Review 28/2001
1
b/ Second, together with many other factors, this technical and operational success has contributed to
the high credibility of the single monetary policy, which is guaranteed, inter alia, by the independence
of the European Central Bank and of the national central banks.
The Eurosystem has inherited the store of confidence that was built up over several decades by the
national  central  banks  in  charge  of  the  most  reputable  currencies.  In  France  for  example,  the  last
opinion  survey  indicated  that  80%  of  French  citizens  trust  the  Banque  de  France.  And  the  level  of
confidence  in  the  other  countries  participating  in  the  euro  area  towards  their  respective  NCB,  is
certainly as high.
Moreover,  and  contrary  to  what  is  often  said,  the  monetary  union  of  Europe  is  not  starting  from
scratch. It is worth emphasising that for no fewer than 12 years before the launch of the euro, six of
the currencies which now make up the euro - and represent close to two thirds of the GDP of the euro
area - had proven to be remarkably stable, not being subject to any realignment within the E.R.M.
This high level of confidence is also supported by the homogeneous functioning of the Eurosystem:
the  European  monetary  team,  composed  of  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  -now-
twelve  euro  area  countries  as  we  have  welcome,  on  the  1st  of  January  2001,  a  new  member,  the
Bank  of  Greece.  All  the  components  of  the  Eurosystem  work  constantly  hand  in  hand.  The
Eurosystem is a single monetary team, with the ECB acting as a coach and the NCBs as the players
on the field, with a single team spirit and this team spirit is one of the priceless assets of the euro area.
c/ Third, the credibility of the Eurosystem rests, fundamentally, on its stability-oriented monetary policy
strategy. I would like to allay the fears and doubts expressed by some observers as regards the clarity
of our monetary policy strategy.
The Maastricht Treaty has given us a mandate for maintaining price stability. We have decided to be
as clear and as transparent as possible by announcing a clear definition of price stability, featuring a
year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area of below 2%. To
reach that goal  we  have  based  our  monetary  policy  on  two  “pillars”.  As  regards  the  first  “pillar”  we
have  set  up  a  quantitative  reference  value,  namely  4.5%,  for  the  growth  of  the  broad  monetary
aggregate M3; last December, we have confirmed this rate of growth of 4,5 % as an important factor
for stabilising expectations. It should be noted that the concept of a reference value does not imply a
commitment on the part of the Eurosystem to mechanistically correct deviations in monetary growth in
the short  term. However, the reference value for M3 is consistent  with, and helps to maintain  price
stability over the medium term.
The second pillar of the monetary policy strategy is a very comprehensive set of indicators that are
important in our eyes in signalling future price developments in the euro area.
This strategy, which ensures a great deal of continuity with the monetary policies of the participating
national central banks, appears to have been understood by financial markets and the public at large.
In particular, the yields on long-term bonds denominated in euros indicate clearly that the Eurosystem
has kept intact the legacy of credibility that it has inherited.
d/  Finally,  the  credibility  of  the  euro  also  results  from  the  Eurosystem’s  constant  efforts  towards
transparency  and  communication.  I  must  stress  here  that  the  Eurosystem  is  one  of  the  most
transparent central banks in the world. Once a month, immediately after the meeting of the Governing
Council, the President of the ECB holds a press conference- which starts with a precise exposition of
the diagnosis of the Governing Council which is immediately made available in real time on the ECB
website. This will be the case when we will meet next Wednesday in Frankfurt.
It is extremely important to stress that the Eurosystem was the first in the world to introduce, on the
1st January 1999, the concept of regular, frequent, real-time transparency in the domain of monetary
policy.  This  illustrates  the  extent  to  which  some  criticisms  are  profoundly  unjust!  It  is  especially
noteworthy,  in  this  regard,  that  soon  after  we  had  embarked  upon  this  new  concept  of  real-time
transparency, other important central banks decided to go along the same path.
Being accountable for an independent institution in a modern democracy or, as it is the case for the
Eurosystem,  in  a  subtle  set  of  democracies  like  the  European  Union,  means  being  accountable  to
public opinion at large.
In this respect, the public speeches and testimonies of the President of the ECB for the benefit of both
European institutions and public opinion, the public speeches and testimonies of the Governors of the
National Central Banks to national institutions and public opinion, are crucial. Explaining tirelessly the
reasons and the reasoning that underpin the decisions of the Governing Council is a key part of our
2
BIS Review 28/2001
collective  duty.  This  intertwining  of  the  communication  of  the  European  monetary  team  with  the
European and national institutions and the full body of the civil societies is currently underestimated.
Wim  DUISENBERG  attends  hearings  at  the  European  Parliament  in  Brussels  as  often  as  Alan
GREENSPAN does on the Hill in Washington. Each national governor explains in his own language
(so in total in ten languages), through the lens of twelve different cultures, the same message from the
Eurosystem.
To improve its transparency and its communication even further, the Eurosystem decided to publish
for the first time in December 2000 Staff Economic Projections for the euro area.
In terms of transparency and accountability - namely the duty  to explain, justify,  whenever  possible
convince, and in any case, being fully responsible vis-à-vis public opinion for decisions taken - I think
that the Eurosystem meets the best practices of the main central banks in the world.
Co-ordination of economic policies
I.2
A few years ago, it was necessary to convince a great number of skeptical people, in Europe as well
as  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  that  the  euro  was  really  to  be  set  up.  Many  observers  pointed  to  its
presumed  contradictions  and  alleged  inconsistencies:  claiming,  for  example,  that  the  economic
divergences  and  structural  gaps  among  euro-area  countries  would  be  too  large  to  ensure  a  viable
monetary union or that the lack of co-ordination between economic policies would deprive the area of
an appropriate policy-mix, and could not be achieved without a political federation. Other objections
raised  were  the  absence  of  instruments  to  respond  to  any  asymmetric  shocks,  and  the  European
economies’ lack of flexibility and real mobility in the labour force. The conclusion  was that  the  euro
would  never  exist!  The  facts  have  disproved  this  conclusion.  But  the  very  same  arguments  are
sometimes deployed to suggest that the euro-area economy contains some inconsistencies that could
endanger its prosperity.
What can we say, from an economic standpoint, on this very important question?
Firstly, that monetary union per se, and wherever it takes place, does not necessarily imply that, at
any given point in time, all the participating countries will experience the same rate of inflation or of
growth, even though the move to the euro was based on the successful completion of a convergence
process.
Let  us  focus,  for  example,  on  inflation.  Present  differentials  do  not  appear  to  be  very  large,  in
comparison  with  the  experience  of  the  United  States,  a  long-established  monetary  union  of
comparable size. Data on major cities of the US shows that inflation differentials have been at times
very substantial, with divergences of 7 percentage points being recorded in the early 1980s.
In the euro area, long-term convergence to a common level of prices gives naturally rise to differences
in inflation rates across EMU countries. The convergence of productivity and living standards creates
a trend towards price convergence, as a consequence of the commonly known Balassa-Samuelson
effect. According to the IMF, this effect is estimated to have contributed 1.5-2.0 percentage points per
annum to inflation for EU countries catching up on productivity.
The  recent  statistics  available  for  the  United  States  also  confirm  that  wage  and  salary  differentials
within the euro area are by no means atypical in a monetary union: for example, in 2000, in the US the
average weekly earnings in the non-durable goods sector stood at USD 546 at the national level, while
standing at USD 437 in Mississippi and USD 644 in New Jersey.
I  am  convinced  that  we  can  be  reasonably  confident  in  the  increasing  integration  of  European
countries, and in the fact that economic developments are becoming more and more correlated in the
area. It has been highlighted, in the academic field, by several empirical investigations that business
cycles are becoming more synchronous across Europe.
Secondly  it  has  often  been  questioned  whether  EMU  can  be  a  success  without  some  form  of
enhanced political union. Certainly, for EMU to function well, all Member States must be aware of the
spill-over effects of all their national policies, especially their budgetary policies.
In  this  regard,  we  are  in  favour  of  strong  co-ordination  between  economic  policies,  while  strictly
respecting the independence of the Eurosystem. This co-ordination is contained in the Treaty  itself,
which obliges Member States to treat national economic policies “as a matter of common interest” and
subjects them to a multilateral procedure.
BIS Review 28/2001
3
Even more importantly, the euro zone is not devoid of mechanisms conducive to an appropriate policy
mix. As a matter of fact, monetary policy alone cannot ensure price stability without the appropriate
fiscal  discipline  at  the  overall  EMU  level.  Indeed,  for  my  part,  I  would  mention  three  economic
justifications for the Treaty provisions that gave rise to the Stability and Growth Pact:
–
First, by co-ordinating the fiscal policies of the Member States of Monetary Union, the pact
ensures  a  good  policy  mix  within  the  Euro  area.  This  is  essential  for  monetary  policy,  to
counterbalance the fact that Europe does not have a significant federal budget, just as it has
no federal government. Close mutual surveillance and co-ordination of fiscal policies are the
responsibility of the “Euro Group” and of the Ecofin Council. Adherence to the medium-term
objective of achieving budgets that are “close to balance or in surplus” means that individual
countries  must  first  rely  on  themselves  to  withstand  possible  economic  downturns  which
affect  only  their  own  economy,  while  ensuring  a  balanced  policy  mix  throughout  the  euro
zone.
Second,  the  pact  helps  to  prevent  well-managed  economies  from  having  to  bear  an
unjustified risk premium by setting up a penalty system for excessive deficits.
And lastly, the stability and growth pact allows us to disprove the assertion that the euro area
has  no  automatic  stabilisers  in  the  event  of  asymmetric  shocks  to  a  member  economy.
Indeed, by urging governments to aim at a fiscal position “close to balance or in surplus” in
the  medium  term,  the  pact  enables  them  to  let  fiscal  deficits  increase  during  recessions
without exceeding the 3% reference value. In short, it allows them to create a fiscal buffer
during normal economic periods that can be drawn on to counter economic divergences or
asymmetric shocks.
  To summarise that overall issue, the “Optimal Currency Area” theory has frequently been called upon
by economists who criticized EMU and expressed concerns about giving up the exchange-rate policy
instrument as a response to asymmetric shocks - in particular to asymmetric shocks within a monetary
union. I would like to point out, first, that one of the most remarkable effect of the European integration
has been the increasing symmetry of shocks. Second, Professor Mundell himself, in support of EMU,
made an interesting clarification at the beginning of 1998: in the event of a shift in demand from one
member country to another, creating unemployment in the first and inflationary pressure in the second,
flexible  exchange  rates  would  not  be  able  to  solve  the  problem.  I  quote:  “If  the  argument  for
devaluation  were  valid,  it  could  be  applied  to  every  state  or  sub-region  in  any  country,  with  a
proliferation  of  new  currencies,  so  they  could  be  devalued!”.  In  the  same  vein,  other  economists
suggest that dealing with divergences and asymmetries should not  prove much more difficult  within
the euro area, at least in its major countries, than within a long-established monetary union such as
the US.
The euro as a catalyst for further progress
II. 
While many acknowledge that the introduction of the euro has been broadly successful, one may ask
at this point what needs to happen to ensure the success of the euro in the medium term. What is very
encouraging in this respect is the fact that  in  a number of areas the euro itself appears to  be as  a
catalyst for these conditions to be met.
The euro and the single market
II.1
a/  The  euro  is  the  crowning  achievement  of  the  single  market.  Need  we  mention  the  advantages
inherent in the single market? It enables the productive sector to make significant economies of scale
and allows savings to be allocated to the most efficient investments. It also enhances market visibility
and boosts competition and innovation to the benefit of consumers. But the ultimate objective of the
single  market  could  not  be  achieved  while  monetary  barriers  continue  to  prevent  the  free  flow  of
goods, services, capital and, in a way, people, by imposing unpredictable and erratic exchange-rate
movements and transaction costs. The last step in this process will be made with the cash changeover
at the end of this year; it will enable not only enterprises but all our citizens to enjoy all the advantages
of  using  the  same  monetary  instrument  throughout  the  European  continent,  just  like  Americans  do
today throughout the territory of the United States.
b/  Moreover,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  brings  about  a  significant  change  in  the  economic  and
financial environment.
4
BIS Review 28/2001
The introduction of the euro has been a strong catalyst for mergers and acquisitions in the euro area.
The European M & A market seems to be amongst the most dynamic in the world: with  operations
totalling over 900 billion euros in 2000, it is now catching up on the American market.
The euro has brought about significant changes for participants in financial markets and has fostered
structural developments in the financial industry. This is true both on euro-area money markets and on
capital markets.
–
From the beginning of Stage Three of EMU, cross-border transactions in the money market
increased so as to represent more than 50% of the total activity in all segments of the money
market. The unsecured deposit interbank market - which is mostly concentrated on shorter
maturities - exhibits a very high degree of integration. The integration of interest-rate markets
within the euro area is a key achievement which deserves to be underscored. EONIA and
EURIBOR have provided the market with uniform benchmarks fully accepted by all market
participants.  The  diagnosis  is  the  same  in  the  short-term  derivatives  market,  whose
integration, standardisation and depth have increased. This is reflected, for instance, in the
scale of daily transactions and the huge expansion of the euro interest-rate swap market.
These structural changes in the euro area money market have generated significant moves
by  market  participants,  who  have  concentrated  within  the  euro  area  their  euro  cash
management activity and have benefited from better liquidity on the secondary market. Of
course, such integration has to  be  brought  to  fruition  in  the  other  segments  of  the  money
market,  i.e.  the  repo  market  and  the  short-term  securities  market.  Further  integration  will
enhance the efficiency of the euro area financial markets and will be beneficial to borrowers
and investors alike.
With regard to the capital markets, progress towards integration has been significant, both
on the euro-denominated bond market and the equity market.
 The gross issuance of long-term debt securities denominated in euro amounted to 791 billion euro in
1999,  against  the  equivalent  of  902  billion  euro  for  debt  securities  denominated  in  US  dollars.  The
pace of euro-denominated issues remained brisk in the first three quarters of 2000 at 498 billion euros.
According to the Bank for International Settlements, euro-area private sector borrowers have issued
about three quarters of their debt in euros since 1 January 1999, compared with an average of 50% in
the predecessor currencies since during the 1990s. Similarly, private borrowers residing outside the
euro  area  issued  more  than  a  fifth  of  their  international  debt  in  euros  from  the  beginning  of  1999,
roughly a twofold increase over the total share of the legacy currencies before the introduction of the
euro. And, according to recent statistics, the euro could have been the first currency for bond issuance
before the US dollar during the first quarter of 2001, with 46% of international bond issuance against
44% for US dollar.
Furthermore,  European  investors  have  substantially  diversified  their  bond  portfolios  since  the
introduction of the euro, encouraged by the removal of the exchange rate risk. This enables them to
achieve higher rates of return for a given level of portfolio risk.
Additionally,  let  me  recall  recent  trends  towards  mergers  or  close  co-operation  between  stock
exchanges, securities settlement systems and clearing houses, and so forth. Had the euro not been
created,  would  it  have  been  thinkable  that  the  Paris,  Brussels  and  Amsterdam  exchanges  would
merge, creating EURONEXT? It is evident that the introduction of the euro is fostering very large-scale
market  restructuring  throughout  Europe.  The  total  stock  market  capitalisation  of  euro-area  equity
markets stood at more than 5.5 trillion euros at the end of 1999, compared with a market capitalisation
of 3.6 trillion euros at the end of 1998. This figure reflects the powerful drive towards securitisation of
private companies throughout Europe and, in particular, the take off of the “new markets” network.
There are still some barriers to further integration of EU capital markets. In this regard, the Eurosystem
has  welcomed  the  objective  of  the  European  Council,  meeting  in  Lisbon  in  March  2000,  of
accelerating completion of the internal market for financial services, and to set a tight timetable so that
the Financial Services Action Plan is implemented by 2005. The Eurosystem also fully supports the
policy conclusions of the Committee of the Wise Men on the integration of the EU securities markets
and  welcome  the  ensuing  Regulation  recently  adopted  by  the  EU  Council  in  Stockholm:  we  are
convinced that the implementation of these policy guidelines will contribute to an improved allocation
of  capital  in  the  European  economy  and  to  developments  in  securities  markets  coherent  with  the
needs of the single monetary policy.
BIS Review 28/2001
5
An incentive for further structural reforms
II.2
a/  The  Euro  is,  per  se,  also  a  strong  catalyst  for  structural  reforms  in  all  non-financial  domains  in
Europe: a single currency facilitates the full comparison of prices, taxes and earnings. I think that the
euro could  encourage “cross-fertilisation”  of best practice through stronger co-ordination  of Member
States’  structural  policies  in  areas  such  as  labour  markets,  education  and  training,  job  creation
incentives, effective welfare safety nets, etc. It is the reason  why the  European Council, meeting in
Luxembourg in December 1997, explicitly mentioned structural policies among the items selected for
reinforced co-ordination. The Lisbon European Council made a further contribution to the necessary
medium-term strategy for structural reform in the Union. The emphasis put on deepening the single
market, the setting of indicators allowing comparisons of best practices among the Member States, the
fact  that  the  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines  will  examine  the  structural  issues  closely:  all  these
developments  are  going  in  the  right  direction.  Two  weeks  ago,  the  Stockholm  European  Council
confirmed these orientations and  even  added key issues such as ageing  in  the  EU  and  the  role  of
biotechnology in the European economic growth.
All European countries must resolutely carry on the structural reforms they have already initiated. It
must be acknowledged that a lot has already been done, in particular with implementation of the single
market. However, continental Europe  is still  experiencing levels of unemployment that are  too  high,
despite the fact that the jobless rate has been declining significantly in most of its economies for three
years. According to the IMF and the OECD, around 80% of this unemployment level appears to be
structural, that is, generated by our own burdensome rules and regulations.
EMU certainly stimulates structural reforms in the labour market. With increased capital mobility and a
better  functioning  single  market,  firms  will  become  more  and  more  sensitive  to  overall  labour  cost
differentials  and  business  regulations  in  choosing  a  particular  location  in  the  euro  area.  They  will
therefore exert a considerable pressure for appropriate reforms.
b/ In addition to structural reforms, a strong emphasis will continue to be put on competitiveness.
Pre-euro economic policy meant monitoring the balance of payments and the foreign exchange and
interest-rate  markets.  The  authorities  thus  received  constant  feedback  on  key  indicators  affecting
national economic performance and could react accordingly. These indicators were sensitive, multiple
and very reactive.
In contrast to the pre-euro period, a loss of competitiveness will not show up quickly on radar screens
like foreign exchange markets, interest-rate markets or the external accounts. As a result, economic
managers  must  monitor  the  relevant  competitiveness  indicators  with  even  greater  vigilance.  The
sanctions for economic policy errors could come more slowly and insidiously via rising unemployment
and weak growth.
The rules of a market economy, especially competition, continue to apply to each economy. Jobs are
created  by  consumers  when  they  choose  the  goods  and  services  they  feel  are  the  best  value  for
money. Businessmen allocate these jobs to various possible locations in various countries according
to the relative competitiveness of these locations. It is therefore necessary to monitor competitiveness
even  more  closely  than  before  through  indicators  such  as  unit  production  costs  and  the  tax  and
regulatory framework.
The close multilateral surveillance and the frank discussions provided in the context, inter alia, of the
Eurogroup,  will  help  monitor  competitiveness  trends  with  a  view  to  ensure  early  warnings  and
appropriate reactions.
 Let  me  address,  in  conclusion,  two  questions:  the  issue  of  sustainable  growth  and  the  present
diagnosis of the Eurosystem as regards the balance of risks.
–
Growth:  Central  bankers  are  sometimes  portrayed  as  being  excessively  cautious  and
reserved with respect to economic growth. On the contrary, we are very much in favour of
growth.  First  and  foremost,  because  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  -  price  stability  -  is
paving the way for medium and for long-term, sustainable robust growth. This is the strong
belief of the Europeans. I see three main channels through which price stability is fostering
growth. First, preserving and reinforcing the competitiveness of the productive sector through
low inflation and therefore low unit production costs. Second, reinforcing the trust of savers
6
BIS Review 28/2001
in that monetary and financial instruments will preserve their value in the medium and long
run therefore permitting low medium and long term market interest rates. And, last but not
least,  fostering  growth  of  domestic  demand  by  preserving  the  purchasing  power  of
households through low inflation.
This  last  contribution  to  growth  is  particularly  important  presently  in  the  Eurozone.  In
reinforcing  confidence  of  the  European  people  in  the  ability  of  the  Eurosystem  to  deliver
price stability and low inflation we are improving the overall confidence of the consumers and
therefore the level of consumer demand.
 Not only are we aiming at sustainable non-inflationary steady growth through our action but also via all
our recommendations: we are calling for implementing resolutely anti-Malthusian policies in all fields of
the economy, that is we support innovation, liberalisation and growth incentives.
We  are  anti-Malthusian  as  regards  scientific  and  technical  progress. We  feel  the  new  technologies
should be approached with an open mind so as to broaden our scope of economic activity and derive
the  best  possible  productivity  gains  from  these  advances,  together  with  the  corresponding  positive
impact on production costs and prices.
We are anti-Malthusian as regards labour. It is essential to ease the bottlenecks in all sectors reporting
a significant shortage of skilled labour in order to continue to contain production cost increases - and
thus  ensure  price  stability  -  and  to  allow  unfettered  growth.  In  this  respect,  we  all  welcomed  the
objectives of the European Council in Lisbon, which aim at boosting the labour force participation rate
in  Europe  from  61%  to  70%  and  increasing  the  supply  of  “new  economy”  skills.  This  is  a  very
important decision which represents a conceptual turning point.
We are anti-Malthusian as regards investment. We would like it to be as dynamic as possible, in terms
of  both  capacity  and  productivity,  in  order  to  loosen  production  capacity  bottlenecks,  preserve
production costs, which is good for price stability, and allow unfettered  growth. More than  ever, the
time has come to invest in Europe.
We  are  also  anti-Malthusian  as  regards  the  liberalisation  of  trade.  An  open-minded  attitude  in  this
respect has the advantage of consolidating and strengthening price stability, increasing the purchasing
power of consumers and encouraging long-term growth.
–
As regards our present diagnosis on the situation of the Eurozone we are very often asked
several questions, in particular: “How do you assess the risks to price stability?” and “What is
your judgment on the present conjuncture in Europe?”
The best I can do is certainly to refer to the consensus of the Council of Governors of the ECB  as
summed up by our President Wim Duisenberg.
The European Central Bank confirms its position of “wait and see” with regard to its monetary policy
stance. In an environment of increased uncertainty about the global economy and its impact on the
euro area, the Governing Council is carefully assessing whether and to what extent upward risks to
price stability will continue to decline.
The ECB has the primary objective of maintaining price stability. Within its forward-looking strategy,
the Governing Council had raised central bank interest rates to contain increasing inflation risks and to
bring inflation back to levels below 2% over the medium term. This policy has retained credibility as
demonstrated  by  continuing  low  inflation  expectations.  It  is  important  for  economic  growth  that  the
households  of  the  euro  area  can  rely  on  price  stability  preserving  their  purchasing  power  and,
therefore, supporting solid domestic demand.
Information from the first pillar shows that  money  growth  has  been  on  a  downward  trend  since  the
spring of 2000, indicating that upwards risks to price stability from the monetary side have receded. As
for  the  second  pillar,  somewhat  lower  real  GDP  growth  this  year  will  contribute  to  a  reduction  in
domestic upward price pressures. On the other hand, owing to the risk of second-round effects from
past oil price increases, wage developments need to be monitored carefully.
Thank you for your attention.
BIS Review 28/2001
7
