T.T. Mboweni: Trends in economic growth
Address by Mr. T.T. Mboweni, Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Rotary  Club  of
Pinelands, Cape Town, 23 February 2001.
 Introduction
Ladies and gentleman, it is indeed a great honour and a privilege to be invited here to speak at this
special induction meeting. I thank you for seeing fit to elect me as an Honorary Member of the Rotary
Club  of  Pinelands.  The  topic  I  have  chosen  to  talk  about  this  evening  is  economic  growth.  It  is  a
subject  that  affects  us  all,  as  citizens  of  South  Africa,  and  it  is  something  in  which  we  all  share;
something from which we all reap the benefits.
I have noted during my recent international visits (to the US, London and Davos), that many people
have  become  focused  on  South  Africa's  low  growth  rate.  Over  the  past  40  years,  the  country's
economic growth has declined from an average rate of 5 per cent per year in the 10 years immediately
prior to the first oil crisis of 1973 to just over half of that in the latter  years of the 1990s; not nearly
enough to create and sustain the levels of employment we would like to see.
Economic growth since 1963
Between 1963 and 1973 growth in real GDP came to 5,0 per cent on average, and a large degree of
financial  stability  and  low  inflation  prevailed.  The  manufacturing  sector  expanded  production,  on
average,  by  a  solid  8  per  cent  per  year  over  the  period,  although  much  of  this  was  a  result  of  the
import replacement policies and protectionist measures in force at the time. The services industry was
also  expanding  strongly  at  an  average  rate  of  5,5  per  cent  per  annum.  Non-gold  mining  output
expanded  at  a  vibrant  arithmetic  mean  rate  of  7  per  cent  per  annum  while  the  gold  mining  sector
reaped the benefits of new mine developments up to 1970 and a higher gold price thereafter.
From the expenditure side, all domestic expenditure components recorded strong growth during this
period. Gross fixed capital formation was exceptionally strong, with a recorded average growth rate of
9 per cent per annum. The expansion of the capital stock was widespread and considerable attention
was given to infrastructure spending.
The supply side of the economy  was  also  boosted by the  immigration of a considerable number of
entrepreneurial and highly skilled people. Education and training of the whole South African population
unfortunately did not receive the required attention, which came back to haunt us later on.
For the next 10 years, from 1973 to 1983, the country’s real GDP growth dwindled to 2,6 per cent per
annum. In the early 1970s, the semi-fixed exchange rate system, which had been in force up to that
time in most parts of the world, broke down, reducing the discipline imposed on policy makers. The
first oil price shock together with a substantial increase in the gold price initiated an inflation spiral and
financial conditions became less stable with inflation rising to double-digit levels from 1974. Growth in
manufacturing  slowed  to  3,4  per  cent  per  annum,  as  momentum  could  not  be  sustained  given  the
more uncertain economic environment and the shortages of highly skilled people.
Still, growth in the tertiary sectors remained relatively buoyant at 3,5 per cent per annum. Non-gold
mining output expanded by 3,6 per cent per annum during this period, with coal performing well as the
high  price  of  crude  oil  lifted  the  prices  of  all  energy-related  minerals.  Although  gold  production
contracted  as ore grades  were  reduced  to  prolong  the  lives  of  mines,  gold  mining  profits  remained
robust because of the high gold price. The high gold price of 1979 and 1980 acted as a buffer and
protected South Africa from the effects of the second oil crisis in 1979, ensuring record growth in 1980.
However, this artificial boost did not last as the gold price declined from its $800 a fine ounce peak.
Fixed  capital  formation  remained  positive  during  1973-83,  although  its  average  growth  rate  slowed
down  appreciably  to  2,8  per  cent  per  annum.  But  final  consumption  expenditure  by  general
government  recorded  the  strongest  growth  rate  amongst  the  expenditure  components.  During  this
period, its growth rate averaged 5,3 per cent per year.
As South Africa became more isolated from the international arena, growth contracted. From 1983 to
1993 real GDP  growth fell  to a mere 1,0 per  cent  average  per  annum.  Manufacturing  grew  at  only
BIS Review ??/2001
1
0,3 per cent per annum, and confidence was shaken as international pressure, sanctions and internal
dissatisfaction  mounted.  Financial  instability  severely  undermined  the  economy.  Consumer  price
inflation peaked at 20,7 per cent in January 1986 and the prime overdraft rate rose from 14 per cent in
1983 to 25 per cent in 1984 before declining to 12 per cent at the end of 1986. The subdued gold price
also  impacted  negatively  on  the  economy.  Only  agriculture,  which  is  an  inherently  volatile  sector,
managed to grow at a rate in excess of the 2,2 per cent per annum population growth rate. On the
expenditure  side,  fixed  capital  formation  fell  by  3,2  per  cent  per  annum.  Household  consumption
growth declined while government consumption grew at an average rate of 2,9 per cent per annum
and  once again came to the fore as the strongest expenditure component. However, this  implied  a
higher  tax  burden  for  the  man  in  the  street  and  large  government  dissaving,  which  could  not  be
sustained.
From  1993  to  1999  (and  incidentally  also  from  1993  to  the  third  quarter  of  2000)  real  GDP  growth
accelerated  once  more  to  some  2,6  per  cent  per  annum.  Confidence  started  to  return,  not  only  as
sanctions were abandoned but also especially as evidence accumulated that economic policies were
going to be prudent, sustainable and transparent. The improved growth rate was achieved in spite of
adverse  external  shocks such  as  the  East  Asian  markets  crisis,  some  3  years  ago,  and  the  floods
early last year. The strongest growth over this period was recorded in the services industries, which
averaged  3,3  per  cent  per  annum.  Growth  in  the  transport  and  communications  industry  was
especially  vibrant,  amounting  to  approximately  7,2  per  cent  per  annum.  A  relatively  strong
performance of this sector, driven by technology and tourism, is likely for many years to come.
Viewed from the expenditure side, gross fixed capital formation picked up from extremely low levels,
growing at a rate of 5,1 per cent per annum. Given the opening-up of the economy, reduced protection
and the fact that it was highly concentrated in the private sector, this capital formation is likely to be
economically  productive  and  sustainable.  The  high  rate  of  expansion  in  fixed  capital  formation  was
achieved in spite of the adverse shocks I have already mentioned. From 1993 to 1999 both exports
and imports rose strongly as international integration proceeded.
Foreign direct investment flows into South Africa have picked up somewhat since the late 1980s and
early  1990s,  but  have  not  reached  healthy  levels.  Foreign  direct  investment  into  South  Africa  has
averaged around 1 per cent of GDP per year since 1994. Almost certainly, the planned privatisation
over the next three years will help to boost this figure.
While South Africa's depressed growth has become something of an overriding concern for many, we
must  not  forget  the  sharp  acceleration  in  growth  recorded  during  the  course  of  last  year.  Revised
quarterly  growth  figures  showed  that  the  economy  was  more  buoyant  than  had  initially  been
forecasted  by  many  economists  and  resulted  in  third  quarter  growth  of  3,8  per  cent,  seasonally
adjusted and annualised, when compared with the second quarter.
Macro-economic fundamentals
And  we  must  not  forget,  too,  the  progress  that  has  been  made  in  shaping  South  Africa's
macro-economic fundamentals to within internationally accepted standards. Economists, analysts and
observers  have  long  agreed,  and  I  am  sure  that  you  will  agree,  on  the  successes  that  have  been
achieved over the past decade in sprucing up the country's macro-economic situation. Major economic
restructuring,  which  was  absolutely  necessary  in  South  Africa's  case,  often  leads  to  a  prolonged
period  of  subdued  economic  activity.  We  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  economic  is  now
poised to maintain higher growth rates in future.
Inflation
Over the last 10 years, inflation has come down steadily from the double-digit figures of the 1980s and
the early 1990s. From 1989 to 1992, consumer price inflation rates of some 14 to 15 per cent were
recorded.  The  index  then  decelerated  to  single-digit  rates  from  1993,  as  the  effects  of  the  tight
monetary policies of the preceding four years came to fruition. By the close of the millennium further
progress  had  been  made  on  the  inflation  front  and  in  1999  and  2000  the  average  consumer  price
inflation rate slowed down to a level of 5,2 per cent and 5,3 per cent per annum.
CPIX, the CPI index excluding mortgage costs, is the measure targeted by the Reserve Bank in its
inflation-fighting strategy and is closely monitored by the Bank. According to this policy, CPIX must fall
to a rate between 6 and 3 per cent by the year 2002. CPIX inflation has proved sticky over the past
2
BIS Review ??/2001
year  and  averaged  6,9  per  cent  in  1999  and  7,7  per  cent  in  2000,  mainly  as  a  result  of  high
international oil prices. The most recent data, released on Tuesday this week, indicates CPIX was at a
level of 7,7 per cent in January 2001. Most analysts B and the Reserve Bank B expect CPIX to slow
down further over the course of the year, given the prudent monetary and fiscal policies that have now
been  put  in  place.  Incidentally,  while  CPIX  data  is  not  officially  available  before  1997,  the  Reserve
Bank estimates that CPIX inflation would have peaked at between 17 and 18 per cent in 1991  and
1992 - a full 10 per centage points higher than where it now stands.
Current account of the balance of payments
Progress  on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  has  also  been  evident  over  the  past
decade. The country was forced to maintain current account surpluses from the mid-1980s to 1994.
This  was  related  to  the  1985  debt  standstill  and  the  international  isolation  of  the  South  African
government,  which acted as a  barrier to foreign investment and  other capital flows  to  South  Africa.
With foreign debt having to be repaid, South Africa had no option but to run its affairs so that exports
exceeded imports, thereby earning foreign exchange.
The political transition in 1994 set the scene for normalisation of South Africa's financial ties with the
rest of the world. From 1995 South Africa ran current account deficits but kept these contained at less
than  2  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  deficits  were  easily  financed  through  net  capital  inflows,  which  were
sizeable  enough  not  only  to  pay  for  the  excess  of  imports  over  exports  but  also  to  build  up  South
Africa's  gold  and  foreign  exchange  holdings  to  a  record  level.  Late  last  year,  holdings  of  gold  and
foreign exchange exceeded the equivalent of 15 weeks' worth of imports, against the internationally
accepted norm of around 12 weeks.
In  spite  of  a  low  gold  price,  high  oil  prices  and  unfavourable  conditions  in  certain  trading  partner
countries in the wake of the emerging markets crisis, South Africa has managed to record very small
deficits on its current account in recent quarters.
Over the past decade both exports and imports have increased relative to GDP, as can be expected
as  part  of  the  process  of  globalisation.  South  Africa's  authorities  have  added  momentum  to
globalisation by phasing in lower import duties in terms of the World Trade Organisation agreements.
This  has  been  painful,  but  has  enhanced  South  Africa's  international  competitiveness  and  ability  to
grow on a sustainable basis. The volume of non-gold exports has risen at an average rate of around
7 per cent a year since the early 1990s - much faster than GDP growth - which enables the country to
finance imports largely needed for investment purposes.
Debt levels
During the decade  we are looking at, government debt rose from 36,4 per  cent  of  GDP  in  1989  to
50,4 per cent in 1999, before receding to 48,1 per cent in 2000. Its most rapid rises were recorded
when the government incurred large deficits from 1992 to 1994. However, South Africa's debt levels
stayed firmly below the 60 per cent level, which is deemed by the Maastricht Treaty participants as the
level beyond which fiscal health is at risk.
South Africa's foreign debt receded from 26,8 per cent of GDP in 1989 to just above 20 per cent in the
early  1990s.  As  international  borrowing  was  resumed  from  1994,  foreign  debt  rose  significantly  to
29,9 per cent of GDP in 1999. But this is still quite low in comparison with other developing countries.
The  South  African  private  sector's  indebtedness  to  the  banking  system  has  risen  over  the  past
decade. From a level of 58 per cent of GDP in 1989, bank credit to the private sector rose to 67 per
cent in 1999. This was a sign of increasing intermediation of credit and financial development in the
economy - so-called financial deepening..
Budget deficits
Similar  progress  has  been  made  on  the  government's  budget  deficits.  The  relatively  low  budget
deficits and high government expenditure during the fiscal years of the late 1980s to the early 1990s
were  largely  achieved  through  increased  tax  revenues.  However,  in  the  1991/1992  fiscal  year  the
deficit  doubled  to  3,7  per  cent  of  GDP,  as  the  recession  impacted  negatively  on  revenue  while
expenditure growth accelerated. There was no respite in the 1992/1993 fiscal year when the recession
BIS Review ??/2001
3
deepened and expenditure accelerated sharply after drought aid had been disbursed in the wake of
the worst drought in half a century. This propelled the budget deficit to a record high of 7,3 per cent of
GDP, a level that was clearly not sustainable. After fluctuating around 5 per cent of GDP, the deficit fell
below 3 per cent of GDP after the 1997/1998 fiscal year. This was achieved through a combination of
budgeting  in  accordance  with  the  country's  most  pressing  priorities,  strict  expenditure  control  and
improved tax collection. With a budget  deficit  of below 3  per cent, South Africa's finances compare
favourably with internationally acceptable levels.
Fiscal policy
Coupled with these improvements, the degree of transparency in fiscal policy was strengthened with
the introduction of the three-year Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, which marked a departure
from the one-year budget announcements. The three-year framework has provided certainty, a crucial
factor for financial stability, and an opportunity for decisions to be informed by public debate.
Clear  objectives  are  set  out  for  fiscal  policy,  such  as  the  elimination  of  government  dissaving  and
reducing the tax burden on society. This prudent approach has kept South Africa out of a debt trap
where government's deficit, government debt and the interest cost of such debt spiral out of control.
The strategy has also contained government's interest costs, enabling more funds to be redirected to
the priority areas where the most pressing needs have been identified. Although capital expenditure
was initially a casualty of the strict control over government spending, it is now set to accelerate, given
the fiscal room for maneuver that the government has created.
Although 10 years is a relatively short period in economic terms, the trends that emerge since 1993
underline the solid foundation and relative macro-economic stability that has been achieved in South
Africa. The policies that are in place will ensure that this strong foundation will be strengthened further
to enable the country to embrace any challenges that may arise.
While  much  success  is  evident  from  the  side  of  the  government  concerning  the  country's
macro-economic framework, the responses to the government's policies have at times been slow. For
example,  the  agricultural  sector  has  undergone  immense  challenges  as  South  Africa  shifted  away
from the excessive state regulation  and  intervention  which  characterised  agricultural  markets  in  the
past.  In  keeping  with  the  global  trends  the  majority  of  agricultural  marketing  schemes  and  control
boards  have  been  phased  out.  The  agricultural  markets  have  been  liberalised  and  access  to  them
broadened  through  legislation.  As  a  result,  farming  has  become  market-driven  and  not  production-
driven, and this naturally leads to greater agricultural price volatility. The removal of these marketing
boards should create space for competition, but we are only beginning to see some encouraging signs
that farmers are reacting appropriately to the new agricultural policies.
As a central bank we continue to be encouraged by what we hear from the government. In his state of
the nation address earlier this month, President Thabo Mbeki indicated that the government was set to
embark  on  a  programme  of  action,  starting  with  the  economy.  The  President  noted  the  general
consensus that we have established the necessary level of macroeconomic balance and stability, and
have  turned  away  from  the  precarious  position  we  found  ourselves  in  during  1994.  This,  as  the
President said, was in spite a very volatile international environment.
President  Mbeki  also  observed  that  South  Africa's  economic  growth  rate,  aggregate  savings  and
investment rates remain too low. The President went on to say, and I quote: While continuing to focus
on  the  maintenance  of  the  correct  macroeconomic  balances,  we  have  therefore  decided  to  pay
detailed attention to the critical microeconomic issues. In particular we have decided that this year the
government  itself,  in  all  its  spheres,  and  the  public  sector  as  a  whole,  must  make  a  decisive  and
integrated contribution towards meeting the economic challenges the country faces.
The objectives we seek to achieve are moving the economy onto a high-growth path, increasing its
competitiveness  and  efficiency,  raising  employment  levels  and  reducing  poverty  and  persistent
inequalities.
The government will draw on the advice of some of the world's top economists, lower input costs and
strive to create a climate of certainty. By doing this, the government is showing its commitment to the
economic well being of South Africa. We at the Reserve Bank are convinced that the micro-reforms
will play an important role in boosting growth and job creation.
4
BIS Review ??/2001
Concluding remarks
Ladies and gentlemen, we at the South African Reserve Bank must also do our bit. We believe, as
most central banks do, that sustained high economic growth and creation of employment opportunities
can  only  be  fulfilled  when  stable  financial  conditions  prevail.  This  is  the  objective  of  the  Bank:  to
achieve  and  maintain  stable  financial  conditions  in  our  country.  This  task  is  spelled  out  in  both  the
Constitution  and  in  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  Act.  The  primary  role  of  monetary  policy,
therefore, is to keep inflation in check, which is an essential ingredient in the recipe for sustainable
economic  growth. We  aim  to  do  this  through  our  approach  of  inflation  targeting.  By  all  counts,  this
pillar  of  growth  is  coming  into  place,  and  our  economic  growth  rate  will  be  set  against  this  more
healthy background.
BIS Review ??/2001
5
