Sakuya Fujiwara: Challenges for Japan’s economy and monetary policy
Remarks  by  Mr  Sakuya  Fujiwara,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Foreign
Correspondents’ Club of Japan, Tokyo, 25 July 2001.
 Introduction
I am honored  and  grateful  to  have  been  given  this  opportunity  to  address  members  of  the  Foreign
Correspondents’ Club of Japan.
Given the present economic situation and that members of this esteemed Club are well known for their
barrage of sharp questions you may think it brave of me to address you. But I immediately accepted
the Club’s invitation without any hesitation because I saw it as a golden opportunity to candidly explain
the difficulties the Bank of Japan is facing under the current severe economic situation.
As  you  are  no  doubt  aware,  there  are  various  arguments  in  Japan  regarding  the  management  of
macroeconomic policy and how to promote structural reform. Until the first quarter of this year, further
monetary  easing  and  how  to  promote  the  disposal  of  non-performing  loans  had  been  actively
discussed  almost  every  day.  Indeed,  many  held  that  Japan’s  economy  could  only  get  out  of  the
stagnant state if monetary easing were effected or if non-performing loans  were disposed of. Since
late April, following the formation of the Koizumi government, structural reform has taken center stage
and a ‘basic plan’ which proposes wide-ranging reform agenda was determined by the cabinet at the
end of June.
Looking back at all the numerous discussions within only the past six months, the central issue has
been  whether  to  first  effect  macroeconomic  policies  such  as  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  or
implement  structural  reform  measures  which  include  the  disposal  of  non-performing  loans,
deregulation, and review of roles between the public and private sectors.
However, these points have been repeatedly discussed since the bursting of the bubble and thus are
not  new.  The  question  of  what  kind  of  policy  measures  are  desirable  in  order  to  bring  Japan’s
economy back to a sustainable growth path is not one that can be easily answered, especially when
taking account of the political economy. The difficulty lies in that you simply cannot make a clear-cut
decision and choose either macroeconomic policy or structural reform. Today, I will explain my views
on the roles monetary policy and structural reform should play under the current harsh circumstances.
Current monetary easing measures
1.
As a starting point, I will explain current monetary easing measures.
Current monetary policy management
As you all know, the Bank of Japan took successive monetary easing measures during February to
March  this  year,  and  the  March  decision  was  a  decisive  one.  There  are  three  points  which
characterize this series of monetary easing measures.
First,  the  Bank  changed  the  main  operating  target  of  monetary  policy  operations  from  the
uncollateralized overnight call rate to the outstanding balance of current accounts held at the Bank of
Japan. In addition, the  Bank increased the average  outstanding  amount of such accounts by  about
25% from some 4 trillion yen to 5 trillion yen.
In  response  to  this  ample  provision  of  funds,  nominal  short-term  market  interest  rates  declined  to
virtually  zero percent.  In  addition,  if  considered  necessary  for  the  smooth  provision  of  liquidity,  the
Bank will increase its outright purchase of long-term government bonds from the previous 400 billion
yen per month subject to certain conditions.
Second, the Bank has clearly stated that it will continue to pursue the new monetary policy framework
until the Consumer Price Index registers stably a zero percent or an increase year on year. This aims
at guiding longer term interest rates to decline by promising the continuation of monetary easing into
the future, and is thus often called the ‘commitment effect’ or ‘policy duration effect’.
BIS Review 68/2001
1
Third, the Bank introduced a ‘Lombard-type lending facility’, through which the Bank extends loans at
the  request  of  counterparties  under  certain  conditions  at  the  official  discount  rate.  Thanks  to  this
facility,  even  when  there  is  turmoil  in  the  market,  counterparties  can  flexibly  borrow  funds  from  the
Bank as long as they have eligible collateral. As a result, the official discount rate shoulders a new role
of setting  a ceiling to the short-term money  market  rate.  This  facility  plays  a  big  role  in  nurturing  a
sense of security among market participants with respect to their financing and also stabilizes interest
rates, thus strengthening the effects of monetary easing.
Effects of monetary easing
These monetary easing measures, unprecedented in central bank history both at home and abroad,
were received with considerable surprise when announced. Though such initial surprise tends to fade,
these  monetary  easing  measures  have  potentially  powerful  effects  as  is  evidenced  by  the  initial
surprise. At the same time, however, it is also true that there are limits to the effects. We hope that all
concerned  will  correctly  and  with  balanced  judgement  recognize  both  the  favorable  effects  and  the
limits of current monetary easing measures.
Let  me  begin  with  the  favorable  effects  of  the  current  measures.  Since  monetary  easing  in  March,
various  interest  rates  have  substantially  declined  to  levels  below  the  lowest  levels  seen  during  the
zero  interest  rate  policy  period.  For  example,  the  overnight  call  rate  is  0.01%,  the  yield  on  1-year
government bonds 0.01-0.02%, and that on 5-year government bonds once declined to 0.3% and has
recently been just over the 0.4% mark. Yields on 10-year government bonds have been moving at the
low  level  of  1.1-1.4%.  In  addition,  the  difference  between  the  yield  on  corporate  bonds  or  CP  and
yields  on  government  securities,  namely  the  ‘credit  spread’,  has  also  been  narrowing,  implying  a
continual improvement in fund raising through the market.
As such, there is abundant liquidity in financial markets. What typically reflects such abundant liquidity
is  the  phenomenon  of  ‘under-subscription’  for  Bank  of  Japan  operations  to  provide  liquidity  to  the
market.  For  example,  in  competitive  yield  auctions  on  May 21st  to  provide  liquidity,  while  the  Bank
offered  one  trillion  yen,  financial  institutions’  bids  were  less  than  400  billion  yen  even  at  a  rate  of
0.01%,  virtually  zero  percent.  In  other  words,  under-subscription  is  an  expression  of  financial
institutions’  views  that  “liquidity  has  already  been  provided  sufficiently  so  that  there  is  no  need  for
additional liquidity even at the rate  of 0.01%.”  Under-subscription  was frequently  observed from the
beginning to the middle of May, and the Bank responded to such situations by reducing the unit for
every  bid  to  0.001%.  As  a  consequence,  the  lowest  interest  rate  the  Bank  would  accept  was  also
reduced  to  0.001%,  and,  thanks  to  such  efforts  which  some  market  participants  have  termed
‘nano-technology’,  under-subscription  ceased  thereafter.  However,  this  does  not  guarantee  that
under-subscription will not occur again in the future. In any event, liquidity is being amply provided to
markets and discussion is now geared toward focusing on the marginal difference between 0.01% and
0.001%.
Limits to monetary easing measures
Such  experience  also  implies  that  there  might  be  a  practical  limit  such  that  a  central  bank  cannot
unlimitedly provide liquidity beyond the demands of financial institutions.
Despite such a practical limit, there would be no problem if liquidity reached corporations which reside
outside the financial markets and contributed to rejuvenating economic activity, but regrettably this has
not been the case so far.
Let me quote some plain numbers which typically illustrate this. In the last five years, current account
deposits  which  private  financial  institutions  hold  with  the  Bank  of  Japan  increased  12%  on  an
annualized  basis.  The  expectation  here  is  that  developments  in  such  accounts  affect  the  credit
creation function of financial institutions. Monetary base, which is the sum of Bank of Japan current
accounts and banknotes issued, increased as high as 8% a year. However, despite such extremely
ample liquidity provision from the Bank, the lending of commercial banks declined by half a percent a
year and money supply grew only 3%.
The decline of bank loans compared with the increase in money supply means, on the part of financial
institutions,  that  assets  other  than  loans  have  been  increasing,  which  turned  out  to  be  mainly
government bonds. Despite  the  increased  provision  of  liquidity  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  to  the  money
market,  financial  institutions  only  increased  investment  in  credit  risk-free  government  bonds  and
lending to firms rather declined. As such, under the circumstances where the credit creation function
2
BIS Review 68/2001
of financial institutions is inactive, economic activity cannot be robust, as evidenced by nominal GDP
growth of only 0.6% a year and the Consumer Price Index being almost flat. Such figures illustrate the
fact that even if the Bank of Japan provides ample liquidity to the market and guides nominal interest
rates to an extremely low level of virtually zero percent, such action itself cannot lift economic activity.
Keynes once used the term ‘liquidity trap’ to point out the possibility that the effectiveness of monetary
policy might be hampered, and the current state of Japan’s economy is quite close to such a situation.
Policy duration and quantitative easing
However, even though Japan’s economy is in a situation close to a liquidity trap, a central bank cannot
be  a  bystander  when  the  economy  is  anticipated  to  deteriorate  further.  Against  this  backdrop,  the
Bank thus took decisive monetary easing measures in March.
In this regard, let me bring your attention to two points.
First is the rationale behind having the outstanding balance of Bank of Japan current accounts as the
main operating target and increasing it.
The  target  of  increasing  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  to  around  5 trillion  yen  is
substantially  more  than  required  reserves  of  around  4 trillion  yen.  As  previously  mentioned,  under
such  ample  provision  of  liquidity,  short-term  interest  rates  will  move  close  to  zero  percent  under
normal circumstances.
In addition to a decline  in  interest rates,  it  is hoped that the  quantitative increase  in Bank of Japan
current accounts itself will have positive effects. If financial institutions hold excess no-risk no-return
current account balances, an incentive will emerge to increase the holding of such assets as loans,
corporate bonds, stocks, and foreign currency-denominated assets which generate some returns even
though  accompanied  by  some  risk.  In  addition,  the  quantitative  increase  itself  might  affect
expectations of the public. Of course, under a situation where both long- and short-term interest rates
are  quite  low  and  the  credit  intermediation  function  of  financial  institutions  is  also  hampered,  such
effects  might  not  be  large.  However,  under  the  circumstances  where  room  for  a  further  decline  in
interest rates is almost exhausted, and bearing in mind the severe outlook for the economy, the Bank
judged it necessary to dare decide to take such measures.
Second is the commitment effect.
As I previously mentioned, the Bank of Japan adopted a policy which incorporated a so-called ‘policy
duration  effect’  in  that  the  Bank  is  committed  to  continuing  monetary  easing  into  the  future.  This
should be regarded as best efforts in a situation where the central bank is trying to hammer out further
monetary  easing  effects  despite  conventional  monetary  policy  instruments  having  almost  been
mobilized  to  their  limit. With  such  a  commitment  in  place,  the  public’s  expectations  with  respect  to
when prices will start to rise will be adjusted if the economy further deteriorates. In such a case, the
public will anticipate that monetary easing will surely be protracted, leading to a more flattened yield
curve, thereby strengthening monetary easing effects. As such the current commitment can be said to
have a sort of automatic adjustment function against changes in economic conditions.
Role of structural reform
2.
As such, while potentially powerful monetary easing has been in place both in terms of interest rates
and quantity, it is essential to resolve structural problems facing the financial system and industry in
order to allow such monetary easing to permeate the real economy to the fullest extent possible.
Structural reform is, put simply, to establish a function which more effectively allocates resources such
as labor and both physical and financial capital, and raises productivity of the economy as a whole.
The content of structural reform will be shaped from now on and at this juncture points of emphasis
differ. Here, I will not go into specific measures in any depth but take up two points with respect to the
basic thrust of structural reform.
Importance of expectations
The first point is what are the conditions for successful structural reform. There could be various ways
of looking at this, but my view is that the key for successful structural reform is how to positively affect
the expectations of economic agents.
BIS Review 68/2001
3
At present, the  expectations  of firms and households  are bearish. When  I  say  we  have  to  work  on
such expectations and change them I mean we have to restore a situation in which economic agents
can  hold  such  a  normal  expectation  that  the  economy  will  grow  in  the  future.  However,  the
expectations of private economic agents are far from being in a normal state. Making a rough back-of-
the-envelope calculation, if the expenditure of firms and households increased an additional 2%, then
nominal GDP growth would be 2% higher. According to a household survey, the monthly consumption
expenditures of the average Japanese household in fiscal 2000 was 317,000 yen, so a 2% increase
would  be  about  6,000 yen.  And,  taking  account  of  the  multiplier  effect,  the  expenditure  necessary
would be less. But things are not so simple.
How  expectations  are  formed  is  a  difficult  question.  For  example,  while  it  was  realized  that  the  IT
boom in the US would eventually come to an end, relatively bullish views were still dominant until last
autumn. In fact, at the last November meeting of the FOMC, which is responsible for setting the short-
term interest rate, inflationary concern was pointed out as a potential risk factor for the US economy
rather  than  economic  weakness,  and  it  was  in  November  that  private  forecasters  revised  their
forecasts  downward.  Subsequently,  the  FOMC  has  on  successive  occasions  since  January
substantially reduced its target FF rate, though it has not yet succeeded in revitalizing the activities of
IT-related  firms  which  once  drove  bullish  expectations.  Looking  back  at  the  experience  of  Japan
during the bubble period, the expectations of economic agents became extremely bullish, to an extent
which seems incredible in hindsight, and now we are facing a completely opposite situation.
Then, how do the expectations of firms and households become bullish?
At this moment, I do not have a clear answer. But if one believes bullish expectations naturally emerge
when an economy grows, then I think the key is simply to make efforts to raise productivity. Measures
to this end were outlined in the cabinet’s ‘basic plan’ for structural reform which was announced this
June. What is important is to make clear that emphasis will be on market mechanisms, that the public
understand that the government is directing its efforts toward increasing productivity of the economy
as  a  whole  through  such  mechanisms,  and  implementing  policy  measures  consistent  with  such  a
direction.
Speed of structural reform
The second point concerns the speed of structural reform.
In  this  regard,  economists  abroad  have  voiced  concern  that  if  various  structural  reforms  are
implemented simultaneously, there would be a substantial deflationary impact on the economy in the
short  run  and  the  deflationary  gap  in  Japan’s  economy,  which  is  already  suffering  from  lack  of
demand, might become wider.
We  can  certainly  understand  the  background  to  such  concern.  Indeed,  looking  at  examples  of
structural reform overseas, there seem to be many cases where there was a deflationary impact in the
short  term.  And,  in  contrast  with  the  US  and  UK,  the  economy  cannot  expect  to  receive  additional
‘dividends’ such as a substantial decline in long-term interest rates accompanying fiscal consolidation,
since in Japan there is little room for any further decline in interest rates. However, the bond market is
not the only market which assesses structural reform. If the stock market favorably evaluates specific
efforts toward the resolution of structural problems, there might be positive  effects  on  the  economy
from this channel even in the short run.
Moreover, it should be noted that, in the case of Japan, delay in effecting structural reform has made
the problem of weak demand all the more serious.
In this context, I would like to refer to the fact that private consumption has been very slow to increase.
Of course, various factors might be behind this, one being uncertainty with respect to pensions and
the tax burden in the future because of the rapidly aging population. Therefore, in order to stimulate
private consumption, it is essential to reduce future uncertainty as much as possible.
According  to  textbook  Keynesian  economics,  the  expansion  of  fiscal  expenditure  financed  by  the
issuance  of  government  bonds  will  stimulate  an  economy  unless  taxpayers  hold  back  consumption
reflecting expectations of a future increase in the tax burden. However, if public investment generated
by a fiscal deficit is inefficient, production capacity of the economy as a whole will not increase and the
‘wealth’ which generates future income and consumption will not accumulate. And, if such investment
clearly suggests an increase in the future tax burden and delay in structural adjustment, then it would
have an adverse impact on current consumption.
4
BIS Review 68/2001
From this viewpoint, once it became clear that the content of fiscal expenditure was going to be shifted
from  less  efficient  to  more  efficient  objectives,  resulting  prospects  of  an  increase  in  future  ‘wealth’
might have a favorable effect on the economy. Compared with a situation where there is little room to
mobilize conventional monetary policy instruments, room for effecting policies which focus more on the
‘quality’ of fiscal expenditure seems to be significantly large, as mentioned in the ‘basic plan’.
Nevertheless, what I have just said does not mean that I am optimistic enough to consider that the
promotion of structural reform will immediately ignite an improvement in the economy. Presumably, in
the process of reform, we cannot deny that there might be ‘pains’ such as increased bankruptcies and
heightened unemployment in the short run. However, at the same time, it is not appropriate to single
out and emphasize only the short-term deflationary impact on the economy from among the various
macroeconomic  effects  of  structural  reform.  In  short,  as  long  as  protracted  stagnation  of  Japan’s
economy  is  rooted  in  structural  problems,  we  are  now  at  a  stage  where  it  is  not  so  productive  to
discuss in general terms whether structural reform is deflationary or not. What is important is, based
on specific structural reform measures which will be presented in the future, to make a well-balanced
assessment with respect to the economic consequences of such measures.
Relationship between structural reform and monetary policy
3.
I  have  explained  the  roles  of  monetary  policy  and  structural  policy,  but  what  is  the  relationship
between these roles? Some would say that pains stemming from the adverse impact on the economy
as structural reform progresses should be mitigated by further monetary easing, or emphasize that in
the process of pursuing structural reform it is mainly the role of monetary policy to ensure economic
stability. Bearing these views in mind I will now explain how I see the relationship between monetary
policy and structural reform.
At the start I would like to say that the monetary easing policy currently being pursued by the Bank
will,  because  of  effects  I  have  previously  explained  in  detail,  also  give  considerable  support  to
structural reform.
First, the current monetary policy framework was determined by taking into account a scenario that the
economy  might  substantially  deteriorate,  including  a  short-term  deflationary  impact  stemming  from
structural  reform.  In  the  process  of  discussion  to  reach  the  monetary  easing  decision  in  March,
because  of  cyclical  adjustment  in  IT-related  areas  worldwide  coinciding  with  Japan’s  structural
adjustment, I could not help but forecast that the economy would worsen considerably in the future.
Based on this recognition, I felt strongly, from the viewpoint of forward-looking policy making, that it
was  necessary  to  make  moves  ahead  of  the  foreseeable  economic  developments  and  to  vote  for
decisive monetary easing.
Second,  even  if  deflationary  pressure  intensifies  in  the  short  run  as  a  result  of  structural  reform,
current monetary policy has an automatic adjustment function such that the easing effects strengthen
through the policy duration effect.
Third, in the process of structural reform, liquidity concerns might increase in financial markets when
non-performing loans are disposed of. In this regard, the previously mentioned Lombard-type lending
facility will have the effect of driving structural reform by containing such liquidity concerns.
And  fourth,  when  corporate  and  household  confidence  with  respect  to  the  future  strengthens  and
economic activity picks up parallel with the progress of structural reform, current monetary easing will
provide  very  strong  support.  Put  differently,  the  benefits  of  recent  decisive  monetary  easing  will
surface in full when the private sector decides to take advantage of the opportunities.
While the relation of the current monetary policy framework with structural reform is such as I have just
mentioned, if I dare to add one more thing, it is that when I voted for monetary easing in March, I did
so with the strong  hope  that  since  we  are  stretching  ourselves  almost  to  the  limit  in  adopting  such
decisive monetary easing measures, structural reform ought to be implemented expeditiously. I had a
strong  feeling  such  that  we  should  exert  some  leadership  in  promoting  structural  reform  efforts  in
various areas. Looking back, it seems that this desire for structural reform was, and is, also held by the
public.  Viewed  from  conventional  monetary  policy  thinking,  such  a  view  might  be  regarded  as
unconventional, but I have no doubt that decisive monetary easing has contributed to the progress of
structural reform.
BIS Review 68/2001
5
Central bank responsibility
4.
So far I have discussed the roles played by monetary policy and structural reform. In the last part of
my  speech,  I  would  like  to  address  the  issue  of  central  bank  responsibility  by  considering  the
argument that since Japan’s economy is in such a worrisome state the Bank of Japan should mobilize
all measures at its disposal even if they might not be the choice in normal times.
When we consider the outlook for the economy, as shown in our April Outlook and Risk Assessment
of the Economy and Prices, there are various risk factors. Bearing in mind every possible eventuality,
including these risk factors, the Bank of Japan will carefully examine, without any presumptions, the
economic  outlook  and  pursue  appropriate  monetary  policy.  This  is  the  responsibility  that  a  central
bank should discharge.
At the same time, in terms of monetary policy management, it is also a responsibility of a central bank
to underline the fact that  it has almost exhausted such conventional monetary  easing  measures  as
reducing nominal interest rates. The reason I say this is because when listening to debate concerning
monetary  policy,  we  are  somewhat  puzzled  that  many  seem  to  consider  that  interest  rates  can  be
further  substantially  lowered.  Of  course,  even  at  the  current  level  where  nominal  interest  rates  are
virtually zero percent, we have managed to devise ways to create monetary easing effects. However,
such efforts have obvious limits. Among various monetary policy options proposed, some argue that
the Bank can freely increase money supply at its discretion as if raining money from the sky. However,
as evidenced by figures I have previously introduced, this is not the reality.
Then,  how  should  we  address  the  assertion  that  since  both  inflation  and  deflation  are  monetary
phenomenon, it is only the Bank of Japan which can prevent a price decline. As one who considers
how actual monetary policy should be conducted by watching actual economic developments, I have a
very mixed feeling when I hear such a view.
For sure, if one takes an extremely long period of time, the relationship between goods and services,
and  the  quantity  of  money  will  be  a  major  factor  in  determining  the  price  level.  The  fact  that  price
stability  is  the  goal  of  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  monetary  policy  is  based  on  such  an  understanding.
However, at the same time, it is also true that the price level will be considerably affected in the short
and medium term by various factors such as costs and changes in productivity.
In fact, the Bank of Japan has eased monetary conditions to the utmost both in terms of interest rates
and quantity such as current accounts at the Bank of Japan and monetary base. In addition, as noted
in  our  March  statement,  current  monetary  easing  was  determined  to  illustrate  the  Bank’s  firm
determination  to  prevent  prices  from  declining  continuously.  However,  as  figures  I  previously
mentioned show, so far the effects of monetary easing have not been able to lift economic activity and
prices continue soft. Our agony as monetary policymakers lies exactly here.
Now, if we focus solely on raising prices and pursuing monetary operations such as buying any type of
asset,  then  prices  will  eventually  start  to  rise,  though  we  cannot  say  when  for  sure.  However,  it  is
uncertain  whether  such  a  price  rise  would  lead  to  sustainable  economic  growth.  The  questions  we
have  to  answer  are:  Would  such  extraordinary  measures  be  desirable  for  Japan’s  economy  as  a
whole?  Would  they  be  consistent  with  the  pursuit  of  price  stability  that  contributes  to  the  sound
development of the  national  economy,  which  is  the  Bank’s  mission  as  stated  in  the  Bank  of  Japan
Law?
Of course a central bank always has to be open-minded in examining new policy measures. In fact,
both  at  the  time  of  adopting  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  and  decisive  monetary  easing  in  March,  I
believe the Bank adopted an innovative posture. At the same time, however, we cannot make a quick
decision  to  pursue  extreme  policy  when  the  effects  are  uncertain  simply  because  some  think  it  is
better to do something than nothing.
For example, while an increase in the outright purchase of government bonds by a central bank might
have some effects, if it induced market uncertainty with respect to future fiscal discipline, it would lead
to an interest rate rise by way of increase in risk premiums and thus entail a risk of having an adverse
impact on the economy. In fact, when looking at the recent development of long-term interest rates,
they often sensitively responded to views concerning the future issuance of government bonds such
that they rose recently reflecting budget discussions. Of course, such a recent rise in interest rates can
be  regarded  as  within  the  range  of  extremely  low  interest  rates  and  thus  we  do  not  have  to  worry
about  any  adverse  impact  on  economic  activity.  However,  it  is  necessary  for  a  policymaker  to
remember  that  market  participants  are  sensitive  to  uncertainty  over  future  fiscal  management  and
resulting bond supply and demand conditions.
6
BIS Review 68/2001
In  March,  the  Bank  decided  to  increase  its  outright  purchase  of  long-term  government  bonds  if
deemed necessary for the smooth provision of liquidity, on the condition that the outstanding amount
of long-term government bonds held by the Bank be kept below the outstanding balance of banknotes
issued. And this decision was arrived at by taking full account of what I have so far mentioned.
In sum, it is because monetary policy has entered uncharted territory that responsible policymakers
are required to conduct a careful examination of all the possible favorable effects and side-effects of
all likely policy responses. In doing so, it is important to recognize that,  with increasingly globalized
financial  markets,  policy  in  Japan  is  exposed  to  harsh  assessment  by  market  participants  both  at
home  and  abroad.  In  this  sense,  in  conducting  monetary  policy,  not  only  policy  action  such  as
individual policy measures but also the principle behind every policy action becomes important. In a
way, such principles might constitute policy.
At present, as production is declining substantially reflecting a fall in exports, economic adjustments
are  intensifying.  Needless  to  say,  the  Bank  of  Japan  will  continue  to  carefully  examine  overall
developments in the economy, including adjustments in IT-related areas and the effects of structural
reform, and conduct appropriate monetary policy. At the same time, I would like to emphasize that,
during  such  process,  ensuring  monetary  policy  credibility  as  a  whole  becomes  critical  for  realizing
sustainable economic growth.
Thank you for your attention.
BIS Review 68/2001
7
