Donald T Brash: Central banks: what they can and cannot do
Speech by Dr Donald T Brash, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Trans-Tasman
Business Circle, Sydney, 30 March 2001.
 Introduction
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  back  in  Australia,  addressing  an  audience  hosted  by  the
Trans-Tasman  Business  Circle  and  Australian  Business  Economists.  Last  year,  I  spoke  about  the
history  of  inflation  targeting  in  New  Zealand,  and  noted  the  extent  to  which  the  Reserve  Bank  of
Australia  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  had  converged  in  their  respective  approaches  to
monetary policy.
This year, it was suggested that I talk about recent developments in the New Zealand economy, and
the immediate prospects. On reflection, however, I have chosen not to do that. My colleagues and I
set out how we see the recent past and immediate future in our March Monetary Policy Statement,
published  just  over  two  weeks  ago,  and  I  usually  try  to  avoid  making  potentially  market-moving
comments except when I am announcing a formal review  of our Official Cash Rate. The next  such
review is scheduled for 19 April.
Instead, I want to talk about what central banks can achieve, and what they can not achieve, and to
make some comparisons between the role of central banks and the role of central governments.
And my motive in doing this is in large part because I believe that, in recent years, in New Zealand as
in many other countries, the public have come to believe that central banks can achieve very much
more than they can, in reality, deliver. There is a serious risk that, when the realisation dawns that the
power  of  central  banks  is  not  in  fact  unlimited,  or  when  economies  which  have  been  performing
extremely well in recent years go through a period of slower growth, central banks will receive far more
than their fair share of blame.
Indeed, there are already signs of this blame and anger emerging in the United States: for much of the
last decade, Alan Greenspan was widely assumed to be able to walk on water. Now there are angry
accusations from many quarters that imply that he should have been able to keep the US economy
growing  above  its  trend  potential  indefinitely,  and  prices  in  the  US  share-market  growing  with  it.
Perhaps there are similar tendencies closer to home.
In all developed countries and most developing countries, the central bank is charged with promoting
stable money and a stable financial system. (This is true even though, in Australia and in many other
countries,  the  task  of  supervising  the  institutions  in  the  banking  system  has  been  allocated  to  a
separate supervisory agency.)
And  these  are  extremely  important  goals.  To  see  just  how  important,  it  is  worth  reflecting  on  the
economic  and  human  cost  incurred  by  many  countries  when  central  banks  got  policy  wrong  and
contributed  to  the  strong  deflation  of  the  thirties.  Or  reflecting  on  the  economic  and  human  cost
incurred by those countries which experienced hyperinflation at some stage during the last century. Or
reflecting on the economic and human cost incurred  by  those countries,  including many  in  our own
region, which experienced severe banking sector crises in recent years.
When central banks get it wrong, when they allow the value of the money which they issue to fluctuate
substantially, as in the case of serious deflation or high inflation, or when they allow banking systems
to  become  unstable,  the  damage  which  can  be  done  is  enormous.  Savings  can  be  destroyed.
Businesses  can  be  destroyed.  Jobs  can  be  destroyed.  Lives  can  be  destroyed.  Indeed,  whole
societies can be destroyed.
So  let  me  not  understate  the  importance  of  the  role  which  central  banks  can  play.  When  central
banking is done well, it not only avoids those catastrophic results which have been seen around the
globe  from  time  to  time,  but  also  makes  some  positive  contribution  to  economic  growth,  to  social
BIS Review 26/2001
1
justice, and perhaps even to the integrity  of society itself. As a former Governor  of  the  US  Federal
Reserve System used to say, "a place that tolerates inflation is a place where no one tells the truth".1
What central banks can achieve
Today I want to focus on the responsibility which central banks have for keeping the value of money
stable, for keeping  inflation low, rather than  on their responsibility for the financial  system.  To  what
extent  do  central  banks  make  a  contribution  to  economic  growth  and  social  justice  by  keeping  the
value of money stable?
Nobody  seriously  doubts  that  both  hyper-inflation  and  significant  deflation  can  do  real  damage  to
economic growth, and that by avoiding both central banks can make a considerable contribution. But
what about the contribution to growth from keeping inflation in low single figures, as compared to the
double-digit  inflation  which  both  our  countries  endured  during  much  of  the  seventies  and  eighties?
Perhaps inevitably, this is still a matter of ongoing debate among economists.
Some claim that the contribution is negligible, that beyond avoiding the catastrophes of hyper-inflation
and  significant  deflation  the  contribution  which  inflation  control  makes  to  economic  growth  is  very
small.  Others  see  a  rather  larger  contribution,  through  the  fact  that  the  pricing  system  works  more
efficiently  to  allocate  resources  when  prices  are  on  average  stable,  for  example,  or  through  the
avoidance  of  the  distortions  caused  by  the  interaction  of  inflation  and  a  tax  system  based  on  the
assumption that prices are stable.
I myself see this latter point - the distortions caused by the interaction of even quite modest levels of
inflation with a tax system designed on the assumption that prices are stable - as being particularly
relevant to the way in which keeping inflation under tight control can assist economic growth. I find it
hard to escape the conclusion that one of the reasons for New Zealanders' relatively heavy investment
in property assets, and relatively low investment in financial assets, in recent decades is related to the
fact that, under the present tax regime, inflation results in an "under-taxation" of property investment
and an "over-taxation" of financial assets. I suspect also that the fact that government spending as a
share  of  GDP  increased  so  substantially  over  the  seventies  and  eighties  is  in  no  small  measure  a
result  of  the  fact  that  inflation  and  relatively  unchanging  income  tax  brackets  caused  government's
share of the  national cake to  expand  steadily,  without  the  politically  uncomfortable  need  to  actually
raise tax rates. And if, as many believe, an increase in the government's share of GDP is associated
with lower economic growth, this is another way in which inflation damages growth.
But even those who see stable money as making a positive contribution to economic growth, as I do,
do  not  see  that  contribution  as  large  in  the  sense  understood  by  most  people.  It  is  a  growth
contribution  measured  in  fractions  of  one  per  cent,  not  the  difference  between,  say,  a  3  per  cent
annual growth rate and a 5 per cent annual growth rate.
Of course, achieving even a small increase  in annual  growth is definitely  worth  having.  One  recent
study  estimates that  a 10 percentage point increase in inflation reduces the growth rate of real  per
capita GDP by between 0.2 and 0.3 percentage points per annum, leading to GDP being some 4 to 7
per cent lower than otherwise after 30 years.2 Otmar Issing, now a member of the Executive Board of
the European Central Bank and prior to that for many years the chief economist of the Bundesbank,
reminds us that
"With  regard  to  the  output  gains  found  in  most  studies  from  price-stability  and  low  inflation,  it  is
important to bear in mind that they are permanent. Even if they may appear to be small in any one
year, in present value terms, the size of these gains can be substantial. For example, discounted at a
3 per cent real interest rate, a 0.5 per cent gain in the level of output per year amounts to 17 per cent
of GDP in present value terms. In fact, the empirical evidence suggests that the gains may be larger
than this."3 Output gains of that magnitude are certainly worth having. But they don't represent the kind
                                                     
1 Cited by Jerry Jordan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, in a speech entitled "The challenge of stability:
Mexico's pursuit of sound money", 29 April 1999.
2
3
2
Barro, R. (1995), "Inflation and Economic Growth", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5326. In this
paper,  the  adverse  effect  of  inflation  on  growth  diminishes  over  time,  with  the  economy  converging  back  to  its  long-run
growth rate, but at a permanently lower level of output.
Issing,  O.  (2000),  "Why  Price  Stability?",  a  paper  delivered  to  the  first  ECB  central  banking  conference  in  Frankfurt,
3 November 2000.
BIS Review 26/2001
of improvement in growth which many people think of when they think about improving the growth rate
in our societies.
In many ways, keeping the value of money broadly stable makes a bigger contribution to social justice
than it does to economic growth. When money is not stable, when in other words there is inflation or
deflation,  the  value  of  financial  assets  and  liabilities  changes  in  potentially  major  and  unexpected
ways. With inflation of 10 per cent per annum, for example, the value of a financial asset falls by about
85 per cent over 20 years, which means that those with savings see these all but wiped out, and those
with debts benefit enormously.
There are no doubt many reasons why New Zealanders had such a miserable savings record during
the  nineties  -  including  deregulation  of  the  financial  sector  and  the  removal  of  all  restrictions  on
imports. But the searing experience of high rates of inflation during the seventies and eighties must
surely have been a significant contributory factor.
Two  or  three  years  ago,  my  colleagues  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  suggested  that  we
should stop issuing five cent coins (as we stopped issuing one and two cent coins about  a decade
ago). I was surprised by the suggestion, until it was pointed out that the purchasing power of five cents
in  the  late  nineties  was  the  same  as  the  purchasing  power  of  a  half-penny  when  New  Zealand
converted to decimal currency in 1967 - and it never occurred to us to issue a half-cent coin at that
time. In other words, the purchasing power of New Zealand's money had declined by over 90 per cent
over a period of just 30 years - despite inflation being quite low for the last 10 years of that period.
And in case you feel that New Zealand's performance was substantially worse than Australia's over
that  period,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  domestic  purchasing  power  of  the  Australian  dollar  also  fell
heavily over the 30 years from 1967, by over 85 per cent.
There  is  nothing  fair,  just,  or  even  honest  in  a  monetary  system  which  steals  people's  savings,  or
rewards those lucky enough to go  heavily into  debt  at  the  right  time.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that
some of those who today are wealthy in both our countries became wealthy as much through having
the  real  value  of  their  borrowings  evaporate  before  their  eyes  as  through  their  own  efforts  and
initiative.  And this sends  absolutely  the  wrong  message  to  everyone  making  saving,  spending,  and
investment decisions.
I know that when I returned to New Zealand in 1971 after living overseas for nine years, four of them in
Australia, I bought a house for $43,000 by paying a small deposit and borrowing the balance. Fifteen
years later, the house had a market value of nearly 10 times the price I paid for it, so that instead of
owning just 10 per cent of it, as I did in 1971, with the bank effectively owning the balance, by 1986 I
owned almost all of it. That increase in my equity was substantially larger than anything I had been
able to save out of my post-tax income during those 15 years.
On the other side of the ledger so to speak, my elderly uncle sold the apple orchard on which he had
worked  all  his  life,  by  chance  also  in  1971.  To  keep  the  sale  proceeds  safe  -  the  orchard  had
represented virtually his entire life's savings - he invested them in 18  year government bonds,  then
yielding 5.4 per cent. Perhaps fortunately, he died before the bonds matured in 1989, because by that
time the $30,000 for which he had sold his orchard would have bought him one small, four-cylinder,
car - not much of a retirement nest egg. In 1971, $30,000 would have bought him 11 of the same four-
cylinder cars, a much more substantial retirement nest egg.
I, and people like me, benefited enormously at the expense of my uncle and people like him, and all
because of inflation.
Because in most societies interest rates are used as a way to try to compensate savers for the erosion
of  the  principal  value  of  their  savings  through  inflation,  there  is  an  additional  problem  which  often
makes it particularly difficult for those with low incomes or few other assets to borrow at a time of high
inflation. The problem arises from the fact that, when inflation is high and nominal interest rates are
similarly high, the cash-flow problem of servicing a loan is quite difficult in the first few  years of the
loan,  but  very  easy  in  the  last  few  years  of  the  loan.  Put  another  way,  using  interest  rates  to
compensate savers for the effects of inflation on their savings has the effect of front-loading the real
burden  of  debt  service.  This  may  effectively  deny  those  on  low  incomes  any  access  to  borrowing
facilities in times of high inflation, even though the real interest rate on the loan is at a moderate level.
So  central  banks  can  probably  make  some  modest  contribution  to  trend  growth  through  keeping
inflation low and stable, and can help to avoid the social injustices often caused by unstable money.
BIS Review 26/2001
3
In seeking to keep inflation low and stable, central banks may also have  a tendency  to smooth the
economic cycle. It is now well understood that one of the more important determinants of changes in
the  inflation  rate  is  the  extent  to  which  actual  output  diverges  from  potential  output.  When  actual
output  falls  short  of  what  the  economy  could  produce  without  difficulty  -  where,  in  other  words,
resources of capital and labour are under-utilised - there is a tendency for inflation to fall. Conversely,
when the economy is straining to produce more than it can on a sustainable basis, when capital  is
being used around the clock and the labour market is tight, there is a tendency for inflation to rise. For
this reason, all central banks, even  those  with no formal mandate to  be concerned about  output  or
employment, have to watch carefully what is happening to both in their attempt to keep inflation under
control. Indeed, once inflation has been brought down to a low level, it is not much of an exaggeration
to say that keeping inflation low and stable is mainly about trying to keep actual output tracking close
to potential. And, by reducing the economic and social dislocation caused by booms and busts, that is
a useful contribution which central banks can make.
What central banks can not achieve
But too often the general public assume that central banks can achieve very much more than in fact is
possible. This tendency to exaggerate the role of central banks has been particularly  evident in the
United  States  in  recent  years,  as  I  have  mentioned,  with  the  almost  universal  perception  that  the
strong growth in US productivity since the mid-nineties has been closely related to the way in which
the Federal Reserve System has operated monetary policy. Of course, the way in which the Fed has
run  policy  appears  at  this  stage  to  have  been  remarkably  sound:  monetary  policy  decision-makers
appear to have correctly judged that there  was  a step  increase in the rate  of growth  of productivity
around the mid-nineties, and that potential output growth had increased as a consequence. But the
main thing driving that step increase in the rate of growth of productivity was the application of some
very  sophisticated  technology,  initially  in  the  manufacture  of  computers  themselves  and  then,
progressively, in much of the rest of the economy. Monetary policy did not impede that development,
but of course did not create the new technology.
Similarly  in  New  Zealand,  and  perhaps  also  in  Australia,  there  has  been  a  tendency  to  attribute  to
monetary policy and central banks an influence on the economy out of all proportion to the reality. The
reality is that, beyond the contribution they can make by maintaining inflation at a  low  level, central
banks can not have any substantial effect on trend growth in output or trend growth in employment. By
contrast, the policies of governments can have a material influence on both.
This is not the place for a comprehensive discussion on the determinants of trend growth in output, but
most  of  the  studies  which  have  examined  this  issue  focus  on  issues  quite  unrelated  to  monetary
policy.  For  example,  some  studies  have  suggested  that  high  levels  of  taxation  discourage  growth
through their effect on incentives to work, save and innovate. Others have pointed to the importance of
protecting private property rights if growth is to be dynamic. Still others note the importance of human
capital, and highlight the role of education as a determinant of economic growth. And there are many
other  factors  too,  such  as  the  extent  to  which  government  regulations  distort  or  disguise  market
signals, thus distorting the allocation of investment. Getting policies in all of these areas right is crucial
if growth is to be increased, and none of them are policies susceptible to central bank influence.
What about employment? Surely central banks have an impact on employment? Yes, monetary policy
does have an impact on employment in the short-term, as it does on output in the short-term. But there
is  no  evidence  that  I  have  seen  that  monetary  policy  can  have  any  enduring  effect  on  the  level  of
employment.
So  what  can  deliver  higher  levels  of  employment  on  an  enduring  basis?  The  answer  lies  not  with
central banks but with choices made by governments and societies more generally.
It was the soon-to-retire Secretary of the Australian Treasury, Mr Ted Evans, who had the courage to
say in 1993 when Australian unemployment was 11 per cent of the work-force that unemployment at
that level was "a matter of choice" - choices made by governments and societies. He went on to say
that
"If  we  are  today  looking  for  innovative  solutions  for  reducing  unemployment  that  is  partly  because,
over the last two decades, we have found innovative ways of creating unemployment; more basically,
4
BIS Review 26/2001
it  is  because  we  choose  now  to  accept  the  constraints  imposed  by  the  many  economic  and  social
policy choices made during those decades."4
And by saying that the unemployment level was a matter of choice, he was not suggesting that it was
a choice for the central bank, but rather a choice of central government and society more generally.
He went on to note that
"There  are  now  very  few  economists  ...  who  would  deny  a  relationship  between  labour  costs  and
unemployment  -  indeed,  doing  so  would  require  abandoning  some  of  the  most  basic  tenets  of  our
economic  training.  That  said,  there  are  very  few,  any  more,  who  would  see  a  reduction  in  nominal
wages as the preferred solution to an unemployment problem ... Such solutions are not preferred in
the formalized labour market but we should be quite clear that that reflects a choice."
In  other  words,  he  was  suggesting,  I  believe  correctly,  that  in  the  long-term  unemployment  is  to  a
substantial  extent  a  function  of  the  relationship  between  the  costs  and  risks  associated  with  hiring
people on the one hand, and the benefits, in terms of increased output, on the other. So job creation
and employment levels are ultimately a function of things like labour market legislation, the level of the
unemployment benefit, and the education system. And all of these things are matters quite unrelated
to monetary policy. Rather, they have a great deal to do with government policy and the attitudes of
the public, both as providers of jobs and as potential employees.
More  fundamentally,  I  suspect  that  trend  growth  in  output  and  employment  are  both  a  function  of
culture and social attitudes. How much do we as a society value consumption today as compared to
consumption  tomorrow?  How  much  do  we  value  education?  How  much  do  we  value  being
independent as compared to being dependent on the state? How highly do we regard private property
rights?  The  answers  to  these  questions  are,  I  suspect,  the  primary  determinants  of  both  economic
growth and employment growth, and none of them have much relation to monetary policy.
I mentioned that, in the course  of keeping  inflation  low and stable, central banks  operate  monetary
policy with the objective of keeping actual output as close as possible to the trend of potential output.
But  that  does  not  imply  that  monetary  policy  can  guarantee  an  absence  of  booms  and  busts,  or
eliminate the business cycle.
To begin with, the "trend of potential output" is not something which can be seen, felt, or measured.
For this reason, it is impossible for any central bank to be sure when actual output is above, below, or
equal to it. Rough calculations can be made of course, adding assumed growth in the labour force to
assumed growth in productivity to come up with a ball-park number. But growth in the labour force can
vary for all kinds of reasons, including in particular because of abrupt changes in net migration.
And growth in productivity is also susceptible to change, as the experience of the United States over
the  last  four  decades  clearly  illustrates.  Until  the  early  seventies,  US  productivity  growth  was  quite
rapid. Then, in about 1973, for reasons which were certainly not clear at the time and are only dimly
understood now, productivity growth slowed rather abruptly, and remained low until the mid-nineties.
Then,  apparently  because  of  heavy  investment  in  computers  and  related  high-tech  gadgetry,
productivity growth picked up again quite strongly. Unless the central bank quickly becomes aware of
these changes, monetary policy will be inappropriately too tight or too loose.
Another reason not to expect that central banks can keep actual output growing at a rate exactly equal
to the trend growth in potential output is that monetary policy affects demand, and hence inflationary
pressure, with a considerable lag - and a lag which varies from economy to economy and from one
period to another. And within the period between the time a central bank adjusts monetary policy and
the time that policy adjustment affects output, and the further time before the change in output affects
inflation,  all  manner  of  things  may  change  in  ways  which  are  difficult  or  impossible  to  predict  -  the
world economy might change (of huge importance to economies like New Zealand and Australia), the
economy might be affected by a drought, government might change its taxation or spending policies,
government might change its immigration policy, and so on. All these things, "shocks" in the jargon,
can have a considerable effect on the relationship between demand and supply, and therefore on the
relationship between actual output and potential output.
So  it  is  simply  not  possible  for  even  the  most  diligent  central  bank  to  keep  actual  output  always
growing at the rate of growth of potential output,  and all of us,  within the central bank and outside,
                                                     
4
Address to the 1993 National Forecasting and Economic Policy Conference, 28 October 1993.
BIS Review 26/2001
5
need to remember that. There will be times when the economy slows, or even goes backward slightly,
and it may be totally inappropriate to blame the central bank for that event.
Governments  can  help  to  minimise  the  "shocks"  hitting  the  economy  by  changing  fiscal  policy  in  a
gradual and well-signalled way, so that monetary policy is not caught off-guard by a sudden shift in
demand emanating from public sector policy choices. And governments can help by ensuring that the
labour market is as flexible as possible, in order to ensure that, when shocks do hit the economy, they
are not reflected in persistent increases in unemployment.
Finally, it is worth noting that central banks can not solve regional, or sectoral, problems. In the mid-
nineties, New Zealand saw quite strong inflationary pressures which required monetary policy to be
tightened.  In  the  public  mind,  if  not  always  entirely  in  reality,  these  inflationary  pressures  were
associated  with  a  housing  boom  in  Auckland.  And  wherever  I  travelled  in  New  Zealand  outside
Auckland I was met by people asking why they had to face high real interest rates and a rising real
exchange rate  when, they claimed, the only  inflationary  pressures in  the  country  were  in  Auckland.
And always my answer was the same. All the parts of New Zealand are in a currency union, and it
simply is not possible for the central bank to deliver different interest rates, or different exchange rates,
to different parts of that currency union.
The same reality is relevant today. At the moment, with the New Zealand dollar at a level which most
observers  believe  is  well  below  its  long-term  or  equilibrium  level,  it  is  the  export  sectors  of  New
Zealand which are enjoying the fruits of the relatively easy monetary conditions. Industries serving the
domestic market, such as the construction industry, are finding life much tougher, in part because over
the last year or two New Zealand has been experiencing a moderate level of net emigration. But it is
quite impossible for monetary policy to resolve the problem facing the construction sector, or any other
particular sector. Monetary policy must be directed at keeping inflation under control in the economy
as a whole, and can not sensibly be used to deal with sectoral pressures.
In conclusion
Because I am a central banker, it will not surprise you to know that I believe that central banks can
make a very useful contribution to the economy and to society more generally. By running monetary
policy to keep the purchasing power of the money they issue stable, they can provide an environment
conducive to growth in output and employment. By doing that, they also provide an environment which
avoids  the  capricious  redistribution  of  income  and  assets  which  is  so  often  the  consequence  of
inflation.
But  in  some  respects,  central  banks  are  a  little  like  the  judiciary,  which  most  societies  have  also
decided to make independent of day-to-day political influence in the interests of achieving the goals
established by those societies in the best possible way. While both the judiciary and central banks can
make a very useful contribution to the societies in  which they  operate, over the longer term central
banks  can't  make  economies  grow  much  more  rapidly,  or  materially  reduce  unemployment,  or
eliminate the business cycle, or deal with the problems of particular industries or sectors - any more
than the members of the judiciary can make us all virtuous.
6
BIS Review 26/2001
