Y V Reddy: Issues in implementing international financial standards and codes
Public  lecture  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Centre  for
Banking Studies of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 28 June 2001.
 Governor Jayawardena, Deputy Governor Wijewardena and friends,
It gives me great pleasure to deliver this public lecture at the Centre for Banking Studies (CBS) of the
Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka.  It  gives  me  greater  pleasure  to  share  the  podium  with  Governor
Jayawardena whom I greatly admire for his intellect, acumen and outstanding statesmanship. The last
time  I  shared  the  same  forum  with  him  was  at  the  Second  South  Asia  Forex  Dealers’  Association
Conference at Hyderabad in October 1998. The East Asian countries were still in the midst of crisis. I
remember that he had listed do’s and don’ts of policy making for crisis avoidance, and his words of
wisdom continue to be valid even today.
Since both Sri Lanka and India shared many concerns in this regard, Governor Jalan had in August
1999  devoted  the  49th  Anniversary  Lecture  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  to  the  subject  of
international financial architecture (Jalan, 1999). Reflecting on the developing countries perspectives,
he focused on several areas of significance, viz., the exchange rate, the policy on reserves, the role of
the  external  private  sector,  the  management  of  capital  flows,  strengthening  the  financial  system,
transparency in systems and development of standards and codes, reform of international institutions
and new arrangements for international liquidity. In particular, Governor Jalan flagged several issues
relating  to  transparency  in  systems  and  developing  standards  and  codes,  and  today  I  propose  to
highlight aspects relating to implementation of these standards and codes.
There are several reasons for choosing to speak on this subject today. Among all the issues posed by
Governor Jalan in his Colombo speech, noteworthy progress is noticeable in respect of standards and
codes. Furthermore, the basic parameters on the issue of codes enunciated by him stand vindicated
by  subsequent  events.  Moreover,  India  has  gained  some  experience  in  sensitising  the  issues  and
creating an awareness, and in attempting self-assessment of its own adherence to various standards
and codes benchmarked against international norms.
Finally, issues relating to financial stability have gained significant attention of policy making in recent
years. In fact, Mr. Andrew Crockett, General Manager, Bank for International Settlements had made
an outstanding analysis of "Why is Financial Stability a Goal of Public Policy" (1997) in the Jackson
Hole (Wyoming; U.S.A.) Conference of August 1997 in which I had participated. More importantly, he
has through the Financial Stability Forum, brought about a more participative approach to evolution,
consolidation and implementation of international standards and codes, though these initiatives need
much more  progress.  A  description  of  the  key  standards  and  the  monitoring  of  their  observance  is
available  on  the  publication  of  Financial  Stability  Forum  (April  2001)  http://www.fsforum.org  entitled
"International  Standards  and  Codes  to  Strengthen  Financial  Systems"  and  so  I  will  not  spend  time
giving a descriptive account of them.
Standards and codes: current international context
The  development  of  international  standards  and  codes  in  the  current  context  has  five  important
features,  viz.,  it  is  part  of  the  reform  of  the  international  financial  architecture;  it  represents  a
consolidated  view  of  several  interrelated  standards  and  codes;  it  is  a  collaborative  effort  involving
different  groups  of  countries,  markets  and  international  financial  institutions  and  standard  setting
agencies  and  bodies;  it  has  elements  of  both  external  and  internal  assessments  of  degree  of
compliance; and, finally there is an assumption of linkage between the implementation of standards
and codes and financial stability.
First, in the light of the  Asian crisis, the need for fundamental changes in the international financial
architecture acquired greater urgency. Many proposals were made for strengthening the international
financial  system.  The  focus  of  these  proposals  was  broadly  on  indentifying  indicators  of  financial
vulnerability, development of sound international codes, standards and best practices, introduction of
preemptive measures and safety nets, and designing a framework for crisis management. Thus, while
development  of  international  standards  and  codes  is  only  one  element  of  the  overall  effort  in  the
BIS Review 62/2001
1
aftermath of the Asian crisis to reform the international financial  architecture, significant progress  is
noticeable  in  this  element  only.  As  part  of  the  effort  to  strengthen  financial  systems  and  improve
coordination  among  the  agencies  responsible  for  them,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  was
established in April 1999. Its mandate is to promote international financial stability by  improving the
functioning  of  markets  and  reducing  systemic  risk  through  information  exchange  and  international
cooperation in supervision and surveillance of financial markets. The FSF has drawn together various
standard-setting  bodies  which  were  constituted  by  means  of  cooperation  among  central  banks,
international  financial  institutions,  national  authorities  and  international  supervisory  and  regulatory
bodies.  The  FSF  has  posted  on  its  website  the  Compendium  of  Standards,  which  serves  as  a
common reference for various standards. Currently, there are 69 standards cited in the Compendium.
A  set  of  12  standards  has  been  highlighted  by  the  FSF  as  key  for  sound  financial  systems  and
deserving  of  consideration  for  priority  implementation.  The  key  standards  are  broadly  accepted  as
representing minimum requirements for good practice. The 12 key areas are organised under three
broad headings, viz., macroeconomic policy and data transparency (covering monetary and financial
policy transparency, fiscal policy transparency, data dissemination and data compilation), institutional
and market infrastructure (covering insolvency, corporate governance, accounting, auditing, payment
and  settlement  and  market  integrity)  and  financial  regulation  and  supervision  (covering  banking
supervision, securities regulation, and insurance supervision).
Second,  the  current  initiative  represents  a  consolidated  view  of  several  interrelated  standards  and
codes.  The  international  standard-setting  bodies  have  existed  for  a  long  time,  but  each  body  was
developing common codes and rules in isolation. There are various international organizations, which
over  the  years  have  made  significant  contribution  to  raising  standards  of  soundness  and  risk-
awareness in financial systems. After the Asian crisis, it was recognised that the world economy can
be  exposed  to  potential  threat  of  contagion  from  problems  in  financial  markets  and  so  it  became
imperative  to  strengthen  financial  systems  through  intensified  coordination  and  cooperation  among
national  regulatory  bodies,  international  regulatory  bodies  and  international  financial  institutions
charged  with  fostering  standards  and  codes.  For  the  first  time,  a  consolidated  view  of  several
standards broadly relevant to the financial sector was considered essential on an appreciation of their
inter-linkages.  For  example,  macro  economic  policy  can  affect  the  sectoral  dimension  of  financial
stability through its impact on the value of financial assets and liabilities. More important, it can affect
the  functioning  of  the  payments  and  settlement  systems.  Similarly,  regulation  and  supervision  are
linked  to  good  accounting  practices,  bankruptcy  laws  and  insolvency  procedures,  and  corporate
governance principles.
Third,  the  current  process  is  a  collaborative  effort  involving  developed  countries  and  emerging
economies, international institutions, public and private sector and regulators and market participants.
The emphasis has been concentrated on the official sector, with the responsibility for implementation
and accountability for results being  vested  with  the Government or the regulatory  agency. It is now
being recognised that the percolation of the compliance to certain standards and codes by the official
sector  will  depend  upon  improvements  in  the  private  sector  also.  For  instance,  while  banking
supervision/regulatory  practices by  official authorities  would  improve  significantly  by  adhering  to  the
core  principles,  in  a  market  related  environment,  the  overall  efficiency  of  the  system  cannot  be
enhanced  without  adequate  response  from  the  banking  institutions  themselves.  Similarly,  corporate
governance in banking and also in the private corporate sector, in particular in securities firms would
be an important aspect.
Fourth,  the  current  initiative  has  elements  of  external  assessment  and  incentive  for  internal
assessment of degree of compliance of a country with the key standards and codes. Thus, the IMF
and  the World  Bank  have  developed  an  organisational  framework  for  assessing member countries’
observance of standards and codes. The IMF assesses the implementation of standards as part of its
Article-IV consultations and the Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) discussion processes in
several countries and the assessments are documented in the Reports on Observance of Standards
and  Codes  (ROSC).  The  IMF  is  preparing  ROSCs  on  data  dissemination  and  fiscal  transparency,
which are considered to be areas important to its mandate of overseeing international monetary and
financial  stability.  The  World  Bank  is  producing  ROSCs  on  auditing,  corporate  governance,  and
insolvency and credit rights systems. In preparing the ROSCs, the assessments have generally been
sensitive to different stages of economic development, administrative capacities and  heterogeneous
cultural,  legal  and  institutional  conditions  of  Fund  members.  Participation  in  ROSC,  however,
continues  to  be  voluntary  in  nature.  Internal  assessments  are  also  encouraged  by  international
institutions and standard setting bodies.
2
BIS Review 62/2001
Fifth, the entire exercise relating to the international standards and codes is being undertaken on the
premise  that  their  implementation  helps  to  promote  sound  financial  systems  domestically  enabling
their smooth integration to global markets contributing thereby to financial stability internationally. They
are meant to play an important role in strengthening financial regulation and supervision, enhancing
transparency,  facilitating  institutional  development  and  reducing  vulnerabilities.  Standards  are  also
expected to facilitate informed decision making in lending and investment and improve market integrity
and, thereby, minimize the risks of financial distress and contagion. No doubt, standards are not ends
in  themselves  but  a  means  for  promoting  sound  financial  fundamentals  and  sustained  economic
growth.
Assessment of international initiative
It may be useful to assess the response to these international initiatives in terms of the validity of the
approach,  adequacy  of  coverage  of  issues,  symmetry  of  treatment  between  participants,  linkage
between international standards and codes and financial stability and issues of coverage of standards
in IMF surveillance.
First, the latest Trade and Development Report (UNCTAD, TDR, 2001) questions the validity of the
overall approach to the reform of  the  international  financial  architecture.  It  observes  that  the  recent
efforts  have  focussed  on  measures  mainly  designed  to  discipline  debtor  countries.  While  it  is
conceded  that  all  the  reforms  that  are  being  prescribed  have  their  merits,  there  is  an  overriding
presumption in the prescriptions that the causes of the crisis rests primarily with policy and institutional
weaknesses  in  the  debtor  countries  and  hence  place  the  onus  of  responsibility  of  reform  on  the
debtors. The Report observes that inadequate attention has been given to the role of institutions and
policies  of  creditor  countries.  The  root  of  the  problem,  according  to  UNCTAD,  lies  in  the  failure  to
establish a stable exchange rate system. There are also criticisms that although the IMF introduced
the contingent credit lines, it has not been used so far. It is well recognised that the capacity of the IMF
to raise resources is severely limited and is inadequate compared to the size of the recent financial
packages.  There  are  also  views  that  not  much  has  been  done  on  standstill  arrangements  and
bankruptcy procedures.
Secondly,  there  are  varying  perceptions  among  different  actors  resulting  in  inadequate  attention  to
many aspects of international order. A study by Prof. Stephany Griffith Jones (2001) highlights that all
key actors involved in the reform process, viz., developed country Governments, banking and financial
markets and international financial institutions share one common objective, which is, that they are in
favour of and benefit from sustained growth of developing countries. For some (developing countries
and international financial institutions) it is a dominant objective. There is, however, far less agreement
on specific measures to be taken for building a new international financial architecture. An important
example  relates  to  the  opening  of  the  capital  accounts  by  developing  countries.  While  international
financial  markets  have  a  strong  preference  for  full  opening  up,  most  developing  countries  favour  a
gradual and sequenced opening up. The study also observes the attitudes of the different players on
specific  changes  in  the  international  financial  architecture.  The  areas  include  codes  and  standards,
international  liquidity,  development  finance,  international  regulation,  standstill  and  orderly  debt
workouts and increased developing country participation. The matrix shows that except in the area of
standards and codes, most of the significant measures that would need to be taken have not actually
happened.
Thirdly,  it  is  argued  that  the  progress  made  so  far  reflects  asymmetry  in  different  participants'
responsibilities for the changes required. The main criticism is that it does not adequately address the
concerns  of  developing  countries.  The  obligations  contained  in  the  standards  and  codes  seem  to
reflect the view that the main flaws in the system for international capital movements are to be found in
recipient  countries  which  should  thus  bear  the  burden  of  adjustment  needed  to  prevent  or  contain
financial  crisis.  The  UNCTAD  Report  (2001)  states:  "the  reform  process  rather  than  focussing  on
international action to address systemic instability and risks has placed emphasis on what should be
done  by  national  institutions  and  mechanisms.  Even  in  this  regard  it  has  failed  to  adopt  an
evenhanded approach between debtors and creditors. Thus, it seems as if standards and codes are
being  pressed  upon  developing  countries 
transparency  and  disclosure  without
corresponding  obligations  for  disclosure  by  financial  institutions  and  hedge  funds".  I  may,  however,
add that this conclusion does not in any way minimise the importance of standards to any nation. It
would be preferable to move to best practices irrespective of other country practices.
improve 
to 
BIS Review 62/2001
3
Fourthly,  the  link  between  implementation  of  standards  and  codes  and  financial  stability  by  itself  is
neither  theoretically  established  nor  backed  by  sufficient  empirical  evidence  though  on  the  basis  of
first  principles  and  judgment,  the  linkage  between  the  two  elements  is  apparent.  Financial  stability
requires stability of both financial institutions and financial markets (Vasudevan 2001). The stability of
financial institutions depends on the confidence of public regarding the ability of the former to meet
contractual  obligations.  Standards  relating  to  effective  banking  supervision,  for  example,  aim  at
enhancing stability of the institutions. Stability in financial markets is reflected in market participants’
confidence  at  being  able  to  transact  at  prices  reflecting  true  market  fundamentals.  Standards  on
accounting,  auditing,  data  dissemination,  and  securities  settlements  systems,  in  turn,  aim  at
strengthening stability  of financial markets. The standards  and  codes,  however,  do  not  address  the
problem associated with inability of the market agents to understand and process the information. In a
vast majority of developing countries, and possibly in developed countries as well, as the recent large
corrections in the international stock markets suggest, mispricing of information could often give rise to
instability. There are some markets, which tend to move more by noise and rumours than  news. In
such markets, release of additional information may not be recognized and understood by the players
and  may  add  more  noise  than  information.  Thus,  in  developing  countries,  it  can  be  argued  that
information  superiority  of  the  regulator  or  Government  may  be  justified  when  it  shoulders  the  dual
responsibility of both "market development" and "avoidance of market failure".
As  regards  institutional  stability,  compliance  with  related  standards  appears  to  make  a  positive
contribution since the early  warning indicators  that  could  be  compiled  due  to  implementation  of  the
relevant  standards,  could  potentially  contain  the  probability  and  severity  of  a  crisis  provided  timely
action is initiated  at  the  early  sign  of  vulnerability.  Stronger  and  sound  supervision  of  institutions  in
respect  of  compliance  with  related  standards,  while  strengthening  the  preventive  mechanisms  and
leading  to  timely  and  proactive  interventions,  may  not  fully  insulate  the  system  from  occurrence  of
financial frauds.
A difficult issue that needs to be addressed while implementing standards and codes for strengthening
stability of institutions is that the implementation of standards enables compilation and monitoring of
information  both  on  aggregated  information  across  all  financial  institutions  and  on  systemically
important  individual  institutions.  The  implementation  authorities  should  recognise  the  value  and
usefulness of both segregated and aggregated data and information and imbibe analytical skills and
techniques to draw useful conclusions.
Recent  initiatives on Macro-Prudential Indicators (MPIs) aim at addressing this particular  issue  of  a
macro-view.  Aggregation  of  performance  indicators  across  heterogeneous  groups  like  banks,  non-
banks,  development  banks,  merchant  banks,  securities  firms,  insurance  companies  etc.,  however,
may not always convey any meaningful signal. In bank dominated financial systems, the emphasis,
therefore,  has  been  on  aggregating  the  information  first  across  banks,  then  extending  it  to  other
institutions  over  time.  Monitoring  is  also  exercised  over  different  groups  separately  at  group  level.
Group  level  analysis  that  clearly  tracks  inter-group  exposures  partly  addresses  the  problem  of
aggregation for the system as a whole.
Fifthly, despite the apparent emphasis on their voluntary adoption, there is a danger that incentives
and sanctions linked to standard setting will become features of IMF surveillance and conditionality. In
such  a  scenario,  publication  of  information  on  the  compliance  status,  particularly  the  information
presented in the ROSC reports, is fraught with the danger of classifying the countries into performers
and non-performers. Even when the international agencies associated with the work on standards and
codes  may  not  intend  so,  once  the  information  is  disseminated,  it  is  possible  that  credit  rating
agencies may assign country ratings on the basis of the levels of achievement of standards. Internal
assessments and external evaluations under Article-IV and FSAP by the Fund-Bank have, therefore,
to be extremely cautious about the dissemination of information on a country’s compliance status. The
policy makers, who shoulder the responsibility for developing markets while at the same time avoiding
market instabilities must retain full discretion on their own dissemination policy.
Desirable approach at national level
Briefly stated, the recent international initiatives in regard to standards and codes provide at best  a
partial  solution  to  the  problems  of  existing  international  financial  architecture.  Furthermore,  in  the
context of a crisis, they provide solutions at domestic level for issues that may often originate outside
the country. Finally, they do not assure international financial stability although they may contribute to
it.  Yet,  there  are  several  reasons  why  public  policy  and  national  authorities  need  to  focus  on  the
4
BIS Review 62/2001
international  standards  and  codes  and  these  reasons  centre  around  both  efficiency  and  stability  of
financial  sector  in  the  country.  In  this  context,  a  desirable  approach  to  the  consideration  of
international standards and codes can be explored in national interest.
As mentioned earlier, standards are not totally new. The current international effort is only to codify
best  practices  and  disseminate  widely  to  member  countries  so  that  the  domestic  markets  in  a
globalised environment will grow and integrate in harmony without destabilisation. The role of financial
sector as also the other institutional arrangements for efficient economic activity has been extensively
debated in the past. One issue is whether the market behaviour has to be viewed from a normative
angle passing ‘value judgments’ or the market behaviour should be taken as ‘rational’ or ‘commercial’
behaviour. This leads to the wider debate between State versus Market and the role of the regulator
over markets. History has taught lessons that while markets have a key role to play, there are limits to
market behaviour leading at times to crisis situation. It is necessary to recognize that just as the nature
and  functioning  of  ‘State’  has  some  variations  as  between  countries,  the  working  of  markets  also
varies among countries.
When a country gets globalised, the domestic institutional,  legal  and  other  structures  have  to  be  in
reasonable  harmony  with  international  best  practices.  Otherwise,  international  flows  cannot  freely
respond to market signals and information. Therefore, the risks arising in domestic markets can spill
over as international or cross border risks. It is in the light of the increasing global cross border flows
and  handling  of  risks  arising  thereby,  that  the  acceptance  and  adherence  of  international  best
practices assume significance. While the standards and best practices may not uniformly apply and
the  relevance  and  applicability  may  differ  from  country  to  country,  as  a  medium  and  longer  term
endeavour,  development  of  international  best  practices  in  any  country  may  be  viewed  in  the  best
interest of sound, stable and efficient financial structure.
Although  the  standards  have  evolved  in  the  context  of  international  stability,  they  have  enormous
efficiency-enhancing value by themselves. Standards by themselves may be presumed to be, prima
facie,  desirable,  and  it  is,  therefore,  in  the  national  interest  to  develop  institutional  mechanisms  for
consideration of international standards. Thus, the implementation of standards needs to be given a
domestic focus with the objectives of market development and enhancing domestic market efficiency.
Some standards keep evolving and it is important to keep close track of development in these areas. It
also needs to be recognized that the process is evolutionary and say two years down the line, present
standards themselves can change, in degree and detail though not in kind.
In  a  broad  sense,  it  can  be  held  that  all  standards  are,  in  some  way  or  other,  relevant  for  all  the
countries though  the  extent  of relevance, scope for application  and urgency  of implementation  may
differ depending  upon  the  stage  of  development  as  also  the  country  specific,  legal  and  institutional
structures.  In  particular,  in  economies  which  do  not  have  developed  markets,  the  entire  market
development has to be given greater weight than mere application of standards. In the case of such
economies,  the  advantage  is  that  since  they  are  starting  on  a  clean  slate,  the  standards  and  best
practices  could  be  easily  incorporated  as  they  go  along  with  the  development  of  institutions  and
markets.
While  there  can  be  no  uniform  prioritisation  of  standards  relevant  for  all  countries,  it  is  possible  to
place, on a universal basis considerable emphasis upon certain specific areas depending on individual
country circumstances. To quote the Task Force on Implementation of Standards chaired by Andrew
Sheng (2000) : "prioritization of standards for implementation must necessarily vary from economy to
economy,  taking  into  consideration  their  current  status  in  observance  of  standards,  economic
circumstances, financial structures, legal and institutional frameworks, and policy priorities. A balance
would need to be struck between international and domestic considerations".
It would be useful to explore parameters for prioritization in respect of specific countries though there
could be different approaches. For instance, it would be easier to implement standards in areas, which
have  been  substantially  developed.  On  the  contrary,  the  prioritization  for  a  particular  country  could
consider  the  identification  of  ‘weak  areas’.  The  weak  areas  may  be,  for  example,  weak  legal  base
leading to legal uncertainties, lack of regulation leading to lack of regulatory norms, etc.
It  may  also  be  possible  to  classify  the  standards  in  a  conceptual  framework  under  three  broad
elements, viz., technical, policy and socio-cultural. Standards like SDDS, accounting and auditing, and
supervision may be classified as purely technical and, therefore, easily amenable to implementation.
Standards  on  monetary  and  financial  policies,  fiscal  transparency  and  securities  regulation  have
certain policy implications and would form an integral  part of the economic reform process in many
developing countries. The changes in these areas depend on timing, sequencing and complementarity
BIS Review 62/2001
5
in  related  areas  and  availability  of  institutional,  technological  and  legal  infrastructure.  Nevertheless,
while it is desirable to adopt these standards quickly, it actually boils down to an issue of managing of
policy  reforms  in  a  non-disruptive  fashion.  Finally,  standards  in  the  areas  of  corporate  governance,
insurance and to a certain extent insolvency and bankruptcy practices take a socio-cultural dimension
and pose challenges of design, adoption and implementation.
It is also possible to attempt a construct of the link between transparency and macroeconomic policy.
Good  macroeconomic  policy  and  good  standards  is  perhaps  an  ideal  situation  for  a  country.  Good
macroeconomic  policy  and  poor  transparency  though  not  ideal  is  perhaps  not  risky  by  itself.  Bad
macroeconomic  policy  and  good  transparency  has  large  elements  of  risk  and  warrants  change  in
policy before launching into transparency. The most risky combination perhaps is bad macroeconomic
policy  and  bad  standards.  In  a  more  dynamic  sense,  it  can  be  argued  that  transparency  provides
incentives to adopt good macroeconomic policies.
Practical issues in implementation
It  is  difficult  to  attempt  an  exhaustive  or  universally  applicable  account  of  practical  issues  in
implementation of standards and codes since they are country-specific. It is, however, worth exploring,
albeit hesitatingly, some general observations.
First, while transparency and financial stability appear fundamentally complementary, there could be a
trade off at some point. Therefore, codes should be treated as milestones and the exact manner and
timing of dissemination of information including the structure of reporting should depend not only on
constitutional,  legal  and  institutional  mechanisms  but  also  the  likely  impact  of  dissemination  on  the
financial sector soundness and stability in a given context.
Secondly,  many  codes  emphasise  legislative  provisions  in  a  concrete  manner.  Legislation  provides
the shield or back up for such actions. The emphasis of the codes should be to promote a general
effort to improve legislative provisions and it is necessary to recognise that the process of legislation is
time consuming and complex. While it is essential to recognize the importance of legislation, given its
complexity, we need to appreciate that sound practices also could be as satisfactory.
Thirdly,  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  is  centralised  with  a  single  authority,  generally  the
central bank, while the implementation of financial policies pertaining to various sectors like non-bank
financial  institutions,  insurance,  securities  markets  and  payments  and  settlement  may  rest  with
different  institutions.  While  the  standards  and  codes  could  be  taken  as  umbrella  ones  for  all
institutions, different aspects of implementation have to be dealt with separately for different sectors.
This is necessary  because  the  objectives  of  the  institutions  may  differ  fundamentally.  For  example,
banking  emphasises  depositor  protection  whereas  in  the  case  of  securities  market,  it  is  investor
protection. The payment and settlement system has huge systemic risk associated with it and in the
case of insurance, the emphasis is upon asset protection. Such differences lead to basic differences in
the approach and management and, therefore, it would be useful to address implementation aspects
separately sector-wise as far as possible, even though the design may be centralised.
Fourthly,  in  implementing  the  Codes,  since  there  is  a  multiplicity  of  institutions  or  arrangements  for
regulating different financial sector segments like insurance, banking, securities markets and payment
and settlement, overall approach to cover different agencies in overlapping/grey  areas of regulation
become important. In the absence of well-defined regulatory roles and responsibilities combined with
over-viewing or overseeing arrangements, there are possibilities for regulatory gaps/overlaps leading
to regulatory arbitrage by market agencies. The use of the word coordination is avoided deliberately,
preferring the word oversee since a rigid and centralised approach to compliance in this complex task
covering several institutions may be counter-productive.
Fifthly, transparency practices are often addressed to financial agencies (regulatory  authorities) and
not  applicable  to  companies  or  other  entities  in  the  private  sector.  The  emphasis  on  the
implementation of standards and codes and accountability thereof is still heavily concentrated in the
official sector. There is some asymmetry here. An optimal balance between regulation and competitive
efficiency  in  the  financial  system  and  markets  can  be  achieved  only  with  equal  emphasis  on
responsibility and accountability of the private sector. The focus of IMF is also with regard to codes
mostly in respect of regulators and not so much with private sector. International accounting standards
and standards set by securities market associations are, no doubt, expected to cover issues relating to
private  sector  market  participants.  Every  effort  should  be  made  to  recognise  and  correct  the
asymmetry.
6
BIS Review 62/2001
Sixthly,  financial  agencies  may  be  justified  not  to  disclose  some  policy  measures  which  are  in
progress,  contingency  plans,  corrective  actions,  emergency  lending  decisions  and  supervisory  or
enforcement actions. Revealing of such information could be based upon case-by-case deliberations
and no standardisation is possible in such cases. It should also be emphasised that the transparency
practices may  not  be the same and the relevance and applicability of practices may  differ  between
financial  sector  agencies.  For  instance,  ‘market  efficiency’  should  be  relevant  more  for  securities
regulatory authority; the ‘market and systemic stability’ would be more relevant for a central bank and
other  supervisory  agencies;  and  ‘client-asset  protection’  would  be  more  relevant  for  institutions  like
Deposit Insurance Companies.
Seventhly,  the  practice  evolved  in  India  is  in  finding  solutions  through  a  participatory/consultative
approach even on major policy issues. Important guidelines are circulated/publicised in draft form for
consultation  and  discussion  before  implementing  and  making  them  operational.  Technical  advice  is
sought  from  participants  including  academia  on  areas  of  market  development  and  reforms.  This  is
perhaps a useful approach to enhance the quality of change and appropriateness of changes while
developing better acceptance among economic agents.
Eighthly, the implementation of codes must be treated as an ongoing process requiring awareness in
the market and the public and should not be treated as a one-time job.
Indian approach to implementation
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  place  before  you  the  approach  adopted  in  India  in  the
implementation of standards and codes.
Development of standards and codes is viewed as an integral part of the process of economic reform,
most appropriate to the country’s needs. The approach to implementation of financial standards and
codes is based on the efficiency-enhancing elements of the standards and codes, and on the need to
consider them as part of process of institutional development in the country, while not ignoring their
relevance  to  domestic  as  well  as  international  financial  stability.  The  emphasis  is  on  creating
awareness  to  promote  adoption  by  the  relevant  official  agencies,  self-regulating  bodies  and  market
participants rather than prescribing compliance at the instance of a central authority.
In order to facilitate positioning of international financial standards and codes in relevant areas of the
financial system in India and to guide the overall process of implementation of appropriate changes in
respect to various segments of the financial system, the Reserve Bank of India  in consultation  with
Government of India, in December 1999, constituted a ‘Standing Committee on International Financial
Standards  and  Codes’  under  the  Chairmanship  of  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and
Secretary, Economic Affairs, Government of India as Alternate Chairman.
The  Committee  was  given  the  responsibility  of  identifying  and  monitoring  developments  in  global
standards and codes being evolved  especially  in the  context  of  the  international  developments  and
discussions as part of the efforts to create a sound international Financial Architecture, considering all
aspects of these standards and codes to Indian financial system. The Committee has also been asked
to  consider  plotting  a  road  map  for  aligning  India’s  standards  and  practices  as  necessary  and
desirable in the light of evolving international practices, periodically reviewing the status and progress
in  regard  to  the  codes  and  practices;  and  reaching  out  its  reports  on  the  above  to  all  concerned
organizations in public or private sectors.
The Standing Committee has constituted Advisory Groups in  ten  core  subject  areas,  which  broadly
encompass the twelve key areas  prescribed  by  FSF,  pertaining  to  the  financial  system.  These  are:
Transparency  in  Monetary  and  Financial  Policies,  Data  Dissemination,  Payments  and  Settlement
System,  Banking  Supervision,  Securities  Market  Regulation,  Accounting  and  Auditing,  Fiscal
Transparency, Insurance Regulation, Bankruptcy Laws and Corporate  Governance.  Accounting  and
auditing have been clubbed together and the twelfth area namely ‘Market Integrity’ associated with the
forty recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on money laundering is not being
presently looked into by the Standing Committee. These Advisory Groups were entrusted with the task
of  studying,  in  detail,  the  present  status  of  applicability  and  relevance  and  compliance  of  relevant
standards and codes, reviewing the feasibility of compliance and the time frame over which this could
be achieved given the prevailing legal and institutional practices, comparing the levels of adherence in
India,  vis-à-vis  in  industrialized  and  also  emerging  economies  particularly  to  understand  India’s
position and prioritize actions on some of the more important codes and standards, and to chalk out a
course of action for achieving the best practices.
BIS Review 62/2001
7
All  Advisory  Groups  are  chaired  by  eminent  experts  not  generally  holding  official  positions  in
Government  or  other  regulatory  bodies.  The  members  are  generally  non-official  experts  in  relevant
subject areas. This process enables an objective, independent and ‘external’ assessment within the
confines of the domestic economy.
The  Indian  approach  to  the  implementation  of  standards  and  codes  has  been  recognised  as
noteworthy by international agencies in that it follows a systematic process. The process consists of
the  initial  recognition,  identification  and  taking  on  record  of  standards  and  codes  in  relevant  areas.
This is followed by in-depth assessment by independent experts of issues pertaining to the present
status of applicability, relevance and the existing degree of compliance, the feasibility of compliance
and the earmarking of the possible time frame for transition given the prevailing legal and institutional
practices.  It  is  also  common  to  seek  comparison  of  the  levels  of  adherence  in  India,  vis-à-vis
industrialized  and  emerging  economies,  particularly  to  understand  India’s  position  and  to  prioritize
actions  on  some  of  the  more  important  codes  and  standards.  The  process  seeks  to  map  out  a
comprehensive course of possible actions for achieving the best practices. This approach is put in the
public domain through publication of Reports on each of the selected standards and codes.
The next stage would involve putting efforts for the widest possible dissemination of Advisory Group
Reports including by means of seminars and workshops. The objective is to obtain involvement and
stimulation of interest among public authorities and other stakeholders in the debate and to garner a
higher  level  of  general  awareness  on  the  subject.  This  is  to  be  followed  by  invitation  of  and
consideration of inputs and feedback from relevant public and private sector organizations to enhance
the sense of involvement and to build confidence. Such a participative and consultative approach is
advocated to secure a convergence of viewpoints and, hence, favorable public disposition towards the
necessity of change.
In sum, the process in  India  is an  exercise  that  aims  at  understanding  and  comprehending  various
standards and codes in terms of rationale, technical complexities, institutional and legal requirements
and  the  immediacy  and  relevance  at  the  present  stage  of  development  and  institutional  structure.
Second, it is intended to result in getting a fair view of the country’s status with reference to standards.
Third,  this  would  enable  getting  an  idea  about  the  necessary  steps  required  to  move  closer  to  the
adherence  of  standards  and  codes.  Fourthly,  it  would  sensitise  the  regulatory  authorities,  agencies
and institutions about the priority areas of action.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I would like to quote Andrew Crockett from a recent IMF-World Bank jointly sponsored
conference  on  International  Standards  and  Codes  (March  2001):  "Therefore,  although  setting
high-quality standards is generally acknowledged to be a good thing, more work needs to be done on
finding the best way to get there."
Thank you.
8
BIS Review 62/2001
