Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Welcoming remarks to the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering
Remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Bank Negara Malaysia, to the Asia/Pacific Group on
Money Laundering’s 4th Annual Meeting, Kuala Lumpur, 22 May 2001.
 Yang Berhormat Tun,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  4th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Asia/Pacific  Group  on  Money
Laundering. Let me also welcome our distinguished delegates from abroad to our country. I hope that
you  will  also  have  the  time  to  experience  Malaysia  while  you  are  here.  It  is  indeed  an  honour  for
Malaysia in partnership with the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering, to host this Meeting.
The  APG,  the  Asia/Pacific  Group  on  Money  Laundering  was  established  in  1997  at  the  Fourth
Asia/Pacific Money Laundering Symposium in Bangkok and is based in Sydney, Australia. Malaysia
and  Australia  are  the  current  co-chairs  of  the  APG.  The  APG  consists  of  19  members  and,  I
understand, will be welcoming 3 new members into its fold at this Meeting. The APG also has several
‘observer’  jurisdictions.  Malaysia  became  an  APG  member  a  year  ago  in  May  2000  and  has  since
participated in the APG as co-chair and now as host to this Meeting. It reflects our commitment to the
efforts in fighting money laundering in Malaysia and in the region.
The FATF, the Financial  Action Task Force  on  Money  Laundering  was  founded  in  1989  by  the  G7
countries and today consists mainly of OECD members. The APG is one of the FATF regional groups
and  its  work  is  underpinned  by  the  40  Recommendations  of  the  FATF,  which  has  become  the
internationally  accepted  standards  against  money  laundering.  Malaysia,  as  well  as  all  other  APG
members, have made a commitment to implement legislation and other measures based  on the 40
FATF Recommendations. The APG’s primary purpose therefore is to provide a regional focus for co-
operation  against  money 
the  40  FATF
Recommendations in the legal, financial and law enforcement sectors.
This Meeting brings together official representatives from government, finance and the private sectors
providing  a platform for  discussion  and  co-operation.  The  Meeting  is  important  as  it  brings  about  a
better  understanding  of,  and  action  against,  money  laundering  and  promotes  the  establishment  of
extensive  and  useful  working relationships among countries in the Asia/Pacific region. The event  is
designed to support members in their efforts to prevent and deter money laundering and provides an
opportunity  to  discuss  the  practical  issues  associated  with  the  implementation  of money  laundering
measures  while  taking  into  account  each  member’s  own  particular  economic,  social  and  political
characteristics.  The  Meeting  will  also  review  work  done  and  set  a  course  for  future  regional  co-
operation and progress against money laundering.
Malaysia  recognises  that  it  is  important  to  have  a  co-ordinated  national  effort  in  the  fight  against
money laundering and realises that this fight requires a multi-disciplinary approach. For this purpose,
the  National  Co-ordination  Committee  to  Counter  Money  Laundering  was  set  up  involving  13
ministries  and  government  agencies  as  its  members.  The  NCC  provides  a  forum  for  co-ordinating
national  anti-money  laundering  strategies  and  policies  in  Malaysia.  It  is  responsible  for  developing
national policies and measures to counter money laundering and co-ordinates Malaysia’s responses
to international initiatives against money laundering.
The  members  of  the  NCC  who  are  present  here  this  morning  have  also  provided  their  support  in
moving  forward  Malaysia’s  effort  in  enacting  the  anti-money  laundering  legislation  that  criminalizes
money laundering. However, enacting the Anti-Money Laundering Bill 2001 is only the first step, albeit
a very  important step. The Central  Bank of Malaysia, as the  lead agency of NCC,  looks forward to
working  closely  with  the  ministries  and  agencies  through  the  NCC  to  ensure  the  success  of  the
national anti-money laundering strategies. In this respect, I am pleased to inform the Meeting that the
laundering,  especially 
implementation  of 
the 
in 
BIS Review 43/2001
1
Bank Negara Malaysia has been part of the process spearheading the formulation and enactment of
the Anti-Money Laundering Bill 2001 that was recently passed by the Parliament.
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  banking  system,  which  has  long  since  been  the  focal  point  of  money
launderers. In the initial stage of money laundering, the criminal and the money launderer will need to
place their ill-gotten gains into the financial system to legitimise the funds. Thus, these illicit funds are
introduced into the financial system. After these funds have entered the financial system, the second
stage typically involves a series of transactions to distance the funds from their illegal source and to
disguise their origin as being from criminal activity.
The Central Bank is committed to ensure that the integrity of the Malaysian financial system is not in
any way compromised by these criminal activities. In this connection, the Central Bank has introduced
a number of initiatives to counter money laundering including, the "Know Your Customer’ Guidelines
which  was  issued  in  June  1989  and  revised  in  December  1993  in  compliance  with  the  FATF’s  40
Recommendations through the requirement of customer identification and verification, financial record
keeping  and  mandatory  reporting  of  suspicious  activity.  The  Guidelines  were  issued  to  prevent
banking institutions from being used as a conduit for money laundering. It requires banking institutions
to determine the true identity of customers opening accounts and to develop a "transaction profile" of
each  customer  and  setting  document  retention  policies  with  the  objective  of  identifying  unusual  or
suspicious  transactions.  Banking  institutions  are  also  required  to  identify  a  single  reference  point
within  their  organisation  to  which  unusual  or  suspicious  transactions  can  be  reported  promptly.
Banking institutions are also required to report to the Central Bank all cases of unusual or suspicious
transactions that they have knowledge of, irrespective of the amount.
In  addition,  the  central  bank’s  Minimum  Guidelines  on  the  Provision  of  Internet  Banking  Services,
which  was  issued  in  May  2000,  requires  banking  institutions  to  have  face-to-face  interaction  with
customers  prior  to  the  opening  of  accounts  or  the  extension  of  credit.  Banking  institutions  are  also
required  to  establish  appropriate  measures  to  identify  customers  reached  over  third  party  websites
and  the  customer  verification  process  as  stringent  as  that  for  face-to-face  customers.  In  providing
Internet banking services, banking institutions are also required to implement monitoring and reporting
mechanisms to identify potential money laundering activities. This enables the Central Bank to ensure
that  the  banking  industry,  while  keeping  abreast  with  developments  in  ICT,  that  is,  information,
communications  and  technology,  would  maintain  the  integrity  of  the  financial  system  and  prevent  it
from being abused by the money launderers.
On 25 April 2001, the Central Bank also issued "Guidelines on Anti-Money Laundering Measures for
the Insurance Industry". These Guidelines require insurance intermediaries to put in place controls to
counter  money  laundering  in  accordance  with  the  concept  of  due  vigilance  which  requires  the
verification  of  the  identity  of  their  customers,  keeping  of  records,  recognition  and  reporting  of
suspicious customers or transactions.
With  the  enactment  of  the  Anti  Money  Laundering  Bill  2001,  the  reporting  requirements  and
obligations in the Guidelines would have the force of law. In addition, financial institutions have to put
in place more stringent  and  efficient measures and  mechanisms  to  fight  against  money  laundering.
These  obligations  are  not  new  as  the  banking  institutions  are  already  complying  with  them.  To
complement these obligations, the new law has also provided these institutions protection from any
action taken against them for reporting the activities of money launderers.
Rapid  developments  in  the  financial  system  and  globalisation  have  made  the  world  increasingly
borderless. As countries implement countermeasures, criminals with their ill gotten gains and money
launderers who disguise the criminal proceeds have developed new and more sophisticated methods
for moving money around the globe. Money launderers are swift in probing the financial system for
vulnerabilities and using their ingenuity to devise new methods to circumvent the system and adapt
their methods to exploit these vulnerabilities. It is, therefore, imperative that the banking industry be
vigilant to ensure that all efforts of the money launderer are thwarted. While, we do not expect banking
institutions  to  be  detectives,  there  should  be  an  awareness  of  the  potential  for  money  laundering
activities and the need to report any suspicion of such activities. Banks have to ensure that they have
sufficient controls to prevent their institution from being used by money launderers. The need to have
rigorous processes in place to minimise any risk of banking institutions dealing, even unwittingly, with
the proceeds of criminal activity cannot be over emphasised in order to protect against them against
credit, reputational and other risks.
Offshore financial centers have been the focus of the international community as being vulnerable to
being  abused  by  money  launderers.  as  you  may  be  aware  Malaysia  has  its  own  offshore  financial
2
BIS Review 43/2001
center the Labuan International Offshore Financial Centre. With regard to Labuan IOFC, the Labuan
Offshore  Financial  Services  Authority  (LOFSA)  will  continuously  assess  and  upgrade  the  legal  and
supervisory framework to ensure that it is on par with the latest international supervisory requirements.
The  relevant  supervisory  structures  within  LOFSA  had  been  enhanced,  particularly  the  compliance
function,  to  preserve  Labuan  IOFC’s  image  as  a  reputable  offshore  centre  conducive  for  quality
players and genuine players. In addition, LOFSA, being an NCC member would continue to promote
Labuan IOFC’s image as a well regulated and clean centre. This is reflected in the stringent policy of
admitting only reputable and full-fledged players to Labuan. To demonstrate Labuan’s commitment in
fighting  money-laundering  activities,  Labuan  had  voluntered  to  be  assessed  by  the  APG.  The
evaluation team comprising evaluators from the APG and the Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors
(OGBS)  has  met  with  the  respective  ministries  and  government  agencies  and  the  Labuan  offshore
players. I understand that the report of the evaluation on Labuan would be tabled accordingly.
Although the focus of my remarks has been confined to the banking industry, money laundering, and
the  need  for  proper  controls  to  prevent  it,  are  not  confined  to  banks.  Virtually  any  financial  service
provider  can  be  used  as  a  vehicle.  To  effectively  combat  money  laundering,  the  whole  financial
system has to be vigilant and work together.
The  APG  Secretariat  and  members  of  the  NCC  have  worked  together  with  the  Secretariat  of  the
Central Bank in organizing this Meeting and for this, I would like to take this opportunity to express our
sincere appreciation for their contribution, time and effort in making this Meeting a success.
Last but not least, I would like to thank Yang Berhormat Tun Daim Zainuddin for having so graciously
accepting to deliver  the  keynote  address  on  this  occasion  at  the  fourth  annual  meeting  of  the  Asia
Pacific Group on Money Laundering.
On that note, I wish you meaningful discussions over the next three days.
BIS Review 43/2001
3
