 Hermann Remsperger: Enlargement of the European Union and European and 
Monetary Union: Maastricht meets Copenhagen 
Speech by Prof Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
annual meeting of ELEC, Frankfurt, 7 December 2001. 
 Introduction1 
I. 
The accession of ten central and east European countries as well as Malta and Cyprus presents the 
European  Union  with  one  of  the  greatest  challenges  in  its  history.2  In  June  2001  the  Gothenburg 
European  Council  clearly  stated  that  the  process  of  European  enlargement  is  irreversible.  It  has 
already  been  foreseen  that  the  first  of  the  accession  countries  will  participate  in  the  European 
Parliament elections in 2004. What currently looks possible is that there will be a “Big Bang”, an initial 
major  enlargement  involving  ten  candidate  countries.  The  new  EU  member  states  also  commit 
themselves to adopt the euro at a later date. Contrary to the United Kingdom and Denmark there will 
be no “opt out” clause. This means that two to three years after enlargement of the European Union 
there could already be a far greater number of countries participating in European Monetary Union. In 
my opinion, however, it is actual progress in convergence rather than pressure to keep to a political 
date which should be the prime focus of the ongoing process of integration.  
I  would  like  to  start  today  by  describing  some  fundamental  economic  facts  concerning  EU 
enlargement. I then propose to outline the challenges for the candidate countries and the current EU 
member states in the enlargement process.  
Economic background to EU enlargement 
II. 
The accession of twelve candidate countries to the EU first of all means that the population of the EU 
is  set  to  rise  by  more  than  100  million,  in  other  words  by  more  than  one-quarter.  However,  gross 
domestic product would not increase by anywhere near as much. The aggregate nominal GDP of the 
accession countries is currently less than 5% of GDP in the EU as a whole. In terms of purchasing 
power  parities,  the  weight  of  the  accession  countries  would  be  roughly  twice  as much.  Even  if  this 
measurement  method  is  used,  however,  there  are  considerable  differences  between  them  and  the 
current member states. 
The  candidate  countries  also  demonstrate  major  structural  differences  with  the  EU.  The  share  of 
agriculture in the gross value added is on average more than twice as high as in the EU, where it is 
around 2%. Sectoral employment also points to the existence of structural discrepancies. In Poland, 
for example, agriculture contributes over 3% to the  gross value added,  whereas almost 19% of the 
workforce  is  employed  in  this  sector.  Increasing  rapprochement  with  the  EU  is  likely  to  result  in  a 
major reallocation of resources even if full structural harmonisation is not likely.  
At this point I should add that the accession countries generally have large current account deficits. 
Although such deficits are thoroughly defensible for countries that are in the process of catching up, 
persistent  current  account  deficits  make  the  economy  more  vulnerable  to  internal  and  external 
disturbances,  especially  if  these  are  relatively  severe  and  are  financed  short  term  and  in  foreign 
currency.  
When  painting  the  external  picture  of  the  economy,  it  needs  to  be  said  that  the  average  degree  of 
openness in the candidate countries is significantly higher than in the EU. This is partly due to the fact 
that  most  of  the  candidate  countries  are  fairly  small.  Nonetheless,  the  figures  range  from  29%  in 
Poland to  109% in Malta.3  Trade liberalisation  and  the prospect  of EU accession, together  with the 
geographical  proximity of  some of these countries to the  present  EU member states, have led to a 
                                                      
1  
2  Turkey is not included in these deliberations. Although it has applied for accession to the EU, negotiations have not yet 
I would like to thank Dr Sabine Herrmann for her assistance. 
begun.  
3   The degree of openness is defined as the average export and import of goods and services as a percentage of GDP.  
BIS Review 101/2001 
 1
 considerable intensification of trade integration with the EU. Imports from and exports to the EU on 
average account for around two-thirds of the candidate countries’ total imports and exports.  
In addition to the differences with current EU member states, account also needs to be taken of the 
heterogeneity  amongst  the  accession  candidates.  With  a  population  of  more  than  38  million  and 
around  40%  of  the  total  output,  Poland  is  by  far  the  largest  accession  economy.  GDP  in  both  the 
Czech Republic and Hungary, the second and third largest economies, is less than one-third that of 
Poland.  Most  of  the  other  candidate  countries  are  relatively  small  economies.  As  well  as  size  and 
economic strength, the standard of living varies considerably. If purchasing power parity is taken as a 
basis, the figures range from 24% of the EU average in Bulgaria to 82% in Cyprus. Nine of the twelve 
candidate countries show less than 60% of the average EU income. It can therefore be assumed that 
real convergence will take some time. 
The heterogeneity amongst the accession countries can also be seen from the fact that there are a 
number  of  different  exchange  rate  regimes  in  operation.  Most  of  the  countries  have  seen  their 
exchange rate regime change at least once, if not more often, during the transition process. This can 
be partly attributed to the fact that exchange rate policy has to fulfil different tasks in the various stages 
of development.4 
The  current  exchange  rate  regimes  can  be  roughly  divided  into  three  groups.  At  one  end  of  the 
spectrum are Estonia, Lithuania, Bulgaria and, to some extent, also Latvia and Malta. These countries 
have reduced their monetary policy flexibility significantly by adopting a currency board arrangement 
or a relatively narrow currency peg. At the other end of the spectrum are the countries which allow 
their national currency to float on the foreign exchange markets and primarily pursue an inflation or 
monetary  target.  Poland,  Slovakia  and  the  Czech  Republic  fall  into  this  category.  The  third  group 
comprising Hungary, Cyprus, Slovenia and Romania5 peg their exchange rates to the euro while at the 
same time allowing the external value of the currency to fluctuate somewhat.  
Three-stage accession process 
III. 
The increase in heterogeneity brought about by EU enlargement is frequently perceived as a risk for 
the single market and the single currency. It must be noted, however, that the candidates have to meet 
a whole range of requirements before they can accede to the EU or EMU. These go far beyond the 
nominal convergence criteria so often cited. For this reason, I think we need to take a closer look at 
the complex three-stage integration process. At the moment we are in the first phase, which will last 
until EU accession. Then comes the second stage, a period of transition characterised by two issues: 
entry  into  the  exchange  rate  mechanism  ERM  II  on  the  one  hand  and  the  convergence  test  for 
membership  of  EMU  on  the  other.  The  third  stage  begins  when  the  accession  countries  adopt  the 
euro. The complicated issues involved with the third stage are not covered in this paper.  
First Stage: Preparations and conditions for EU accession  
In  1993,  when  the  Copenhagen  European  Council  decided  that  the  European  Union  would  be 
enlarged to include the  twelve candidate countries, it also established the terms of their accession. 
The Copenhagen criteria require new member states to demonstrate a sufficient degree of political, 
institutional  and  economic  stability,  to  comply  with  the  obligations  arising  from  membership  and  to 
identify fully with the goals of European integration. Of particular relevance to the Eurosystem are the 
economic criterion and the criterion on the adoption of the acquis communautaire, as the body of EU 
law is known. 
The  economic  criterion  established  in  Copenhagen  requires  new  EU  member  states  to  have  a 
functioning  market  economy  that  is  able  to  cope  with  competitive  pressure  within  the  Union.  This 
requires,  among  other  things,  functioning  property  rights,  competition,  free  price  formation  and  a 
well-developed financial sector. The European Commission’s progress reports clearly show that so far 
only Malta and Cyprus fully meet the economic criterion. Although Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, 
the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia and Slovenia are functioning market economies, further efforts 
                                                      
4   See Wagner, H. (2001), “Pitfalls in the European Enlargement Process – Challenges for Monetary Policy”, presented at the 
Bundesbank Conference on 26-27 October 2001. 
5   Officially, Slovenia and Romania operate a strategy of monetary targeting, although the exchange rate is implicitly pegged 
relatively closely to the euro (managed floating). 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2001
 are  needed  to  differing  degrees  before  these  economies  are  able  to  cope  with  market  forces.  In 
Bulgaria  and  Romania  the  reform  effort must  be  intensified  considerably. While  great  progress  has 
already  been  made  in  terms  of  liberalising  trade  and  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  in  the 
privatisation of business enterprises, prime consideration must be given to economic competitiveness.  
If  a  country  is  to  be  able  to  cope  with  international  competition  and  if  capital  is  to  be  channelled 
smoothly within a country, it is of paramount importance for the domestic banking and financial sector 
to be efficient. This requires a high degree of financial intermediation, liquid capital markets, the banks 
having a sufficient capital base, a functioning system of banking and securities supervision and sound 
payment systems. 
The financial sector in the accession countries is in need of further development. All in all, the banks 
have  a  fairly  low  level  of  financial  intermediation.  This  primarily  reflects  the  relatively  limited 
development position  of former transition countries that are still  undergoing  a restructuring process. 
For instance, banking expertise is not yet developed enough in some areas and some banks remain 
insufficiently geared towards making a profit. 
All  this  is  also  reflected  in  loans  to  the  private  sector.  Here,  the  candidate  countries  display,  on 
average, only  around 30% of GDP or less than one-third of the figure for the EU. The occasionally 
very large spreads between loan and deposit rates – which are on average roughly twice as high as in 
the  EU  –  point  to  a  risk  premium.  Some  observers  interpret  this  spread  as  an  indication  that  the 
banking system is not yet efficient enough. 
On the whole, securities markets do not yet play a major role in the accession countries. Although the 
equity markets have grown steadily in importance since 1994, market capitalisation remains small by 
comparison  with  the  EU.  The  bond  markets  are  dominated  by  government  bonds.  Corporate  bond 
markets scarcely exist. None of this is unusual for countries that are in the process of catching up. 
However, it does indicate problems with regard to the competitiveness of business enterprises. 
If  the  major  significance  of  the  financial  sector  is  taken  into  account  when  allocating  resources,  it 
becomes  apparent  that  the  accession  countries  need  further  structural  reforms.  The  framework 
provided  by  the  Copenhagen  criteria  is  intended  to  ensure  this  structural  convergence.  It  is  a 
necessary precondition to accelerating the process of real convergence in the accession countries. 
The criterion on adopting the acquis communautaire obliges the accession candidates to implement 
and enforce all the European legal acts and regulations. In terms of the later adoption of the single 
currency, this relates particularly to the central bank acts, movement of capital, the banking system 
and the stability of the financial system.  
By  virtue  of  their  accession,  the  central  banks  of  the  new  EU  member  states  become  part  of  the 
European System of Central Banks (ESCB). Central bank legislation must therefore be in line with the 
relevant provisions of the  EC Treaty. The accession countries must accept the primary objective of 
maintaining price stability, ensure the institutional, personal and financial independence of their central 
banks and prohibit direct public sector financing by the central bank. 
In  addition,  EU  accession  is  conditional  upon  the  liberalisation  of  capital  movements.  Nine  of  the 
twelve candidate countries have already been able to conclude provisionally the relevant chapters in 
the  accession  negotiations.  However,  there  are  still  pronounced  differences.  Estonia,  Latvia  and 
Lithuania have removed all foreign exchange controls and are therefore fully liberalised in this respect, 
although there are still some restrictions to the purchase of property or land by foreigners. The Czech 
Republic  and  Bulgaria  have  also  been  able  to  fulfil  the  relevant  capital  account  provisions  of  the 
acquis to a large extent. In Poland, Hungary,  Slovakia and Slovenia there are restrictions on short-
term  movements  of  capital,  in  particular.  There  are  still  a  considerable  number  of  restrictions  in 
Cyprus, Malta and Romania.  
While  the  liberalisation  of  capital  movements  is  essentially  non-negotiable,  the  timing  and  the 
scheduling  of  the  liberalisation  steps  should  be  dependent  on  the  macroeconomic  facts  and  the 
stability of the financial sector. Free movement of capital actually represents an additional challenge 
for  the  economies  concerned.  Particularly  as  their  financial  sector  is  not  yet  fully  developed  and 
reforms in banking supervision have still some way to go, it is best to adopt a step by step approach – 
especially  if the  accession countries are tying their  exchange rate  to the  euro.  It is  not  possible for 
BIS Review 101/2001 
 3
 monetary  policy  to  be  autonomous  if  the  movement  of  capital  is  completely  liberalised  and  if  the 
exchange rate is targeted (impossible trinity6).  
Second Stage: The transition period 
The period of transition following EU accession is geared to enhancing the convergence needed for 
adoption of the single currency. The countries which accede to the EU commit themselves to adopting 
the euro at a later date. There is no “opting out”. The preparations for EU accession as laid down in 
the  Copenhagen  criteria  establish  basic  rules  for  later  adoption  of  the  euro.  Central  bank 
independence constitutes the institutional basis for increasing harmonisation of exchange rate policy. 
Free movement of capital is essential to a meaningful monitoring of the exchange rate criterion. The 
reforms  relating  to  the  structure  and  stability  of  the  financial  markets  speed  up  the  process  of  real 
convergence.  At  the  same  time,  the  process  of  catching-up  by  the  new  EU  member  states  will,  of 
course, continue after accession. 
When acceding to the EU the candidate countries commit themselves to regard economic policy as a 
matter  of  common  concern  and  to  submit  to  the  EU  mechanism  for  coordinating  and  monitoring 
economic policy. The objective is for all EU member states to have a stability-oriented economic policy 
that is geared to increasing convergence. The Stability and Growth Pact is especially geared to fiscal 
policy and establishes the medium-term objective of a balanced public-sector budget.  
Participation in the exchange rate mechanism ERM II 
(a) 
In the period of transition exchange rate policy is also a matter of common concern. In accordance 
with  the  Treaty,  it  is  not  possible  to  accede  simultaneously  to  the  EU  and  EMU.  Rather,  the 
convergence  criteria  require  a  country  to  have  participated  in  ERM  II  for  at  least  two  years  without 
severe tensions. Only then can it join EMU. Whether an even longer transition period would appear 
necessary  or  whether  participation  in  ERM  II  can  take  place  immediately  after  EU  accession  is 
dependent on the particular situation of the country in question or on its progress in the convergence 
process and in achieving macroeconomic stability.7  
With regard to the question of what exchange rate regime would be appropriate, in my view particular 
attention must be paid to the following three aspects: 
1. 
EU accession and liberalisation of capital movements could lead to capital flows becoming 
more  volatile.  It  is  therefore  likely  to  be  more  difficult  to  maintain  “rigid”  exchange  rate 
regimes. 
As  a  result  of  the  catching-up  process,  the  accession  countries  will  probably  find  their 
equilibrium real exchange rates increasing in the years ahead. 
As inflation rates in some accession countries are still considerably different from those in 
the  current  EU  countries,  the  exchange  rate  regime  must  also  take  account  of  the  risk  of 
higher current account deficits and of competitiveness.  
2. 
3. 
In  the  transition  period  from  EU  accession  to  joining  EMU,  efforts  must  therefore  focus  on  the 
consistency of exchange rate strategy and macroeconomic policy. Participation in the exchange rate 
mechanism is only appropriate if pegging the exchange rate more closely to the euro is in line with the 
general macroeconomic situation.  
In my opinion, the European exchange rate mechanism is an adequate way of preparing for adoption 
of  the  single  currency.8  This  mechanism  can  help  to  limit  exchange  rate  fluctuations  in  a  credible 
multilateral system, without preventing a certain degree of exchange rate flexibility.  
However, it should be noted that there may be cases, in which even the broad bands of ERM II may 
not be wide enough to accomodate the necessary exchange rate adjustments during the integration 
process. This may be due, for example, to liberalisation measures or persistent changes in the relative 
                                                      
6   See Frankel, J. (1999), “No Single Currency Regime is Right for All Countries or At All Times”, NBER Working Paper No. 
7338, Cambridge. 
7  See  Von  Hagen  et  al.  (2001),  “Sustainable  Regimes  of  Capital  Movements  in  Accession  Countries”,  presented  at  the 
Bundesbank Conference held in Eltville on 26-27 October 2001.  
8  See Wolf, H. (2001), “Exchange Rate Regime Choice and Consequences”, presented at the Bundesbank Conference held 
in Eltville on 26-27 October 2001.  
4 
 BIS Review 101/2001
 prices. It is therefore best to wait until the initial impact of EU accession is over before taking part in 
ERM II. This is the best way to avoid speculative attacks. This is particularly true of the present free 
floating currencies, whose proponents consciously stress exchange rate flexibility or the advantage of 
an  autonomous  monetary  policy.  Premature  participation  in  the  exchange  rate  mechanism  could 
prompt the foreign exchange markets to “test” this mechanism. 
In countries which have already maintained a fixed exchange rate peg to the euro for some time, it is 
argued that the current high degree of integration is “relaxed” by accession to ERM II, in other words 
by  adopting  an  exchange  rate  band.  This  could  lead  to  the  risk  of  distortions.  But  in  this  context  it 
should be taken into account that in certain circumstances exchange rate bands narrower than +/- 15 
percentage points or even currency boards can also be sustained within the framework of ERM II. In 
the case of a currency board, however, this would merely involve a unilateral decision by the country 
concerned.  The  Eurosystem  would  not  be  under  any  obligation  to  intervene  in  order  to  support  the 
currency board.  
Other exchange rate systems, such as free floating, crawling pegs or currency boards using reference 
currencies other than the euro, are essentially incompatible with ERM II. Neither would the unilateral 
introduction of the euro as legal tender (euroisation) be in line with the way to participation in monetary 
union  foreseen  in  the  EC  Treaty.  The  Treaty  requires  all  candidate  countries  to  adopt  the  acquis 
communautaire  in  its  present  form.  This  means  that  all  candidates  must  comply  with  the  stages 
leading to adoption of the euro provided for in the Treaty.  
In any case, euroisation would probably be worth considering, if at all, for those accession countries 
that have already had a well functioning currency board or a fixed currency peg for some time. After 
euroisation,  however,  the  countries  in  question  could  not  count  on  the  support  of  the  Eurosystem. 
Consequently,  they  would  renounce  monetary  sovereignty  completely  without  benefiting  from  the 
confidence-building effect of participation in the Eurosystem.  
In addition, it should be remembered that a decision to allow a country to participate in monetary union 
only makes sense if the economy concerned has proved able to cope with the pressures of the single 
market  without  contravening  the  convergence  criteria  of  the  EC  Treaty.  The  credibility  of  the  whole 
Eurosystem is ultimately dependent on the sustained convergence of all participants. The multi-stage 
integration process is intended to ensure that this convergence is indeed sustainable. Early adoption 
of the euro would simply undermine the integration process.  
(b)   High degree of lasting convergence before adoption of the euro 
The  long  and  carefully  planned  process  of  integration  culminates  in  the  adoption  of  the  single 
currency.  Accession  to  EMU  is  only  possible  if  the  accession  countries  can  show  a  high  degree  of 
lasting convergence. Pursuant to Article 121 of the EC Treaty, a high degree of convergence has been 
attained if the Maastricht convergence criteria have been fulfilled. A clear benchmark is thus set for 
attainment of this target. Sustainability of convergence, however, is very difficult to assess. The criteria 
do not merely have to be met once at the time of the examination; they also have to be maintained 
after that time. Both aspects are important if monetary union is to function smoothly.  
A high degree of convergence  
The  convergence  criteria  make  considerable  demands  on  the  accession  countries  in  terms  of 
macroeconomic  stability.  The  inflation  criterion  requires  a  high  degree  of  price  stability  backed  by 
market  economic  conditions.  This  is  necessary  to  avoid  longer  and  more  persistent  delays  to  the 
competitiveness within EMU and to allow the development to be as tension-free as possible within the 
framework of a single monetary policy. Stable prices create an atmosphere of accountability, increase 
transparency  and  allow  resources  to  be  allocated  efficiently.  They  are  thus  a  vital  precondition  for 
growth and employment.  
Most  candidates  have  made  distinct  progress  in  recent  years  in  terms  of  macroeconomic  stability. 
However,  counter-developments,  especially  in  prices,  have  been  observed  recently;  in  addition  to 
internal influences, such as wage developments, these have been the result of external factors – such 
as oil prices and the exchange rate of the euro.9 Great efforts are still needed to take the double-digit 
                                                      
9  See IMF(2000), “Exchange Rate Regimes in Transition Countries”, Washington. 
BIS Review 101/2001 
 5
 rates of inflation in Romania, Slovakia, Bulgaria and Poland back to an acceptable level. In 2000 only 
Lithuania and Malta had a rate of inflation which would have been in line with the inflation criterion. 
If inflation expectations are to be kept as low as possible and the appropriate underlying conditions for 
a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  secured,  deficit  and  debt  ratios  need  to  be  low.  Sound  public 
finances also  ensure  that  national fiscal policy remains flexible  even  in times of cyclical downturns. 
This room for manoeuvre becomes even more important for the participants in a monetary union since 
they no longer have recourse to the instrument of exchange rate adjustments.  
With regard to the criteria on the sustainability of public finances, the countries made improvements by 
and  large  up  to  last  year.  On  average,  in  2000  the  accession  candidates  virtually  attained  the 
benchmark of 3% established by the Maastricht convergence criterion. Malta and the Czech Republic, 
in  particular,  still  have  very  high  public  deficits.  Especially  against  the  background  of  an  economic 
slowdown, however, some candidate countries are likely to experience a marked deterioration of their 
budgetary  position  in  2001.  Moreover,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  deficits  are  based  on 
definitions  that  are  not  always  fully  consistent  with  those  of  the  EU.  Government  debt  in  all  the 
countries – with the exception of Bulgaria – is around 60% or less.  
The interest rate criterion requires an adjustment of the long-term nominal interest rates. In liberalised 
capital markets differences in the nominal interest rates primarily reflect expectations  with regard to 
the  development  of  the  rate  of  inflation,  public  finances  and  exchange  rate  stability.  Viewed  in  this 
way, the interest rate criterion provides an assessment, in line with market conditions, of whether the 
convergence progress can be sustained over the long term. However, in the run-up to monetary union 
it became apparent that interest rate differentials were declining sharply as confidence in accession 
grew (“convergence trade”).  
Sustainable convergence 
In terms of EMU accession, the Maastricht criteria are intended to ensure not only a high degree of 
convergence,  but  also  its  sustainability.  Structural  discrepancies  and  differences  in  the  standard  of 
living could, however, lead to the economies drifting  apart  again after accession. It is consequently 
important  to  ensure  that  convergence  is  sustainable.  This  is  of  particular  importance  for  price 
performance, to which I shall return in a moment. First, though, it must be said that sustainability is 
also vital to fiscal policy. The Treaty states that persistent excessive deficits are to be avoided (Article 
104).  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  gives  concrete  expression  to  the  obligation  to  ensure  a 
government budget that is in balance over the medium term. The stability programmes stipulate how 
and  when  the  objective  is  to  be  achieved.  The  aim  is  to  ensure  that  the  stability  orientation  of 
European monetary policy is not undermined by a lack of fiscal discipline.  
The Balassa-Samuelson effect,10 as it is called, means that above-average growth rates in catching-up 
countries  are  accompanied  by  higher  rates  of  inflation.  This  is  the  result  of  major  increases  in 
productivity in traded goods. In the case of the small open economies of the accession countries, the 
resultant improvement in return  does  not  always  lead to  price reductions and  may, instead,  lead to 
calls for higher wages. The corresponding wage claims in the non-tradable goods sector, which does 
not generally show the same progress in terms of productivity, are accompanied by higher unit labour 
costs in this sector. The outcome is higher prices in the catching-up countries.  
In this connection there have been frequent calls for the definition of price stability in the euro area to 
be  increased.11  This  is  intended  to  prevent  inflationary  tendencies  in  the  faster  growing  economies 
having to be counterbalanced by deflationary  developments in other countries. Several  aspects are 
problematic.  
First, relaxing the objective of stability would undermine the credibility of the ECB in the early stages of 
its development. Second, the impact of the Balassa-Samuelson effect needs to be qualified. Estimates 
put  it  somewhere  in  the  range  of  1%-3%  p.a.12  Given  the  relatively  small  economic  weight  of  the 
                                                      
10  See Balassa, B., (1964), „The Purchasing Power Doctrine: A Reappraisal“, Journal of Political Economy, Nr. 72, S. 585-596 
and  Samuelson,  P.,  (1964),  „Theoretical  Notes  on  Trade  Problems“,  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics,  Nr.  46, 
S. 145-154. 
11  As proposed, for example, by Sinn and Reutter (2001), “The Minimum Inflation Rate for Euroland”, NBER Working Paper, 
No. 8085, Cambridge.  
12  See  Broek/Slok  (2001),  “Interpreting  Real  Exchange  Rate  Movements”,  IMF  Working  Paper,  01/56,  Washington  D.C.; 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2001.  
6 
 BIS Review 101/2001
 candidates, the effects on the European aggregate would therefore be fairly minor. For fundamental 
considerations  major  shortfalls  in  convergence  should  not  be  compensated  by  relaxing  the  stability 
objective. Fairly minor inflation differences, however, are completely normal in a monetary union and 
can  be  accommodated  by  the  ECB’s  stability  objective  of  up  to  almost  2%.  They  have  so  far  not 
jeopardised monetary policy in Europe. 
With regard to the enlargement of EMU, I would like to point out that efforts to increase the flexibility of 
the  labour  markets  could  take  account  of  the  sectoral  and  regional  productivity  differentials  in  the 
accession economies. Moreover, intensifying competition in the non-tradable sector and a restrained 
fiscal policy may be ways of avoiding higher rates of inflation. In any case, such efforts would seem to 
make a lot more sense than relaxing the European Central Bank’s stability objective.  
To ensure the sustainability of convergence, it is vital that not only nominal convergence but also an 
appropriate  level  of  real  convergence  be  achieved  before  accession  to  EMU.  In  this  connection, 
attention should be drawn to the importance of the Copenhagen criteria and the concomitant structural 
reforms which lay the foundation for swifter real convergence prior to EU accession. Nominal and real 
convergence are two sides of one coin and should therefore be pursued simultaneously. To put it in a 
nutshell, Maastricht meets Copenhagen. 
Nonetheless, the desire to achieve monetary stability is often seen to be at odds with the real process 
of  catching  up.  It  is  argued  that  a  monetary  policy  geared  to  the  objective  of  stability  puts  an 
unnecessary brake on growth. This is, however, to overlook the fact that, if at all, this could happen in 
the  short  term;  over  the  longer  term  a  stable  monetary  environment  is  absolutely  essential  to  price 
stability,  a  healthy  investment  climate  and  sustainable  growth.  This  has  also  been  borne  out  by 
numerous empirical studies. The IMF, for  instance, shows that most progress  is made by  precisely 
those transition countries that are determined to push forward with monetary stabilisation.13  
The criteria laid down in the EC Treaty represent a comprehensive set of rules for enlargement of the 
EU and European Monetary Union. If the rules are respected, it will be possible to sustain the degree 
of nominal and real convergence that is essential to ensure that European Monetary Union functions 
well. With regard to measuring convergence the EC Treaty therefore also refers to the need to take 
account of the results of the integration of markets, the situation and development of the balances on 
current account and the development of unit labour costs and other price indices (see Article 121 (1)). 
The EC Treaty subjects all members to the same criteria, thus avoiding the formation of a two-class 
monetary union. To sum up, neither the introduction of new hurdles nor the relaxing of existing criteria 
appear economically necessary or politically judicious.  
Conclusion 
IV.  
I would like to close by summarising my deliberations with five comments.  
1. 
2. 
3. 
Accession  of  central  and  east  European  countries  as  well  as  Malta  and  Cyprus  to  the 
European  Union  represents  an  unprecedented  integration  process.  Owing  to  the  large 
number of candidates and their heterogeneity, not to mention the differences between new 
and existing member states, all those involved are faced with major challenges.  
There is general consensus that the integration of the candidate countries represents both a 
political  necessity  and  an  economic  opportunity.  It  is  perfectly  understandable  that  the 
candidates  wish  to  benefit  from  the  prosperity  of  this  large  economic  area  as  quickly  as 
possible.  Particularly  after  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  an  integration-related 
reduction in transaction costs, greater price transparency and a consolidation and expansion 
of the capital markets can be expected. In addition, the accession countries stand to benefit 
from the ECB’s track record. A further decline in inflation rates, capital market rates that are 
tending to fall and improved investment terms can be expected.  
If one considers the major significance of the financial sector for the allocation of resources, 
it becomes clear that further structural reforms are needed in the accession countries before 
they  are  ready  to  join  the  EU.  The  framework  provided  by  the  Copenhagen  criteria  is 
intended to ensure this structural convergence. It is a necessary precondition to advance the 
process of real convergence in the accession countries.   
                                                      
13  See  Havrylyshyn  et  al.  (1999),  “Growth  Experience  in  Transition  Countries  1990-1998”,  IMF  Occasional  Paper  No.  184, 
Washington D.C.; IMF, (2001), “A Decade of Transition: Achievements and Challenges”, Washington D.C. 
BIS Review 101/2001 
 7
 4. 
5. 
Accession  to  EMU  before  sustainable  convergence  has  been  achieved  could  prove  to  be 
disadvantageous both for the candidate countries concerned and for the Union as a whole. 
For example, forgoing the possibility of using the exchange rate as an adjustment instrument 
would  be  problematic  if  an  insufficient  degree  of  convergence  has  been  attained.  The 
competitiveness  of  the  candidate  countries  could  even  be  jeopardised.  It  is  therefore  vital 
that  the  Copenhagen  and  Maastricht  criteria  for  enlargement  are  actually  fulfilled.  Before 
central and eastern European countries, Malta and Cyprus can participate in EMU, it really 
needs to be a case of Maastricht meeting Copenhagen. 
The unilateral introduction of the euro as legal tender (euroisation) is out of keeping with the 
route to membership in monetary union foreseen in the EC Treaty. The Treaty requires all 
candidate countries to adopt the acquis communautaire in its present form. This means that 
all candidates must comply with the stages leading to adoption of the euro provided for in the 
Treaty. 
8 
 BIS Review 101/2001
