 A H E M Wellink: The impact of new technologies on the implementation of 
monetary policy 
Speech by Dr A H E M Wellink, President of the Nederlandsche Bank, at a symposium of the Banque 
de France on “New Technologies and Monetary Policy”, Paris, 30 November 2001. 
 When  thinking  about  new  technologies,  Information  and  Communications  Technology  (ICT)  is 
probably  the  first  thing  that  comes  up  in  most  people’s  mind.  And,  there  are  those  who  see  an 
acceleration in the diffusion of ICT as being equivalent to the concept of the ‘New Economy’. For the 
purposes of this conference, I would prefer to take a wider perspective, in which the new economy is 
seen  as  the  interaction  of  several  mutually  reinforcing  factors.  These  include  advances  in  ICT, 
financial innovation and liberalisation, the globalisation of trade, improved functioning of markets and 
enhanced macroeconomic management. The interplay of these factors has the potential to raise the 
speed limits of the economy. That is, the new economy can operate at higher growth rates than in the 
past  without  generating  additional  inflation.  Therefore,  both  the  initial  hype  surrounding  the  new 
economy with some pronouncing the demise of the business cycle, as well as the elimination of the 
new economy all together in response to current economic circumstances, seem to be misguided. 
The jury is still out on the question whether we can detect a new economy in Europe. Without wanting 
to prejudge the outcome, I would argue that there is no intrinsic economic reason to expect the new 
economy not to materialise. So, assuming that it will take root, indeed what does this new economy 
imply for the monetary policymaker? I have a couple of general observations to make. 
First, the new economy influences the transmission of monetary impulses through the economy. It can 
be  argued  that  in  the  new  economy  it  will  take  less  time for  a monetary  policy  impulse  to  have  an 
impact on inflation and output, while the impact of a given impulse will be smaller. Since there is a 
separate  panel  discussion  devoted  to  this  topic,  I  will  leave  it  at  that  and  move  on  to  the  second 
observation.  
That is, policy makers do not bring about the new economy. It is the result of private sector behaviour, 
driven by innovative entrepeneurship or, more fashionably, ‘creative destruction’. Policy in general can 
only  be  conducive  to  the  new  economy.  In  a  market-based  economy,  private  sector  decisions  are 
guided by the allocative role played by the price mechanism, which performs best in an environment of 
price stability. Hence, the monetary policy objective of price stability, which served us well in the old 
economy,  will  help  foster  a  new  economic  environment.  It  is  no  coincidence,  therefore,  that  the 
champion  of  the  new  economy,  the  United  States,  achieved  its  greatest  advances  in  an  era  of  low 
inflation.  
A third issue, crucial for monetary policymakers, is the question of how to react to the new economy. 
Let me simplify matters by conceptualising the new economy as a shock to productivity. The economic 
consequences of this shock will be felt in the long run as well as in the adjustment towards the new 
steady state of the economy. Let me start with the long run.The new equilibrium is characterised by 
structurally higher growth rates of productivity, implying higher profitability of investments. In order to 
attract the capital needed to finance these investments, and achieve macro-economic equilibrium, a 
higher interest rate is needed. The central bank must take this upward movement of interest rates into 
account when formulating monetary policy. Before this new equilibrium is achieved, the economy goes 
through a complex adjustment process. Analytically, this adjustment not only involves an outward shift 
of the aggregate supply curve, which by itself implies lower inflation and higher growth. It could also 
elicit a stimulus to aggregate demand, for example due to wealth effects. The latter would imply higher 
inflation and higher growth. So, it depends on the circumstances and on the stage of transition from 
the old steady state to the new one, how monetary policy should react. 
It is important to note that the monetary strategy of the Eurosystem was devised in order to conduct 
monetary  policy  in  a  particularly  uncertain  economic  environment.  The  monetary  strategy  is 
well-suited, therefore, to cope with uncertainties, including the uncertainty surrounding the effects of 
the  new  economy.  As  such,  the  definition  of  price  stability  does  not  need  to  be  altered  and  the 
two-pillar structure will continue to serve us well. There could, however, be a need to re-assess the 
information content of individual variables within each pillar. Let me try to illustrate this. 
BIS Review 99/2001 
 1
 Advances in and the spread of ICT can lead to new forms of money, i.e. electronic means of payment. 
Anticipating this, electronic money balances held by euro area residents have already been included 
in  the  definition  of  euro  area  monetary  aggregates.  However,  the  new  economy  could  change  the 
information  content  of  the  monetary  aggregates.  For  example,  electronic  money  could  increase  the 
velocity of money, because people will be able to economise on their money holdings, only accessing 
money when they need to spend it. Also, structurally higher productivity growth will eventually lead to 
higher trend growth in the euro area. In due time, both effects could independently elicit an adjustment 
of the reference value for M3. This issue is covered by the yearly review of the reference value for M3 
by  the  ECB  Governing  Council.  Under  the  first  pillar,  valuable  information  is  also  distilled  from  the 
counterparts of broad money, such as credit variables. The development of new financial instruments 
could  change  the  information  content  of  these  variables.  For  example,  securitisation  places  bank 
assets outside bank balance sheets, which could complicate the observation by the central bank of 
credit flows. 
In the second pillar, the new economy could widen the range of useful indicators, i.e. because wealth 
effects gain in importance. The information content of other indicators must be re-evaluated in order to 
take into account a possible increase in the speed limits of the economy. The new economy could, for 
example,  lead  to  a  downward  adjustment  of  the  NAIRU  –  the  non-accelerating  inflation  rate  of 
unemployment.  At  the  same  time,  variables  that  measure  the  current  economic  situation  could 
become  more  important,  as  these  will  be  the  first  to  reveal  that  the  new  economy  has  landed  in 
Europe.  
Let me conclude with three key points. First, the new economy could have, and in my view will have, 
important implications for monetary transmission. Second, the implications of the new economy for the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  are  not  clear-cut.  Especially  not  in  the  transitional  period  to  the  new 
economy.  What  is  clear,  however,  is  that  price  stability  will  remain  at  the  heart  of  central  banking. 
Third, the ECB monetary policy strategy is well-suited to take the uncertainties surrounding the new 
economy  into  account  in  policy-making.  There  is  no  reason  to  amend  the  two-pillar  structure  on 
account  of  the  new  economy.  Within  and  between  both  pillars,  the  assessment  of  all  incoming 
information is  and  will continue to be evaluated. This exemplifies the art of monetary policymaking, 
both in the ‘old’ and in the ‘new’ economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2001
