 Ernst Welteke: Germany as a financial centre – European perspectives for 
Japanese markets  
Lecture  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Finanzplatz-Dinner, 
Tokyo, 29 November 2001. 
 I 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to thank you most sincerely for this opportunity to speak to such a distinguished 
audience. It is always a pleasure for me to be here in Tokyo. I especially appreciate the opportunity to 
discuss with the financial elite of Japan the chances and prospects for Germany as a financial centre. 
Looking at the financial centre Germany (which we call “Finanzplatz Deutschland”), we have to take a 
European  perspective.  Germany  and  eleven  other  European  states  have  formed  the  European 
Monetary Union with the European Central Bank located in Frankfurt. This union is only one month 
from  completion.  On  January 1st,  the  notes  and  coins  of  the  single  European  currency  will  be 
circulated.  Europeans  will  be  able  to  pay  bills  using  their  single  domestic  currency  in  all  twelve 
member states of the Eurosystem. For the man in the street, this is a sea-change. In economic terms, 
however, the cash changeover is virtually a minor-event. Europe has de facto had a common currency 
and a single monetary policy for nearly three years now.  
The EU has been developing a common market for more than half a century. However, the member 
states of this closely-knit economic network have (almost) all used a currency of their own. In 1999, 
economic  and  financial  integration  made  a  huge  leap  forward,  as  eleven  – now  that  Greece  has 
joined, twelve – countries decided to embark on a common currency.  
II 
Clearly, the enlarged currency area and the integration process are of utmost importance for growth 
and stability of the German economy and for the expansion of the financial market in Germany. 
Therefore,  let  me  start  with  a  few  figures  about  the  euro  area.  Its  size  of  population,  with  roughly 
300 million  people,  is  quite  similar  to  the  United  States.  The  twelve  countries  have  twelve  national 
governments. People in the euro area speak eleven native languages. 
The  euro  area  is  the  most  open  of  the  three  large  currency  areas  –  the  United  States,  Japan  and 
Europe. Japan and the United States are our most important non-European trading partners. 17 per 
cent  of  our  GDP  of  six-and-a-half  billion  euro  is  generated  by  exports,  and  the  current  account  is 
roughly in balance. The euro area generates almost one-fifth of world exports. 
Average per capita GDP stands at somewhat more than € 20,000 (roughly Y 2.2 million), a third less 
than in Japan. Differences between individual countries are considerable.  
The public sector share in the euro-area economy accounts for nearly fifty per cent of GDP, and the 
aggregate budget shows a small deficit. Aggregate gross public sector debt stands at 70 per cent of 
GDP. Individual country figures, however,  differ. For instance, gross public sector debt ranges from 
four per cent of GDP (Luxembourg) to 100 per cent of GDP (Belgium, Italy). 
Heterogeneity is a fact of life in the euro area. But homogeneity far outweighs heterogeneity in one 
crucial respect: we are united by our intention to form an integrated Europe with a common market as 
a strong and reliable partner for the world economy. 
Germany  has  82  million  inhabitants  or  about  28 per  cent  of  the  euro  area’s  combined  population. 
Germany’s  share  in  domestic  product  is  about  a  third  of  the  euro  area.  In  terms  of  foreign  direct 
investment and trade, the German economy is even more intertwined with the world economy than the 
euro area. About a third of our national income is generated by exports.  
This share may even rise after the integration of the central and eastern European states. Within the 
foreseeable future, some of our neighbouring countries will join the European Union and maybe also 
BIS Review 98/2001 
 1
 the Monetary Union. Germany, at the moment still a border territory of the euro area, will become the 
geographical centre of the union. Since these countries are in the midst of a catching-up process, we 
will clearly benefit from their dynamic economies. 
III 
I am well aware that the most important effect that the currency union will have on markets is by its 
performance – mainly through the degree of price stability achieved.  
At its start, the Eurosystem saw a period of hitherto unprecedented price stability. In 1998 and 1999, 
consumer  prices  rose  by  only  1.1 per  cent;  in  the  year  2000,  the  inflation  rate,  at  2.3 per  cent,  ran 
a little above the two-per cent ceiling in the wake of the sharp increase in oil prices. 
This  year,  after  peaking  in  May  at  3.4 per  cent,  the  inflation  rate  has  been  decreasing.  In  October, 
prices  were  2.4 per  cent  higher  than  a  year  before.  In  the  current  environment  of  a  weak  world 
economy,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  is  expecting  a  further  moderation  of  price  increases.  At  its 
meeting on November 8, the Governing Council therefore decided to cut rates by half a percentage 
point. It has lowered its key interest rates during this year by 150 basis points, to 3.25 per cent.  
A generally stable currency, and markets that trust the stability-orientation of the central bank, make 
for lower price increases at times of crisis.  
In  its  brief  history,  the  Eurosystem  has  already  dealt  successfully  with  three  external  shocks  and 
crises. We  have  witnessed  the  Asian  crisis  in  1997-99,  an  oil-price  shock  in  1999-2000  and,  most 
recently,  the  terrorist  attacks  in  the  USA.  Europe  did  not  escape  unscathed  from  all  these  events. 
However, the low level of turbulence within the euro area contrasts with sharper reactions to similar 
events in the period before EMU existed. This means that we have withstood what has been regarded 
as  the  worst-case  scenario  for  the  new  currency.  The  European  currency  area  exhibits  greater 
macroeconomic stability, to the benefit of all its citizens, and also to the benefit of the world economy 
at large.  
IV 
Three years into its life, the euro is the second most important currency in the world. It took over that 
role from the Deutschmark.  
The euro has a share of roughly 13 per cent in international currency reserves – about as much as the 
Deutschmark  had  before.  In  this  field,  the  dollar  is  the  unchallenged  leader,  with  two-thirds  of 
international reserves. The size, depth and liquidity of the dollar markets, as well as the widespread 
habit of using the dollar for interventions and for pricing commodities, explain its predominance. The 
need to diversify and the growing importance of European financial markets make a rising share of 
euro reserves in central banks‘ portfolios possible.  
As regards its use as a store of value, we find some evidence of the growing importance of the euro. 
30 per cent of all international securities outstanding are denominated in euro. This share is slightly 
above  the  aggregate  share  of  the  predecessor  currencies  shortly  before  EMU  was  launched.  That 
leaves the euro as the second-most-important currency in the international securities markets. Again, 
the dollar is the dominant currency, accounting for one-half of all international securities outstanding.  
The currency composition of international bank assets presents a similar picture. Again, the dollar is 
the leading currency, with a share of 40 per cent, while the euro is in the process of catching up. From 
slightly less than one-quarter at the end of 1998, its share rose to 27 per cent. 
What can we see from these figures? Although habits in the international use of currencies change 
only gradually, the euro has already won a respectable market share. Its market share roughly equals 
the economic weight of the euro area.  
Further progress in the development of broad, deep and liquid financial markets is a precondition for 
the expansion of the euro’s international role. Increased international use of the euro, as a currency for 
international  reserve  holdings,  for  investment  and  financing  purposes,  might  have  some  bearing  on 
monetary  policy,  but  this  potential  impact  seems  manageable.  Hence,  in  the  Eurosystem,  we  have 
adopted a neutral stance towards the internationalisation of the euro. We regard it as a market-driven 
process, and we neither hinder it nor foster it.  
2 
 BIS Review 98/2001
 V 
The functioning of the European Monetary Union depends heavily on a high degree of financial market 
integration.  Its  smooth  functioning  enables  monetary  transmission  to  work.  Progress  in  this  field  is 
tremendous, but more is yet to come.  
Correspondingly, it is in the financial markets that the benefits of a common European currency are to 
be felt most clearly. The implications of the euro are obvious: rising liquidity, deepening and widening 
of the money, bond and stock markets, reduction of transaction costs and abolition of currency risks. 
The euro is speeding up financial market integration. 
Those parts of the European financial markets that are crucial to the transmission of the Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy are already integrated to our satisfaction. The wholesale market for interbank liquidity 
in the euro area is now actually a single European money market.  
In  addition,  European  banks  are  interconnected  in  a  common  payment-system  infrastructure.  And 
improvements  to  the  euro-area-wide  payment  system  are  being  undertaken.  A  few  days  ago,  the 
Bundesbank  launched  its  new  payment  system  RTGSplus  (Real  Time  Gross  Settlement),  which 
improves security, reduces liquidity needs and expedites settlements of large-value gross payments. 
Through this system, about 8,500 banks and credit institutions, including their branches all over the 
world, are accessible. 
VI 
The  most  impressive  progress,  in  terms  of  integration,  has  been  witnessed  in  the  euro-area  bond 
markets. Yield differences among the government bonds of the different participants have narrowed 
from  more  than  five  percentage  points  before  EMU  to  some  30 basis  points  now.  The  remaining 
spread is mainly due to the varying liquidity of the paper issued. Currency risks or divergent monetary 
policies no longer disturb the euro-area-wide diversification. 
In terms of outstanding amounts, the euro-denominated bond market is still significantly smaller than 
that denominated in US dollars. But in terms of new issuance, both markets are on a par. One reason 
for that is the sharp rise in the new issuance of corporate bonds. Here again, diversification within the 
euro area has increased. The issuers' nationality, as a determinant of the  yield and performance of 
bonds, has been superseded by other factors, especially by a sectoral view. Country diversification is 
being substituted by industry diversification. 
The volume of German government bonds is second in Europe only to the Italian bonds. Nevertheless, 
the ten-year German government bond, known as the “Bund”, enjoys benchmark status in EMU with 
the lowest yield and a remarkably liquid market. 
The  “Bund”  is  the  main  underlying  product  for  the  contracts  of  Eurex,  the  derivatives  exchange  in 
Frankfurt. Since three-quarters of all bond futures traded in Europe are euro-Bund futures, Eurex has 
become by far the leading derivatives exchange in the world. With almost 500 million contracts, Eurex 
has clearly outperformed all other derivatives exchanges. Eurex is a good example of the international 
attractiveness of the German capital markets. More than 60 per cent of the participants in Eurex are 
non-Germans. 
Looking  at  corporate  bonds,  we  can  recognise  the  emergence  of  a  "high-yield"  bond  segment  in 
Europe and especially in Germany. Corporates are becoming increasing popular among both issuers 
and  investors.  In  this  way,  firms  become  independent  of  bank  financing  and  investors  esteem  the 
higher yield and the opportunity to diversify. Much new issuance is generating a high growth rate in 
this segment. The volume of non-public bonds in Germany is only about a sixth of the corresponding 
figure in the USA, but it is more than twice as much as in any other European country. 
A  speciality  of  the  German  capital  markets  are  the  mortgage-backed  bonds  and  municipal  bonds 
known as “Pfandbriefe”. Both are a kind of asset-backed-security. The German “Pfandbrief” became 
so popular that  other European countries copied the  idea. Investors can  gain some additional  yield 
over  public  bonds,  but  without  much  risk.  About  38 per  cent  of  the  issuers  are  triple-A-rated. 
“Pfandbriefe” are now issued in larger volumes and are placed internationally.  
There  are  three  developments  which  increase  the  German  bond  markets’  attractiveness  for  both 
issuers and investors:  
 a higher turnover and therefore increased liquidity,  
BIS Review 98/2001 
 3
   many new issuances and therefore more opportunities to diversify, and  
a wider range of products, and therefore more chances to satisfy the needs of investors.  
VII 
As in the bond markets, investors in  the  equity markets have shifted  their perspective from country 
benchmarks to pan-European sector benchmarks. European equity markets are still small compared 
with those in the USA. The market capitalisation of domestic shares, as a ratio of GDP, reaches about 
90 per  cent.  The  matching  figures  for  the  USA  and  Japan  are  152  per  cent  and  68 per  cent, 
respectively. 
However,  equity  markets  in  the  euro  area  are  growing  fast.  The  ratio  of  new  issuance  to  market 
capitalisation averages over 4 per cent. This is twice as much as has been achieved in the USA or 
Japan. 
Germany has outperformed within the euro area in terms of the number of listed companies, of new 
stock  issues,  and  of  market  capitalisation.  The  most  impressive  feature,  however,  is  the  ongoing 
growth of the capital markets and the potential to continue growing. 
Market  capitalisation  as  a  ratio  to  GDP  in  Germany  is  about  60 per  cent.  This  reflects  our  bank-
dominated  financial  system.  However,  market  capitalisation  of  domestic  stocks  grew  over  the  last 
decade by 17 per cent per year.  
The  turnover  growth  of  the  German  equity  markets  is  also  reflected  in  a  rising  importance  of 
investment  funds  and  their  assets.  In  Germany  some  6,800  funds  manage  assets  of  more  than 
800 billion euro. Over the last decade the number of funds almost tripled, while their assets rose by 
18 per cent per year. 
The German capital market has been able to provide the bulk of start-up financing in Europe. More 
than  200  venture  capital  companies  operate  in  our  country.  They  serve  as  a  catalyst  for  new 
companies  and  – in  the  event  of  success –  as  a  pacemaker  for  initial  public  offerings  (IPOs), 
especially on the “Neuer Markt”, which is the high-tech and innovative segment of the German stock 
exchange. 
Germany  benefits  from  a  high  degree  of  international  attractiveness  of  its  capital  markets.  About 
235 foreign companies have their stocks listed in Germany, a number which is topped only by the USA 
and  the  UK.  Germany  is,  of  course,  among  the  leading  centres  for  central  and  east  European 
business. 
In comparison to equity markets of other leading industrial countries, the German equity market has a 
remarkable potential for growth. Of the 3 million companies in Germany, only one-fifth are organised 
as corporations. Some one per cent of these are stock corporations. A little more than a tenth of these 
are listed on the exchange. 
Clearly, the stock corporations are more important in economic terms than their number suggests. But 
it is equally clear that even a small additional number of IPOs would cause a real surge in issuance on 
our capital markets. There are many initial public offerings in the pipeline. Quite a lot of medium-sized 
firms are thinking about using the financial opportunities offered by our liquid and well regulated equity 
markets. Two years ago, we witnessed the first municipal company to go public (Mannheim utilities) 
and there are hundreds of possible followers. 
As  a  result,  a  shareholder  culture  is  emerging  very  fast.  Compared  to  the  USA  and  the  United 
Kingdom, the percentage of shareholders in the total population is low in Germany – just like in Japan. 
The percentage in the USA and UK is about a quarter of the population, while our countries show little 
less than ten per cent. However, to judge this number for Germany you need to look at the historical 
development. The number of people holding shares  and mutual fund units has doubled since  1997 
and is still increasing, even this year. This clearly proves that we have an emerging equity culture. 
What is equally important is the changing structure of shareholdings in Germany. Investment funds, 
private  households  and  foreign  investors  have  a  rising  share,  while  the  former  dominance  of 
companies as shareholders has vanished. The old picture of “Germany Incorporated” is disappearing 
and a market-based culture is emerging. This process will accelerate even more because capital gains 
from the sale of corporate shareholdings will be tax-free as of 2002. 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2001
 The overall picture of the German equity market is that of a high quality market, less important than 
those in the anglo-saxon world but with a high growth potential. The realized growth rate in the recent 
years  is  indeed  impressive.  For  investors  this  provides  a  good  opportunity  to  join  the  markets.  A 
potentially high growth rate means better chances for gaining market share than a saturated market. 
One  important  medium  and  long-term  effect  is  coming  from  the  changes  in  the  statutory  pension 
schemes.  Japan,  Italy,  and  Germany  are  the  countries  with  the  most  rapidly  ageing  population.  In 
2040 – according to demographic estimates – every working person in Germany will have to support 
one pensioner. And up to now our pension systems have mainly been financed on a pay-as-you-go 
basis. Probably less than 20 per cent of pensions are paid out of funded pension schemes. This share 
will  rise  because  of  the  recent  reform  of  the  pension  system  and  because  of  the  rising  number  of 
pension funds. That also justifies the expectation of an ongoing growth rate for turnover and stocks on 
the German capital markets. 
One  major  asset  for  our  capital  markets  are  the  highly  efficient  exchange  structures,  including  the 
high-technology systems. But that applies only to the national markets. Looking at Europe or the euro 
area as a whole, we must admit that there is a segmentation of both stock exchanges and clearing 
and settlement systems. Even in Germany, besides the dominant Frankfurt Stock Exchange, there are 
seven regional stock exchanges which focus on special services and the specialisation or particular 
strength of their regional economy. 
This segmentation is hampering financial market integration to a considerable extent. A consolidation 
process  has  started  and  should  be  boosted  further  by  legal  harmonisation  in  the  field  of  financial 
services.  This  weakness  will  be  overcome  step  by  step:  The  European  Commission’s  Financial 
Services  Action  Plan  provides  42  proposals  to  frame  legislation  aimed  at  establishing  a  uniform 
European capital market by 2004. 
VIII 
Let me share some insights with you into the European and German banking sector. The degree of 
European  integration  in  the  banking  sector  is  mixed.  On  the  one  hand,  wholesale  markets  and 
investment banking are largely integrated. On the other hand, commercial credits and retail banking 
still operate in national, segmented markets. However, a few European banks created by cross-border 
mergers are slowly starting to offer retail services at a standardised level for customers in more than 
one country.  
The  financial  system  in  the  euro  area  is  still  highly  bank-dominated.  At  the  end  of  last  year,  credit 
financing totalled about 108 per cent of GDP. This is about as much as in Japan, and twice as much 
as in the USA. The picture is similar with deposits. In the euro area, they account for 80 per cent of 
GDP, and for 110 per cent in Japan, while the US figure is only about 40 per cent. 
However, capital markets are increasing in importance in the euro area. Disintermediation is gaining 
ground. Financial markets have boomed in recent years and investment banks (as well as non-bank 
financial firms like institutional  investors, pension and investment funds) have  enlarged their market 
share. Disintermediation  will be enhanced by the need for pension systems to rely more on funded 
retirement schemes. 
Another trend is the centralisation and consolidation within the banking sector. The financial centres, 
and among them especially Frankfurt, will benefit from that trend. 
IX 
One  could  argue  that  financial  services  will  be  provided  at  the  location  of  demand  and  that  a 
centralisation  does  not  necessarily  improve  efficiency.  However,  economies  of  scale,  economies  of 
scope, and the motivating and innovation-stimulating effect of personal (face-to-face) contact add up 
to large benefits for financial centres. 
Globalisation in world financial markets therefore means concentration. There is only room for a few 
large financial centres in the world, probably one or two for each time zone and some niches for minor 
players and actors. 
There are a couple of hard facts which prove the qualifications of Germany (Frankfurt) as the leading 
financial centre in the euro area: 
BIS Review 98/2001 
 5
        a stable currency, 
a full range and multiplicity of financial institutions, instruments and products, 
a high volume of funds available for investment, 
an innovative financial culture, 
an efficient legal framework,  
a sound and competitive banking system, and 
a strong national economy in the background. 
The German financial centre is not restricted to Frankfurt. Important locations for financial services are 
for example Düsseldorf, Stuttgart, Berlin and Munich. 
Munich is the third largest location of insurance companies worldwide and leads the world in terms of 
insurance premia. There are 280 insurance companies located in that city, of which 80 maintain their 
head office in Munich. Among them is the largest reinsurer in the world. 
In  addition,  the  internationality  of  Frankfurt  and  Munich  is  an  important  aspect.  Frankfurt  hosts  the 
head offices of as many as 136 foreign banks, among them 13 Japanese banks. Frankfurt has a lively 
(English speaking) international financial community.  
This has grown considerably since the ECB was located in downtown Frankfurt and all of those ECB 
watchers joined the former Buba watchers in our city. Frankfurt is the “City of the Euro”. A couple of 
international trade fairs, international schools and universities and, last but not least, the large airport 
and traffic hub “Rhine-Main” provides the necessary international flair. 
What we are working on now is the improvement of our intellectual infrastructure. This comprises the 
need for internationally comparable education degrees, the concentration on finance and banking as 
well as professional schools for further education. Much has been achieved in this field, but we have to 
improve to serve the recruitment needs of a financial centre. 
X 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The new currency is a symbol of European integration. That has attracted a lot of interest in currency 
unions  and  in  Europe  all  over  the  world.  We  are  both  pleased  and  proud  to  see  this  heightened 
attention for this unique historic event and the ongoing integration process in Europe.  
Today  I  wanted  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  integration  and  development  of  financial  markets  in 
Europe, with a focus on Germany. I hope that I managed to give you a reliable and true picture of the 
financial markets in Germany. 
But that is only part of the story. Listening, talking and hearing about it is not nearly as interesting and 
informative as going there and gaining insights yourself. You will always be welcome.  
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 98/2001
