 Ernst Welteke: The introduction of the euro as a historic event 
Speech  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  European  American 
Business Council, Washington, 19 November 2001. 
 I 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honor for me to be here in Washington today. I would like to thank you for your kind invitation, 
which  gives  me  an  opportunity  to  discuss  European  Monetary  Union  with  so  distinguished  an 
audience. Before I come to my main point, I would like to assure you that I feel close bonds with the 
people of the United States in these troubled times. 
If  you  type  “historic  event” 
internet  search  engine,  you  will  get  about 
into  your  favorite 
40,000 responses. Well, of course, I did not check all the sites suggested, but be assured that there is 
quite a wide variety of “historic events”. The introduction of the euro was not among the top twenty hits 
of that search, though. In discussing the historic dimension of the introduction of the euro today, we 
are not exactly walking a well-trodden path. However, as I will make plain today, that introduction is a 
historic event.  
II 
The three large currency areas in the world — the United States, Japan and the euro area — together 
account for almost one-half of world output. Those three entities share a lot of similarities, but they are 
strikingly different in some respects.  
In terms of population size, the United States and the euro area are quite similar, around 300 million 
people, while Japan is a little less than half that size.  
In terms of the share in world GDP, Japan is less than 10 percent, the euro area comes out in the 
middle, at 16 percent, while the USA accounts for rather more than one-fifth of world GDP. Per capita 
GDP, however, in the USA and Japan is about 50 percent higher than the euro area’s Ε 20,000 per 
head.  
Ranked by openness — external trade in relation to GDP — the euro area is the most open of the 
three large currency areas, with its current account roughly in balance. The USA comes second with a 
current account in deficit, and Japan has its current account in surplus.  
Comparing the three areas with respect to the public sector’s share in the economy, the USA has the 
lowest  government  expenditure,  it  has  the  lowest  public  debt  and  for  the  time  being  a  budget  in 
surplus. While the euro area has made some progress in reducing the government deficit and debt, 
the continuing slump in Japan has led to a rise in both measures of the scale of the public sector's 
activity.  
In the field of finance, the  three large currency areas show different structures due to the traditions 
followed.  Bank  deposits  as  a  medium  of  investment,  and  bank  credit  as  a  source  of  finance, 
predominate in Japan.  
Investors and financiers in the USA clearly prefer the capital markets. The euro area is claiming the 
middle ground, with a certain tendency towards a more market-centered system.  
Economic  and  financial  integration  is  deepening  fast.  International  trade  has  grown  considerably 
during the last couple of years. Foreign direct investment flows have increased even faster. Portfolio 
investment has internationalized. Stock exchanges are moving more or less in sync.  
Growth rates are dwindling simultaneously in all three large currency areas at this point in time. That 
has very much to do with the higher degree of global integration yet underestimated by many policy 
makers.  Growth  of  global  trade  will  probably  diminish  this  year  to  two  percent  after  12 percent  last 
year. Among the major regions in the world only China, the Middle East and Russia, including some 
neighboring countries, will show substantially positive growth rates. There is something like a global 
business  cycle.  However,  there  is  no  perfect  synchronicity  among  different  areas.  Causes, 
BIS Review 93/2001 
 1
     2 
 consequences  and  repercussions  are  different  in  every  currency  area.  Therefore,  policy  reactions 
have to vary.  
The US business cycle is close to a technical recession. Remember, less than a year ago, forecasters 
wondered whether the USA would see a hard or a soft landing. The downward trend of the high tech 
industry,  and  the  corresponding  overinvestment  in  IT  where  prominent  among  the  causes  of  the 
downward movement in growth rates. The savings rate rose abruptly and the labor market performed 
increasingly worse. After September 11, additional negative psychological impact has to be overcome.  
The USA responded quickly. The Fed lowered interest rates, the federal government lowered taxes 
substantially. Firms and markets do adjust quickly. I have no doubt that the US economy  will again 
show rising growth rates within a few months. 
Japan — already in a prolonged recession — could not withstand this downward trend. Japan has to 
cope with an economy that is still recovering from the effects of the severe banking crisis that followed 
the bubble economy of the late eighties.  
Finally, the Euro area business cycle followed the world trend more closely than was observable in 
recent  years.  This  can  be  seen  as  an  outcome  of  closer  links  due  to  increased  foreign  direct  and 
portfolio investment. Growth rates diminished, employment gains came to a halt, and prospects for the 
next  year have worsened over the last months. However, capacity utilization and sentiment are still 
higher than, for example, in the recession of 1993. Adjustments take place, although slower than in 
the USA. As usual, expectations adjust faster than production. For Europe, psychological factors are 
no less important than in any other currency area. 
Different causes require different policy reactions. This is the first reason for varying responses of the 
three central banks. Another – equal important reason – is that they pursue different concepts. The 
Bank of Japan is in an exceptional situation, anyway.  
The  US  Federal  Reserve  System  was  set  up  in  1913.  In  accordance  with  the  Employment  Act  (of 
1946) and the Humphrey-Hawkins Act (of 1978), it must pursue several objectives at the same time: 
economic growth  in line  with potential output growth, stable prices, a high  level of employment and 
moderate long-term interest rates.  
The European System of Central Banks is "the new kid on the block" among the large central banks. 
Since 1999, it has pursued its sole primary objective of price stability. Differences in objectives and in 
strategy are the main explanations of the perceived differences in response to the current situation.  
For  Europe,  monetary  integration  is  an  event  of  historic  dimensions.  Joining  forces  to  set  up  a 
common  currency  area  promises  prosperity  and  stability  to  300 million  people.  The  institutional 
features of the ESCB provide for a framework enabling it to keep this promise. The success of the 
euro is one of the driving forces for Central and Eastern European states to apply for membership in 
the EU. 
It is not only in Europe that efforts towards regional integration are being made, including notions of, 
and  moves  towards,  monetary  harmonization.  Such  discussions  are  likewise  topical  in  all  five 
continents:  
• 
A currency union between Russia and Belarus is the one that is most concrete at present. 
The two countries have decided to set up a currency union from 2005 onwards; at first, the 
Russian rouble will be their currency.  
The member states of the Gulf Cooperation Council have been contemplating an Arab Gulf 
currency for some time. To further that initiative, they have recently set up a committee to 
take  charge  of  studying  the  necessary  requirements.  However,  political,  economic  and 
financial convergence does not suggest the early introduction of a common currency.  
In South America, monetary integration is envisaged for the Mercosur countries from time to 
time;  however,  with  economic  developments  in  Brazil  and  Argentina  diverging  more  and 
more, a currency union looks rather far away.  
The idea  of developing an American currency union  from NAFTA emerges now and then. 
Obviously, it has not been pursued with any real zeal up to now.  
Talks about a possible yen zone have come up regularly in Asia. However, although trade 
and  financial  integration  is  well  advanced  there,  switching  from  dollar  orientation  to  yen 
orientation does not look very likely at this point in time.  
BIS Review 93/2001
  Deliberations on forming currency unions between Australia and New Zealand, or in Africa, 
are in a very preliminary state, as the political will to cooperate is lacking. In Africa, however, 
with  the  CFA  Franc  zone  and  the  South  African  Rand  zone,  two  currency  unions  already 
exist.  
III 
European  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  which  started  on  January 1st, 1999,  has  its  origins  in  the  1970s, 
when the first plan of a single European currency was drafted. Not until the Treaty of Maastricht — 
signed  in  1992  —  was  the  notion  of  a European  currency  put  into  concrete  form.  EMU  is  to  be 
completed six weeks from now, when euro notes and coins are circulated. 
Monetary unions in Europe, however, are not unprecedented. Three of them were set up during the 
second half of the 19th century. Today’s world resembles the 19th century world in certain respects.  
In  that  age  of  industrialization,  rapid  international  integration  was  witnessed.  Transportation  costs 
sank, and led to closer trade relations. Profound structural change was the result. As the European 
countries became more similar, their economies converged. In that environment, naturally, monetary 
integration was deemed helpful.  
Today,  we  are  in  the  age  of  so-called  “globalization”.  Transportation  costs,  information  costs  and 
communication  costs  have  come  down  tremendously.  Structural  change  is  taking  place  in  the 
“information society”.  
Trade  and  investment  relations  are  becoming  ever  closer.  This  is  especially  true  of  the  European 
Common Market, where freedom of movement is guaranteed for people, goods, services and capital. 
The case in favor of monetary integration in Europe is compelling. 
Let’s have a look now at the 19th century currency unions in Europe, and find out what we have learnt. 
Just as drawing an analogy of the international setting is far from perfect, so is any comparison of the 
monetary unions themselves. We can, however, gain some useful insights from earlier experiences.  
In  1865,  the  four  sovereign  states  of  Belgium,  France,  Italy  and  Switzerland  - Greece  joined  a  little 
later - set up the Latin Monetary Union. The union covered only coinage, and had no common central 
bank. It was originally constructed as a forerunner of a political union — which was never established, 
though.  
The founding treaty was open to interpretation in several respects, and that leeway was extensively 
exploited.  Overall,  commitment  to  the  treaty  was  weak.  One  country  was  able  to  finance  its  public 
deficit  by  printing  - or  rather  minting -  money.  What  made  those  altogether  rather  heterogeneous 
countries  stick  together  for  more  than  60  years  was  basically  the  need  to  tap  the  French  capital 
market.  
The issue of the Scandinavian Monetary Union was rather different. Sweden, Denmark and Norway 
- all three countries now abstaining from EMU - pegged their currencies to one another in 1872. They 
aimed at economic, political and cultural cooperation. In some respects, the Scandinavian union was 
more weatherproof than the Latin union. The three countries pursued similar development strategies, 
they were export-oriented, and they showed great adaptability to exogenous shocks. 
Today, we would speak of convergent economies. Furthermore, the union treaty only spelled out what 
had been practised before.  
What  made  the  Scandinavian  Monetary  Union  fall  apart  (in  1931)?  Against  the  backdrop  of 
international banking crises, it seems as if the lack of a single monetary policy framework was one of 
the  reasons.  Monetary  policy  in  the  three  countries  gained  an  increasingly  national  flavor,  as,  first, 
a pre-World-War-One export boom hit the union asymmetrically. And so, a little later, did the war itself. 
Monetary policy diverged increasingly, until the union was formally terminated in 1931.  
As a third example, let’s have a brief look at the German Monetary Union of 1871. The ground for that 
currency union was well prepared. First, the German Customs Union had already created a common 
market,  although  that  had  been  hampered  by  the  existence  of  disparate  coinage  systems.  Labor 
mobility in the common market was relatively high. Second, Germany had been united politically under 
the lead of Prussia. The Reichsbank Act of 1875 then established a unified central bank to complete 
the German Monetary Union. It introduced the German "Mark" currency one year later.  
BIS Review 93/2001 
 3
 What  are  the  insights  to  be  gained  from  these  stylized  facts  about  three  earlier  experiences  of 
European  monetary  unions?  We  can  identify  certain  features  of  such  unions  that  seem  to  be 
conducive  to  the  stability,  and  the  success,  of  a monetary  union.  The  European  Union  took  these 
experiences into account when designing EMU.  
IV 
A monetary union is intended to provide the participating countries with a stable monetary regime that 
ensures price stability and enables them to thrive. The Maastricht Treaty set up the European System 
of Central Banks, with the European Central Bank - the ECB - on top. Both the ECB and the national 
central banks are independent. Monetary policy decisions are taken by the ECB Governing Council, 
which  consists  of  the  ECB  Executive  Board  and  the  Governors  of  the  participating  national  central 
banks.  
Unlike  the  centralized  decision-making,  the  implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  is 
decentralized.  National  central  banks  provide  the  markets  with  liquidity,  in  accordance  with  the 
decisions of the ECB Governing Council.  
The primary objective of the European System of Central Banks is to maintain price stability. The ECB 
Council defines price stability as an increase in consumer prices in the medium term of less than two 
percent a year.  
Unlike  earlier  monetary  unions  in  Europe,  EMU  was  set  up  with  a  watertight  monetary  regime. We 
have one single currency, the euro. The ECB has the sole right to authorize the issue of banknotes. 
Troubles similar to those which both the Latin and the Scandinavian Monetary Union ran into, when 
the countries’ central banks pursued divergent policies, cannot occur under the European monetary 
framework, where decision-making is centralized.  
A  common  stability  orientation  of  all  policy  areas,  to  which  all  member  states  are  committed,  is 
essential.  
The second stability-ensuring institutional feature of EMU is the Stability and Growth Pact. It spells out 
how  member  states  are  supposed  to  ensure  sound  public  finances,  as  the  Treaty  obliges  them  to 
avoid excessive deficits.  
As long as national budgets are in order, there is no incentive for member states to pursue an overly 
lax  monetary  policy,  with  an  eye  to  reducing  the  interest  burden  on  their  budgets.  Wage  policy  is 
another national responsibility. Wage agreements have in general been settled in line with productivity 
advances. Low, and stable, inflation expectations reflect confidence in the Eurosystem’s policy, and 
help in negotiating stability-oriented wage settlements.  
Research in the field of optimum currency areas has come to the conclusion that the member states of 
a successful currency union need to be what is called convergent economies. Convergent economies 
allow for a unified policy; divergent economies require differentiating policies. Its relative homogeneity 
may explain why the Scandinavian Monetary Union, over a long period, was more successful than the 
less convergent Latin version.  
The  European  Union  has  been  developing  a  Single  Market  for  more  than  half  a  century.  The  four 
fundamental  freedoms  - mobility  of  goods,  services,  people  and  capital -  ensure  that  what  had 
previously been a customs union became an integrated economic area. Convergence is progressing.  
Entry into EMU was and is conditional on the fulfillment of “convergence criteria”. Countries willing to 
join the monetary regime must display a “high degree of sustainable convergence”. That is measured 
in terms of price stability, exchange rates, capital-market rates and sound public finances. 
In a currency area, we have a “one-size-fits-all” monetary policy, and no exchange rates to cope with 
asymmetric economic shocks. Such shocks may occur despite the advanced state of convergence in 
the euro area. The countries of a monetary union are therefore in need of flexible goods, capital and 
labor markets. The EU member states are working to improve the flexibility of those markets. Insofar 
as price rigidities exist mobility, as ensured by the four basic freedoms, is called for.  
Political  union  has,  in  the  past,  proved  helpful  in  preserving  the  stability  of  a  monetary  union.  The 
European Union is moving slowly but steadily towards that long-term goal. Its willingness to assume 
greater responsibility in the global context is encouraging in that respect.  
4 
 BIS Review 93/2001
 Overall,  European  policy  makers  have  created  a  monetary  union  that  is  designed  to  last.  Features 
which, in former currency unions, proved destabilizing have been avoided in the design of EMU.  
But institutional features alone do not guarantee EMU’s success. Commitment to the Union, and a true 
European spirit, are called for. In the ECB Council, we show this European spirit. National interests are 
not relevant to the process of shaping monetary policy for the euro area — the euro area as a whole.  
V 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
At  its  start,  the  Eurosystem  has  seen  a  period  of  unprecedented  price  stability.  In  1998  and  1999, 
consumer prices rose by only 1.1 percent; in the year 2000, the inflation rate, at 2.3 percent, ran a little 
above the two-percent ceiling, after the sharp increase in oil prices during 1999 and 2000.  
This  year,  after  peaking  in  May,  at  3.4 percent,  the  inflation  rate  has  been  decreasing.  In  October, 
prices were 2.4 percent higher than one year before.  
In  the  current  environment  of  a  weak  world  economy,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  is  expecting  a 
further  moderation  of  price  movements.  At  its  most  recent  meeting  on  November 8,  the  Governing 
Council decided therefore to cut rates by half a percentage point. It has lowered its key interest rates 
during this year by 150 basis points to 3.25 percent.  
The  ESCB  has  been  assigned  one  main  policy  goal:  keeping  inflation  in  check.  If  possible  without 
compromising  price  stability,  it  shall  support  general  economic  policiesThe  reasoning  behind  this 
policy mandate is threefold.  
First, there is a purely economic reason. Keeping overall inflation low is the best contribution a central 
bank  can make  to  sound  economic  growth.  Furthermore,  inflation  tends  to  modify  distribution  in  an 
unfavorable way.  
Second, there is the well-known principle of reaching a bundle of policy goals best if each institution is 
assigned only one of the goals. And, third, there is the argument based on democracy theory: once an 
institution is granted independence, it should be given a clear mandate in return.  
A generally stable currency, and markets that trust the stability orientation of central banks, make for 
lower  price  increases  at  times  of  crisis.  They  also  anchor  inflation  expectations  at  low  levels.  The 
larger currency area is able to cushion external shocks.  
In  its  brief  history,  the  Eurosystem  has  already  dealt  successfully  with  three  external  shocks  and 
crises. We have seen the Asian crisis in 1997-99, an oil-price shock in 1999-2000 and, most recently, 
the terrorist attacks. Europe did not escape unscathed from all these events. However, the low level of 
turbulence within the euro area contrasts with sharper reactions to similar events in the period before 
EMU existed. This means that we have withstood what has been regarded as the worst-case scenario 
for the new currency. 
The European currency area exhibits greater macroeconomic stability, to the benefit of all its citizens, 
and  also  to  the  benefit  of  the  world  economy  at  large.  For  this  greater  macroeconomic  stability  to 
become reality, convergence is of paramount importance. Economic convergence is a precondition for 
the “one-size-fits-all” monetary policy really fitting all the regions in the euro area. A currency union, 
both  stable  and  beneficial,  needs  convergence  in  all  three  respects:  nominal,  real  and  structural 
convergence.  
VI 
The  European  single  currency  fostered  stronger  economic  integration  by  means  of  foreign  direct 
investment. In 1999, world FDI flows, at Ε 888 billion, were more than three times as high as in 1995. 
Intra-EU FDI flows grew significantly faster over that period. In 1999, they were five times the size of 
1995. In addition, intra-EU direct investment has risen significantly since the start of EMU. In the year 
2000,  it  actually  rose  by  50 percent.  Today,  intra-EU  FDI  accounts  for  one-quarter  of  world  foreign 
direct investment.  
BIS Review 93/2001 
 5
 FDI  stocks  show  a  similar  picture.  Intra-EU  FDI  stocks  make  up  22 percent  of  world  FDI  stocks. 
Almost one-half of the FDI stock originating in the European union is invested in another EU member 
state.  
The FDI statistics clearly show, first, that economic integration in the EU is intense, and, second, that 
economic  integration  deepened  fast  after  the  introduction  of  the  common  currency.  These 
observations are borne out by the trade statistics. About one-half of the external trade of the euro-area 
member states is intra-euro-area trade.  
VII 
It  is  in  the  financial  markets  that  the  benefits  of  a  common  European  currency  are  to  be  felt  most 
clearly.  The  implications  of  the  euro  are  obvious:  rising  liquidity,  deepening  and  widening  of  the 
money,  bond and stock markets, reduction of transaction costs and abolition  of currency risks. The 
euro speeds up financial market integration. 
Correspondingly, the functioning of the European Monetary Union depends heavily on a high degree 
of  financial  market  integration.  Its  smooth  functioning  enables  monetary  transmission  to  work. 
Progress in this field is tremendous, but more is yet to come.  
Those parts of the European financial markets that are crucial to the transmission of the Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy are already integrated to our satisfaction. The wholesale market for interbank liquidity 
in the euro area is now actually a single European money market.  
In  addition,  European  banks  are  interconnected  in  a  common  payment-system  infrastructure.  And 
improvements  to  the  euro-area-wide  payment  system  are  being  undertaken.  A  few  days  ago,  the 
Bundesbank launched its  new payment system RTGSplus,  which improves security, reduces liquidity 
needs and expedites settlements of gross payments. 
Through this system, about 8,500 banks and credit institutions, including their branches all over the 
world, are accessible. 
The  most  impressive  progress,  in  terms  of  integration,  has  been  witnessed  in  the  euro-area  bond 
markets. Yield differences among the government bonds of the different participants have narrowed 
from more than five percentage points before EMU to some 30 basis points nowadays. The remaining 
spread is mainly due to the varying liquidity of the papers issued. Currency risks or divergent monetary 
policies no longer disturb the euro-area-wide diversification. 
In terms of outstanding amounts, the euro-denominated bond market is still significantly smaller than 
that denominated in US dollars. But in terms of new issuance, both markets are on a par. One reason 
for that is the sharp rise in the new issuance of corporate bonds. Here again, diversification within the 
euro area has increased. The issuers' nationality, as a determinant of the  yield and performance of 
bonds, has been superseded by other factors, especially by a sectoral view. 
Accordingly, investors in the equity markets have shifted their perspective from country benchmarks to 
pan-European sector benchmarks. European equity markets are still small compared with those in the 
USA.  The  market  capitalization  of  domestic  shares,  as  a  ratio  of  GDP,  reaches  about  90 percent 
[2000]. The matching figures for the USA and Japan are 152 percent and 68 percent, respectively. 
Equity markets in the Euro area are growing fast. The ratio of new issuance to market capitalisation 
averages over 4 percent. This is twice as much as has been achieved in the USA or Japan. 
Further integration of equity markets in Europe is being hampered by the segmentation of both stock 
exchanges and clearing and settlement systems. A consolidation process has started, and should be 
fostered  by  legal  harmonization  in  the  field  of  financial  services.  The  degree  of  integration  in  the 
banking  sector  is  mixed.  On  the  one  hand,  wholesale  markets  and  investment  banking  are  largely 
integrated.  On  the  other  hand,  commercial  credits  and  retail  banking  still  operate  in  national, 
segmented markets. Only a few European banks created by cross-border mergers start to offer retail 
services at a standardized level for customers in more than one country.  
The  financial  system  in  the  euro  area  is  still  highly  bank-dominated.  At  the  end  of  last  year,  credit 
financing  totaled  about  108 percent  of  GDP.  This  is  twice  as  much  as  in  the  USA.  The  same  ratio 
holds for deposits. In the euro area, they account for 80 percent of GDP, while the US figure is about 
40 percent. 
6 
 BIS Review 93/2001
 it 
the 
transmission  process.  Basically, 
However, capital markets are increasing in importance in the euro area. Disintermediation is gaining 
ground. Financial markets have boomed in recent years and investment banks (as well as non-bank 
financial firms like institutional  investors, pension and investment funds) have  enlarged their market 
share. Disintermediation  will be enhanced by the need for pension systems to rely more on funded 
retirement schemes. 
Disintermediation  will  change 
is  speeded  up.  And 
disintermediation will change the income structure of banks. A rising share of fees and dividends, at 
the expense of interest income, will increase the volatility of banks' income. Since capital markets are 
more  integrated  than  the  banking  sector,  disintermediation  will  foster  the  integration  of  the  entire 
financial system in Europe.  
Changes for the banking sector are in prospect once the new Basle Accord is applied. In general, we 
welcome the new accord if it helps to improve the allocation of capital. However, two special features 
of the German economy should be considered:  
1. 
The German economy is largely dominated by small and medium-sized enterprises, known 
as the „Mittelstand“. 
Our financial systems rely to a large extent on long-term financing. 
2. 
This  long-termism  of  financing  has  contributed  successfully  to  the  stability  and  prosperity  of  our 
economy, as well as the financial system. That is why the Bundesbank argues that banking regulation 
should not discriminate against long term financial relations.  
Small and medium-sized enterprises with a revenue of up to φ 5 million make up more than 95 percent 
of  all  enterprises  in  Germany.  This  „Mittelstand“  forms  the  backbone  of  the  German  economy. 
However, their share of outside capital is significantly higher than with larger firms. A lower rating is 
therefore to be expected, unless other collateral or risk-lowering factors are taken into account. Here 
again, we favor a differentiated approach that does not put banks with a large disposure to small and 
medium-sized enterprises at a disadvantage. 
Since we do not want the new Basle Accord to endanger the prosperity or stability of our economy, 
and our financial system, we have to convince our partners to agree to a more differentiated accord. 
VIII 
Let us share a few thoughts on the international role of the euro.  
Three years into its life, the euro is the second most important currency in the world. It took over that 
role from the Deutschmark.  
The euro has a share of roughly 13 percent in international currency reserves — about as much as the 
Deutschmark  had  before.  In  this  field,  the  dollar  is  the  unchallenged  leader,  at  two-thirds  of 
international reserves. The size, depth and liquidity of the dollar markets, as well as the widespread 
habit of using the dollar for interventions and for pricing commodities, explain its predominance.  
As regards its use as a store of value, we find some evidence of the growing importance of the euro. 
30 percent [at end-2000] of all international securities outstanding are denominated in euro. This share 
is slightly above the aggregate share of the predecessor currencies shortly before EMU was launched. 
That leaves the euro  as the second-most-important currency in the international securities markets. 
Again,  the  dollar  is  the  dominant  currency,  accounting  for  one-half  of  all  international  securities 
outstanding.  
A  look  at  the  flow  data  underlines  the  growing  importance  of  the  euro  as  a means  of  international 
finance  and  investment.  In  its  first  year  (1999)  the  euro  was  the  most  important  currency  for 
debt-securities  issues  that  were  aimed  at  the  international  market;  in  the  year  2000,  it  fell  back 
somewhat, to 40 percent.  
The currency composition of international bank assets presents a similar picture. Again, the dollar is 
the leading currency, with a share of 40 percent, while the euro is in the process of catching up. From 
slightly  less  than  one-quarter  at  the  end  of  1998,  its  share  rose  to  27 percent,  twelve  percentage 
points of which were intra-EU bank assets.  
BIS Review 93/2001 
 7
 What can we see from these figures? Although habits in the international use of currencies change 
only gradually, the euro has already won a respectable market share. Its market share roughly equals 
the economic weight of the euro area.  
Further progress in the development of broad, deep and liquid financial markets is a precondition for 
the expansion of the euro’s international role. Increased international use of the euro, as a currency for 
international  reserve  holdings,  for  investment  and  financing  purposes,  might  have  some  bearing  on 
monetary  policy,  but  this  potential  impact  seems  manageable.  Hence,  in  the  Eurosystem,  we  have 
adopted a neutral stance towards the internationalization of the euro. We regard it as a market-driven 
process, and we neither hinder it nor foster it.  
IX 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
For Europe, the introduction of the single currency  is an  event of historic scope. The launch of the 
European System of Central Banks came with a promise of stability and prosperity.  
Stability  must  be  earned,  again  and  again,  day  by  day.  The  German  “Stabilitätskultur”  - one  may 
translate  this  as  "stability  culture" -  is  one  of  our  most  cherished  exports  to  our  European  partner 
countries. European people now share a firm stability orientation. 
Prosperity  must  likewise  be  earned,  again  and  again,  day  by  day.  The  Eurosystem  can  and  does 
contribute  by  providing  an  environment  of  stability,  where  prices  are  fairly  accurate  indicators  of 
relative  scarcity.  The  ensuing  efficient  allocation  of  resources  is  a  precondition  for  prosperity. 
However, other policy areas can - and must - do more in this respect than monetary policy.  
People in the European Monetary Union hold on to the single market and the single currency, because 
they know it is good for them - individually - and also for their countries. This, ladies and gentlemen, is 
why  I expect  a  long  life  for  the  European  version  of  a  currency  union,  as  shaped  in  the  late 
20th century.  
8 
 BIS Review 93/2001
