Svein Gjedrem: Is the financial system stable?
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank,  at  the  2001  Annual  Meeting  of  the
Norwegian Savings Banks Association, Haugesund, 18 October 2001.
Please note that the text may differ slightly from the actual presentation
 Introduction
The  role  of  the  financial  industry  in  the  economy  has  become  increasingly  important  over  the  last
decades.  Deregulation  and  technological  advances  have  increased  the  industry’s  opportunities  and
scope to channel savings to various projects. Strong competition has induced the industry to make use
of  these  new  opportunities.  The  range  of  saving  and  financial  instruments  is  becoming  ever  wider.
Systems and financial instruments for managing and controlling risk are becoming more advanced. As
a  result,  it  has  become  easier  for  households  and  enterprises  to  decouple  consumption  and
investment  from  current  income.  In  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  in  particular,  international  capital
markets  have  become  more  integrated.1  It  has  been  easier  for  growing  economies  to  finance
investments through a balance-of-payment deficit and foreign capital. At the same time, countries with
high savings can increasingly diversify their investments.
Globalisation places increasing demands on the business sector’s ability to adapt. New products and
technology squeeze out old solutions. This creative destruction, as Schumpeter called it, may foster a
more efficient distribution of resources and higher economic growth in the long run. A rapidly changing
environment  places  considerable  demands  on  the  financial  industry.  The  financial  prospects  for  a
project  must  be  assessed  in  relation  to  risk.  A  diversified  portfolio  of  loans  and  investments  limits
expected losses. Losses on one project may be more than offset by gains on another.
Economic  growth  is  cyclical.  During  an  upswing  most  projects  fare  better  than  expected.  A  deep
recession can lead to heavy losses, insolvency and financial crisis. Banks may address this risk by
building  up  sufficient  buffers  during  upturns.  Often,  this  is  not  done  in  practice.  Instead,  financial
enterprises  tend  to  place  special  emphasis  on  increasing  market  shares  while  times  are  good  and
allow their capital ratios to fall.
It is during an upturn that the basis for the downturn is laid. Financial crises are often characterised by
a first phase when optimism predominates, risk assessments weaken and the willingness to borrow
and asset prices increase. When negative news starts to spread, investments fall short of expectations
and the mood shifts, asset prices fall and debt-servicing problems accumulate.
A financial bubble can first be identified with certainty after it has burst. There are a growing number of
examples  of  this.  After  the  Asian  crisis,  which  started  in  1997,  and  gradually  had  global  spillover
effects, there have been national financial crises in Turkey and Argentina.
During much of the 1990s, the US experienced extensive restructuring and high economic growth. The
gap between the US and the rest of the world widened. Investment expanded sharply, particularly in
the technology sector. This was made possible by dynamic credit and capital markets. Developments
led to a broad expansion in other sectors of the economy and other countries. Restructuring and new
technology may also have increased the long-term growth potential of the US economy. The marked
turnaround that has now come shows that developments went too far. The technology stock bubble
burst.  The  focus  has  now  shifted  towards  heavily  indebted  households  and  businesses.  Banks  are
expecting higher losses.
The  question  may  arise  as  to  whether  financial  crises  are  an  inherent  feature  of  a  market-based
financial  system. What  can  the  authorities  and  the  financial  industry  do  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of
future crises?
                                                     
1
See Bank for International Settlements (2001). 71st Annual Report. Basel
BIS Review 86/2001
1
I will take a closer look at certain crisis periods that  occurred before World War  II  and  government
responses  in  the  form  of  legislation,  regulation  and  the  introduction  of  a  financial  safety  net.  In  the
decades prior to 1914, financial crises with a pronounced impact on banks were just as frequent as in
our time.2 During the interwar period, financial crises occurred even more frequently.
In the period of extensive direct regulation of banks up to the 1970s, there was a virtual absence of
banking crises. However, the system was not sustainable and was at the root of many of the problems
that followed. With a succession of crises since the early 1980s, financial stability has again become
an issue, both at home and abroad. Nevertheless, there is fairly broad consensus as to the merits of a
market-based system and free cross-border capital movements. The frequency of financial crises must
be reduced by fostering solid financial enterprises. Risk systems must be improved. Market access to
information  on  developments  in  micro  and  macro  performance  must  be  enhanced  in  order  to
strengthen market discipline in the financial industry. Better and uniform standards for accounting and
statistics  are  important.  Financial  safety  nets  may  offer  greater  security  to  households  and  small
enterprises, which have difficulty obtaining an adequate overview of the risks in the financial system.
At the same time, however, they must not  be so  favourable  that  they  encourage  irresponsible  risk-
                                                     
2
Bordo, M., Eichengreen B., Klingebiel, D. and M. S. Martinez-Peria (2001). Is the crisis problem growing more severe?
CEPR
2
BIS Review 86/2001
taking.  Central  banks  are  also  faced  with  the  challenge  of  ensuring  financial  stability  through  their
analyses and monetary policy.
Developments from the 1800s to the present
The regulation of financial institutions has undergone considerable changes. In the 1800s and up to
World War I, the regulation of banks and other financial institutions was very limited. Norway was one
of  the  most  liberal  countries.  Regulation  in  other  countries  such  as  the  US  and  the  UK  was  more
extensive.
In  Norway,  savings  banks  were  subject  to  separate  legislation,  because  they  were  to  have  a  more
social function than commercial banks. There were no guarantee funds, and the law for savings banks
was designed to ensure that they were operated in a manner that safeguarded depositors’ funds.
Cross-border  capital  movements  were  also  subject  to  little  or  no  regulation  in  the  decades  prior  to
1914.3 Capital markets were integrated in countries that had adopted the gold standard. There  was
solid confidence in the gold standard, and exchange rate risk was regarded as very low. Movement of
capital between countries was often long-term, and tended to be associated with specific projects. As
a  small,  open  economy,  Norway  was  totally  dependent  on  an  open,  smoothly  functioning  capital
market.  From  1885  to  1913,  the  fixed  investment  rate  in  Norway  was  on  average  higher  than  the
saving ratio.
Although  short-term  gross  capital  movements  were  far  from  their  current  levels,  they  were
nevertheless  significant.  Monetary  policy  was  restricted  by  the  gold  standard.  Capital  was  highly
mobile, and the interest rate had to be set to ensure that the exchange rate remained between the
gold  points.  As  a  result,  monetary  policy  could  not  normally  be  used  to  stabilise  economic
developments. Countries that suspended the gold standard were penalised with higher interest rates.4
A look at earlier crises
A weak stabilisation policy, relatively ineffective banking legislation combined with a poorly developed
financial industry provided fertile ground for many financial crises.
The Oppland crisis occurred in 1864. It was a backlash of the boom in the latter  half of the  1850s,
when a sharp upswing in the timber industry led to widespread speculation.
Growth  was  also  very  strong  in  the  early  1870s.  At  the  same  time,  the  boom  paved  the  way  for  a
period with the most severe banking disasters up to that time. There was considerable overcapacity in
many industries at the time of the turnaround in the international economic situation in 1874. The most
serious crash occurred in Arendal in 1886.
Not  long  afterwards,  in  the  late  1890s,  Kristiania  (now  Oslo)  experienced  a  financial  bubble.  A
favourable international economic situation and the building of railways led to a period of prosperity in
the Norwegian economy, particularly in the capital. The money market was highly liquid as a result of
the  inflow  of  gold,  and  interest  rates  were  relatively  low.  Growth  in  banks’  deposits  and  lending
increased  in  pace  with  the  money  supply.  Kristiania’s  population  grew  and  there  was  an  explosive
period of construction, of both dwellings and commercial buildings. Prices for land, building materials
and  houses  rose  dramatically.  The  crash  was  triggered  in  1899  by  a  major  bankruptcy.  The  crisis
gradually  became  more  acute  for  Norwegian  banks,  particularly  commercial  banks.  It  had  lasting
consequences for the Norwegian financial industry and the economy. The stock market was virtually at
a standstill until World War I.
The  crash  compelled  Norges  Bank,  for  the  first  time  in  its  history,  to  channel  crisis  liquidity  to  the
banking industry.
                                                     
3
Bordo, M. D, B. Eichengreen and J. Kim (1998). Was there really an earlier period of international financial integration
comparable to today? NBER Working papers 6738
4  Mauro, P., Sussman, N. and Y. Yafeh (2000). Emerging Market Spreads: Then Versus Now. IMF Working Paper.
BIS Review 86/2001
3
The next financial bubble occurred during World War I. During the first half of the war, in particular,
there was strong growth in the Norwegian economy. This provided the foundation for a boom that is
unparalleled in history. Banks’ lending rose sharply. The build-up of risk in the financial system was far
more pronounced than in previous episodes. A strong inflow of gold led to uncontrolled growth in the
money supply and inflation at the beginning of the war. In addition, the constraints implicit in the gold
standard gradually broke down, and the money supply expanded sharply. The banking crisis came in
the wake of a cyclical downturn in the early 1920s and can largely be attributed to the build-up of risk
during the boom period. The bulk of bank losses occurred before the introduction of parity policy.5
The authorities’ response
In response to the extensive banking crises in the interwar period, a financial safety net for banks was
introduced  in  most  developed  countries.  In  Norway,  guarantee  funds  were  introduced  for  savings
banks in 1921 and for commercial banks in 1938. There was also a need for separate rules on public
administration of banks. These arrangements helped to dampen the effects of the crises and prevent
new ones.
Commercial  banks  were  subject  to  separate  legislation  and  supervised  by  the  newly  established
Banking and Savings Bank Inspectorate. Supervision of savings banks commenced as early as 1900,
with the establishment of the position of Inspector of Savings Banks. This was probably one reason
why savings banks were not as expansive as commercial banks during World War I. Nor were they as
severely affected by the banking crisis.
A gradual increase in the regulation and supervision of financial enterprises and the introduction of a
financial safety net did not mean that the market-based system was abandoned. However, recessions
and demands for more protectionism led to restrictions on international trade and capital movements.
The result was that domestic investments increasingly had to be financed through domestic savings.
This can be illustrated by looking at the relationship between the saving ratio and the fixed investment
rate for selected countries. A strong correlation indicates a limited degree of openness. Measured in
this way, integration was greater before 1914 than in the interwar period.6 Protectionism had a very
harmful effect on economic developments.
                                                     
5  Ecklund,  G.  J.  and  S.  Knutsen  (2000).  Vern  mot  kriser?  Norsk  finanstilsyn  gjennom  100  år.  (Protection  against  crises?
100 years of Norwegian financial supervision) Fagbokforlaget.
Jones, M. T. and M. Obstfeld (1997). Saving, Investment, and Gold: A Reassessment of Historical Current Account Data.
NBER Working Paper Series.
BIS Review 86/2001
6 
4
After World War II, international organisations were established to promote economic cooperation and
their objective was increased integration of international trade and fixed investment. However, cross-
border  capital  movements  remained  heavily  regulated.  The  same  applied  to  direct  regulation  of
financial enterprises. Other considerations, than returns and risk, took precedence in connection with
the provision of credit and capital movements.
At the end of the 1970s, direct controls were gradually removed. As a result of the emergence of new
financial instruments, the controls no longer had the same effect. There was a growing realisation that
the existing controls had a negative effect on the allocation of credit and capital, and hence on long-
term economic growth. Cross-border capital movements were gradually liberalised. It was not until the
1990s that capital was able to move between countries as freely as before 1914.
Because of the serious effects of financial crises, the financial industry is subject to many regulations
and to extensive supervision. The industry is by no means deregulated, but the regulations are now
designed to make markets function more securely and more efficiently. Clear requirements have been
established for both capital adequacy and liquidity. Nevertheless, the regulations do not eliminate the
possibility of financial crises.
Are financial crises an inherent feature of today’s system?
The transition to a market-based system has increased the scope for financial cycles.7 The cycles may
be  amplified  by  unrestricted  cross-border  capital  flows.  Because  of  the  central  role  of  the  financial
industry as a credit and capital intermediary, this can also influence macroeconomic developments. At
worst, an upswing in the economy can be amplified through the build-up of financial imbalances, which
may trigger and reinforce a downturn and financial crisis.
Technological  innovations  that  increase  productivity  in  the  economy  may  rapidly  lead  to  general
optimism and a broad economic upturn. Since the 1800s, we have seen waves of optimism and large-
scale  investment  in  railways,  shipping,  hydroelectric  power  stations  and  now,  most  recently,
information  technology.  Upturns  may  also  be  driven,  or  amplified,  by  demand-side  factors  in  the
economy.
During an upturn, income growth is high in both the enterprise and the household sector. The value of
property and securities, and thus the collateral for new loans, rises. Financial and other enterprises are
upgraded  by  credit  rating  agencies.  Banks  record  low  losses  and  solid  results  and  can  increase
lending  without  weakening  capital  adequacy.  Demand  for  credit  can  easily  be  met  by  obtaining
financing on favourable terms in both domestic and foreign money and capital markets. As a rule, it is
also easier to raise equity during economic upturns.
                                                     
7  See Bank for International Settlements (2001): 71st Annual Report. Basel
BIS Review 86/2001
5
Under  these  circumstances,  credit  risk  may  be  underestimated  and  not  priced  into  margins.  The
financial industry may share in the generally prevailing optimism, and strong competition may lead to a
contest for market shares. In this way, banks contribute to building up risk in the financial system. The
loans with the highest risk are probably those granted at the peak of the economic cycle. Households
and  enterprises  often  have  a  relatively  high  debt  burden  at  such  times,  and  loans  are  secured  by
inflated property and asset prices.
The securities and capital markets are another important source of capital for enterprises. During an
upturn, many enterprises find that capital is "cheap", because the outlook for the future is regarded as
very bright. There is a risk of over-investment.
Optimism may  rapidly  give  way  to  pessimism  if  investments  fall  short  of  expectations  and  negative
news  starts  to  spread.  As  a  result,  the  risk  that  has  accumulated  during  the  upturn  period  may
materialise.  The  financial  sector  may  choose  to  interpret  developments  as  a  sign  that  the  risk
associated with new projects has also increased, with the result that this risk may be overestimated. A
drying up of credit and capital may trigger or amplify a crisis.
The costs of financial instability may be very substantial. Therefore, it is necessary to dampen financial
cycles.
The outlook for financial stability
The outlook for the global economy is now weak. The terrorist attacks on the US on 11 September
have increased uncertainty. We have witnessed a bubble in technology shares. From 1998, the price
of technology shares rose substantially more than earnings, and since March 2000, there has been a
sharp correction in prices.  Life insurance companies and pension funds, both  at home and abroad,
have lost a substantial portion of their buffers due to the decline in share prices. Telecommunications
companies  have  been  through  a  phase  marked  by  substantial  borrowing.  Credit  rating  companies
have  downgraded  many  telelcoms  due  to  high  debt  levels  in  relation  to  future  prospects.  This  has
increased funding costs.
When economic growth slows, problems in enterprises and countries with high debt burdens rise to
the  surface.  There  has  been  constant  unrest  in  countries  like  Turkey  and  Argentina,  which  are
struggling  with  high  borrowing  costs.  Japan  has  not  yet  recovered  from  its  more  than  10-year-long
banking crisis and is vulnerable to new shocks.
Up to this autumn, the effects of the international turnaround on the Norwegian economy were limited.
It  now  appears  clear  that  Norway  will  also  be  affected  by  the  slowdown.  A  number  of  Norwegian
enterprises in export industries and the travel industry have felt the effects of growing caution among
households and businesses worldwide. Investment in mainland enterprises will probably also decline.
6
BIS Review 86/2001
Domestic credit growth remains high, and since 1993 has been stronger than growth in value added
measured in terms of GDP. Banks in particular have contributed to this.
At times, growth in lending has been markedly higher in savings banks than in commercial banks. At
the end of August, year-on-year growth in lending was 11.7 per cent for savings banks and 9.2 per
cent for commercial banks, when adjusted for portfolio transfers. There seems to be an indication of
growing competition for market shares. Savings banks are also competing increasingly in commercial
banks’ traditional business areas. There is a risk of overcapacity.
Credit growth in both the household and enterprise sectors has  been strong. At the end of August,
year-on-year growth was 11 and 9.1 per cent respectively. Growth in lending to the enterprise sector
has  slowed  recently  while  demand  for  credit  in  the  household  sector  has  remained  stable.  Both
households and mainland enterprises have increased their debt burden markedly in recent years.
If  credit  to  the  household  sector  continues  to  grow  through  next  year,  household  gross  debt  is
expected to increase to more than 140 per cent of disposable income by the end of next year. Even
with  such  high  debt,  the  interest  rate  will  have  to  rise  by  more  than  3  percentage  points  for  gross
interest expenses to constitute the same burden, measured as a percentage of income8 as before the
banking crisis, when it was around 10 per cent. This illustrates that we have a long way to go before
households are as vulnerable as they were then, but no one wants us to come that far either.
BIS Review 86/2001
7
High credit growth has resulted in a falling core capital ratio. However, capital adequacy ratios at many
savings banks remain high.
Bank lending has increased more than deposits, and in the last few years banks have become more
dependent  on  money  and  capital  markets.  Small  and  medium-sized  banks  have  substantially
increased  their  borrowing  from  other  credit  institutions.  Short-term  foreign  debt  has  also  risen.
Although  the  decline  in  stock  markets  appears  to  have  improved  the  financing  situation  in  recent
months, other forms of saving are expected to compete strongly with bank deposits.
In  general,  foreign  borrowing  is  a  source  of  diversification  and  thus  risk  reduction,  but  it  can  also
spread  unrest.  By  international  standards,  Norwegian  savings  banks  are  small.  It  can  be  costly  to
change a source of funding if one source should dry up. In the event of considerable financial unrest in
international  financial  and  capital  markets,  savings  banks  may  be  affected.  Today,  the  shocks  are
often global.
If  the  current  high  credit  growth  continues,  financial  stability  in  Norway  will  be  threatened.  We  will
become more vulnerable to all kinds of shocks. I have already touched upon the weak outlook for the
global  economy.  There  is  also  reason  to  expect  considerable  structural  changes  in  the  business
                                                                                                                                                                     
8 
Income here is defined as household disposable income before deduction of gross interest expenses.
8
BIS Review 86/2001
sector, for example, when economic resources have to be transferred to the public sector and other
sheltered  sectors.  Restructuring  may  take  place  within  established  companies,  but  may  also  take
place in a far less controlled manner and result in losses for banks and other lenders.
Policy challenges
Like banks and other market participants, the  authorities also  learn  from  crises.  I  will  discuss  three
areas in which we have learned important lessons.
First,  economic  policy  must  be  oriented  towards  stable  economic  development.  An  inappropriate
economic policy has been a contributing cause of crises both in Norway and abroad.
Norges Bank has been given an operational target for monetary policy, which means that monetary
policy instruments shall be used with a view to maintaining low and stable inflation. The inflation target
is set at 2½ per cent. Low and stable inflation is probably the best contribution monetary policy can
make to financial stability. This is also supported by empirical studies.9
However, there have been episodes where bubbles have accumulated in the form of sharp increases
in asset  prices in  the  property  and  financial  markets  while  inflation  has  been  low.  Developments  in
Japan in the 1980s and in the US in the 1990s may be examples of this. When the bubbles burst, the
result may be an economic downturn. Thus, developments in the financial and property markets may
also fuel more unstable inflation. In principle, it might be appropriate to use the interest rate to counter
this.  In  practice,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  assess  whether  developments  in  prices  for  property  and
financial assets are sustainable.
When Norges Bank concludes that the key rate should be changed, the change will in most cases be
made gradually. If special emphasis is placed on developments in financial or property markets when
the key rate is changed, Norges Bank will provide an assessment of this.
It is Norges Bank’s responsibility to present its  view on the risks facing the financial system from a
macroeconomic perspective. This is the purpose of Financial Stability, a report published twice a year.
Second, the international financial infrastructure must be strengthened. This also entails increased
international cooperation.
Many  financial  crises  in  the  1980s  and  up  to  today  have  occurred  in  countries  where  rules  and
supervision are relatively ineffective. As a result, the financial sector has become fragile. The capital
strength of financial institutions has been inadequate. Deregulation has occurred before the country’s
financial infrastructure is in place. This has fuelled the build-up of financial bubbles. Large fluctuations
in capital movements have often intensified the problems. Elements of this were also present during
the banking crisis in the Nordic countries.
The financial safety net should help prevent financial instability and curb the effects if instability should
arise.  This  may  also  prevent  the  development  of  imbalances.  Deposit  guarantees,  crisis  liquidity
schemes and the assumption that large banks will be rescued by the government may weaken market
discipline. The result may be increased risk-taking.
International  organisations  have  developed  international  codes  and  standards  for  the  financial
infrastructure and for the regulation and supervision of the financial sector, which are in line with good
practices.10  These  codes  and  standards  should  contribute  to  improving  policy  and  creating  more
robust  financial  systems.  They  should  make  it  easier  for  investors  and  others  to  keep  abreast  of
developments, which in turn will increase their ability to assess risks in a country. This will reduce the
risk of herd behaviour and the build-up of substantial imbalances.
The  International  Monetary  Fund  plays  an  important  role  in  international  surveillance  and  crisis
management. They have substantially strengthened their oversight of the financial systems in member
countries. Other  international  organisations  are  also  intensifying  their  efforts  in  the  area  of  financial
stability.
In the Nordic countries, both the supervisory authorities and the central banks have  expanded their
cooperation as a result of the integration of the Nordic banking industry. One question that will arise is
                                                     
9
Bordo,  M.  D.,  Dueker,  M.  J.  and  D.  C.  Wheelock  (2000).  Aggregate  price  shocks  and  financial  instability:  An  historical
analysis. NBER Working Paper 7652
10 See BIS, Financial Stability Forum (2001). International Standards and Codes to Strengthen Financial Systems.
BIS Review 86/2001
9
whether  guarantee  funds  and  other  rules  and  regulations  can  differ  when  markets  are  so  closely
integrated.
Next year, an important international milestone will be reached when the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision  presents  the  new  capital  adequacy  rules.  According  to  plan,  the  rules  will  apply  from
2005. Basel II has a three-pillar architecture. First, the rules relating to minimum capital requirements
will be further developed. Second, the supervisory authorities will monitor banks more actively. Third,
information  disclosure  requirements  will  enhance  market  discipline.  Combined,  this  will  constitute  a
coherent  system  for  protecting  the  financial  strength  of  banks.  The  regulations  will  improve  the
balance between capital requirements and banks’ financial risk. This will also increase the focus on
the development of risk management systems.
Finally, I would like to place particular emphasis on the need for market discipline, which is the third
pillar  in  the  proposed  Basel  Capital  Accord.  Financial  stability  is  dependent  on  the  identification,
management and control of risk. This also means that we must factor in risk. This applies to banks in
their internal credit routines, and others with interests in banks – shareholders, lenders, bondholders
and depositors. Market participants must understand that equity, subordinated loan capital and other
claims on banks not covered by deposit guarantees may be lost. The financial industry must therefore
be  forward-looking.  Buffers  must  be  built  up  in  periods  of  expansion  when  losses  are  low  and
profitability is high.
The financial safety net must be reassessed if it is so favourable that banks and market participants
are not encouraged to exercise market discipline. For example, deposit guarantees in Norway cover
larger amounts than in many other countries.
Despite  the  lessons  that  both  the  authorities  and  the  financial  industry  have  learned  from  financial
crises, such crises may nevertheless occur in the future. Experience indicates that crises are often a
result of inherent processes in the financial system. There is still reason to hope that the authorities
through their policies and formulation of rules and the financial industry through its management of risk
will reduce the frequency of financial crises.
Thank you for your attention.
10
BIS Review 86/2001
