 Joseph Yam: Developing and positioning Hong Kong’s bond market 
Speech by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Forum on 
China’s Government Securities Market in the New Century, Hong Kong, 19 November 2001. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  to  share  with  you  Hong  Kong’s  experience  in  the 
development of the bond market and our views on the future prospects of that market. Before I go into 
the subject, however, I would like to congratulate our friends from the Mainland on their superb efforts 
leading  to  China’s  accession  to  the  World  Trade  Organisation.  The  signing  of  the  necessary 
documents a week or so ago marks the successful conclusion of 15  years of sheer hard  work and 
determination,  and  the  beginning  of  a  new  era  in  which  the  Mainland  embraces  globalisation  in 
earnest, to the long-term benefit of China, the region and the world. I have no doubt that Hong Kong, 
in  particular,  will  benefit  tremendously  from  this.  The  international  business  community  has  been 
positioning itself, here in Hong Kong a free and open economy at the doorstep of the Mainland and an 
integral part of China to take advantage of the many opportunities that  will open up in the  years to 
come. As the international financial centre of China, Hong Kong is particularly looking forward to the 
opportunities  arising  from  a  much  quicker  pace  of  financial  liberalisation  in  the  Mainland  after 
accession to WTO. Put simply, notwithstanding the gloom of global recession, the future of Hong Kong 
is bright. 
Bond market development 
Let me turn quickly now to bond market development. There are a few points that I would like to make 
immediately. The first point is a basic and obvious one, so obvious that it is often overlooked. This is 
that the bond market is a channel of financial intermediation for the purpose of mobilising savings into 
productive  investment  that  promotes  economic  growth  and  development.  There  is  a  need  for  those 
involved in the bond market those responsible for its development and those making a profit or a living 
from it to be frequently reminded of this basic purpose. This is particularly so when considering the 
introduction  of  sophisticated  products  derivatives  and  the  like.  I  have  nothing  against  sophisticated 
financial engineering, or against the engineers being well remunerated, provided that the regulators 
and the market participants, both at the wholesale and retail levels, are capable of appreciating and 
coping  with  the  associated  risks.  This  may  not  often  be  the  case.  It  is  possible  that,  while  these 
products theoretically make the market more efficient, in terms of spreading and managing risks, in 
practice the risks may be magnified, to the extent of creating systemic instability  and disrupting the 
crucial flow of funds through that basic and important channel of financial intermediation. 
The second, again rather obvious, point  is that the  bond market is one  of three broad channels of 
financial  intermediation,  along  with  the  better  developed,  at  least  in  this  region,  banking  and  equity 
markets.  Less  obvious,  perhaps,  is  the  importance  of  ensuring  that  the  bond  market  commands  a 
degree  of  robustness  and  efficiency  capable  of  channelling  suddenly  enlarged  flows  of  savings  to 
investment that may be diverted from one or both of the other two channels as a result of crises there. 
These  channels  should  reinforce  each  other  in  order  that  financial  intermediation  and  therefore 
economic  growth  can  continue  in  times  of  financial  stress.  We  have  witnessed  how  the  US  bond 
market helped substitute for bank intermediation in the credit crunch of the late eighties. We have also 
witnessed how the US banking system in turn played the back-up role when the bond market failed to 
intermediate funds as a result of the LTCM crisis, thus minimising the disruption to economic growth. 
In  contrast,  the  less  developed  bond  market  in  this  region  failed  to  provide  the  necessary  backup 
when  banks  in  a  number  of  jurisdictions  faced  difficulties.  Funds  simply  dried  up  and  there  were 
debilitating economic and financial consequences. Bond market development in this region is thus an 
urgent task. 
This  task  is,  however,  hindered  by  a  third  point,  which  is  that  the  three  channels  of  financial 
intermediation are in competition with each other. This is so to the extent that the development of the 
bond market, at least in this region, may have been inhibited by the rather more efficient banking and 
equity  markets.  Understandably,  vested  interests  may  have  exerted  a  degree  of  influence  to  this 
effect,  and  this  is  one  reason  why  the  bond  market,  where  it  is  underdeveloped,  may  have  to  be 
BIS Review 94/2001 
 1
 considered as a public good that justifies the involvement of the official sector in its development. This 
is indeed the case in Hong Kong,  but  it has come about  only  after a long  period of agonising  over 
whether such deliberate government involvement, in the freest economy in the world  and  without a 
continuing need for government borrowing to finance budget deficits, was appropriate. Perhaps with 
greater institutional integration in the provision of financial services, the lack of enthusiastic support in 
the  development  of  the  bond  market  from  service  providers  in  the  alternative  channels  of  financial 
intermediation will in time be transformed into co-operation or even initiative, thus obviating the need 
for government involvement. In the meantime, however, and having regard to the degree of financial 
sophistication  of  most  economies  in  the  region,  some  official  sector  involvement  in  bond  market 
development  seems  justified.  This  might  be  in  the  form  of  facilitating  development  of  the  market 
infrastructure, ironing out administrative obstacles, helping with education, etc, rather than more direct 
or obvious forms of subsidy. 
Fourth,  bond  market  financial  intermediation  need  not  be  narrowly  confined  to  just  a  domestic 
phenomenon.  It  can  and  should  take  on  an  international  dimension.  Through  facilitating  the  inward 
investment of foreign savings, the source of funding for much needed domestic investments can be 
tremendously enlarged. This would also enhance the overall efficiency in the international allocation of 
funds,  to  economies  that  can  provide  a  higher  return  commensurate  with  the  risks  involved.  An 
economy with capital controls should therefore plan for the eventual internationalisation of the bond 
market, even though the associated financial liberalisation process can be quite a risky one. But risks 
are to be managed and not avoided, and the benefits of open markets far outweigh the costs in terms 
of financial instability. I can confirm this, even with the unpleasant experience of the financial turmoil of 
1998. Free and open markets impose a valuable discipline on policy makers that is to be welcomed in 
the long-term interest of the people they serve. 
Fifth,  and  turning  to  the  actual  bond  market  development  issues,  there  is  a  need  to  adopt  a 
comprehensive approach. We should address the demand and supply sides, the environment in which 
they  interact to discover the prices for the debt instruments, including market making arrangements 
and the determination of benchmarks, and the market infrastructure, including payment, clearing and 
settlement systems. 
Focusing on these issues individually, and this is the sixth point, there is usually strong latent demand 
for debt instruments, particularly in economies with a high savings rate. Between the low risk-return 
bank deposits and the high risk-return equity market, there should be a risk-return profile that fits that 
of debt instruments. The trick is how this latent demand, involuntarily trapped at the two ends of the 
spectrum, can be brought out and satisfied. Investor education and the creation of a retail network to 
market  debt  will  help.  But  the  costs  of  the  latter  can  be  quite  substantial  and  possibly  prohibitive, 
particularly in a low interest environment, if the retail banking system cannot be relied upon to support 
this  wholeheartedly  (which  I  am  glad  to  add  is  not  the  case  in  Hong  Kong).  Furthermore,  when 
government debt is used by the banking system as assets for acquiring liquidity support, the demand 
from  the  banks  may  easily  crowd  out  the  retail  demand.  Nevertheless,  the  institutionalisation  of 
savings,  if  this  could  be  organised,  through  for  example  the  introduction  of  professionally  managed 
provident fund schemes, should be quite effective in harnessing this demand. This would, at the same 
time, enable the retail demand to be transformed into a level of sophistication that, with the appropriate 
supply response, will greatly enhance the efficiency and robustness of the debt market as a channel of 
financial intermediation. 
The seventh point I wish to make concerns the supply side. For an economy with a continuing need to 
finance budget deficits there is of course a natural supply of debt instruments, unless, like Hong Kong, 
it has surpluses to spend. But the story does not end there. It is essential for this supply of government 
debt to be organised in such a way as to enable demands of different natures to be met. This requires 
a well structured, transparent and predictable programme, with a wide maturity spectrum. 
Thus, my eighth point concerns the interaction of demand and supply to discover price reliably and 
efficiently.  This  is  relevant  to  both  the  primary  and  the  secondary  markets,  and  is  best  achieved 
respectively through well-structured tender and market making arrangements. These may involve last 
resort support from the regulators. There are many successful models of such arrangements and there 
is  ample  literature  on  them. The  common  objective  is  to  ensure  a  high  level  of  liquidity  to  facilitate 
reliable  and  efficient  price  discovery,  thereby  providing  a  benchmark  yield  curve  upon  which  other 
issuers can confidently and accurately price their own, hopefully much bigger volume of, private sector 
debt. That is what we should aim for in the development of the bond market if it is to play a meaningful 
role in financial intermediation. 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2001
 My  ninth  point  concerns  the  market  infrastructure,  and  by  that  I  mean  the  payment,  clearing  and 
settlement  systems.  This  is  regrettably  the  most  neglected  aspect  in  the  development  of  financial 
markets, not just the bond market. Imagine how general investor confidence would be damaged if the 
financial instrument that an investor had bought got lost in delivery. Or if he had to wait a considerable 
amount of time to receive it after he had paid over the money, or if the money that he had paid over 
was not received by the vendor. I have often pointed out that governments spend huge amounts of 
money and efforts building the physical infrastructure to move people and goods around safely and 
efficiently, but that not even a small fraction of those resources is given to moving money and financial 
instruments around safely and efficiently. The result, very simply, is inefficient financial intermediation. 
Money  is  not  mobilised  to  its  full  potential,  and  economic  progress  is  undermined.  The  financial 
infrastructure that we want, to use a bit of market jargon, is one that enables, as soon as possible after 
dealing, RTGS DvP, namely, real time gross settlement with delivery versus payment for transactions 
in financial instruments (RTGS PvP or payment versus payment for foreign exchange transactions). 
This is what we have achieved in Hong Kong. 
Hong Kong’s bond market 
Let me turn now to the development of Hong Kong’s bond market and share with you our experience. 
As I said  earlier,  after agonising over this for a long  period, behind the convenient argument that  if 
there is a need for a market to develop it will develop by itself without the urging of government, we 
decided to get involved. The Exchange Fund Bills and Notes programme was subsequently introduced 
at the beginning of 1990. But the primary justification deployed then was the need for a money market 
instrument,  targeted  at  the  banks  as  customers,  to facilitate  monetary  management  rather  than  the 
development of the bond market. Nevertheless, we adopted a comprehensive approach to the task. 
We put together an innovative market making system that virtually guaranteed liquidity by allowing a 
handful of market makers to go short in any issue of our paper for as long as their overall holdings, 
with  suitable  haircuts,  are  long.  This  has  now  been  replaced  by  an  even  more  robust  arrangement 
whereby short positions in particular issues are squared at the end of the day through overnight repos 
against other issues. We also built a paperless clearing, settlement and custodian system operated by 
our Central MoneyMarkets Unit (CMU), which also provided similar services to the larger volume of 
private sector debt. And, at the same time as we introduced our Real Time Gross Settlement payment 
system at the end of 1996, we moved on to DvP, or delivery versus payment, with real time and end of 
day capabilities. 
Meanwhile, the supply of debt has steadily been increasing. Corporate bond issuance has increased 
by 300 per cent in the last decade or so. We also have an increasing variety of products, including 
mortgage-backed  securities  and  retail  products  brought  to  the  market  by  the  Hong  Kong  Mortgage 
Corporation. All have been readily absorbed by the latent demand to which I also referred earlier. And 
with  the  recent  introduction  of  the  Mandatory  Provident  Fund  schemes,  the  demand  for  bonds  has 
been building up quickly. In 1991, the bond market has a size of only about 4 per cent of GDP. This 
has grown to 35 per cent last year, and the share of private sector debt is now at around 77 per cent. 
We have come a long way but there is still a lot of room for expansion, as evidenced by comparisons 
with bond markets in the G-3 economies. But our bond market has grown big enough and has been 
robust enough for it to provide some meaningful back-up in times of financial stress. In 1998-99 when, 
as  property  prices  fell  sharply  and  the  financial  turmoil  led  to  deteriorating  asset  quality,  the  banks 
adopted a conservative stance in their lending, corporate bond issuance increased significantly. 
Positioning for the future 
Our  present  pre-occupation  in  the  development  of  the  Hong  Kong  bond  market  is  to  bring  in  the 
international  dimension.  As  an  international  financial  centre,  we  of  course  aspire  to  play  a  role  in 
international  financial  intermediation.  To  achieve  this,  our  efforts  have  been  concentrating  on  two 
fronts.  First  is  the  establishment  of  bilateral  linkages  of  the  appropriate  elements  of  our  financial 
infrastructure with those  of other jurisdictions wherever it is compatible to  do so, and  whenever the 
counterparts are willing. This basically is for the purpose of facilitating the cross border investments in 
debt  securities.  Our  CMU  was  linked  up  with  Euroclear  and  Clearstream  in  1994,  with  the  Central 
Securities Depositories in Australia in 1997, New Zealand in 1998 and Korea in 1999. We also have a 
standing  offer  in  the  region  to  link  up  our  Hong  Kong  dollar  RTGS  payment  system  with  other 
currencies  with  RTGS  capability  so  as  to  achieve  payment  versus  payment  in  foreign  exchange 
transactions, in other words, to eliminate Herstatt risk. But I must confess that, for the former, there 
BIS Review 94/2001 
 3
 has not been a lot of traffic, and for the latter, there have been no takers, so far. I hope this is merely a 
reflection  of  the  fact  that  the  financial  infrastructures  of  others  are  not  yet  ready  for  these  types  of 
linkages.  But  I  really  cannot  see  a  more  robust  arrangement  than  what  we  have  proposed  for 
promoting  and  facilitating  the  international  financial  intermediation  that  is  found  so  lacking  in  the 
region. But we shall be patient. 
The  other  front  that  we  have  been  working  on  is  the  replication  of  our  Hong  Kong  dollar  financial 
infrastructure for the US dollar, the popular currency for international financial intermediation. We have 
late last year completed this for the debt clearing system and the RTGS payment system. We have 
linked these to the corresponding systems in the Hong Kong dollar financial infrastructure. I won’t bore 
you  with  the  technical  details.  What  this  means  is  that  we  now  have,  in  this  time  zone,  a  robust 
financial  infrastructure  for US  dollar  transactions  that  can  accommodate,  among  other  things,  a  US 
dollar  bond  market  in  this  region.  You  do  not  have  to  wait  until  New  York  opens  before  you  can 
achieve  finality  of  settlement  of  your  US  dollar  transactions  in  bonds  or,  indeed,  in  any  US  dollar 
denominated financial assets, if they are lodged with our CMU in Hong Kong. Furthermore, any Asian 
currency with an RTGS payment system, if it is linked up with our system, will be able to achieve PvP 
or payment versus payment for the two currencies in real time. We already have PvP for Hong Kong 
dollar versus US dollar transactions the first in the world. 
I  have,  as  you  are  probably  aware,  drifted  into  the  positioning  of  the  Hong  Kong  bond  market  for 
meeting  future  challenges.  We  have,  through  our  efforts  in  the  development  of  the  financial 
infrastructure, put ourselves in a position to play the ideal host to the bond market of the region, or of 
this time zone. I hope members of our financial community can leverage on this position of strength 
and bring issuers and investors of US dollar bonds to Hong Kong. Further development of the bond 
market is largely in their hands. As central banking officials, we in the Hong Kong Monetary Authority 
have  done  what  we  can  appropriately  do,  in  the  provision  of  this  public  good  a  robust  financial 
infrastructure. We can, of course, replicate this financial infrastructure for other currencies, and indeed 
we  are  currently  exploring  the  possibility  of  doing  so  for  the  other  major  international  currency  not 
domiciled in this time zone the euro. And if this is appropriate, we can also transfer our technology to 
others through our advisory services. I am, in particular, thinking of the RMB financial infrastructure, 
which in my opinion requires urgent strengthening, not just for facilitating the development of the RMB 
bond  market,  but  also  for  facilitating  the  many  further  measures  in  financial  liberalisation  following 
WTO accession. 
Meanwhile,  our  US  dollar  financial  infrastructure  in  Hong  Kong,  coupled  with  the  market  making 
arrangements that have been well tried for over a decade, and the critical mass of financial institutions, 
is ideal for the launching of a US dollar bond programme for the Mainland. I understand, of course, 
that with foreign reserves well exceeding US$ 200 billion, there is arguably little need for the Mainland 
to raise additional foreign debt. But part of the outstanding foreign debt could be refinanced in Hong 
Kong through such a programme. Perhaps with a liquid market and a reliable benchmark yield curve 
established,  similar  to  those  of  Exchange  Fund  paper  in  Hong  Kong  dollars,  the  overall  borrowing 
costs could be lowered. This seems worth trying, for the downside risks are minimal and the benefits 
could be substantial, to the Mainland in terms of potential savings in borrowing and road show costs, 
and to Hong Kong, in terms of consolidating our position as the regional bond centre. 
And we are ready to play  our part in the development of the RMB bond market in the Mainland, in 
accordance with the timetable associated with WTO accession, starting, slowly, with the establishment 
of joint ventures for underwriting and trading, and the development of RMB bond funds and so on. But 
what  we  hope  for  is  that,  in  the  fullness  of  time,  the  Mainland  authorities  can  come  around  to 
accommodating full access to the RMB bond market from Hong Kong. I am sure there will be demand 
for RMB assets in Hong Kong, if the demand is not there already. I know that this matter, and other 
issues  concerning  financial  intermediation  of  the  RMB  outside  of  the  Mainland,  raises  complicated 
issues of capital account controls that need to be resolved cautiously. But I would like to reiterate my 
view  that,  with  increasing  economic  integration  between  Hong  Kong  and  the  southern  part  of  the 
Mainland, some, possibly an increasing degree of, mobility of capital between the two economies is 
inevitable.  The  choice  is  whether  to  channel  properly  this  flow  of  capital  openly  and,  if  considered 
desirable,  in  a  controlled  manner,  and  to  monitor  it,  or  to  leave  it  in  the  dark,  when  ironically  it  is 
performing the useful role in promoting the efficient use of capital in the two economies. There is a 
great  deal  that  the  free  and  open  financial  markets  of  Hong  Kong  can  offer  in  RMB  financial 
intermediation,  and  I  am  delighted  that,  at  this  important  point  in  China’s  economic  and  financial 
development,  one  of  the  themes  of  this  conference  is  how  this  can  be  effected.  I  wish  you  a  very 
fruitful discussion during the rest of this forum. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2001
