 Ernst Welteke: The euro changes Europe and the world 
Speech  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  to  the  Japanese  Bankers’ 
Association, Tokyo, 28 November 2001. 
 I 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First  of  all,  I would  like  to  thank  you  most  sincerely  for  your  kind  invitation  to  speak  to  such  a 
distinguished audience. It is always a pleasure for me to be here in Tokyo. I especially appreciate the 
opportunity to discuss with the financial elite of Japan the changes brought about by the introduction of 
the euro. Thank you very much.  
The European monetary union is only 33 days from completion. On January 1st, the notes and coins of 
the  single  European  currency  will  be  circulated.  Europeans  will  be  able  to  pay  bills  using  their 
domestic currency in all twelve member states of the Eurosystem. For the man in the street, this is a 
sea-change. In economic terms, however, the cash changeover is virtually a non-event. Europe has 
de facto had a common currency and a single monetary policy for nearly three years now.  
The EU has been developing a common market for more than half a century. However, the member 
states of this closely-knit economic network have (almost) all used a currency of their own. In 1999, 
economic  and  financial  integration  made  a  huge  leap  forward,  as  eleven  – now  that  Greece  has 
joined, twelve – countries decided to embark on a common currency.  
II 
What  is  this  strange  Europe  like,  that  wakes  up  only  when  the  business  day  in  Japan  is  well 
advanced?  
Let me start with a few figures. The euro area has a population of 300 million people – quite similar to 
the United States. The twelve countries have twelve national governments. People in the euro area 
speak eleven native languages. 
The  euro  area  is  the  most  open  of  the  three  large  currency  areas  –  the  United  States,  Japan  and 
Europe.  Japan  and  the  United  States  are  our  most  important  non-European  trading  partners. 
17 percent of our six and a half billion euro GDP is generated by exports, and the current account is 
roughly  in  balance.  Average  per  capita  GDP  stands  at  somewhat  more  than  € 20,000  (roughly 
Y 2.2 million), a third less than in Japan. Differences between countries are considerable.  
The public sector share in the euro-area economy accounts for nearly fifty percent of GDP, and the 
aggregate budget shows a small deficit. Aggregate gross public sector debt stands at 70 percent of 
GDP. Individual country figures, however,  differ. For instance, gross public sector debt ranges from 
four percent of GDP (Luxembourg) to 100 percent of GDP (Belgium, Italy). 
Heterogeneity is a fact of life in the euro area. But homogeneity far outweighs heterogeneity in one 
crucial respect: we are united by our intention to form an integrated Europe with a common market as 
a strong and reliable partner for the world economy. 
III 
In  addition,  our  monetary  union  is  built  on  a  host  of  common  values  and  interests.  The  euro-area 
countries share a firm stability orientation. It is reflected in the institutional framework of the European 
Monetary Union.  
The European System of Central Banks is a two-tier system. It consists of the national central banks 
and  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  ECB.  Both  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  are 
independent from any political interference.  
Monetary policy decisions are taken by the ECB Governing Council, which consists of the six-strong 
ECB Executive Board and the Governors of the participating national central banks. The vote of very 
BIS Review 98/2001 
 1
 single Board member or governor carries the same weight notwithstanding the size of population of his 
home  country.  The  rule  is  "one  person,  one  vote".  Unlike  the  centralized  decision-making,  the 
implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  is  decentralized.  National  central  banks  provide  the 
markets with liquidity, in accordance with the decisions of the ECB Governing Council. 
The primary objective of the European System of Central Banks is to maintain price stability. The ECB 
Governing Council defines price stability as an increase in consumer prices (measured in terms of the 
Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices) of less than two percent a year.  
The  ECB  Governing  Council  has  opted  for  a  two-pillar  strategy  to  analyze  prospective  price 
movements  over  the  medium  term.  In  pillar  one,  the  growth  of  a  broad  monetary  aggregate  is 
analyzed. This pillar takes account of the fact that, over the medium or longer term, inflation is always 
a  monetary  phenomenon.  In  pillar  two,  a  wide  range  of  other  economic  and  financial  variables 
indicating potential future price effects, are closely analyzed. The two-pillar strategy makes for a broad 
assessment of the potential risks to future price stability. 
The second stability-ensuring institutional feature of EMU – besides the ESCB – is the Stability  and 
Growth Pact. It spells out how member states are supposed to ensure sound public finances, as the 
Treaty obliges them to avoid excessive deficits.  
Wage policy is another national responsibility. In the most recent years, wage agreements have been 
settled  roughly  in  line  with  productivity  advances.  Since  the  start  of  the  monetary  union  inflation 
expectations have been low and stable. This reflects confidence in the Eurosystem’s policy, and helps 
in negotiating stability-oriented wage settlements.  
To sum up: 
We  have  a  single  currency,  the  euro.  Monetary  policy  decision-making  is  centralized,  the  primary 
objective of monetary policy being clearly specified: price stability. Stability-oriented monetary policy is 
underpinned by stability-oriented fiscal policy.  
However,  even  in  a  watertight  institutional  and  political  environment,  stability  cannot  be  taken  for 
granted. Stability must be earned, again and again, day by day. The German “Stabilitätskultur” – one 
may translate this as "stability culture" – is one of our most cherished exports to our European partner 
countries. European people now share a firm stability orientation.  
IV 
How did the single monetary policy perform? 
At its start, the Eurosystem saw a period of hitherto unprecedented price stability. In 1998 and 1999, 
consumer prices rose by only 1.1 percent; in the year 2000, the inflation rate, at 2.3 percent, ran a little 
above the two-percent ceiling, after the sharp increase in oil prices. 
This  year,  after  peaking  in  May,  at  3.4 percent,  the  inflation  rate  has  been  decreasing.  In  October, 
prices  were  2.4 percent  higher  than  a  year  before.  In  the  current  environment  of  a  weak  world 
economy, the  ECB Governing Council  is expecting  a further moderation  of price movements. At its 
meeting on November 8, the Governing Council therefore decided to cut rates by half a percentage 
point. It has lowered its key interest rates during this year by 150 basis points, to 3.25 percent.  
A generally stable currency, and markets that trust the stability-orientation of central banks, make for 
lower price increases at times of crisis.  
In  its  brief  history,  the  Eurosystem  has  already  dealt  successfully  with  three  external  shocks  and 
crises. We  have  witnessed  the  Asian  crisis  in  1997-99,  an  oil-price  shock  in  1999-2000  and,  most 
recently, the terrorist attacks. Europe did not escape unscathed from all these events. However, the 
low level of turbulence within the euro area contrasts with sharper reactions to similar events in the 
period before EMU existed. This means that we have withstood what has been regarded as the worst-
case  scenario  for  the  new  currency.  The  European  currency  area  exhibits  greater  macroeconomic 
stability, to the benefit of all its citizens, and also to the benefit of the world economy at large.  
2 
 BIS Review 98/2001
 V 
The three large currency areas in the world – the United States, Japan and the euro area – together 
account for almost one-half of world output.  
Currently, growth rates are dwindling simultaneously in all three major currency areas. That has very 
much to do with the higher degree of global integration, still underestimated by many policy makers. 
Global trade growth will probably slow down to only 1.3 percent this year, after 12 percent last year. 
The new round of trade talks recently launched in Doha is an encouraging signal in this respect. 
Among the major regions of the world, only China, the oil-exporting countries of the Middle East and 
Russia  (including  some  neighboring  countries)  will  show  growth  rates  of  a  seriously  positive 
magnitude. There is something like a global business cycle. However, there is no perfect synchronicity 
among different areas. Causes, consequences and repercussions differ in the three currency areas. 
This does call for area specific policy responses.  
The US business cycle is  close to a recession. Remember, less than a  year ago, forecasters were 
wondering whether the USA would see a hard or a soft landing. The downward trend of the high-tech 
industry,  and  the  corresponding  overinvestment  in  IT,  were  prominent  among  the  causes  of  the 
downward movement of growth rates. The savings rate rose abruptly and the labor market performed 
ever-worse. After September 11, the additional negative psychological impact had to be overcome.  
Risk  sensitivity  initially  increased  steeply  after  the  terrorist  attacks.  We  have  seen  a  widening  of 
corporate,  especially  high-yield, spreads over  government bonds. The increased risk sensitivity  is a 
major  reason  why  monetary  easing  has  still  not  made  its  way  through  the  entire  (corporate)  yield 
curve.  More  recently,  the  spreads  have  receded  somewhat.  They  are,  however,  still  above  their 
pre-attack level. 
The United  States responded  quickly to the  worsening economic outlook. The Fed lowered interest 
rates, the federal government substantially reduced taxes. Firms and markets are adjusting quickly. 
I have no doubt that the US economy will show rising growth rates again within a few months. 
Japan  —  no  need  to  tell  you  —  could  not  withstand  the  global  downward  trend,  as  the  overall 
economic situation has not been favorable for years. The economy is still recovering from the effects 
of the prolonged banking crisis that followed the bubble economy of the late eighties.  
Finally, the euro-area business cycle followed the global trend more closely than has been manifest in 
recent years. This can be seen as the outcome of closer links, owing to increased foreign direct and 
portfolio investment.  
Exports and business investment led the slowdown in Europe. Growth rates diminished, employment 
gains came to a halt, and the prospects for next year have worsened over the past few months. Both 
business  and  consumer  sentiment  are  tending  to  be  weak.  However,  they  are  still  higher  than,  for 
instance, during the recession of 1993. So is capacity utilization. Adjustments are taking place and will 
reinvigorate growth during the next year. As usual, expectations are adjusting faster than production. 
For Europe, psychological factors are no less important than for any other currency area.  
Overall,  the  political  situation  in  the  world  today  is  having  a  more  pronounced  impact  on  the  world 
economy than in less troubled times. The degree of uncertainty is the factor to watch in global short-
term economic developments.  
European Monetary Union has repeatedly spared us turmoil in the euro area. On the other hand, it has 
led  to  tremendous  changes  within  Europe.  One  of  them  – and  one  of  vital  interest  to  me –  is  the 
changing role of the Bundesbank in Europe.  
VI 
Among the participating national central banks, the Bundesbank is the one that has seen the greatest 
changes induced by the changeover to a truly European currency. Before EMU, the Bundesbank had 
effectively – although not formally – been the central bank deciding the monetary policy for much of 
Europe. The Deutschmark was the key currency in Europe, and the second most important currency in 
the world. To this day, the Deutschmark is a byword for stability.  
Now the Deutschmark is history, and the German central bank is an integral part of the supranational 
European System of Central Banks. The Bundesbank has been very active in the process of designing 
the ESCB. Important features of the system have been modeled on the Bundesbank.  
BIS Review 98/2001 
 3
 As the German central bank, we have relinquished our outstanding position in Europe. The leading 
role  has  been  handed  over  –  to  the  trustworthy  hands  of  the  ESCB.  Decision-making  in  European 
monetary policy is centralized. That constitutes a major change in Europe. As long as the Bundesbank 
was the leading central bank in Europe, European monetary policy was designed to fit Germany, now 
it is designed to fit the euro area as a whole.  
The  Bundesbank  contributes  its  vast  experience  in  the  field  of  economic  and  financial  analysis. 
Extensive  research  and  analysis  have  always  been  a  foundation  of  German  monetary  policy.  The 
Bundesbank  is  part  of  the  intellectual  infrastructure  of  Germany  and  of  Europe  –  and  we  intend  to 
remain such a "think tank".  
In addition, the implementation of monetary policy is entirely in the hands of the national central banks, 
which  deal  with  the  monetary  and  financial  institutions  in  their  home  country.  Other  decentralized 
functions are: 
  The operation of the payment systems, which are interconnected in the TARGET system. 
The distribution of cash.  
The holding and management of currency reserves.  

And,  it  is  the  national  central  banks  that  explain  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  to  the  general 
public in their respective home country. 
The  role  for  the  Bundesbank  has  changed  tremendously.  We  have  surrendered  sovereignty,  to 
become part of a larger system. This was not an easy process, but it was worth the effort.  
VII 
For  the  greater  macroeconomic  stability  envisaged  by  the  architects  of  monetary  union  to  become 
reality, it is essential for the member states to be convergent economies. A currency union, both stable 
and beneficial, needs convergence in all three respects: nominal, real and structural convergence.  
As regards nominal convergence, inflation rates are the key criterion. The gap in inflation rates – as 
measured by the standard deviation of EMU country-inflation rates – has been basically unchanged 
since the launch of EMU.  
As regards real convergence, I use the term here in the sense of the synchronicity of business cycles. 
The Governing Council of the European Central Bank sets a monetary policy appropriate to the euro 
area as a whole. A country whose business cycle gets grossly out of step might suffer if it is subject to 
a monetary policy that is inappropriate to its national economy.  
However,  marching  in  absolute  lockstep  is  not  necessary,  as  we  know  from  past  experience  in  the 
United States, where certain regions grow faster than others. The growth rates of states and regions 
within  a  currency  union  may  differ  to  some  degree.  It  is  the  size  of  the  gap  between  actual  and 
potential growth rates which matters. If potential output-growth rates differ, actual growth rates may 
differ as well. That does not necessarily indicate any lack of real convergence. 
In  the  longer  run,  stability  must  be  built  upon  economic  integration,  which  brings  about  structural 
convergence.  An  extensive  body  of  theory  has  evolved  on  the  characteristics  of  optimum  currency 
areas.  The  most  important  feature  is  that  prices  and  wages  must  be  able  to  adjust  flexibly.  The 
mobility of goods, labor and capital will ensure market integration.  
The European single currency has fostered stronger economic integration by means of foreign direct 
investment. In 1999, world FDI flows, at - 888 billion, were more than three times as high as in 1995. 
Intra-EU FDI flows grew significantly faster over that period. In 1999, they were five times as big as in 
1995. In addition, intra-EU direct investment has risen significantly since the start of EMU. In the year 
2000, it actually rose by 50 percent. Today, intra-EU FDI accounts for one-quarter of global FDI.  
The FDI statistics show clearly, first, that economic integration in the EU is intense, and, second, that 
economic integration increased fast after the launch  of the single currency. These observations are 
borne out by the trade statistics. About one-half of the external trade of the euro-area member states 
is intra-euro-area trade.  
4 
 BIS Review 98/2001
 VIII 
It  is  in  the  financial  markets  that  the  benefits  of  a  common  European  currency  are  to  be  felt  most 
clearly.  The  implications  of  the  euro  are  obvious:  rising  liquidity,  deepening  and  widening  of  the 
money,  bond and stock markets, reduction of transaction costs and abolition  of currency risks. The 
euro speeds up financial market integration. 
Correspondingly, the functioning of the European Monetary Union depends heavily on a high degree 
of  financial  market  integration.  Its  smooth  functioning  enables  monetary  transmission  to  work. 
Progress in this field is tremendous, but more is yet to come.  
Those parts of the European financial markets that are crucial to the transmission of the Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy are already integrated to our satisfaction. The wholesale market for interbank liquidity 
in the euro area is now actually a single European money market.  
In  addition,  European  banks  are  interconnected  in  a  common  payment-system  infrastructure.  And 
improvements  to  the  euro-area-wide  payment  system  are  being  undertaken.  A  few  days  ago,  the 
Bundesbank  launched  its  new  payment  system  RTGSplus  (Real  Time  Gross  Settlement),  which 
improves security, reduces liquidity needs and expedites settlements of gross payments. Through this 
system,  about  8,500  banks  and  credit  institutions,  including  their  branches  all  over  the  world,  are 
accessible. 
The  most  impressive  progress,  in  terms  of  integration,  has  been  witnessed  in  the  euro-area  bond 
markets. Yield differences among the government bonds of the different participants have narrowed 
from more than five percentage points before EMU to some 30 basis points nowadays. The remaining 
spread is mainly due to the varying liquidity of the papers issued. Currency risks or divergent monetary 
policies no longer disturb the euro-area-wide diversification. 
In terms of outstanding amounts, the euro-denominated bond market is still significantly smaller than 
that denominated in US dollars. But in terms of new issuance, both markets are on a par. One reason 
for that is the sharp rise in the new issuance of corporate bonds. Here again, diversification within the 
euro area has increased. The issuers' nationality, as a determinant of the  yield and performance of 
bonds, has been superseded by other factors, especially by a sectoral view. 
Accordingly, investors in the equity markets have shifted their perspective from country benchmarks to 
pan-European sector benchmarks. European equity markets are still small compared with those in the 
USA. The market capitalisation of domestic shares, as a ratio of GDP, reaches about 90 percent. The 
matching figures for the USA and Japan are 152 percent and 68 percent, respectively. 
Equity markets in the Euro area are growing fast. The ratio of new issuance to market capitalisation 
averages over 4 percent. This is twice as much as has been achieved in the USA or Japan. 
Further integration of equity markets in Europe is being hampered by the segmentation of both stock 
exchanges and clearing and settlement systems. A consolidation process has started, and should be 
fostered by legal harmonization in the field of financial services.  
The degree of integration in the banking sector is mixed. On the one hand, wholesale markets and 
investment banking are largely integrated. On the other hand, commercial credits and retail banking 
still operate in national, segmented markets. However, a few European banks created by cross-border 
mergers are slowly starting to offer retail services at a standardised level for customers in more than 
one country.  
The  financial  system  in  the  euro  area  is  still  highly  bank-dominated.  At  the  end  of  last  year,  credit 
financing totaled about 108 percent of GDP. This is about as much as in Japan, and twice as much as 
in the USA. The picture is similar with deposits. In the euro area, they account for 80 percent of GDP, 
and for 110 percent in Japan, while the US figure is only about 40 percent. 
However, capital markets are increasing in importance in the euro area. Disintermediation is gaining 
ground. Financial markets have boomed in recent years and investment banks (as well as non-bank 
financial firms like institutional  investors, pension and investment funds) have  enlarged their market 
share. Disintermediation  will be enhanced by the need for pension systems to rely more on funded 
retirement schemes. 
Since  capital  markets  are  more  integrated  than  the  banking  sector,  disintermediation  will  foster  the 
integration of the entire financial system in Europe.  
BIS Review 98/2001 
 5
 Changes for the banking sector are in prospect once the new Basle Accord is applied. In general, we 
welcome the new accord if it helps to improve the allocation of capital. However, two special features 
of the German economy should be considered:  
1. 
The German economy is largely dominated by small and medium-sized enterprises, known 
as the „Mittelstand“. 
Our financial systems rely to a large extent on long-term financing. 
2. 
This  long-termism  of  financing  has  contributed  successfully  to  the  stability  and  prosperity  of  our 
economy, as well as the financial system. That is why the Bundesbank argues that banking regulation 
should not discriminate against long-term financial relations.  
Small and medium-sized enterprises with a revenue of up to B 5 million make up more than 95 percent 
of  all  enterprises  in  Germany.  This  „Mittelstand“  forms  the  backbone  of  the  German  economy. 
However, their share of outside capital is significantly higher than with larger firms. A lower rating is 
therefore to be expected, unless other collateral or risk-lowering factors are taken into account. Here 
again, we favour a differentiated approach that does not put banks with a large exposure to medium 
and small sized enterprises at a disadvantage.  
IX 
Banking regulation and supervision in Europe have become ever-more integrated, in keeping with the 
development of the single market. The introduction of the common currency in 1999 was therefore an 
additional factor contributing to the further harmonization of the regulatory and supervisory framework, 
accelerating the integration of financial systems.  
Currently, we have a system of home-country supervision and extensive cooperation among European 
regulators  and  supervisors.  This  tried  and  tested  framework  is  serving  us  well.  Especially  in  the 
banking  sector,  integration  is  not  yet  so  advanced  as  to  justify  pan-European  supervision. 
Furthermore, tax systems, accounting standards and also banking systems vary to a degree that does 
not  warrant  unified  banking  supervision.  As  financial  integration  advances  further,  however,  this 
situation may change in the future.  
If,  in  future,  once  we  have  a  truly  European  financial  system,  we  will  take  steps  towards  a  single 
supervisory  structure.  Those  steps  could  probably  start  with  the  large,  internationally  operating, 
European banks.  
In Germany, the government has recently drafted a bill on a new framework for financial supervision. 
The  future  "Federal  Authority  for  Financial  Services  Supervision"  will  combine,  under  one  roof,  the 
supervision of banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions.  
The Bundesbank’s role in the supervision of banks will be enhanced under the new law. This is a good 
thing, because there are good practical reasons for the participation of central banks:  
    Central  banks,  by  providing  cash  and  liquidity,  by  running  payment  systems,  and  by 
operating  in  the  open  market,  have  a  good  insight  in  banking  behavior  and  solvency. 
Therefore,  economies  of  scope  arise  by  providing  both,  central  banking  and  banking 
supervision.  
Central banks have a responsibility for financial system stability, which is a prerequisite for 
the conduct of monetary policy. 
Central banks operate payment systems that are a potential source of systemic risks. 
And,  at  times  of  crisis,  central  banks  have  a  role  as  mediators,  as  well  as  a  potential 
"lender-of-last-resort"  function.  If  liquidity  assistance  has  to  be  provided  for  illiquid,  but 
solvent, banks, national central banks would benefit from having "first-hand information", as 
supervisors, for the sake of maintaining or restoring financial stability. 
Hence,  once  a  European  framework  is  envisaged  for  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  it  must 
necessarily provide for the meaningful involvement of the ESCB. There is, however, no single solution 
to  fit  all  countries  and  all  environments.  In  Japan,  as  I have  learnt,  you  have  adopted  a  different 
approach.  
6 
 BIS Review 98/2001
 X 
Let us share a few thoughts on the international role of the euro.  
Three years into its life, the euro is the second most important currency in the world. It took over that 
role from the Deutschmark.  
The euro has a share of roughly 13 percent in international currency reserves – about as much as the 
Deutschmark  had  before.  In  this  field,  the  dollar  is  the  unchallenged  leader,  at  two-thirds  of 
international reserves. The size, depth and liquidity of the dollar markets, as well as the widespread 
habit of using the dollar for interventions and for pricing commodities, explain its predominance.  
As regards its use as a store of value, we find some evidence of the growing importance of the euro. 
30 percent  of  all  international  securities  outstanding  are  denominated  in  euro.  This  share  is  slightly 
above  the  aggregate  share  of  the  predecessor  currencies  shortly  before  EMU  was  launched.  That 
leaves the euro as the second-most-important currency in the international securities markets. Again, 
the dollar is the dominant currency, accounting for one-half of all international securities outstanding.  
The currency composition of international bank assets presents a similar picture. Again, the dollar is 
the leading currency, with a share of 40 percent, while the euro is in the process of catching up. From 
slightly less than one-quarter at the end of 1998, its share rose to 27 percent. 
What can we see from these figures? Although habits in the international use of currencies change 
only gradually, the euro has already won a respectable market share. Its market share roughly equals 
the economic weight of the euro area.  
Further progress in the development of broad, deep and liquid financial markets is a precondition for 
the expansion of the euro’s international role. Increased international use of the euro, as a currency for 
international  reserve  holdings,  for  investment  and  financing  purposes,  might  have  some  bearing  on 
monetary  policy,  but  this  potential  impact  seems  manageable.  Hence,  in  the  Eurosystem,  we  have 
adopted a neutral stance towards the internationalisation of the euro. We regard it as a market-driven 
process, and we neither hinder it nor foster it.  
XI 
The  euro  currently  plays  a  role  in  the  exchange-rate  regimes  of  55 countries.  Among  these 
euro-minded  countries  are  eight  of  the  twelve  countries  willing  to  become  member  states  of  the 
European Union.  
The motivation for aiming at joining the European Union is the prospect of stability and prosperity in a 
unified Europe. Soon after the Iron Curtain was lifted in 1989, the former communist states, with their 
centrally-planned economies, had negotiated “Europe Agreements” with the European Union. Those 
partnerships  were  meant  to  foster  the  transition  process  towards,  first,  democracies,  and,  second, 
fully-fledged  market  economies.  Since  then,  a  lot  has  been  attained  in  terms  of  macroeconomic 
stability and prosperity. 
Two  weeks  ago,  the  European  Commission  issued  its  annual  progress  report  on  the  accession 
process. That report confirms the prospect of ten countries joining the EU as early as 2004:  
  the three Baltic nations: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania;  
five  central  and  eastern  European  countries:  Poland,  Hungary,  the  Czech  Republic,  the 
Slovak Republic and Slovenia;  
and the two Mediterranean islands of Cyprus and Malta.  

The process of accession is organized in three stages. We are currently in the pre-accession stage. 
The  next  step  will  be  that  of  accession  to  the  EU,  and  the  final  stage  might  be  full  participation  in 
European Monetary Union. 
Accession  to  the  European  Union  is  conditional  on  the  fulfillment  of  the  so-called  "Copenhagen 
criteria". These comprise, 
First, "the stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human rights, and 
respect  for,  and  the  protection  of,  minorities".  This  political  criterion  is  already  met  by  all 
negotiating countries. 
BIS Review 98/2001 
 7
 Second, “the existence of a functioning market economy as well as the capacity to cope with 
competitive  pressures  and  market  forces  within  the  EU”.  All  of  the  countries  envisaging 
accession  in  2004  are  functioning  market  economies.  The  EU  Commission,  in  its  recent 
report, also expects them to be able to cope with competitive pressures and market forces 
within the EU in the near term. 
And, third, "the ability to accept the obligations of membership, including adherence to the 
aims of political unification, as well as Economic and Monetary Union". The EU Commission 
recognizes  substantial  progress, 
the  adoption, 
implementation  and  enforcement  of  the  "acquis  communautaire"  –  the  Community’s 
legislation.  
in  candidate  countries, 
towards 
The Copenhagen criteria define the common ground for the future EU.  
Accession to European Monetary Union is conditional on "a high degree of sustainable convergence" 
(Art. 121 of the Treaty), as specified in the Maastricht criteria. They stipulate nominal convergence in 
terms  of  inflation  rates,  sound  public  finances,  long-term  interest  rates  and  exchange-rate  stability. 
Candidate countries can join EMU two years after their EU accession, at the earliest, as they have to 
spend at least two years in the European Exchange-Rate Mechanism ERM II.  
There  are  still  considerable  discrepancies  between  the  candidate  countries  and  the  present  EU 
member  states  in  their  macroeconomic  and  structural  data.  Accession  of  the  twelve  candidate 
countries  will  increase  the  EU  population  by  roughly  one-third.  Nominal  GDP,  however,  will  rise  by 
only five percent.  
The  discrepancies  today  are  more  pronounced  than  they  were  in  the  previous  three  rounds  of 
enlargement.  The  wealth  gap  between  the  current  member  states  and  the  accession  candidates  is 
large. Per capita GDP (measured in terms of purchasing-power parity) is only  44 percent of the EU 
average.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  striking  degree  of  heterogeneity  among  the  candidate  countries 
themselves. Per capita GDP measured against the EU average ranges from 24 percent (Bulgaria) to 
83 percent (Cyprus). 
For convergence to be sustainable, it must be based on advanced economic and financial integration. 
The integration of the candidate countries with the EU runs deep. The EU is by far the most important 
trading  partner  of  the  accession  candidates.  Around  two-thirds  of  their  exports  are  destined  for  the 
15 EU member states. In addition, two-thirds of capital inflows in the accession candidates during the 
nineties originated from the European Union. Real and structural convergence increase with ongoing 
economic and financial integration.  
Ladies and gentlemen, EU enlargement is in fact a challenge. A lot of political work is yet to be done. 
Not only by the candidate countries, but also by the current EU, which has to reshape its institutions to 
be able to cope with the enlarged membership – probably 25 states in only two years time.  
XII 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
A  stable  and  strong  euro  will  serve  as  a  catalyst  of  the  ongoing  process  of  European  integration  
– among the present member states and the accession candidates alike. Euro banknotes and coins 
– to be put into circulation in less than five weeks – will soon become the most obvious symbol of a 
unified Europe. Political integration should receive a boost then, too.  
“The euro changes Europe and the world”. Yes, so it does. And it is a change for the better. A Europe 
united by a common currency implies that the world's second-largest economic entity is a stronghold 
of  stability.  I am  sure  that  a  stable  currency  will  strengthen  the  foundations  of  an  orderly  world 
economy and of productive global competition. And, I am sure, that Japan as  a major player  in the 
world economy will benefit as well.  
8 
 BIS Review 98/2001
