 Guy Quaden: Central banking in an evolving environment 
Speech  by  Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the  23rd  SUERF 
Colloquium, Brussels, 27 October 2001. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am particularly pleased to speak before this eminent forum and to have the opportunity of addressing 
the topic "Technology and Finance" from a central banker's point of view.  
Technology  and  the  challenges  it  raises  for  financial  markets  is  a  most  appropriate  theme  for  this 
Colloquium.  On  the  one  hand,  technology  is  closely  intertwined  with  the  evolution  of  many  other 
factors affecting financial markets and, so, allows coverage of a wide range of issues. On the other 
hand, it has farreaching consequences for all market participants, and this certainly includes central 
banks. In a first part I propose to briefly recall how technology has impacted on our macroeconomic 
and regulatory  environment. In the next two parts I  would  like to sketch the main consequences of 
these developments on what my colleagues at the Bank of England have described as the two wings 
of central banking, i.e. monetary and financial stability. 
  Technology is a powerful factor of change in our macroeconomic environment. So, a few years ago, 
our colleagues of the Federal Reserve had to recognize that something new was happening in the US 
economy: a persistent higher growth and lower unemployment without the emergence of inflationary 
strains.  This  was  related,  at  least  partly,  to  the  revolution  in  the  Information  and  Communication 
Technologies, which increased productivity growth and fostered efficiency in the labour market too. A 
third feature of the so-called New Economy, the reduction in the variability of output growth, obviously 
proved to  be short-lived! But a  wave  of over-pessimism should not submerge the previous  wave  of 
over-optimism.  The  question  whether  the  American  economy  is  still  on  a  higher  trend  productivity 
growth  path  remains  open,  as  well  as  what  the  prospects  for  the  European  economy  are  in  this 
respect. Europe will benefit from a specific driving force, the completion of the single market with the 
new  single  currency,  which  should  trigger  further  structural  reforms  and  hence  foster  innovative 
energies. 
Technology also radically transformed the financial sector, which by the way greatly contributed to the 
new technological wave by financing it. INew techniques in the treatment, the storage and the transfer 
of information exerted profound effects on a sector which is largely an information based industry.  
In a first stage, Information Technologies made it possible to develop more sophisticated products, to 
build  up  a  better  market  infrastructure,  to  implement  more  accurate  and  reliable  techniques  for  the 
control  of  risks,  to  reach  more  distant  and  diversified  markets,  and  to  multiply  the  value  and  the 
volume  of  operations.  In  short,  new  technology  has  radically  transformed  all  three  major  functions 
performed by banks, i.e. access to liquidity, transformation of assets and monitoring of risks. 
A  new  phase  is  presently  at  work  with  the  emergence  of  e-money,  e-banking  and  e-finance.  It  is 
clearly this new development which will represent the great challenge of the coming years. The speed 
of adoption of these new products remains difficult to forecast. Contrary to the preceding phase, this 
new  wave  is  not  limited  to  professional  operators  but  involves  all  customers,  including  the  retail 
market. Many of the scenarios suggested by IT firms or consulting groups have proved to be overly 
optimistic.  At  the  same  time,  it  would  be  wrong  to  become  complacent.  Most  new  technology  is 
spreading following an S-shaped curve. The base section of the S can be quite long and practically 
horizontal; however, it will sooner or later be succeeded by a steep section. The example of Nordic 
countries,  and  more  specifically  Finland,  shows  how  quickly  e-finance  can  develop,  once 
circumstances are ripe.  
It is important to emphasize that the integration of new technology into the financial sector did not take 
place  in  isolation.  Rather,  it  is  the  interaction  of  technology  with  another  major  development, 
deregulation, that contributed to reshaping the financial landscape. True, the pressure of the market to 
fully  exploit  the  new  technologies  was  strong,  probably  even  irresistible.  However  a  receptive 
BIS Review 96/2001 
 1
 environment had  also  been created by a lifting of the rather strict financial and banking regulations 
which were still prevalent at the end of the seventies.  
The increased awareness of the wide-ranging possibilities offered by new technologies illustrated that 
a  lot  could  be  gained  through  the  removal  of  distortions  in  competition,  directly  linked  to  excessive 
regulation or intrusion from the Government. 
In combination, these two evolutions contributed to the emergence of a more open, competitive and 
globalised financial market, which obviously improves efficiency in the world economy. The transition, 
however, has not been a smooth one. It was not easy for the authorities who had to cope with the 
more frequent arbitrages operated by market participants between the various currencies and financial 
instruments or even between different legal, regulatory or tax regimes. Neither was it easy for financial 
intermediaries that had to work in a much more competitive environment where traditional protection 
and  barriers  to  entry  were  progressively  lifted.  In  short,  the  shift  toward  a  more  liberalised  system 
together  with the quick expansion of new products and markets has greatly increased uncertainties 
and risks for financial sectors. 
This was not immediately recognised by many market participants who had previously been sheltered 
by the existing regulation. As a result, individual bank failures and banking crises, quasi non-existent 
between the end of the forties and the early seventies, became all too frequent during the past two 
decades. In this context, the absence of significant problems within the Belgian banking sector during 
the recent period must be considered more an exception than a rule. 
Despite deregulation there is still a major role to be played by public authorities, among others in the 
field  of  competition  rules,  consumer  protection,  fight  against  money  laundering...  and,  of  course, 
central  banking.  Central  banks  indeed  have  to  provide  stability,  which  certainly  does  not  mean  "no 
change" but, on the contrary, building the best foundations for a sustainable dynamism. In doing so, 
central banks will cope with the evolving environment shaped by technical progress, by deregulation 
and globalisation and, last but not least in Europe, by the single currency. 
  As regards the first wing of central banking, monetary stability, central banks have to provide a durable 
anchor  in  order  for  the  price  system  to  appropriately  guide  economic  decisions.  A  stable  value  of 
money is all the more necessary for preserving the information value of relative prices in a changing 
world, where decisions have to be taken rapidly. Maintaining price stability is the primary objective of 
monetary policy, not only for the Eurosystem - according to the Treaty of Maastricht- but also for every 
central bank. 
Nowadays  the  only  regulations  central  banks  rely  on  in  designing  the  operational  framework  of 
monetary policy are the monopoly of banknote issuance and reserve requirements. The Eurosystem 
fully  respects  the  principle  of  an  open  market  economy  with  free  competition,  as  enshrined  in  the 
Treaty.  Its  main  instrument  is  the  weekly  allotment  of  credit  by  euro  area-wide  tenders.  Minimum 
reserves, which are remunerated, have a stabilisation function, thanks to an averaging provision, and 
are enlarging the structural liquidity shortage of the money market. 
As the development of e-money is liable to weaken the leverage of the Eurosystem and in order to 
provide for a level playing field, e-money issuers should not escape reserve requirements. A European 
directive of last  year rightly  broadens the definition of credit institutions in order to include e-money 
institutions. 
Technological  change  and  financial  market  developments  do  not  only  affect  monetary  policy 
instruments  but  also  the  whole  transmission  process  and  consequently  the  strategy  of  monetary 
policy. In this complex and changing world the Eurosystem was right in rejecting any simple rule and 
adopting an all-encompassing two-pillar strategy. Central bankers have to continuously reassess the 
information content of many economic indicators. Let me pick out some of them - output, money, stock 
prices  and  bond  market  indicators  -  not  because  other  variables,  like  wage  developments  and  the 
fiscal policy stance, are less important, but because the former are most affected by technological and 
financial market changes. 
Central  bankers,  even  in  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  are  not  insensitive  to  growth  and 
employment prospects, as some critics argue. But they are well aware of two limitations: firstly, growth 
should  not  be  stimulated  to  the  detriment  of  price  stability,  because  such  a  stimulus  would  be 
short-lived and would imply longer-term costs; secondly, as "à la plus belle fille du monde on ne peut 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2001
 demander que ce qu'elle  a", monetary  policy may exert some influence on the demand side of the 
economy  but  cannot  solve  structural  problems,  like  persistent  unemployment.  Central  banks  may 
nevertheless  contribute  to  output  stabilisation,  as  far  as  the  risks  to  price  stability  are  linked  to  the 
business cycle. 
A  central  concept  in  this  respect  is  the  output  gap,  but  its  measurement,  especially  in  real  time,  is 
surrounded with a large degree of uncertainty. Potential output growth, which is an ingredient of both 
pillars  of  the  Eurosystem's  strategy,  is  not  known  with  precision.  Should  the  New  Economy 
materialise, higher rates of growth could become sustainable. In the absence of any firm evidence of a 
New Economy in the euro area - although some driving forces are to some extent in place - and since 
the emergence of a New Economy is not driven by monetary policy, the Eurosystem did not take the 
risk of pre-emptively accommodating it. Nevertheless it monitors a wide range of indicators in order to 
periodically reassess the "speed limit" of the euro area economy.  
Needless to say, in the present circumstances growth is unfortunately even below the Old Economy 
speed limit, and the associated decrease in inflationary pressures has already prompted a 100 basis 
points interest rate cut in three steps since the spring.  
The first pillar of the strategy of the ECB gives a prominent role to money. It is based on the conviction 
that inflation is a monetary phenomenon in the long run and underlines the medium-term orientation of 
monetary policy and the inheritance in this respect from the Deutsche Bundesbank. Recognising that 
the demand for money can be subject to short-term fluctuations which are harmless for price stability, 
the ECB has not announced an "intermediate objective" but rather a "reference value" for the growth 
of a broad monetary aggregate. The recent rise in M3 growth is up to now interpreted as being such a 
short-term fluctuation, caused by the relatively flat yield curve and the weakness in stock markets. 
Technology  and  financial  market  changes  obviously  affect  the  first  pillar.  They  might  increase  the 
volatility  of  the  income  velocity  of  monetary  aggregates  and,  as  they  are  blurring  the  frontiers  of 
"moneyness", they complicate the definition of key aggregates. To paraphrase a former Governor of 
the  Bank  of  Canada  speaking  about  M1  twenty  years  ago,  I  would  say  that  while  the  ECB  is  not 
planning  to  abandon  M3,  I  cannot  rule  out  that,  some  day,  M3  could  abandon  us,  but  you  already 
noticed that the first pillar is much more than the reference value. It encompasses a broad monetary 
analysis which will duly take into account such developments. 
The first pillar also rests on the fact that credit institutions remain major players in the transmission 
process of monetary policy. The development of euro area capital markets could however increase the 
weight of financial market indicators in the second pillar. 
The stock market is still a much less important channel of transmission in the euro area than in the 
US, but the holding of shares is spreading, for example through mutual funds. I would not attempt to 
summarise the vast debate about the appropriate monetary policy reaction to asset price movements. 
I  am  inclined  to  say  that  central  banks  have  not  to  put  on  these  variables  more  emphasis  than 
warranted by their effects on demand and should avoid asymmetric reactions - benign neglect in the 
case  of  irrational  exuberance,  intervention  in  the  case  of  sharp  downward  correction -  which  could 
pose a moral hazard problem. 
The bond market provides indicators which are probably more important within the second pillar of the 
Eurosystem's  monetary  policy.  Technical  progress  and  European 
to  more 
sophisticated  and  liquid  markets  which  supply  useful  information  about  market  expectations. 
Incidentally I notice that, while many central banks looked disapprovingly on indexed bonds prior to 
monetary  union,  the  Eurosystem  now  welcomes  the  opportunity  to  extract  information  on  inflation 
expectations  from  the  comparison  of  yields  on  indexed  and  nominal  bonds.  Despite  the  upsurge  in 
inflation in the euro area resulting from oil price and food price shocks, inflation expectations appear to 
remain very moderate, showing that the Eurosystem benefits from a high degree of credibility. Such a 
capital of credibility has to be preserved. 
integration 
lead 
  About the second wing of central banking, the safeguarding of financial stability, I would like to adopt a 
chronological  approach.  First,  how  are  central  banks  currently  adapting  to  the  new  environment  by 
reconsidering the role  they are  playing in the financial market? Second, how could new technology 
affect  the  relations  in  the  coming  years  between  market  participants,  central  banks  and  other 
supervisory and regulatory authorities? 
BIS Review 96/2001 
 3
 Financial  market  developments  and  the  heightened  risks  associated  with  these  rapid  changes  led 
central banks to reconsider the role they had to play to preserve financial stability. For those central 
banks  that  were  in  charge  of  the  surveillance  of  individual  credit  institutions,  the  implications  were 
straightforward.  They  had  to  adapt  the  modalities  of  their  micro-prudential  activities.  However,  the 
need to proceed to macro-prudential monitoring was also strongly felt by central banks, like the NBB, 
which were not vested with the micro supervision. 
First, at an analytical level, central banks were induced to enlarge the scope of their research. The use 
of  new  technologies  has  caused  a  spectacular  expansion  in  the  volume  of  financial  operations, 
certainly in comparison to the growth of real activities. This has required reconsidering the direction of 
the links between these two fields. Central banks had traditionally focused on the consequences that 
changes in financial conditions could have on the real economy. If such analyses remain essential, 
central  banks  are  also  increasingly  concerned  by  the  vulnerability  of  the  financial  system  to 
fluctuations in real activities. So, the causalities also have to be reversed and due attention must be 
given  to  the  impact  that  evolution  of  the  real  economy  could  have  on  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system.  It  is  no  coincidence  that  an  increasing  number  of  central  banks  now  complement  their 
traditional annual reports centred on monetary policy and macro-economic developments by another 
report focused on the theme of financial stability. This is a development that the NBB will also actively 
embrace through the publication, possibly starting in 2002, of a new yearly Financial Stability Report. 
At  a  more  operational  level,  central  banks  contribute  directly  to  strengthening  the  stability  of  the 
financial system by the development of secure and efficient payment and settlement systems. Here 
also  new  technology  is  playing  a  crucial  role.  Real  time  gross  settlement  systems,  delivery  versus 
payment mechanisms, cross-border connections between  various clearing or settlement institutions, 
instant world transmission of information would be in practice unmanageable without the possibilities 
offered  by  IT  technologies.  These  multiple  layers  of  networks  are  too  often  considered  as  mere 
plumbing. However, this so-called plumbing is in many respects as spectacular and sophisticated as 
the more glamorous Internet or mobile phone networks. 
The oversight of these modern payment and settlement systems has become a key function in modern 
central banking and this certainly  applies to the NBB, as Belgium is hosting two major international 
institutions, SWIFT and Euroclear. 
The  second  step  in  our  chronological  approach  is  also  the  most  uncertain  as  it  implies  speculating 
about the impact of new technology on the future organisation of financial markets. 
It must be recalled from the outset that the introduction of new technology in the banking sector is not 
a one shot phenomenon. On the contrary, it is proceeding by waves. As already said, the development 
of e-money, e-banking and e-finance will represent a great challenge.  
Whatever  its  speed,  this  new  wave  will  strongly  modify  the  nature  of  relations  between  market 
participants.  Distant  access  to  financial  products  is  substituting  for  close  individual  contacts.  Brand 
loyalty, while still a key asset in a business built on trust, is increasingly associated with cherry picking. 
Banks themselves tend to shift from an approach based on long term and stable relations to a strategy 
where each deal is individually appreciated on its own merits. 
The  various  financial  institutions  are  also  redefining  what  should  be  their  core  business.  The 
technological wave of the eighties and early nineties allowed the unbundling of most financial products 
into their various components. To the unbundling of products is now associated, thanks to the second 
wave of innovation, an outsourcing of the production but also of the distribution process. Back office 
functions, distribution networks and IT infrastructures can now easily be subcontracted, creating a new 
web of connections between various categories of market participants.  
There are also important changes in the relations between monetary and prudential authorities, on the 
one hand, and financial institutions on the other. First the authorities will have to rely, much more than 
in the past, on the markets themselves for the surveillance of financial stability. One may legitimately 
feel  concerned  by  such  an  evolution,  which  sounds  like  asking  the  fox  to  watch  over  the  hens. 
However we must realise that financial markets are not only a major factor of change, they are also 
potentially a  powerful factor of discipline. They are forcing credit institutions to  be more transparent 
and  to  communicate  more  reliable  information.  The  development  of  new,  more  sophisticated,  risk 
management techniques, under the form of internal models, has been, at its roots, a private initiative 
from  market  participants.  In  order  to  integrate  this  modeling  approach  in  the  monitoring  of  banks 
solvency, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision is not designing a new system from scratch. 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2001
 On the contrary, it is referring to the best practices of the market itself as a benchmark against which 
to calibrate its own proposals. 
Now, the authorities should not delude themselves. Best practices are what they are, easier to respect 
by strong institutions and in favourable circumstances, but much harder to maintain when the situation 
deteriorates. Far from being lightened, the burden of prudential authorities is becoming heavier. The 
necessarily limited human and financial resources of these authorities will be called upon all the more 
by the new Basle proposals which will require a more individualised and detailed surveillance of these 
new internal risk management systems. 
The resource constraint will finally also strongly determine the relations that the various monetary and 
supervisory authorities  will have to maintain  among themselves. A more globalised financial market 
calls for a more globalised approach to supervision. 
At the international level, several co-operative bodies and mechanisms have been established, either 
in the form of multilateral forums bringing together the competent authorities in the fields of prudential 
control and financial stability, or by means of bilateral protocols concluded between the supervisory 
bodies of different countries or sectors. 
At  each  national  level,  the  authorities  also  have  to  carry  out  an  in-depth  examination  of  their 
supervisory  structure  and  procedures.  I  will  not  dwell  here  on  the  subject  of  the  devolution  of 
prudential tasks. Different models exist across the world bearing witness to the trade-offs which have 
to be made to adapt to market trends while also taking account of the specific national context.  
Finally,  this  existing  national  and  international  framework  needs  to  be  periodically  reviewed  and 
adjusted. Whatever its form, the prevailing structure will  have  to fulfil two major conditions. On one 
hand, it must be efficient  in preventing either loopholes or redundancy  in supervision. On the other 
hand, it must be all encompassing by combining the microprudential control of individual institutions 
with macroprudential monitoring of the systemic risks faced by the global financial market.  
  To conclude, let me stress that central banks are fully  aware of the close connection and the large 
convergence  existing  between  the  two  goals  of  financial  stability  and  monetary  stability.  Keeping 
inflation under control, which is the ultimate goal of every central bank, has proved to be the best way 
to  reduce  uncertainties  on  the  market,  to  alleviate  distortions  and,  so,  to  eliminate  one  of  the 
fundamental sources of financial instability. 
Conversely, central banks need sound and efficient banking systems for ensuring rapid transmission, 
to the whole economy, of the impulses of their monetary policy. This is all the more important given 
that  the  assets  at  the  disposal  of  central  banks  -  the  monetary  base  in  our  jargon-  is  becoming 
increasingly  tiny  compared  to  the  total  assets  managed  by  credit  institutions  and,  beyond  that,  by 
financial market operators. 
In this context, the monitoring of financial stability may certainly not be considered as a by-product or a 
mere extension of the traditional monetary stability objective of central banks. The two functions are 
closely related but distinct. In other words, the monetary stability and financial stability wings belong to 
the same bird. 
BIS Review 96/2001 
 5
