 Klaus Liebscher: The Euro area - an anchor of stability in Europe and the world 
Luncheon  speech  by  Mr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  at  the 
East-West-Conference, Wien, 6 November 2001. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am glad to have this opportunity to personally thank you all for your participation and all speakers for 
their  active  involvement  in  this  year’s  East-West  Conference,  which  centers  on  topics  that  are  of 
long-term relevance for Eastern, Central and Western European countries, of relevance to the growing 
integration and historic reunification of our continent, but certainly also of relevance outside Europe. It 
is a pleasure for the Oesterreichische Nationalbank to continue the long tradition of offering our annual 
East-West Conferences as a platform and a meeting place for debates  on  issues relevant to those 
countries – but not only to them – in order to help developing answers to the challenges ahead. 
Since the very inception of transition, the Oesterreichische Nationalbank has had the opportunity to be 
an  active  partner  for  central  banks  in  transition  countries.  At  the  same  time,  the  Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank has been actively participating in another historic project, the realization of the European 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and the introduction of the euro. The establishment of the euro 
as  the  single  currency  in  12  sovereign  countries  of  the  European  Union  was  certainly  not  a  purely 
economic move, but rather another major step in the process of European integration that began more 
than half a century ago.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The strong rise of commodity prices, in particular of the oil price, in 1999 and 2000, recent economic 
turbulences in some emerging markets and the tragic events of September 11 have not compromised 
stability in the euro area. On the contrary, and I would like to stress this especially, EMU, among other 
factors, contributed to avoiding possible exchange rate or financial tensions in Europe. 
However, the terrorist attacks on the U.S. have further dampened global economic activity in 2001 and 
will postpone an economic rebound at least for one or two quarters in 2002.  
Apart from the irreplaceable human loss, the direct effect of the terrorist attacks on the overall U.S. 
economy is likely to be limited. However, the indirect effects on private consumption, investment and 
savings  could  be  more  significant  as  confidence  of  consumers  and  business  has  already  stated  to 
fade.  Due  to  increased  uncertainty,  investors  have  become  more  risk-averse.  But  policy  makers 
reacted quickly. Central banks around the world, including the Eurosystem, acted swiftly by providing 
ample  liquidity  to  financial  institutions  and  lowering  key  interest  rates  decisively.  This  adjustment of 
interest rates came on top of earlier significant rate cuts. The Governing Council of the ECB has also 
lowered its key interest rate by 100 basispoints from 4 ¾ to 3 ¾ % since May 2001. Moreover, the 
United  States  and  the  euro  area  have  grown  increasingly  resilient  to  shocks  over  the  past  decade. 
Structural  reforms  aiming  at  efficient  and  flexible  product  and  labor  markets,  deregulated  financial 
markets  and  improved  public  finances  have  enhanced  the  ability  of  our  economies  to  cope  with 
adverse shocks.  
Thus  I  am  confident  that  the  world  economy,  after  a  temporary  slowdown,  will  return  to  healthier 
growth rates in the course of 2002. In this assessment, the single currency plays a pivotal role, since 
the euro has established itself as a stable anchor not only for the European, but also for the global 
economy.  
Among the benefits already being reaped from EMU are the following:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
a stable currency based on price stability throughout the euro area and 
a stable factor in the international financial system,  
a huge domestic market with 300 million inhabitants (with high purchasing power),  
deeper and further integrated European financial markets,  
lower transaction costs for intra-European trade, tourism and investment and, last, but not 
least,  
BIS Review 91/2001 
 1
  cross-border price transparency and increased competition.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
These benefits are assured by a number of stability safeguards: The Eurosystem follows a monetary 
strategy whose  primary objective is to maintain price stability over the medium term. Price stability is 
defined as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonized Consumer Price Index (HCPI) for the euro area 
of below 2 %. Currently, the euro area’s inflation rate is somewhat above our definition of price stability 
(2.4 % October). This is mainly due to temporary supply shocks, among them the increase of oil prices 
until the end of 2000 and livestock diseases. But the latest forecasts confirm that inflation will most 
likely fall below 2 % in the first half of 2002. Still, at the present moment it is too early to conclude that 
the risks of inflation have been banished. But there is no doubt that these risks have been diminished 
due to the economic slowdown and weaker pressures from the demand side. 
Another stability safeguard are fiscal policies in the euro area that have become better coordinated in 
recent  years.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  obliges  participating  EU  Member  States  to  achieve 
budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus in a sustainable manner, in order to minimize the 
risk of breaching the budget deficit criterion of 3 % of GDP, according to the Treaty of Maastricht, in 
the  course  of  a  business  cycle.  Sound  budgetary  positions  not  only  create  enough  leeway  for 
automatic  stabilizers  to  take  full  effect  in  economic  slumps,  they  also  contribute  to  reducing  the 
debt-to-GDP  ratio  and  consequently  the  interest  burden  for  governments,  increase  investors‘ 
confidence  in  the  euro  area,  keep  interest  rates  lower  than  they  would  otherwise  be  and,  as  a 
consequence,  lead  to  a  crowding-in  of  private  investment.  Thus,  the  current  economic  slowdown 
should not distract governments from the successful consolidation process we have witnessed so far. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Perseverance  in  structural  reforms  of  product,  capital  and  labor  markets  constitute  an  important 
foundation  for  vibrant  and  strong  euro  area  economies,  underpinning  the  euro  as  an  anchor  of 
stability.  Product  markets  in  the  European  Union  have  already  undergone  sizable  improvements, 
though we should not underestimate how important it is to fully implement internal market legislation 
and,  for  example,  further  reduce  state  aid.  In  concert  with  independent  and  powerful  competition 
authorities,  these  types  of  measures  would  not  only  help  make  economies  more  efficient  and 
competitive,  but  would  also  play  their  part  in  ensuring  price  stability.  In  addition,  it  is  of  utmost 
importance  that  the  EU  continues  to  be  committed  to  trade  liberalization  and  that  we  support  the 
opening of a new trade round within the WTO.  
Moreover,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  accelerated  structural  reforms  in  the  European  financial 
markets. Apart from making financial markets less fragmented and more competitive, it is important 
that these developments lead to an efficient and stable financial system. The recent tragic events in 
the United States have shown how quickly financial markets can come under severe stress – and that 
sound and well supervised markets, with the backing of liquidity provided by central banks, can cope 
even with such dreadful events. 
As  regards  labor  markets  in  the  euro  area,  continuing  high  structural  unemployment  and  low 
participation rates in many member countries are a cause for concern. Obviously  the functioning of 
labor  markets  needs  to  be  improved  to  allow  higher  employment.  Wage  settlements  in  line  with 
productivity  developments  appear  crucial  for  the  attainment  of  a  sound  macroeconomic  policy  mix. 
The  social  partners  are  called  upon  to  continue  to  act  in  a  responsible  manner,  thereby  enhancing 
prospects for healthy growth and employment. 
If  the  just  mentioned  macroeconomic  and  structural  safeguards  are  adequately  kept  in  place  and 
reinforced, the euro area will remain an area of sustained stability.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Where  do  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  enter  this  picture?  I  am  convinced  that 
enlargement of the European Union and - in a later stage - of EMU will strengthen Central and Eastern 
European  countries‘  positions  and  further  enhance  the  importance  of  the  euro  as  an  anchor  of 
stability.  This  brings  me  to  the  topic  of  our  current  East-West  Conference  “Convergence  and 
Divergence in Europe” – a pivotal issue with regard to the afore-mentioned historic integration process 
in Europe. 
As we all know, nominal convergence of inflation rates, interest rates, budget deficit and debt levels 
among  initially  11,  later  12  Member  States  of  the  European  Union  have  ensured  the  launch  of 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2001
 Monetary Union and the introduction of the euro. This process has been accompanied by long-term 
movements toward real convergence also of income levels, i.e. poorer EU Member States have partly 
caught up in living standards with wealthier Member States. 
Yesterday, the first two Sessions of this conference dealt with various aspects related to the history of 
European  convergence  in  detail.  The  transition  process  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and 
preparations for EU accession are to a large degree about convergence in a very broad sense. The 
economic  systems  in  the  region  are  now  approaching  market  economy  standards;  macroeconomic 
policy-making is pursued along the same principles as in Western Europe; and institution building and 
human capital formation are proceeding.  
As we all realize, structural changes and modernization may often be very painful. On the other hand, 
privatization  is  largely  completed  in  most  countries  of  the  region  and  strong  flows  of  foreign  direct 
investment have contributed to impressive advances in productivity and competitiveness. 
Real  convergence  and  the  balance  of  real  and  nominal  convergence  have  been  the  topics  of  the 
afternoon Sessions. Challenges for monetary and exchange rate policy were dealt with. As you know, 
the  Eurosystem  proposes  a  three-step  approach  for  monetary  integration  of  accession  countries: 
Firstly, accession to the European Union, secondly, entrance into ERM II, and thirdly, joining the euro 
area and the Eurosystem.  
Inflation  continues  to  be  on  average  somewhat  higher  and  income-per-capita  levels  remain  much 
lower in most “transition economies” than in the present-day European Union. In my view, the pace of 
further  disinflation  in  accession  countries  should  be  determined  in  line  with  the  overall  economic 
situation, in particular with the need of countries to increase real convergence. The Maastricht inflation 
criterion should not be seen as an immediate requirement for the EU-entry, but rather as an objective 
of  central  banks  during  the  period  of  ERM  II  participation.  But  to  stick  to  it  and  it's  definition  as 
formulated in the Maastricht Treaty is a MUST. 
The Eurosystem’s policy position that nominal and real convergence should be pursued in parallel and 
that accession countries should strive to achieve price stability in the medium term is very sensible.  
Over the past few years, there has been significant diversity in the monetary policy and exchange rate 
strategies of accession countries. Over this period, the euro has become the main reference currency 
for most of these countries, including those operating managed floating regimes. In the pre-accession 
phase,  the  consistency  of  the  exchange  rate  strategy  with  other  macroeconomic  policies  and 
objectives will take precedence over the choice  whether to reduce existing exchange rate flexibility. 
However, a certain degree of exchange rate orientation toward the euro would be in line with further 
economic  and  financial  integration  and  would  also  be  consistent  with  the  prospect  of  ERM  II  entry. 
ERM II arrangements should not necessarily be seen as a „waiting room“ prior to the adoption of the 
euro, but as a flexible framework for the achievement of further convergence.  
In particular, real convergence can help promote both economic cohesion within EMU and integration 
between member states, thereby supporting efforts to minimize the risk and the effects of asymmetric 
shocks.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
This morning the discussions focused on the role of the financial sector. This sector is predestined to 
provide  a  key  contribution  to  speeding  up  real  convergence  in  accession  countries.  Significant 
progress has been made over the past years in rehabilitating banking sectors and encouraging foreign 
ownership.  The  latter  has  also  contributed  to  greater  microeconomic  integration  with  the  EU.  But 
financial sectors are still relatively small and some segments are underdeveloped. Creating conditions 
for  the  sound  expansion  of  the  intermediating  role  of  the  banking  sector  remains  fundamental  to 
promote the efficient use of capital and sustained growth. Progress in corporate governance and the 
enhancement  of  the  legal  frameworks  that  support  the  banking  sector  would  also  be  conducive  to 
achieving the macroeconomic objectives of the accession countries. 
Looking ahead to an enlarged European Union, it will be even more important in the future than today 
to keep up the momentum of existing convergence processes and to promote them further. Nominal 
as well as real convergence are key ingredients of regional and social cohesion and thus, stability, in 
our Union and the euro area. I am looking forward to the final session this afternoon, which will deal 
with some of these issues. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
BIS Review 91/2001 
 3
 We will not be immune to adverse shocks in the future. However, based on the stable architecture of 
EMU, I am confident that sound policies will continue to keep the euro area a robust shock absorber 
and the euro a stable anchor. Prudent accession and enlargement policies will enhance the position of 
the European Union and add to the importance of the euro worldwide, reinforcing it as a major and 
stable cornerstone of the international monetary system.  
This  will,  however,  require  perseverance  of  structural  reform  efforts  in  various  fields  within  the 
European  Union,  as  well  as  sound  convergence  strategies  and  policies  on  the  part  of  accession 
candidates. Together we provide our strategic response to rising global competition and our common 
contribution to global stability.   
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 91/2001
