Urban Bäckström: The Swedish economy 
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of 
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  to  the  Swedish  Shareholders’ 
Association, Örebro, 30 October 2001 
 First a word of thanks for the invitation to come to Örebro and discuss matters to do with the Swedish 
economy with you. 
It  is  now  a  fortnight  since  the  Riksbank  presented  this  year’s  third  Inflation  Report.  Some  more 
statistics  have  been  published  in  the  meanwhile  but  the  information  they  contain  does  not  point  to 
anything  particularly  new.  So  today  one  can  hardly  arrive  at  an  assessment  of  economic 
developments in Sweden one to two years ahead that differs all that much from the picture outlined in 
the Report. Those of you who want to know more about our assessment should consult the Riksbank’s 
website, www.riksbank.se. The whole Report can be downloaded, as can all the figures on which the 
tables and charts are based. 
The ”new economy” concept in Swedish media.
Diagram 1:
(Number of hits)
250
200
150
100
50
0
217
87
8
26
1998
1999
2000
2001 Jan.-
Oct.
Sources: Mediearkivet and Presstext.
 
There are, however, a couple of questions concerning the Swedish economy and the outlook in the 
somewhat longer term that I should like to dwell on here today. 
Diagram 2:
”The IT-bubble”
Affärsvärlden:
Affärsvärlden:
IT-index
IT-index
Nasdaq::
Nasdaq
Composite
Composite
Dow Jones:
Dow Jones:
Industrials
Industrials
97
98
99
00
01
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
800
700
600
500
x
e
d
n
I
400
300
200
100
0
96
 USA Dow Jones Industrial Average, close daily   [index 1996-01-02]
 USA Nasdaq Composite index, close daily   [index 1996-01-02]
Sources: Hanson & Partners AB.
BIS Review 90/2001 
 1
One  is  what  has  happened  to  the  discussion  about  the  “new  economy”.  Swedish  media  are 
mentioning  the  subject  less  and  less  (Diagram  1).  I  believe  that  mirrors  how  people’s  interest  in 
general has waned. And considering how rapidly and extensively prices have fallen for IT and telecom 
shares,  one  is  inclined  to  the  view  that  all  the  talk  about  the  third  industrial  revolution  was  really 
something of a dead end (Diagram 2). 
That  leads  on  to  my  other  question,  namely  the  part  that  technological  breakthroughs  play  for 
corporate profits and thereby for the return on equity. 
Where did the “new economy” go? 
Concerning my first question, perhaps it is not so surprising that we now hear less and less about the 
“new  economy”  than  we  did  last  year.  Share  prices  for  IT  and  telecom  companies  have  fallen 
markedly.  Many  people  have  lost  a  great  deal  on  their  investments.  We  hear  or  read  about 
redundancies and cutbacks in this sector almost daily. There have been a number of bankruptcies. It 
is  common  knowledge  that  the  going  is  rough  for  Sweden’s  telecom  giant,  Ericsson,  with 
repercussions for many suppliers. We also know that much the same is happening in other countries, 
not least the United States. 
In order  to put these developments into  perspective  and thereby make it easier to interpret  what is 
going on, I believe we should take a look at the past. That can also enable us to form a better picture 
of where we are going. Having done so, the only conclusion I can draw is that the troublesome times 
through which we are now passing are transient. Let me explain. 
Some say that the first computer was constructed around the mid 1940s. But the real breakthrough 
can  perhaps  be  dated  to  the  1970s,  when  it  suddenly  became  possible  to  produce  a  complete 
computer in the form of a tiny chip — a microprocessor. From approximately 2000 at the end of the 
1950s, the number of computers in  world  has grown to several hundred million today. At the same 
time, their data processing capacity and possibilities have increased by an estimated factor of as much 
as 4 billion, which works out at an annual increase of almost 60 per cent. 
Gordon Moore, one of the founders of Intel, noted some decades ago that thanks to advances in the 
production of semiconductors, the data capacity of a single chip could be doubled every 18 months. 
This  observation,  which  came  to  be  known  as  Moore’s  law,  still  holds.  In  other  words,  microchip 
capacity is being doubled every 18 months. What is perhaps even more relevant is that there does not 
seem to be any reason why Moore’s law should not continue to be valid a good way into the future. 
Computer manufacturers are accordingly achieving a rapid improvement in productivity that will last for 
a  good  time  to  come.  Provided  demand  for  computers  is  sufficiently  strong,  it  looks  as  though  the 
computer-producing sector will become successively larger and make a growing contribution to GDP, 
the indicator we use for a country’s total income. 
In  simple  terms  one  can  say  that  if  an  economic  sector  expands  rapidly  and  also  achieves  high 
productivity growth, it will generate an acceleration of the total economy’s average productivity growth. 
Put  differently,  the  expanding  sector  weighs  increasingly  heavily  in  the  measurement  of  total 
productivity, defined as GDP per hour worked, and all else equal, this raises average productivity. 
This is probably one explanation for the acceleration of productivity growth in the United States in the 
1990s, which gave rise to the concept of a “new economy”. In time, moreover, as computers and the 
new technology are introduced in various ways in other parts of the economy, productivity growth will 
also pick up there. So it is not just the production of computers that becomes more efficient; computer 
applications  in  other  fields  heighten  the  efficiency  of  processes  there  as  well.  The  effects  spread 
through the economy. 
It is another matter that things may not go quite as quickly and become as widespread as the greatest 
optimists foresaw just a year or so ago. People in Sweden do not suddenly stop going to shops just 
because websites make it possible to buy clothes, shoes, cars and food, for example, on the internet. 
Alternatives in the form of mail order firms, newspaper advertisements and the telephone have been 
available for many years, yet many people still prefer to do their shopping in the traditional way. But it 
does seem very probable that computers in various forms will render many production and purchasing 
processes increasingly efficient as time goes by. 
The effects of the new technology will occur in various parts of society. It is easy to think of a number 
of  uses.  And  as  the  innovations  become  cheaper  and  cheaper,  there  will  be  growing  incentives  to 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2001
apply them in many economic activities. The price of computers, for example, has fallen in the past 
four decades by around 20 per cent a year. In literal terms, that means that a computer which costs 
10,000 kronor today would have cost almost 50 million kronor in the early 1960s. So prices have fallen 
dramatically. 
Our own history clearly shows that the combination of major technical breakthroughs and a sizeable 
price  fall  can  lay  the  foundation  for  outstanding  economic  growth.  Few  innovations  played  such  a 
central part in Sweden’s industrialisation around the turn of the nineteenth century as electricity and 
techniques for using  it for propulsion. Swedish technicians and companies played a pioneering role 
here. 
In the early 1890s electricity was relatively expensive. Its cost per energy equivalent was considerably 
higher than power generated from coal. Little more than a decade later, however, the relative price 
had  fallen  50  per  cent.  This  paved  the  way  for  the  electrification  and  related  expansion  of  such 
industries  as  pulp,  paper,  mining  and  basic  chemicals. The  explosive  growth  of  pulp  manufacturing 
was intimately bond up with the harnessing of Norrland’s rivers for hydroelectric power, which pushed 
the  price  of  electricity  down  still  further.  In  connection  with  electrification,  trend  GDP  growth 
accelerated from approximately 2 per cent a year to between 3 and 4 per cent. Economic growth in 
Sweden reached one of the highest rates in the world. 
The leap forward that may result from the new computer and telecom technology cannot, of course, be 
compared directly with Sweden’s electrification and its economic effect. Many obstacles lie ahead. But 
an emerging technology clearly possesses an enormous potential. 
In the first decade of the twentieth century, however, the optimism over all that the new technology 
could achieve became rather excessive. The euphoria about the huge profits that could be reaped by 
using hydroelectric power and other forms of electricity to exploit such natural resources as ore and 
timber became more and  more exalted between 1905 and  1907. Prices for shares and real estate, 
which unlike the case today were pledged for bank loans, rose rapidly. When the economic downturn 
came in 1907 there was a troublesome financial crisis that hit many companies. 
The setback in 1907 in the economic transformation was not confined to Sweden. The United States 
experienced  similar  problems  for  much  the  same  reason:  excessive  optimism  about  what 
electrification could do in the short run. So there is nothing new about globalisation’s repercussions, 
which  are  usually  good  but  sometimes  not.  The  course  of  events  in  Sweden  in  the  early  twentieth 
century was influenced by  what was happening in other countries, both in the utilisation of the new 
technology and in generating an exaggerated euphoria around it. Yet it was perhaps just in that phase, 
around the turn of the nineteenth century, that Sweden laid the foundation for a long period of rapidly 
growing prosperity and a modernisation of the whole of society. 
But no two economic downturns or setbacks are the same. What we are now experiencing differs in 
many respects. The point I want to drive home by drawing parallels with what happened in the early 
twentieth century is that periods of “growing pains” have occurred before. Even if new technology has 
a large potential, the optimism it generates can be excessive for a time. That has happened before 
and it is happening now. But sooner or later, activity picks up again and creates new opportunities. 
That  is  why  I  am  also  fundamentally  optimistic  about  what  computer  and  telecom  technology  can 
achieve in time for our country’s economic growth and prosperity. 
Technological breakthroughs, corporate profits and share prices 
Now  let  me  consider  the  other  question,  namely  the  part  that  technological  breakthroughs  play  for 
corporate profits and thereby for share prices. 
In the latter part of 1999 and early in 2000 shares were a feverish topic in Sweden — everyone talked 
about them and how much you could make by speculating in the stock market. The media were full of 
articles  about “How  to find the  winners” and “How to become a  day-trader”.  Advisors at banks and 
stockbrokers waxed lyrical about share investment’s possibilities. Many people who had never owned 
a share or never even dreamed they would do so were tempted to speculate. Perhaps they needed a 
little extra money for the summer holiday, a new car or simply more cash for everyday things — why 
not make a little money easily and quickly, everyone  was doing it, to judge from what people  were 
telling each other at work and elsewhere. 
As though to confirm all this, share prices on the Stockholm bourse rose continuously to new all-time 
highs, as they did on many stock markets around the world. Shares did best for companies that were 
BIS Review 90/2001 
 3
running at a loss and even needed to issue new shares to cover current operations. This, after all, was 
the new economy and massive profits were apparently waiting round the corner. Yes, that was almost 
the case, wasn’t it? 
An argument that was frequently put forward when share prices broke new records was that the “new 
economy” would lead to higher profit growth. Today we know that that has not been the case so far. 
The share price rise left many companies notably over-valued. 
Then what always happens happened. A bubble is bound to burst, sooner or later. From the high, the 
Swedish stock market in general has fallen by around 50 per cent, IT shares by almost 90 per cent 
and telecom shares about 75 per cent. In a historical perspective these are dramatic figures. Such a 
large average fall has not occurred since the major corrections in the early 1920s and 1930s. 
But  it  is  not  only  on  the  Stockholm  exchange  that  share  prices  have  fallen  so  markedly.  Much  the 
same  has  happened  in  other  countries,  not  least  on  New  York’s  technology-oriented  Nasdaq 
exchange. 
Now let us take a slightly closer look at corporate profits in connection with earlier shifts in technology. 
A strong expected increase in corporate profits is bound to be mirrored in expectations for the total 
economy. A country’s GDP represents the aggregate incomes that are earned in the course of a year. 
The  national  accounts  show  the  shares  of  total  income  that  go  to  owners  of  capital  and  to  wage-
earners,  respectively.  Capital  incomes  are  the  compensation  paid  to  owners  of,  for  example, 
machinery and inventories, commercial real estate, residential property and land. As a large part of 
this capital is owned by firms, it follows that an expected increase in corporate profits must lead to 
higher growth of either total GDP or of the GDP share that consists of capital income. 
Experience shows, however, that in the long term the profit share is fairly constant at around one-third 
of GDP; the remainder, approximately two-thirds, consists of wages. The stable long-term relationship 
between these shares accordingly means that the trend rate of increase in corporate profits roughly 
matches GDP growth. Historically, therefore, the increase in corporate profits should lie between 2 and 
3 per cent. The historical statistics on the profits of Swedish listed companies are rather inadequate 
but a look at the American companies in the S&P 500 index shows that their long-term profit growth 
does not quite come up to the trend for GDP (Diagram 3). There have been periods, however, when 
profit growth was above this trend; the profit share was then probably higher in the total economy but 
sooner or later it fell back to the long-term trend. 
United States: real profits (S&P 500)
Diagram 3:
1 00
10
Trend 1.5% per year
1
1 87 0 18 80 18 90 1 90 0 1 91 0 1920 19 30 1940 1 95 0 1 96 0 19 70 19 80 1 99 0 2 00 0
Source: Shiller.
 
The profits of listed companies can, of course, rise comparatively rapidly in the short run. If the profit 
share moves up from, say, 30 to 35 per cent, this implies a temporary increase in profits of 15 to 20 
per cent, spread over the years when the profit share is elevated. Such a temporary increase in the 
profit share  has not been  uncommon in connection  with  technological breakthroughs.  It occurred  in 
Sweden in the 1990s and also early in the twentieth century in the era of electrification. 
 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2001
The profit share followed a rising path up to the end of the 1910s and this was accompanied by higher 
GDP growth (Diagram 4). It is perhaps hardly surprising that this led many shareholders to believe that 
profit growth would continue to exceed the historical trend in the longer run. That did not happen. An 
elevated profit share tends to fall back sooner or later and corporate profits then return to their long-
term path. Neither do I believe that in connection with the ongoing technological breakthrough we can 
look  forward  to  corporate  profit  growth  being  essentially  higher  than  what  would  follow  from  an 
increase  in  GDP’s  potential  growth.  And  even  then  it  would  probably  not  be  a  matter  several 
percentage points. But smaller figures than that are still sufficient to generate a major improvement in 
a country’s prosperity after one or  two decades. The acceleration  of Sweden’s  annual GDP growth 
from 2 per cent around the turn of the nineteenth century to between 3 and 4 per cent for a couple of 
decades, was crucial for our economic development. 
Diagram 4:
Sweden: GDP and profits share
Average 3,2%
1 8 7 0
1 8 8 0
1 8 9 0
1 9 0 0
1 9 1 0
1 9 2 0
1 9 3 0
1 9 4 0
Average 32%
GDP
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
4 0
3 0
Profit share
2 0
1 0
0
1 8 7 0
1 8 8 0
1 8 9 0
1 9 0 0
1 9 1 0
1 9 2 0
1 9 3 0
1 9 4 0
Sources: Östen Johansson and Karl Jungenfelt.
 
Another  argument  in  the  same  direction  is  that  the  new  economy  refers  to  the  breakthrough  for 
computer and telecom technology. These innovations should make it easier to obtain information and, 
if  anything,  make  consumers  more  knowledgeable.  If  that  happens,  perhaps  such  factors  as  past 
reputations  and  brand  familiarity  will  have  less  influence  on  purchasing  decisions  in  the  future. 
Consumers may attach more importance instead to the inherent qualities of goods and services and to 
their  price  in  relation  to  these  qualities.  That  would  more  likely  lead  to  stronger  competition  and 
increased downward pressure on prices and profit margins. The new technology would then turn out to 
benefit consumers rather than shareholders. 
Diagram 5:
Real return on equity 1900-98
Trend 7% per year
1000
100
10
1
0,1
1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Sources: Frennberg & Hansson, Affärsvärlden and Riksbank calculations
BIS Review 90/2001 
 5
Returning to the comparison with the United States at the turn of the nineteenth century, we find that 
the  profits  of  electricity  producers  were  not  higher  than  normal.  The  increased  competition  pushed 
prices and profit margins down. 
All this means that there are many reasons for supposing that even in the future the long-term real 
annual return on equity will probably continue to be in the vicinity of the historical trend of around 7 per 
cent, though it is liable to vary. That has been the case in Sweden throughout the twentieth century 
(Diagram  5)  and  in  the  United  States  for  virtually  two  hundred  years.  Major  technological 
breakthroughs occurred in this period. This long historical perspective shows that over considerable 
periods the real return on equity has been fairly constant. 
 
Conclusion 
In conclusion it can be said that my argument basically points to a positive finding. The technological 
breakthrough,  based  on  the  microchip  and  the  computer,  that  together  with  the  new  information 
techniques has come to be known as the “new economy” is something that is very much alive and will 
leave its mark on many countries, including Sweden, for a long time to come. 
The  present  economic  downturn,  which  to  some  extent  is  a  hangover  after  excessively  optimistic 
expectations, will give way to another upswing. That will impart renewed vigour to the technological 
breakthrough that the global economy is experiencing. 
However, we do not know either just how deep the ongoing slowdown will be or just when it will bottom 
out. But it would be hard to argue that this will not happen. The underlying cyclical rhythm with upward 
and  downward  phases  in  economic  activity  has  always  been  there.  Economic history  also  contains 
periods of what I would call “growing pains”. Things do not always turn out as well as people often 
hope,  or  at  least  they  do  not  happen  as  quickly,  but  neither  are  they  ever  quite  as  bad  as  we 
sometimes fear. 
My conclusion about the technological breakthrough’s impact on corporate profits is maybe not quite 
as optimistic, at least for share investors. Roughly speaking, historical experience indicates that the 
true  winners  are  consumers,  not  shareholders.  That  conclusion  is  perhaps  even  more  valid  today 
since the breakthrough is very much a question of information. Better informed consumers tend to lead 
to stronger competition and depressed profit margins rather than the opposite. 
Even so, most things suggest that equity will continue to be a good vehicle for saving in the long term 
even if the trend rate of return is not as high as we saw in the 1980s and 1990s or as some foresaw a 
couple of years ago. 
References 
Bradford  DeLong,  J.  and  Summers,  L.,  (2001),  The  ”New  Economy”:  Background,  Questions,  and 
Speculations, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Economic Symposium, August, Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming.  
Brookes, M.  and Zaki, W., (2000), Is the Internet Better than Electricity?, Global  Economics Paper, 
No. 49, Goldman Sachs, July, London. 
D’Avolio,  G.,  Gildor,  E.  and  Shleifer,  A.,  (2001),  Technology,  Information,  Production  and  Market 
Efficiency,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City’s  Economic  Symposium,  August,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming. 
Frennberg, P. And Hansson, B., (1992), Swedish stocks, bonds, bills and inflation, Applied Financial 
Economics, Vol 2, pp79-86. 
Johansson,  Ö.,  (1967),  The  gross  domestic  product  of  Sweden  and  its  composition  1861-1955, 
Almqvist & Wiksell, Stockholm. 
Jungenfelt,  K.  G.,  (1966),  Löneandelen  och  den  ekonomiska  utvecklingen,  IUI,  Almqvist  &  Wiksell, 
Uppsala. 
Schön, L., (2000), En modern svensk ekonomisk historia, SNS förlag, Borås. 
6 
 BIS Review 90/2001
Shiller, R., (2000), Irrational exuberance, Princeton University Press, Chichester, West Sussex. 
Siegel, J., (1999), Stocks for the Long Run, McGraw Hill, New York. 
Åberg, Y., (1969), Produktion och produktivitet i Sverige 1861-1965,  IUI, Almqvist & Wiksell, Uppsala. 
BIS Review 90/2001 
 7
