 Guy Quaden: The monetary policy of the European Central Bank and the 
economic outlook in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium and Member of the Governing 
Council of the European Central Bank, at a conference in Ottawa, 30 November 2001. 
 For economists and financial markets, the euro has been reality since January 1st, 1999. The decisive 
steps were taken at that moment by irrevocably fixing parities between the different national currencies 
that continued to exist momentarily and the start of the single monetary policy conducted by the new 
European Central Bank. 
For the general public, however, in Europe and elsewhere, the euro will only be real when it will at last 
be tangible  in the form of notes  and coins. In little  over one month, on January  1st 2002,  the euro 
banknotes and coins will become part of the every day life of more than 300 million European citizens 
in 12 countries. And, after an unprecedented logistical operation, at the end of February at the latest, 
12 national currencies will have disappeared for good. At that moment, monetary union will have been 
achieved completely. 
 To my mind, the implementation of monetary union in Europe can be explained by a series of long 
term structural factors.  
First of all European integration is to a large extent a political process, having its roots in the two world 
wars that have devastated our continent in the first half of the 20th century. The Schuman Declaration 
of May 1950, which provided the basis for the European Coal and Steel Community, stated clearly that 
“solidarity in production  will make it plain that any  war between France  and Germany  becomes not 
merely unthinkable, but materially impossible”. 
Then came the deepening of economic and financial integration with the common market which has 
logically culminated into monetary union. 
Finally,  during  the  1990s,  a  large  consensus  was  reached  regarding  the  objectives  of  a  stability 
oriented  macroeconomic  policy  which  has  contributed  to  a  remarkable  convergence  towards  low 
inflation and limited public deficits, without which monetary union would not have been possible. 
 In the new monetary constitution of Europe, what we call the Eurosystem plays an essential role. It 
consists of the European Central Bank as such, that is situated in Frankfurt, and of the twelve national 
central banks of the countries that have introduced the euro. The Eurosystem is not to be confounded 
with the structure of any other central bank in the world, be they even of a federal nature. In the euro 
area, monetary policy decisions are centralised from now on, but their implementation remains to a 
large extent decentralised. 
The Governing Council of the European Central Bank is the supreme decision-making body. It meets 
every  fortnight  and  consists  of  the  six  permanent  members  of  the  Board  of  the  ECB  and  of  the 
governors  of  every  national  central  bank.  It  is  the  Governing  council  which  more  in  particular 
determines the level of official interest rates.  
In  practice,  decisions  are  taken  on  a  consensus  basis,  but  according  to  the  legal  provisions  they 
require a simple majority of votes. Each member has one vote: the vote of the governor of the National 
Bank of Belgium carries the same weight as the one of the president of the Bundesbank, the governor 
of the Central Bank of Luxembourg or the Governor  of the National Bank of Belgium. The principle 
‘one  person,  one  vote’  thus  reflects  the  fact  that  even  though  they  are  originally  from  different 
countries of the euro area, the members of the Governing Council act completely independently and 
not as representatives of their country. The Treaty specifically stipulates that they can neither ask for 
or  receive  instructions  from  their  government  or  from  anybody  else  and  that  they  must  take  their 
decisions solely on the basis of the interests of the euro area as a whole. 
BIS Review 99/2001 
 1
  In granting the  decision makers of the European Central  Bank a high degree  of independence, the 
Treaty of Maastricht- and I think these two things go together- has also assigned them a specific task: 
i.e. to guarantee price stability. Indeed, the Treaty clearly states that this is the primary objective of 
European monetary policy and that, without prejudice to this stability, monetary policy contributes to 
the other objectives of economic policy. 
In every country in the world the population is, I think, of the opinion that the first duty of the central 
bank  consists  in  maintaining  the  purchasing  power  of  the  currency  it  issues.  But  this  mandate  is 
particularly stringent for the euro area, as was the case previously for the Bundesbank in Germany. 
The people in Europe, and moreover not only in Germany, seem to be particularly attached to price 
stability. 
Moreover, no central banker, and in any case not the members of the Governing Council of the ECB, 
is  insensitive  to  growth  and  employment.  But  we  think  that  growth  should  not  be  stimulated  to  the 
detriment of price stability, as such an action is short-lived and costly in the long term and monetary 
policy cannot resolve structural problems, in particular structural unemployment, which is important in 
Europe. 
Furthermore,  price  stability  contributes  to  economic  growth  by  sustaining  consumer  confidence,  an 
essential  element  of  growth,  and  by  favouring  low  long  term  interest  rates,  these  rates  being  even 
more important for the financing of growth than short term rates in many European countries. (It must 
be observed that while for the moment short term rates are higher in the euro area than in the United 
States, long term rates are slightly lower). 
The European Central Bank has given a precise definition of what she understands by price stability : 
price stability is defined as “an annual rise in the harmonised index of consumer prices for the euro 
area of less than 2 p.c. It must be maintained in the medium-term.” 
Such  a  definition  offers  a  stable  anchoring  point  for  the  expectations  of  economic  agents  in  an 
uncertain environment. It also offers the public a means to evaluate monetary policy, thus enhancing 
the  transparency  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  enabling  it  to  be  called  to  account  for  its 
performance. 
The  expression  “of  less  than  2  p.c.”  specifies  the  maximum  limit  for  the  pace  of  inflation  that  is 
considered  compatible  with  price  stability.  At  the  same  time,  the  word  “rise”  clearly  indicates  that 
deflation must be avoided in the same way as inflation. By defining price stability at the level of the 
euro area, one clearly specifies that monetary policy is based on an assessment of developments at 
this level. Finally, when one speaks about maintaining price stability “in the medium term”, this means 
that one acknowledges the existence of short term price volatility, due to non-monetary influences and 
that monetary policy must be oriented towards the future (“forward looking”). 
 To reach its target and to assess the risks weighing on price stability in a founded manner, the ECB 
carries out its analyses according to two separate, but complementary, analytical approaches. These 
are called the two pillars of the strategy.   
In  the  first  pillar,  the  emphasis  is  on  the  monetary  origins  of  inflation,  as  inflation  indeed  remains 
ultimately  a  monetary  phenomenon  and  the  important  role  of  money  supply  in  the  strategy  also 
emphasises the responsibility of the Eurosystem for inflationary monetary pressures, which a central 
bank can more easily keep under control than inflation itself. 
For the assessment within the framework of the second pillar, use is made of a wide range of other 
economic  indicators,  especially  variables  which  have  qualities  as  leading  indicators  of  future  price 
developments. These consist of, among other things, wages, exchange rates, bond prices, the term 
structure  of  interest  rates,  indicators  for  budgetary  policy,  various  standards  for  measuring  real 
economic activity, and the results of surveys among producers and consumers. 
 2 
 BIS Review 99/2001
 If I make a short comparison between the monetary policy in the United States, Canada and the euro 
area, I observe a great similarity between the Bank of Canada and the ECB : price stability is clearly 
the primary objective of their policy, whereas the mandate of the Federal reserve is both wider and 
less  specific.  In  your  country  quantifying  the  objective(“inflation  target”)  is  subject  to  an  agreement 
between  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  the  central  bank,  whereas  in  the  euro  area,  the  central  bank 
determines  this  autonomously.  It  is  true  that  in  the  euro  area  we  have  twelve  Finance  Ministers! 
However the discretionary power of the Fed is greater still. But apart from these few differences, our 
three  central  banks  share  the  characteristics  of  the  major  modern  central  banks  :  price  stability  is 
considered  as  a  necessary  condition  for  sustainable  growth;  they  enjoy  a  high  degree  of 
independence  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  simultaneously  have  a  strong  concern  for 
transparency and accountability. 
 During  the  first  three  years  of  the  euro’s  existence,  the  European  Central  Bank  has  already  been 
confronted  with important and different challenges. At the start of the single monetary  policy,  in the 
beginning of 1999, its principal leading interest rate stood at a low level of 3 p.c. During the spring of 
that same year the ECB then has had to address a deflationary threat and lowered its rate to 2.5 p.c. 
Later on, primarily due to the steep rise in oil prices, but also of meat prices in Europe inflationary risks 
appeared  which  the  ECB  has  sought  to  contain  by  gradually  raising  its  interest  rate  from  2.5%  to 
4.75% between November 1999 and October 2000. 
No  central  bank  can  avoid  that  a  shock  beyond  its  control,  such  as  an  oil  shock,  momentarily 
increases inflation. But the central bank has to prevent the increase of certain prices from transforming 
into an upward spiral of all prices and costs. The European Central Bank has succeeded in doing so. 
Euro area inflation reached a maximum of 3.4 p.c. at the beginning of the summer of this year; since 
then it has been declining and should according to all expectations drop below 2 p.c. in the coming 
months. 
The reduction of inflationary pressures has allowed the European Central Bank to reduce its interest 
rates since the spring by 150 basis points in four moves (coming from 4.75 p.c., a level lower than in 
North America). These moves had moreover become desirable given the weakening economic activity 
in the euro area. 
 The economy of the euro area has been affected, more than originally thought, by the slowdown in the 
United  States,  (which  itself  has  been  more  important  and  long  lasting  than  initially  foreseen). 
Admittedly, since trade between European countries has become internal trade, from a monetary point 
of view, paid for in euro, our countries have become less dependent of their foreign trade as such. But 
other transmission channels have developed: European financial markets have grown, but Wall Street 
still sets the tone; as European companies have invested on a large scale in the United States during 
the  last  years,  the  height  of  their  profits  and  investments  is more  influenced  by  their  results  on  the 
other side of the Atlantic than was previously the case. Finally, different shocks, such as the increase 
in oil prices or the crisis of the new technologies have hit all industrialised countries and more recently 
the tragic events of September 11th have significantly increased uncertainty all over the world. 
It is true that the economy of the euro area is running for the moment at a very slow pace. However 
economic activity should return to a much more satisfactory path in the course of next year. Normally 
the  high  level  of  uncertainty  currently  affecting  the  world  economy  should  diminish.  And,  with  the 
exception of the confidence of consumers and entrepreneurs, the conditions for a recovery are already 
present  in  Europe.  I  think  of  the  gradual  effects  of  the  measures  favourable  to  growth  that  have 
already been taken (interest rate cuts and in many countries also tax cuts); of the fact that inflation is 
low and is still declining and that financing conditions (both short term and long term interest rates) 
have become very favourable. Moreover consumers in the euro area are hardly indebted and there 
has been less excess in investments, which should make it easier for consumption and investment to 
take off again if non-economic uncertainty progressively recedes. 
 BIS Review 99/2001 
 3
 Europe is not an island as we have seen in 2001. However, the full introduction of the euro should, 
without immunising us against external influences, allow the euro area in the coming years to register 
supplementary growth owing to supplementary stability, efficiency and visibility.  
More stability: since the birth of the euro in 1999, much has already been achieved in this field. Within 
the  euro  area  exchange  rate  fluctuations  have  disappeared.  A  framework  has  been  set  up  for  a 
macroeconomic policy aiming at stability, where monetary policy is oriented towards price stability and 
fiscal policy, within the framework of the so called Pact for Stability and Growth, towards sound public 
finances.  These  objectives  are  crucial  for  the  confidence  of  economic  agents  and  sustainable 
economic growth. 
The single currency is also a major step forward in terms of more efficiency, by lowering transaction 
costs and increasing price transparency and competition, which will be even more evident once the 
notes and coins will have been introduced. Monetary union also intensifies the integration of European 
financial  markets,  which  improves  financing  possibilities  for  companies.  The  single  currency  should 
also help speed up other necessary structural reforms in Europe. 
Finally, the introduction of euro banknotes and coins will provide not only the new currency but Europe 
itself with more visibility all over the world. And within Europe, the use of the same notes and coins 
from Helsinki to Lisbon and Athens via Brussels will give the European citizens, much more than is 
now the case, the feeling of belonging to a community sharing the same destiny.  
4 
 BIS Review 99/2001
