Stanley Fischer: Challenges facing the Israeli economy in the 
globalisation era  
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the 2008 Herzliya 
Conference, Herzliya, 21 January 2008. 
 The topic of this session relates to the challenges that our economy faces in the globalization 
era. Indeed, since the early 1990s the Israeli economy has undergone a successful process 
of integrating into the global economy, and today we are already a part – albeit a small part – 
of it. 
As part of this integration, the Bank of Israel headed a campaign of liberalization of capital 
flows  and  disinflation  until  price  stability  was  obtained.  The  various  governments  adopted, 
and have been practicing to this day, an approach of budget discipline and pushed through a 
series of structural reforms. 
Israel’s successful integration into the global economy is manifested, among other things, in 
rapid growth; in exports, which reached about 45 percent of GDP; foreign investment; a flow 
of foreign investments into Israel; a high credit rating; favorable evaluations by international 
financial institutions; and an invitation from the OECD to begin the process of joining. These 
important achievements are contributing to the strong growth and stability of our economy. 
In  one  important  field  in  the  process  of  globalizing  our  economy,  however,  little  has  been 
done thus far: passing a new and modern Bank of Israel Law. The Law in effect today 
was passed in 1954; it is antiquated and does not meet the accepted norms in the advanced 
economies. 
Various governments in Israel and the Bank of Israel have done a great deal of work on the 
new Bank of Israel Law. In this context, two important milestones are noteworthy: 
1. 
In  late  1998,  a  committee  under  the  late  Justice  Dov  Levin  presented  the 
government  with  recommendations  for  a  new  Bank  of  Israel  Law.  This  was  the 
aftermath of professional work based on other countries’ efforts in this field, among 
other things. The members of the commission included Prof. Haim Ben-Shahar and 
Prof.  Alex  Cukierman,  and  several  noteworthy  personalities  appeared  before  it, 
including  the  former  President  of  the  Bundesbank,  Hans  Tietmeyer;  the  Deputy 
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mervyn  King  (today  the  Governor);  and  even 
myself. 
On  October  2,  2005,  shortly  after  I  took  up  office  as  Governor,  the  government 
resolved  to  adopt  the  principles  of  the  new  Bank  of  Israel  Law  in  the  spirit  of  the 
Levin Committee’s recommendations and developments in this field abroad. 
2. 
Before turning to the new law, I will mention two basic changes in central bank thinking over 
the last twenty years: (1) the emphasis on the independence of the central bank as a major 
component of its success in fulfilling its functions and achieving its targets; and (2) the need 
for  central  bank  transparency  and  accountability  in  its  interest  rate  policy,  including  the 
analysis of the information it had available that provided the basis for its decision, and the 
results of its interest policy. 
Central bank independence 
I.  
Studies were carried out in the 1990s, among others by Prof. Cukierman, to examine and 
make  international  comparisons  regarding  the  link  between  central  bank  independence, 
inflation,  and  economic  growth.  The  significance  of  the  concept  of  independence  in  the 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 1
context of a central bank is that it has the authority to make its decisions without needing to 
obtain any external confirmation or approval. 
The  research  findings  were  clear:  the  relation  between  central  bank  independence  and 
inflation is a negative one, and this, without paying a price in terms of growth. In other words, 
countries  that  reinforce  their  central  banks’  independence  attain  low  inflation  with  no 
impairment to growth. 
This lesson and experience gained in countries with independent central banks, particularly 
in  Germany,  also  influenced  decision  makers.  With  the  establishment  of  the  European 
Monetary Union, the founding of the new republics following the collapse of the Soviet Union, 
and  the  process  of  democratization  in  Latin  America,  new  laws  were  enacted  relating  to 
many  central  banks,  and  in  all  cases,  the  emphasis  was on  their  independence.  The  best 
known  and  most  impressive  instance  is  that  of  the  Bank  of  England:  the  first  economic 
decision  taken  by  the  new  Labour  Government  after  the  election  in  1997  was  to  grant 
independence to the Bank of England. Till then the central bank had not been independent, 
and decisions on the interest rate were taken by the Treasury. It is clear from the marked 
improvement in the performance of the UK economy over the last ten years, with regard to 
both inflation and steady growth, that the decision was wise and justified. 
The  independence  of  a  central  bank  is  very  important  for  its  success  in  performing  its 
functions  and  achieving  its  objectives.  This  is  because  democratic  governments  have  an 
“inflation bias,” for two main reasons: 
a. 
Since an expansionary interest rate policy, i.e., lowering the interest rate, tends to 
have a positive effect on GDP and only later does it contribute to higher inflation, 
and  since  democratic  governments  generally  have  a  short  horizon,  they  prefer  to 
reduce interest rates, particularly when there are elections looming. An independent 
central bank can make decisions with a view to the long term and without paying 
regard to political timetables. 
Governments find it more convenient to ask the central bank to print money in order 
to  finance  their  activities  than  to  impose  taxes  or  raise  capital  in  the  financial 
markets. Such behavior, however, ultimately leads to higher inflation. 
b. 
Here I would like to quote the well-known words of Keynes in the period of hyperinflation in 
Europe after World War I: 
A government can live for a long time… by printing paper 
money… It is the form of taxation which the public finds it 
hardest to evade and even the weakest government can enforce. 
This scenario was highly typical of Israel of the early 1980s, until it was put to an end in 1985 
when as part of the Economic Stabilization Program, a law known as the “No Printing Law” 
was enacted, which prohibited the Bank of Israel from granting loans to the government. This 
was in effect the first step toward the independence of the Bank of Israel. 
In  the  past  twenty-five  years  many  central  banks  around  the  world  have  been  granted 
independence,  and  governments  thus  relinquished  the  ability  to  obtain  finance  from  the 
central bank and to influence interest rate policy. They did so because they realized that (a) 
without  giving  their  central  banks  independence,  they  would  probably  find  themselves  in 
situations of high inflation, as happened in the 1970s and 1980s; (b) the economy performs 
better with an independent central bank; and (c) as a by-product of the above, globalization 
had  the  effect  of  increasing  the  importance  of  central  bank  independence,  in  light  of  the 
weight that domestic and foreign investors give to that factor as a major consideration in their 
decisions about the countries in which to invest. 
This  approach  received  further  support  from  a  1995  study  that  examined  data  covering 
fifteen  years  and  found  that  central  bank  independence  and  price  stability  are  positively 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2008
correlated. Central bank independence was also found to be positively correlated with high, 
stable growth and low rates of interest. 
I would like to stress: an integral feature of central banks’ independence throughout the world 
is their administrative independence. This is a vital condition, as it determines the resources 
required for the bank to fulfill its functions. 
Central bank transparency and accountability 
II.  
The  independence  of  a  central  bank,  especially  in  democracies,  must  be  accompanied  by 
the bank’s responsibility to account for its policies and the achievement of its objectives. For 
that  purpose  it  is  necessary  to  provide  it  with  clearly  defined  targets  against  which  its 
performance can be measured. 
It  is  thus  important  that  the  central  bank  submit  a  regular  report  to  the  legislature, 
government  and  public  on  its  policy  and  the  achievement  of  its  goals.  The  report  should 
describe the decisions made and the reasons behind them, the instruments employed and 
how they were operated, the resources employed and how they were used, etc. Thus, for 
example,  with  regard  to  interest  rate  policy,  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Israel, 
usually  publish  annual  reports,  economic  forecasts,  periodic  inflation  reports,  minutes  of 
interest rate discussions, press releases on decisions taken, etc. 
This 
transparency  and  accountability  ensures  an  open  channel  of 
communication between the central bank and the public in general, and the financial markets 
in  particular,  and  constitutes  an  important  mechanism  of  control  over  the  central  bank,  its 
management and its policies. It enables the central bank to stay attuned to public criticism, 
and  it  enables  the  public  to  better  understand  the  functions,  policy,  decisions  and 
achievements of the central bank. 
The  two  subjects  I  have  spoken  about  so  far,  central  bank  independence  and  the 
requirement for transparency and accountability incumbent on the central bank lead me to 
my main subject this evening. 
framework  of 
The new Bank of Israel Law 
III.  
The new law will clearly define the independence of the Bank, its goals, and the mechanisms 
for  decision  making,  and  should  impose  on  the  Bank  a  comprehensive  framework  of 
transparency  and  accountability.  The  new  law  should  thus  contain  the  correct  mixture  of 
independence, transparency and control mechanisms for the Bank of Israel, all, of course, 
according to the generally accepted standards in the advanced economies. 
In my first few months as Governor of the Bank we cooperated with the Ministry of Finance, 
the Prime Minister’s Office and the Ministry of Justice in drafting a bill. We decided to shelve 
the matter temporarily until a wage accord at the Bank was concluded, but now we are taking 
it up again. I hope that we will soon work out a final draft. 
Independence of the Bank of Israel 
1. 
The new law will give the Bank of Israel independence in making decisions about the interest 
rate as needed to perform its functions and reach its goals. This independence must also be 
reflected  in  the  management  of  the  Bank,  as  that  is  the  means  by  which  it  creates  the 
instruments required to meet its goals. 
Definition of the objectives of the Bank of Israel 
2.  
The new law will clearly define the Bank of Israel’s targets, along the lines of the targets of 
other  modern  central  banks.  The  modern  approach,  and  that  adopted  in  the  major  central 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 3
banks  such  as  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  ECB,  generally  define  three  targets:  1)  the 
achievement  and  maintenance  of  price  stability;  2)  subject  to  that,  support  for  the 
government’s other economic objectives, headed by growth and employment; and 3) support 
for the economy’s financial stability. 
Decision-making mechanisms at the Bank of Israel 
3. 
The law will establish new decision-making mechanisms for the Bank. In Israel today, as in a 
few  other  countries  including  New  Zealand  and  Canada,  the  Governor  makes  the  interest 
decisions alone, under law. He also runs the Bank, and is responsible for all administrative 
decisions.  Research  has  shown  that  decisions  made  by  committees  of  experts  are,  on 
average, better than those made by one expert acting alone. 
The  new  Bank  of  Israel  Law  will  establish  two  decision-making  mechanisms  –  one  in  the 
policy area, and the other in the area of management of the Bank. 
Interest rate policy – the Monetary Committee 
a)  
In  most  countries  decisions  on  the  interest  rate  are  made  by  a  monetary  committee  that 
operates  in  the  central  bank.  Generally  the  monetary  committee  has  some  members  from 
outside the central bank and some from within, with the governor of the bank heading the 
committee.  This  is  the  preferred  model,  which  will  be  specified  in  the  new  law.  The 
participation of external members, who are not beholden to the central bank or its governor 
but are committed to the attainment of the target set for the bank, is an important part of the 
mechanism of external control over the Bank’s policy. 
Management of the Bank – the Administrative Council 
(b)  
The new Bank of Israel Law will specify an Administrative Council alongside the Monetary 
Committee, with an absolute majority of external members, one of whom will serve as chair 
of the council. The Governor and Deputy Governor will serve as members. This model is the 
one  followed  in  several  central  banks  in  the  advanced  economies,  including  the  Bank  of 
England. 
The  role  of  the  council will  be  to  make  decisions  related  to  the  management  of  the  Bank, 
such as approving work plans, the Bank’s budget and wages. The council will also appoint 
an audit committee from among its external members. All this is intended to provide another 
system of external control over the activities of the Bank. 
To adhere to the principle of the Bank’s independence, and its professional expertise, it is 
essential  that  the  external  members  of  the  Monetary  Committee  and  the  Administrative 
Council, who will be appointed by the government, should be experts in the relevant fields, 
free of conflict of interests, and independent of the government and political institutions. 
the 
time,  economic 
Transparency and accountability 
4.  
The new Bank of Israel Law will require the Bank to account for its decisions, policies and 
achievements to the Knesset, the government and the public. In this context the Bank will 
have to explain the considerations underlying its decisions, including the relevant information 
available  at 
it  views  expected  economic 
developments.  The  reports  will  include  inflation  reports  and  other  periodic  reports, 
summaries  of  the  discussions  of  the  Monetary  Committee,  fundamental  decisions  by  the 
Administrative Council, press releases, etc. 
In light of the importance of transparency and accountability, The Bank of Israel, even prior to 
the  enactment  of  the  new  law,  has  already  adopted  a  level  of  transparency  and 
accountability that is broader than current law requires. However, this should be enshrined in 
new legislation. 
forecasts,  and  how 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2008
Allow me to conclude. There is nothing to gain by wasting time talking about the new Bank of 
Israel Law. The time has come to roll up our sleeves and get to work on completing the bill 
and  passing  it  into  law  promptly.  By  so  doing,  we  will  have  completed  the  final  and  most 
important  stage  in  the  global  integration  of  Israel’s  economy.  It  will  be  an  important 
achievement and a badge of maturity for Israel’s economy. 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 5
