Ingimundur Friðriksson: Interest rates and financial markets in February 
2008 
Speech by Mr Ingimundur Friðriksson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at a Rotary 
Club meeting, Reykjavik, 28 February 2008. 
 On  Thursday  14  February  2007,  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland 
announced its decision to keep the Bank’s policy interest rate unchanged at 13.75%. In its 
announcement,  which  can  be  found  on  the  Bank’s  website,  the  Board  of  Governors 
explained the rationale behind its decision. It mentioned the fact that inflation was higher than 
November  forecasts  indicated,  and  that  the  short-term  inflation  outlook  had  deteriorated 
since November. This is borne out by the rise in the Consumer Price Index in February. The 
Board of Governors emphasised that uncertainty has increased, and that the Central Bank 
intends to monitor developments in economic indicators very closely, particularly those that 
reflect  the  impact  of  poorer  financial  market  conditions  on  lending  and  demand.  In  the 
conclusion of its announcement, the Board of Governors stated that, as before, it was critical 
for  households  and  businesses  that  inflation  be  controlled  and  inflation  expectations 
anchored successfully. The policy rate decision was based on these considerations.  
The Central Bank is required by law to promote price stability. Currently in effect is a joint 
declaration issued by the Icelandic government and the Bank in 2001, stating that the Bank 
must aim at keeping inflation as close as possible to 2½%. Inflation is well above that target 
for a multitude of reasons, which will not be itemised here. These contributing factors have 
been discussed numerous times by the Central Bank, in verbal and written form. Suffice it to 
say  that  enormous  investments,  radical  changes  in  the  domestic  financial  markets,  ready 
access to inexpensive credit from abroad, and – last but not least – the substantial increase 
in disposable household income, especially in the past year, have played their part.  
Critics maintain sedulously that the Central Bank’s tools are weak, that its policy of restraint 
is ineffective, and even that its inflation target is a failed experiment. The Bank rejects this. It 
can be considered established that, were it not for the Central Bank’s tight monetary policy, 
inflation would have been much higher than it has indeed been – with the concomitant strain 
on households and businesses. It is not the Central Bank’s objective as such to keep interest 
rates high – indeed, the Bank is of the opinion that it is disadvantageous if the policy rate is 
high  for  a  sustained  period  of  time.  Inflationary  pressure  has  been  greater  than  forecasts 
indicated – and more than was easily dealt with – and as a result, it has proven difficult to 
contain inflation. It took a while before the impact of the Central Bank’s restraining measures 
was sufficiently felt, but considerable changes took place over the past year, when policy rate 
decisions made themselves felt more strongly in all areas of the credit market. In the fall and 
in early winter, the market also felt the weight of rapidly deteriorating global lending terms, 
which  will  undeniably  support  the  Central  Bank’s  tightening  measures  and  will  reduce 
domestic demand and inflationary pressure, as was mentioned in the Board of Governors’ 
announcement of 14 February.  
It is possible that there will be a rapid drop in domestic demand as a result of high interest 
rates and a tightening credit supply. At this point, however, it is impossible to assert that this 
will be the case. Exactly when it will be possible to lower the policy rate will be determined by 
economic developments and outlook. Precipitate interest rate reductions would push inflation 
upward  and  standards  of  living  downward.  The  suggestion  that  it  is  necessary  to  lower 
interest rates in order to control inflation is absurd. Indeed, it is astounding how carelessly 
many people seem to view inflation.  
Furthermore,  it  is  appropriate  to  stress  that  the  Central  Bank  believes  it  is  impossible  to 
choose between price stability and financial stability. If we were to relax our stance on price 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 1
stability, it would surely undermine the credibility of monetary policy. Inflation – and no less 
important – inflation expectations would increase drastically, which could lead, in short order, 
to an upward spiral of prices and wages and falling exchange rate. Even though domestic 
financial institutions might seem to profit, for the short term, by a depreciation in the króna 
and  a  rise  in  inflation,  a  trend  in  this  direction  would  quickly  take  its  toll  on  indebted 
households and businesses and would eventually result in loan losses. From the standpoint 
of financial stability, it is critical that inflation be reined in. It is also appropriate to emphasise 
the obvious fact that Icelandic banks’ access to foreign credit will not change if the Central 
Bank lowers the policy rate.  
It  has  been  maintained  that,  because  central  banks  in  other  countries  have  lowered  their 
interest rates, the wider interest rate differential with abroad that resulted should have given 
the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  the  margin  to  reduce  its  policy  rate  this  February.  This  is  not 
entirely correct. As is well known, the US Federal Reserve Bank reduced its interest rates in 
several  stages,  for  a  total  reduction  of  2.25%,  over  the  course  of  the  fall  and  winter.  The 
Bank of England has lowered its base lending rate twice this winter, for a total reduction of 
0.5%. Other central banks in our neighbouring countries have not lowered their rates. The 
European  Central  Bank  has  kept  its  interest  rates  unchanged  for  several  months,  and  the 
central banks in Norway and Sweden raised their rates earlier this year. The Reserve Bank 
of Australia also raised its rates recently. Australia belongs to the group generally referred to 
as high-yield countries. At this point, it is impossible to say what these banks’ next interest 
rate decisions will be.  
On Thursday, April 10, the Central Bank will publish its next issue of Monetary Bulletin, which 
will  contain  its  newest  macroeconomic  and  inflation  forecasts.  At  that  time,  the  Board  of 
Governors will announce its next policy rate decision.  
The global financial markets have been in a state of flux in recent months, primarily because 
of the crisis in the US sub-prime mortgage market. Securitised assets based on sub-prime 
lending proved much more risky than previously believed, even by credit ratings agencies, 
which had given various collateralised debt obligations their highest ratings. But when they 
were put to the test, it emerged that they were far from reliable, and banks all over the world 
that had invested heavily in them lost staggering sums of money, amounts that are practically 
unheard  of.  In  some  instances,  the  losses  were  such  that  they  compromised  the  banks’ 
equity position and forced them to seek out new share capital. A large number of banks have 
had to write off billions of US dollars, and some have even been forced to write off tens of 
billions. And in all likelihood, the effects will continue to emerge.  
Last year’s changes in the global financial markets were swift. For a long time, liquidity had 
been  ample,  interest  rates  low,  and  risk  appetite  high.  That  situation  changed  –  virtually 
overnight – to one characterised by a lack of liquidity and a re-evaluation of the pricing of 
risk,  and  this  resulted  in  substantially  increased  interest  rate  premia.  Banks  became 
especially  careful  in  their  transactions  with  one  another,  and  a  considerable  tightening  of 
interbank markets ensued the world over. Central banks on both sides of the Atlantic reacted 
by granting special liquidity facilities with virtually unprecedented amounts and maturities.  
As the end of the year approached, conditions in the interbank markets improved markedly, 
though  they  were  still  far  from  their  prior  state.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fundamentals  of 
important  financial  undertakings  became  an  ever  greater  source  of  concern.  The  general 
economic outlook deteriorated significantly, spurring greater pessimism in the global equity 
markets.  
Iceland certainly did not escape the effects of these global developments. Here in Iceland, 
those  developments  emerged  in  the  form  of  higher  interest  rate  premia,  shrinking  credit 
supply,  and  risk  aversion.  Risk  aversion  means,  among  other  things,  that  companies  and 
regions at the periphery – if it can be expressed that way – feel the effects of the changes 
more than others do. This periphery includes Iceland and its banks. Among Icelandic banks, 
these changed conditions emerge most clearly in wide CDS spreads. CDS spreads among 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2008
Icelandic banks are much wider than among foreign banks with comparable credit ratings, 
and  much  wider  than  many  –  including  respected  financial  analysis  institutions  abroad  – 
consider appropriate and consistent with the banks’ financial strength and performance.1  
It  is  worth  remembering  that  Iceland’s  financial  system  has  grown  by  leaps  and  bounds 
recently,  and  the  operations  of  Icelandic  commercial  banks  extend  to  a  large  number  of 
foreign locations. Iceland’s three largest commercial banks now generate more than half of 
their  income  through  their  operations  in  other  countries.  Those  operations  are  distributed 
over a wide geographical area. While they are most prominent in the Nordic region and the 
UK, they are also visible in Continental Europe and farther afield, though to a lesser extent. 
Through  these  operations,  Iceland’s  banks  have  fortified  their  foundations  and  distributed 
their risk. They are international banks with headquarters in Iceland, and they are much less 
dependent on economic developments in Iceland than they were previously.  
At the end of January, the banks published their annual accounts for the year 2007. These 
reflected both the success of the past several years and last year’s changes in the global 
capital  markets.  For  the  year  as  a  whole,  the  banks  demonstrated  excellent  performance. 
Profits were good, and core operations yielded strong returns. As can be expected, profits 
dropped in the fourth quarter, as was the case with banks all over the globe. Nonetheless, all 
three of Iceland’s large commercial banks recorded a profit in the fourth quarter of 2007, and 
they concluded the year with an ample equity position.  
Banks all over the world have been forced to write off large amounts of money because of 
their investments in securitised assets related to the US mortgage market. Icelandic banks’ 
investments  in  obligations  of  this  sort  were  small.  That  being  the  case,  they  have  had 
relatively little need for such write-offs – and some had no need whatsoever because they 
had not invested in securitised assets.  
Furthermore, it is worth remembering that changes in the share price of Iceland’s banks have 
not differed markedly from that of banks in other areas of the world. Over the past few years, 
for example, the share price of Icelandic commercial banks dropped by 7-30%, while various 
large  Nordic  banks  fell  15-40%  and  the  shares  of  well-known  international  banking  giants 
depreciated by margins ranging from 30% to over 50%. The decline is greater if measured 
against the peak of share prices. Financial companies carry unusual weight in the Icelandic 
stock  exchange’s  share  price  index  (OMXI  15)  –  at  present,  some  two-thirds.  No  matter 
where one looks, the price of financial company stock has declined all over the world – in 
most locations, it has fallen more than that of other companies that constitute equity indices. 
In other words, financial companies have pulled equity indices downward – much more so in 
Iceland, where banks constitute a greater proportion of the index than in other markets.  
Iceland’s  commercial  banks  went  through  a  difficult  period  in  early  2006  and  learned  a 
number of things from the experience. Among the lessons they learned was that they must 
increase  transparency  in  their  operations  to  a  significant  degree,  reduce  cross-ownership, 
significantly enhance their liquidity position, and increase the proportion of deposits in their 
funding. Having undergone these changes, they were much better prepared to weather last 
year’s turmoil than they would otherwise have been. Iceland’s banks have been considered 
bold in their investments, and they have a reputation for being more risk-tolerant than banks 
in many of our neighbouring countries. This may be correct, but it is also reflected by the fact 
that Icelandic banks have elected to maintain a relatively strong equity position.  
The  banks  are  all  subject  to  surveillance  by  the  Icelandic  Financial  Supervisory  Authority, 
which bases its operations on the regulatory framework that applies to financial markets in 
the  European  Union.  Subsidiaries  of  Icelandic  banks  are  all  subject  to  surveillance  by  the 
financial supervisory authorities in their home countries. The Icelandic Financial Supervisory 
                                                 
1   E.g. Credit Sights, February 3, 2008: Icelandic Banks FY07: Heads You Lose, Tails You Lose. 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 3
Authority carries out regular stress tests on the banks’ accounts and publishes the results on 
its  website.  These  stress  tests  assume  extreme  changes  in  fundamental  premises.  The 
banks  have  always  passed  the  stress  tests,  most  recently  the  one  carried  out  on  their 
balance  sheets  at  year-end  2007.  At  that  time,  the  equity  ratio  of  Iceland’s  largest  banks 
ranged from 11.2% to 11.8%. The result of the stress test was that, even if various severe 
shocks inherent in the premises of the test were to occur simultaneously, the banks would 
still have an equity ratio ranging from 10.4% to 11.2%. Their liquidity position was ample at 
year-end, so there was no driving need to seek funding in the international credit market. But 
at some point in time, they will need to return to the capital markets.  
All  of  Iceland’s  large  commercial  banks  have  an  international  credit  rating.  Though  these 
credit ratings are comparable to those awarded to similar banks in other countries, there is 
an  abiding  suspicion  in  the  market  toward  Icelandic  banks.  This  is  difficult  to  explain  fully, 
and it results, for example, in CDS spreads that are higher than in foreign banks, although 
CDS  spreads  also  differ  among  Icelandic  banks.  It  is  worth  remembering  that  Kaupthing 
Bank’s CDS spreads rose when the bank announced its intent to acquire a Dutch bank last 
August. As the autumn progressed, the other banks’ CDS spreads increased also. That trend 
continued intermittently until now. When Kaupthing abandoned its plans to acquire the Dutch 
bank, the reason for the increase last August vanished. Spreads declined slightly thereafter, 
as a large uncertainty factor had been eliminated. But the change was small, and then CDS 
spreads increased once again, as they did for many banks. The fact that Moody’s announced 
a change in its outlook for the banks’ credit ratings was no help. 
To some degree, the sizeable CDS spreads arise from suspicion vis-à-vis Icelandic banks. In 
their penetration into new markets, Iceland’s banks have doubtless threatened competitors 
that were established in those markets and were subjected to stiff competition as a result. 
Perhaps it also matters that Iceland’s banks are in a peripheral area and that such banks are 
generally subjected to higher premia than are banks in large countries. The size of the banks 
in  comparison  with  the  national  economy  is  doubtless  a  factor  as  well.  Otherwise,  higher 
premia could be explained by the fact that in recent years Iceland’s banks sought out credit 
in the global bond market. When conditions for such transactions were most beneficial, there 
was  considerable  demand  for  the  banks’  bonds  because  they  were  considered  to  fit 
unusually  well  with  the  various  CDOs  that  were  then  popular  among  investors.  They 
generated relatively good yields, especially given the banks’ credit ratings. Conditions have 
changed dramatically, and there is no longer a demand for such instruments. It would seem 
that  many  of  them  are  unwinding  –  that  is,  that  bonds  are  being  sold  off,  including  bonds 
from Icelandic banks. To a considerable degree, the banks’ high CDS spreads could be a 
consequence of their enormous borrowings on the global markets, together with the unusual 
circumstances currently reigning in the financial markets.  
The Icelandic banks’ CDS spreads now range from 4% to over 6%. Well-known international 
banks must also tolerate high premia, even though they are lower than those in Iceland. For 
example, the American investment bank Bear Stearns has paid a premium of 3½% and over 
on five-year CDS agreements, and Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch have been charged 
2% and over – not far from the premia charged to Landsbanki until very recently. The CDS 
spreads of many large, well-known international banks have risen by 0.4 – 0.8% so far this 
year. It may be mentioned that the proptional increase of the CDS spreads of the Icelandic 
banks  over  the  last  two  years  has  not  been  greater  than  of  many  other  and  better  known 
banks. This fact does not, however, improve their position in the captial markets. 
The CDS spreads charged to Icelandic banks mean that they do not currently have access to 
international funding on acceptable terms. The pricing of international loans is based on CDS 
spreads, especially if liquidity is limited in underlying bonds. This is the case even though the 
CDS market is imperfect and non-transparent and quotes differ significantly in the market. It 
is nonetheless used as a reference. For Icelandic banks, it is therefore extremely important 
that  CDS  spreads  decline,  even  though  it  is  not  clear  what  could  cause  it  to  do  so  in  the 
current climate.  
4 
 BIS Review 25/2008
At the end of last month, Moody’s Investor Service announced that the outlook for the credit 
ratings of two Icelandic banks had been downgraded from stable to negative, and that the 
outlook for the third bank remained negative. A decision on whether their credit ratings would 
be changed was to be expected within the month. This announcement came perhaps as no 
surprise, in view of the changes in the banks’ credit ratings from Moody’s over the past year. 
If they are downgraded by one notch, Glitnir and Kaupthing will revert to the credit rating they 
enjoyed before Moody’s announced the implementation of its so-called Joint-Default Analysis 
methodology  early  last  year.  Landsbanki’s  current  rating  is  two  notches  above  that  a  year 
ago. In contrast with Moody’s, Fitch Ratings recently affirmed its ratings for Iceland’s banks 
and  changed  its  outlook  for  Kaupthing  Bank’s  rating  from  negative  to  stable.  It  should  be 
noted  that  many  banks  have  been  subjected  to  changes  in  their  credit  rating  outlook.  For 
example, Standard & Poor’s changed its outlook for many of the world’s largest and best-
known  banks  from  stable  to  negative.  Among  the  banks  affected  were  Deutsche  Bank, 
Dresdner Bank, Barclays Bank, UBS, Credit Suisse, and others of their ilk.  
Last month Moody’s issued a Special Comment on Iceland2, bearing the title “Iceland’s AAA 
ratings  at  a  crossroads.”  The  Special  Comment  provided  grounds  for  the  credit  rating 
Moody’s awarded Iceland – the highest the agency gives. In particular, it examined the ability 
of  the  Icelandic  government  to  weather  serious  financial  shocks  and  concluded  that  the 
government was able to do so. It also pointed out that further international expansion of the 
Icelandic financial system could strain that capacity. The report suggested that it might be 
worthwhile  to  examine  the  possibility  of  fortifying  the  Central  Bank’s  foreign  reserves, 
establishing a co-operative relationship with central banks in countries where Icelandic banks 
have  extensive  operations,  and  perhaps  tightening  the  framework  for  the  banks  liquidity 
management.  All  of  this  is  being  considered.  I  wish  to  emphasise,  however,  that  here  in 
Iceland  banks  are  subjected  to  more  stringent  liquidity  requirements  than  banks  in  many 
other countries. Liquidity rules were set by the Central Bank a decade ago, and monitoring is 
carried  out  to  ensure  that  individual  banks  abide  by  them.  In  addition,  the  Financial 
Supervisory Authority set its Guidelines on Foreign Currency Liquidity Management late in 
2004.  The  objective  of  the  Guidelines  was  to  promote  careful  practise  as  regards  liquidity 
management, and they contain 10 fundamental criteria for best practise. Since that time, the 
Financial Supervisory Authority has ensured that companies adopt these criteria. It can be 
said that Iceland is a step ahead of many other countries in this regard, as the events of the 
past  year  show  that  there  is  ever-increasing  interest  in  setting  even  clearer  liquidity 
requirements for banks.  
The  operational  climate  for  banks  is  difficult  all  over  the  world.  Under  current  conditions, 
Iceland’s banks – and many others – have no other option but to furl their sails, and they 
have  already  begun  to  do  so.  They  must  implement  stringent  cost  control  and  direct  their 
attentions toward their core operations and the areas where they can truly compete. They 
might also have to sell off some assets. It is important that the banks continue to disclose 
information on their position, and where transparency is lacking, they must enhance it.  
The  conditions  that  have  developed  in  the  global  financial  markets  were  foreseen  by  very 
few, and they are virtually unprecedented. However, I would like to mention that the Central 
Bank of Iceland stated the following in its Financial Stability 2007 publication last April: “The 
Central Bank underlines that global market conditions can take a sudden turn for the worse 
and  it  is  important  to  be  on  the  alert  and  prepared  for  such  a  contingency.  The  current 
episode  of  ample  liquidity  and  lower  interest  rates  which  has  been  ideal  for  risk-seeking 
investors may change unexpectedly.” 
Even though conditions will eventually improve, they are unlikely to improve much in the near 
future. On the contrary, forecasts suggest that times will be difficult for the greater part of the 
                                                 
2   Moody’s Investors Service: Special Comment: Iceland’s Aaa Ratings at a Crossroads, January 2008. 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 5
year, if not longer. The conditions that reigned in the financial markets for several years, and 
changed abruptly in mid-2007, were also quite unusual, and it is unlikely that such a period 
will occur again in the foreseeable future. It can be considered certain that investors will be 
much more cautious in the future than they were until the middle of last year, and that the 
banks’ room for manoeuvre will be more limited than it has been for a long time. Icelandic 
companies, including banks, must therefore adapt to changed circumstances, a tighter credit 
supply, and less advantageous terms. Under these circumstances, it is even more important 
to  reduce  the  imbalances  in  the  economy  by,  among  other  things,  lowering  inflation  and 
anchoring inflation expectations. The Central Bank will continue its efforts to that end. 
6 
 BIS Review 25/2008
