Lucas Papademos: Financial market excesses and corrections – a 
central banker’s perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy,  jointly  organised  by  the  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Center for German and European Studies at 
Georgetown  University,  the  Centre  for  Financial  Studies  at  Frankfurt  University  and  the 
European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 26 June 2008. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 Introduction  
I.  
It is a great pleasure for me to address you on the occasion of this fifth conference of the 
International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy.  The  goal  of  the  Forum  is  to  foster  a 
transatlantic  dialogue,  based  on  rigorous  theoretical  and  empirical  research,  on  issues  of 
relevance to monetary policy in the United States and the euro area, but also from a global 
perspective. And certainly the topics on the conference programme are of global relevance to 
monetary  policy-makers  and  concern  issues  that  continue  to  pose  challenges  for  central 
banks.  
The  financial  market  turbulence  over  the  past  10  months  has  highlighted  the  global  and 
pressing  relevance  of  several  policy  issues.  And  it  has  posed  significant  challenges  for 
central banks: challenges for the conduct of monetary policy, the management of liquidity in 
the  money  markets  and  the  performance  of  tasks  pertaining  to  their  responsibility  to  help 
safeguard  financial  stability.  The  ongoing  process  of  risk  reappraisal  and  balance  sheet 
adjustment has led to extensive analysis and discussion of a number of pertinent matters: 
the  underlying  causes  and  (proximate)  triggers  of  the  market  turmoil,  the  mechanisms 
responsible for the propagation and amplification of shocks across markets, institutions and 
borders,  the  identified  weaknesses  in  the  capacity  of  financial  institutions  and  investors  to 
appropriately assess and adequately manage risks, and, finally, necessary actions of market 
participants  and  authorities  to  address  the  consequences  of  the  ongoing  financial  market 
correction and to strengthen the resilience of the financial system.  
In my remarks, I will concentrate on three themes: 
• 
The first pertains to the underlying causes of the turmoil and, in particular, some key 
factors  and  processes  that  contributed  to  the  emergence  and  persistence  of 
financial  market  excesses  and  asset  price  bubbles  and  can  also  help  explain  the 
timing and abruptness of the market correction. 
The second concerns the special role of certain asset markets, notably the housing 
and credit markets, in driving the dynamics of boom-and-bust.  
The third focuses on the role of central bank policies and tasks in containing the risk 
of financial market imbalances and in mitigating their potential consequences on the 
financial system and the economy. 
  II.  
The emergence and persistence of asset price bubbles and financial 
imbalances  
So what key factors and processes contribute to the emergence of asset price bubbles and 
their  persistence  over  a  fairly  long  period  before  they  abruptly  unwind?  There  is  no 
consensus among economists about the answer to this question. And, indeed, some have 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 1
argued  that  they  are  meaningless  because  in  their  view  asset  price  bubbles  do  not  really 
exist! Some economists had claimed that even the most famous bubbles in history – e.g. the 
Dutch Tulip Mania from 1634 to 1637, the French Mississippi Bubble in 1719-20, the South 
Sea  Bubble  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1720  and,  more  recently,  –  the  worldwide  new 
economy boom in the late 1990s (the “dot.com-bubble”) – should not be considered as such 
because  they  can  be  explained  by  rational  expectations  justified  by  fundamental  factors 
related to future returns on the respective underlying assets. Which in one case were tulip 
bulbs!1  
This view may have some merits given the hypotheses on which it rests. But, there is little 
doubt  in  my  mind  that  we  occasionally  observe  behavioural  patterns  in  financial  markets, 
which  although  they  may  be  perfectly  “rational”  or  justified  from  an  individual  investor’s 
perspective, they nevertheless lead to large, increasing and unjustifiable deviations of asset 
prices from their fundamental values.  
Indeed, an insight into special or psychological factors that can affect stock market valuation 
can  be  highlighted  by  the  following  simple  story:  Once  an  investor  approached  his 
stockbroker for advice on which stock to buy and was told to purchase a penny stock that 
was valued at just 50 cents a share. “This one is really going to move”, the broker said, and 
the persuaded investor instructed his broker to buy him 5000 shares. The following day, the 
stock was valued at 1 euro and, seeing this, the investor called the broker and told him to 
buy another 10,000 shares. The next day the investor saw that the price of the stock had 
jumped up to 3 euro. Excited and satisfied with the huge profit he had made in just two days, 
the  investor  called  his  broker:  “Sell  all  my  shares”,  he  instructed.  “To  whom?”  the  broker 
replied. “You were the only one buying that stock!”  
This  humorous  story  is  instructive because  it highlights two  features  of  asset  markets  that 
seem to contribute to the emergence of bubble-like phenomena and the build-up of financial 
imbalances. The first is the fact that asset markets involve the trade of expectations, or more 
precisely,  the  trade  of  instruments  whose  prices  depend  on  expectations  about  the  future 
and  which  are  fundamentally  uncertain  and  susceptible  to  potentially  large  swings.  The 
second feature is the fact that asset prices are influenced by positive feedback mechanisms. 
These  feedbacks  effects  can  amplify  initial  revisions  in  expectations  and  thereby  generate 
market  outcomes  that  might  induce  investors  to  adjust  their  expectations  even  further, 
leading to a feedback loop between expectations and outcomes.2  
Let me mention one important feedback mechanism that seems to have played a crucial role 
in the run-up to the current events. It appears that the present financial market turmoil has 
partly  been  driven  by  a  certain  pro-cyclicality  in  risk  assessments,  especially  by  what 
appears – ex post – to be an unjustified pro-cyclicality in the assessment of liquidity risk.  
The increasing volume of securitisation of mortgage loans caused securitised mortgages to 
become  increasingly  liquid  assets  over  the  years.  Investors  in  these  assets  with  long-
maturities apparently considered them sufficiently liquid that they could afford to finance their 
holdings with very short-term financing instruments. Given the market conditions prevailing 
for  some  time  (over  the  period  2003-2007),  such  a  strategy  seemed  justified:  in  case  of 
insufficient funding, investors could (reasonably) expect to be able to quickly sell some of the 
mortgage-backed  securities  in  a  rather  liquid  market.  But  what  would  happen  if  funding 
liquidity would dry up for some reason?  
Some  –  possibly  even  many  –  investors  were  aware  of  the  possibility  of  future  liquidity 
problems and occasionally even expressed their surprise about the ease with which it was 
possible  to  fund  mortgage-backed  securities  via  short-term  credit.  Nevertheless,  most 
                                                 
1   See Garber (1990/2001) and Pastor and Veronesi (2006). 
2   See for example Adam et al. (2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2008
investors  continued  doing  what  they  had  been  doing  for  some  time,  underestimating  the 
associated (liquidity) risk and they even expanded the volume and range of their risky but 
profitable activities. Why did this happen? Why did investors underestimate the liquidity risks 
and  fail  to  act  promptly  upon  their  sceptical  views?  The  answers  to  these  questions  are 
relevant for our understanding of why the “party lasted for so long” and why some party (that 
is,  market)  participants  kept  on  dancing  until  the  very  end,  until  the  music  finally  stopped 
playing. 
A number of reasons can help explain the observed behaviour. The first is associated with 
the  difficulty  of  speculating  against  a  strongly  rising  market  that  is  driving  prices  above 
estimates of fundamental values. You may recall that John Maynard Keynes once cautioned 
against such a strategy by warning that “The market can stay irrational longer than you can 
stay  solvent.”  One  explanation  for  this  is  that  speculating  against  the  market  requires  a 
critical mass of investors that will act in synchronised or coordinated manner and will be able 
to push prices back towards fundamental values. This may not be easy when markets are 
deep  and  liquid  as  they  tend  to  be  during  upswings.  The  “coordination  problem”  may 
therefore  substantially  delay  arbitrage.3  Indeed,  it  might  be  rational  for  each  individual 
investor  to  aim  at  riding  the  bubble  (just)  until  the  moment  before  it  bursts,  and  this  can 
explain the apparent contradiction between what investors do and what they believe to be 
fundamentally justified.4
A second reason why speculation against a rising market may be limited is that there are few 
incentives  to  do  so.  Payoff-structures  and  compensation  schemes  tend  to  encourage  risk-
loving  attitudes.  Compensation  contracts 
incorporate  sufficient  “history-
dependence”  can  similarly  lead  to  risk-loving  behaviour:  a  fund  manager  whose  bonus 
depends  on  his  or  her  annual  performance  is  likely  to  prefer  a  volatile  environment  which 
may be characterised by a sequence of bonanza years followed by a year or two of crisis 
and doom, rather than a more stable environment.  
A third possible explanation, which is “rational” from an individual investor’s point of view, is 
that if taking investment positions against the market eventually fails to be profitable, it will 
carry the stigma of an unsuccessful investment manager, while being wrong with the crowd 
is likely to be considered to be just bad luck. 
But the music will eventually stop playing. And it will stop playing when the orchestra realises 
that market value is totally out of tune with any reasonable expectations of future returns. As 
perceptions  and  attitudes  gradually  change,  seemingly  minor  events  can  produce  large 
changes in valuations. In August 2007, the difficulties emerged when it was recognised that 
some of the assets – initially those backed by sub-prime mortgages – turned out to be more 
risky  investments  than  previously  thought.  This  meant  that  structured  investment  vehicles 
(SIVs),  hedge  funds  and  other  investors  suffered  losses  in  relation  to  the  value  of  these 
securities. This in turn caused the liquidity providers to these investors to reassess the value 
and  risk  of the  collateral  offered  against  their  funding  and to  demand higher  margins.  The 
resulting funding problems forced investors in mortgage-backed and other related securities 
to  deleverage.  With  many  investors  trying  to  do  the  same  thing  at  the  same  time,  the 
downward pressure on prices intensified, resulting in extensive losses, even higher margin 
requirements and further forced sales until the market for funding and for mortgage-backed 
securities largely dried up. 
The recent episode has shown how and why fundamentally unjustified asset price booms or 
excesses can occur and persist for some time. There are many lessons to be learned. Some 
of these are new and relate to the features and functioning in practice of the “originate-to-
that 
fail 
to 
                                                 
3   Abreu and Brunnermeier (2002). 
4   Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003). 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 3
distribute” (OTD) model and the securitisation process. Other lessons, however, are not new 
and should be relearned as they had been forgotten, including the role of excessive credit 
expansion and high leverage in driving the rising phase of a boom-and-bust asset price cycle 
and accounting for the steepness of the fall during the downturn phase. One policy-relevant 
question which should be addressed is whether some asset markets are likely to be more 
vulnerable to valuation swings and are more likely to have significant adverse implications for 
the stability of the financial system and the economy. I will now turn to this question. 
The role of housing and credit markets 
III.  
Are there particular markets that are more prone to boom-and-bust cycles and, in the event 
of a sharp correction, are likely to have more pronounced effects on financial and economic 
stability? And if so, which ones? The speculative element that could result in a mispricing of 
risk implies that financial market excesses are likely to have their origin in markets with long-
lived assets with uncertain returns such as the housing markets or the equity markets, and 
possibly also the market for private bonds with long maturities. Moreover, asset markets that 
lack  effective  short-selling  instruments,  which  allow  investors  to  address  overvaluations, 
should also be more prone to bubble-like price deviations from fundamental values.5  
What are the facts? In advanced economies, stock and house price booms seem to occur 
rather frequently and with approximately the same frequency. Among the observed housing 
booms, every second one is likely to be followed by a house price bust. In equity markets, a 
crash follows a stock market boom only in 1 out of 6 cases. Thus, boom-and-bust cycles in 
housing markets occur much more frequently than in equity markets. Moreover, house price 
boom-bust cycles are historically associated with correspondingly larger inflation and output 
gap movements than stock price booms and busts.6  
The  association  of  house  price  cycles  and  macroeconomic  volatility  is  not  necessarily 
obvious  a  priori.  We  might  expect  housing  boom-bust  cycles  to  have  a  less  pronounced 
impact  on  aggregate  output  than  equity  cycles.  The  available  evidence  in  many  countries 
indeed suggests that consumption is less sensitive to housing wealth than financial wealth.7] 
This probably reflects the fact that financial wealth in many countries can be mobilised more 
easily for consumption than housing wealth (e.g. by selling some of the assets).  
Over time, however, the effect of housing wealth on consumption seems to have increased. 
In  the  euro  area,  since  the  (early)  1990s  the  effect  of  a  change  in  housing  wealth  on 
consumption  has  become  significant  in  terms  of  size  and  statistically,  with  the  marginal 
propensity to consume out of housing wealth estimated at around 2 cents in response to a 1 
euro  increase  in  housing  wealth.  While  the  estimated  magnitude  in  the  euro  area  of  the 
impact is rather small, the sheer size of the housing market and wealth implies that a 10% 
permanent  decrease  in  house  prices  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  would  decrease 
consumption by approximately 1%. In the United States the marginal propensity to consume 
out of housing wealth is estimated to be considerably larger, roughly twice to three times as 
large as in the euro area.8
But there is another important reason why house price cycles have had a pronounced effect 
on the economy. Historically a number of housing market busts have been associated with 
crises in the banking sector, as banks traditionally have held the largest part of the mortgage 
                                                 
5   See Helbling and Terrones (2003) and Allen and Gale (2000). 
6   See Bordo and Jeanne (2002) for the evidence mentioned in this paragraph. Similar conclusions are reached 
by Detken and Smets (2004). 
7   See Slacalek (2006) as well as Case, Quigley and Shiller (2005) and Skudelny (2008). 
8   See Slacalek (2006). 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2008
loans  on  their  balance  sheets.  An  increase  in  delinquency  rates,  triggered  by  house  price 
declines and a coinciding economic slump reduce the capital buffers of banks with adverse 
effects on credit expansion and the intermediation process. The greater vulnerability of the 
banking sector to sharp housing market corrections explains why these events have had a 
bigger impact on output than stock market crashes.9  
Turning  to  the  recent  experience,  it  would  have  reasonably  been  expected  that  increasing 
financial  integration  and  the  rapid  growth  of  the  loan  securitisation  and  of  the  market  for 
credit  risk  transfer  instruments  would  have  allowed  banks  to  substantially  reduce  their 
exposure  to  mortgage  loans  and  protect  themselves  from  the  effects  of  a  sharp  housing 
market  decline.  And,  there  is  no  doubt  that  these  financial  innovations  did  facilitate  the 
spreading and redistribution of credit risks across institutions, sectors and countries. 
At  the  same  time,  the  functioning  in  practice  of  the  OTD  mode  of  intermediation  was 
characterised by a number of weaknesses. Let me briefly point to a few of them:  
• 
First, the increased leverage that was supported by the rapid growth in securitisation 
was accompanied by an erosion of credit standards reflecting weak incentives and 
competitive pressures.  
Second, the complexity of structured finance products and the imperfect information 
about  the  risk  characteristics  of  the  underlying  assets  made  difficult  the  proper 
assessment and management of associated risks.  
Third, as a result, financial institutions and other investors relied excessively on the 
ratings of complex structured credit products by credit rating agencies (CRA). And, 
as it turned out, the models and methodologies used by CRAs had shortcomings, 
and  inadequate  information  was  provided  about  the  methodologies  employed  and 
the characteristics of the ratings of structured finance products.  
Fourth,  financial  institutions  established  off-balance-sheet  conduits  and  structured 
investment  vehicles  (SIVs)  which  held  the  long-term  complex  structured  finance 
products  and  financed  them  by  issuing  short-term  maturity  instruments  (which 
backed  these  long-term  and  not  very  liquid  products).  This  maturity  mismatch 
between  assets  and  liabilities  was  accompanied  by  explicit  or  implicit  liquidity  or 
credit commitments of the sponsoring banks to provide financial support in the event 
of funding difficulties. Overall, as a consequence of the effects of various factors and 
practices, including poor internal controls on the management of on- and off-balance 
sheet  risks,  a  number  of  banks  underestimated  not  only  default  risks  but  also 
concentration and liquidity risks. 
   As  a  result  of  these  shortcomings,  the  sharp  rise  in  delinquencies  on  US  subprime 
mortgages triggered a significant and widespread adjustment in the balance sheets of many 
financial institutions which had direct and indirect exposures to mortgage debt on and mainly 
off their balance sheet. So, effectively the securitisation process did not sufficiently insulate 
bank balance sheets from the adverse impact of sharp corrections in the housing market. In 
a few extreme cases, the shareholders of some institutions and the public at large suddenly 
realised, looking at the balance sheet, that “on the left side, nothing was right, and on the 
right side, nothing was left”. 
Having said that, however, I would not conclude that the recent experience suggests that the 
OTD  model  and  the  securitisation  process  have  failed  and  should  be  abandoned.  These 
financial innovations entail important benefits. Looking ahead, the actions and initiatives by 
market participants and policy-makers should aim at addressing the identified weaknesses, 
by improving incentive structures, risk management practices and transparency, so that the 
                                                 
9   E.g. Helbling and Terrones (2003) and Adalid and Detken (2007). 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 5
OTD model can function effectively and contribute to an efficient and stabilising sharing of 
risk and help contain the intensity of boom-and-bust asset price cycles. 
The role of central bank policies 
IV.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  some  pertinent  policy  issues  for  central  banks.  What  is  the  role  of 
monetary  policy,  and  more  generally  of  central  bank  policies  and  tasks,  in  preventing  or 
containing  the  risk  of  financial  market  imbalances  –  of  asset  price  bubbles  –  that  can 
threaten  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  entail  serious  risks  to  aggregate  output 
volatility and medium to long-term price stability? And what is the role of central bank policies 
in mitigating the potential consequences of a sharp market correction on the financial system 
and the economy?  
Over  the  past  10  months,  central  bank  actions  have  provided  answers  to  the  second 
question. The ECB has pursued a clear strategy that aims at ensuring the orderly functioning 
of money markets and mitigating financial stability risks through the effective management of 
liquidity in the interbank money markets and without changing the stance of monetary policy. 
The  level  of  policy  rates  has  been  determined  by  the  overriding  objective  of  preserving 
medium-term  price  stability,  while  money  market  operations  have  kept  the  very  short-term 
market rates close to the key policy rate and have alleviated pressures in the term money 
market. Looking forward, the envisaged actions by public authorities and the private sector, 
in  line  with  the  proposals  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  and  the  ECOFIN  Council  policy 
roadmap,  aim  at  addressing  the  consequences  of  the  turmoil  by  restoring  confidence  and 
strengthening the resilience of the financial system. And very good progress is being made in 
implementing the envisaged actions. 
But the answer to the first question I posed is also essential, for we can all agree that, in 
principle and in general, prevention is better than cure. The issue has been recently debated 
again and policy-makers and academic economists have expressed different views. So can 
and should monetary policy prevent – or at least contain – asset price bubbles? My answer 
to this question consists of five points.  
• 
First,  the  overriding  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  –  and  should  remain  –  the 
preservation  of  the  stability  of  the  general  price  level,  as  measured  by  the  CPI 
(HICP), and monetary policy has the instruments to achieve this objective over the 
medium and longer term.  
Second, monetary policy cannot effectively control asset prices, which are relative 
prices that are fundamentally determined by real factors, including expectations of 
future real rates of return incorporating risk premia.  
Nevertheless, and this is the third point, there can be significant links between asset 
price developments and consumer price developments over the longer term, while 
monetary and credit conditions can influence asset price dynamics in various ways. 
For  this  reason,  a  careful  monitoring  of  asset  price  developments  and  a  thorough 
assessment  of  asset  price  prospects  and  risks  can  provide  useful  input  to  the 
assessment of the risks to medium-term price stability.  
Fourth, the empirical evidence from many countries and various periods, including 
the recent experience, has shown that excessive credit expansion and high leverage 
can  be  key  drivers  of  unsustainable  asset  price  developments,  through  various 
channels,  including  their  effects  on  funding  liquidity  risk, risk  premia  and  market 
liquidity.  Consequently,  the  monitoring  and  analysis  of  monetary  and  credit 
aggregates  can  provide  useful  early  warning  signals  about  the  build-up  of  asset 
price bubbles and their potential longer-term implications for the functioning of the 
financial system, macroeconomic volatility, and price stability.  
   6 
 BIS Review 85/2008
 Therefore,  and  this  is  my  fifth  point,  there  may  be  circumstances  when  the 
assessment of the potential impact of asset price dynamics – past and projected – 
on price stability may imply that monetary policy should try to “lean against the wind” 
in order to mitigate medium to longer-term risks to price stability and the economy.  
Having  said  that,  I  should  add  that  defining  a  monetary  policy  stance  that  aims  to  “lean 
against the wind” in a manner that is consistent with the preservation of price stability may 
not  be  straightforward.  And  the  effectiveness  of  such  a  policy  is  likely  to  depend  on  the 
effects of other factors that influence asset prices and consumer price developments. Time 
does  not  permit  to  elaborate  on  these  complex  issues.  But  let  me  note  that  the  monetary 
policy  strategy  of  the  ECB  provides  an  appropriate  and  comprehensive  framework  for  the 
analysis of the links between money and credit expansion, asset price dynamics and price 
stability risks that can provide a solid basis for decision-taking and external communication. 
More generally, addressing the broader issue of how to minimise the risk of financial bubbles 
occurring requires the involvement of the private sector itself, financial market regulators and 
supervisors of financial institutions. Monetary policy could, under certain circumstances, play 
a role in containing this risk, but it is certainly not the main instrument to help deal with the 
emergence,  persistence  or  unwinding  of  financial  imbalances.  Not  least  against  the 
background of the market turmoil, we can ask the question: Is there anything else that central 
banks could – or should – do to minimise the likelihood of significant financial market volatility 
and to strengthen the capacity of the financial system to  absorb their consequences? The 
answer to this question involves various functions and potential actions of central banks, but I 
would  like  to  stress  the  contribution  which  central  banks  can  make  by  enhancing  their 
monitoring  of  financial  stability,  by  further  developing  the  pertinent  methodologies  and 
models and improving the availability of the relevant data. 
This is, of course, no easy task. Contagion effects and likely non-linearities in both the build-
up of imbalances and their transmission across the financial system and to the real economy 
make  the  modelling  of  financial  stability  risks  very  complex.  Moreover,  assessing  and 
estimating the likelihood of typically low probability events – the famous “black swans” – is 
exceedingly challenging. 
There is no time now to discuss these matters in detail. Allow me, however, to make three 
pertinent remarks in this context: First, all of the financial stability indicators that are currently 
being developed (by the IMF, central banks and in research institutions) – be they indicators 
based on securities prices (such as credit spreads, distances-to default, volatilities implied by 
options  prices),  or  “rule  of  thumb”  thresholds  derived  from  longer-term  historical  averages, 
fundamental  equilibrium  considerations,  or  from  cross-country  comparisons  –  certainly 
contain  important  information,  but  they  are  also  subject  to  important  inherent  limitations. 
Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  appropriately  combine  the  information  contained  in  various 
indicators and avoid excessive reliance on single indicators.10
Second,  in  order  to  create  an  internally  consistent  framework,  or  model,  for  analysing 
imbalances  and  monitoring  financial  stability,  it  is  also  necessary  to  identify  linkages  and 
channels  of  contagion  within  the  financial  sector  –  across  markets,  institutions  and 
infrastructures – and between the financial and non-financial sectors. Such complexity poses 
a formidable modelling challenge. Even if models might never be able to predict a financial 
crisis,  and  its  precise  timing,  we  can  nevertheless  seek  to  develop  models  for  assessing 
vulnerabilities.  
Third,  a  promising  way  of  gauging  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to  cope  with 
disturbances  is  stress-testing,  which  is  increasingly  used  at  a  macro  level  for  assessing 
mainly the stability of banking systems. Important advances have been made in developing 
                                                 
10   See Borio and Lowe (2002), Detken and Smets (2004); and ECB (2007). 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 7
stress-testing techniques, and central banks have played a catalytic role in this progress.11 
However,  also  with  regard  to  stress-testing  techniques,  we  are  faced  with  important 
limitations,  related  to  unpredictable  non-linearities  or  unexpected  links  that  may  surface 
during periods of stress. Until the existing limitations have been adequately addressed, our 
financial stability assessment will need to use an eclectic approach, building on a wide range 
of data sources, indicators and models.  
Looking forward, I see the need to make further progress on at least three fronts, concerning 
(i)  the  availability  of  data,  (ii)  the  development  of  models  and  (iii)  the  understanding  of 
linkages.  Regarding  data,  more  and  better  data  on  quantity  indicators  –  such  as  liquidity, 
leverage,  market  positioning,  etc.  –  would  help  in  shedding  light  not  only  on  the  indicator 
properties  of  securities  prices,  but  also  on  the  vulnerabilities  prevailing  within  financial 
markets. In addition, micro balance sheet data, especially on distribution of exposures, can 
be helpful when seeking to identify the relevance of linkages both between real and financial 
sectors  and  within  the  financial  system  itself.12  As  financial  institutions  further  strengthen 
their practices, data availability in this area may improve over time.  
With regard to models, we need dynamic general equilibrium modelling frameworks capable 
of  measuring  (possibly  non-linear)  interactions  between  the  financial  and  non-financial 
sectors of the economy and the links to monetary policy instruments. This would allow for a 
more  accurate  assessment  of  the  likely  impact  of  adverse  disturbances,  and  the  further 
development macroeconomic stress-testing techniques is clearly are a promising avenue to 
pursue in this respect.  
Finally, regarding linkages, further work would be desirable on the modelling of real-financial 
interaction, and on interactions within the financial system itself, including payment systems 
and interbank markets. This would help to better understand the likely impact of correcting 
imbalances  on  financial  institutions,  markets  and  infrastructures,  and  to  capture  possible 
second-round effects of financial crises. 
Concluding remarks 
V.  
Let me conclude on a note of appreciation and optimism: significant progress has been made 
in  recent  years  in  understanding  how  financial  imbalances  emerge,  why  they  persist,  and 
how  they  may  be  avoided,  also,  and  especially,  thanks  to  the  dedicated  effort  and  fruitful 
work  of  researchers  in  academia  and  policy-making  institutions.  But  of  course,  many 
conceptual  and  methodological  challenges  lie  ahead.  As  you  witnessed,  some  of  the 
explanations given and conclusions drawn were tentative, for the fact is that we do not know 
enough to provide a complete and accurate diagnosis of all the problems and definite policy 
prescriptions. Therefore, there is plenty of scope for economists to further contribute towards 
the  deepening  of  our  understanding  of  these  phenomena  and  to  the  development  of  tools 
which can help to quantify their effects and identify the appropriate policy responses. After 
all, anticipating the consequences of financial innovation for the functioning of the financial 
system  is  a  process  of  continuous  learning  and  discovery.  New  products  are  likely  to  be 
invented, and some of these may give rise to new and unexpected risks. Unfortunately, we 
often  learn  about  the  risks  only  after  they  have  materialised.  It  is,  therefore,  likely  that  as 
markets will continue to develop and innovate and as long as investors’ “animal spirits” are 
not harnessed by an appropriate market and institutional framework that can foster prudence 
and discipline, the bubbles and financial imbalances will reappear in our economies. And so 
                                                 
11   See  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (2005);  Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision  (2006, 
2008). 
12   Possible reference here to the example of household indebtedness which could be less of a problem if it is 
concentrated on high-income deciles, or bank exposures, if they are on loans/assets that are not in particular 
risk. 
8 
 BIS Review 85/2008
will the need for further analysis on our research agenda. This is a clear example of the truth 
of  the  observation  (made  by  19th  century  English  author  Mark  Pattison)  that  often  “in 
research the horizon recedes as we advance”. There is no shortage of challenges ahead! 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
References 
Adalid,  Ramon  and  Carsten  Detken  (2007),  “Liquidity  Shocks  and  Asset  Price  Boom/Bust 
Cycles”, ECB Working Paper No. 732. 
Adam,  Klaus,  Albert  Marcet  and  Juan  Pablo  Nicolini  (2008),  “Stock  Market  Volatility  and 
Learning”, ECB Working Paper No. 862. 
Abreu,  Dilip  and  Markus  K.  Brunnermeier  (2002),  “Synchronization  risk  and  delayed 
arbitrage”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 66(2-3), pp. 341–360. 
Abreu, Dilip and Markus K. Brunnermeier (2003), “Bubbles and Crashes”, Econometrica, Vol. 
71(1), pp. 173-204. 
Allen,  Franklin  and  Douglas  Gale  (2000),  “Bubbles  and  Crises”,  The  Economic  Journal, 
Vol. 110(460): pp. 236255. 
Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision  (2006),  “Studies  on  credit  risk  concentration”, 
Working Paper No. 15, November. 
Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision  (2008),  “Liquidity  Risk:  Management  and 
Supervisory Challenges”, February. 
Bordo,  Michael  D.  and  Olivier  Jeanne  (2002),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices:  Does 
‘Benign Neglect’ Make Sense?”, International Finance, Vol. 5(2), pp. 139-164. 
Borio,  Claudio  and  Philip  Lowe  (2002),  “Asset  Prices,  Financial  and  Monetary  Stability: 
Exploring the Nexus”, BIS Working Paper 114. 
Case, Karl E., John M. Quigley and Robert J. Shiller (2005), “Comparing Wealth Effects: The 
Stock Market vs. the Housing Market”, Advances in Macroeconomics Vol. 5(1), pp. 1–34. 
Detken, Carsten and Frank Smets (2004), “Asset price booms and monetary policy”, in Horst 
Siebert (ed.), Macroeconomic Policies in the World Economy, Springer, Berlin. 
ECB (2007), “Financial Stability Review”, Box 9 “Understanding Financial Market Liquidity”, 
June 2007.  
Goodhart,  Charles  and  Boris  Hofmann  (2008),  “House  Prices,  Money,  Credit  and  the 
Macroeconomy”, ECB Working Paper No. 888. 
Garber,  Peter  M.  (1990),  “Famous  First  Bubbles”,  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives,  Vol. 
4(2), Spring, pp. 35-54. 
Garber, Peter M. (2001), “Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias”, The 
MIT Press, Cambridge (MA) 
Helbling,  Thomas  and  Marco  Terrones  (2003),  “When  Bubbles  Burst”,  World  Economic 
Outlook April, 2003: Chapter II. International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.  
Herring, Richard and Susan Wachter (2003), “Bubbles in Real Estate Markets. Asset Price 
Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory, and International Policies. Chapter 14: 
217, The MIT Press. 
Pastor,  Lubos  and  Pietro  Veronesi  (2006),  “Was  There  a  Nasdaq  Bubble  in  the  Late 
1990s?”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 81(1), pp. 61-100. 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 9
Skudelny,  Frauke  (2008),  “Euro  Area  Consumption:  Is  There  a  Role  for  Housing  Wealth 
Effects?” ECB, mimeo. 
Slacalek,  Jirka  (2006),  “What  Drives  Personal  Consumption?  The  Role  of  Housing  and 
Financial Wealth”, DIW Discussion Paper No. 647.  
10 
 BIS Review 85/2008
