Frederic S Mishkin: The importance of economic education and financial 
literacy 
Speech  by  Mr  Frederic  S  Mishkin,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Third  National  Summit  on  Economic  and  Financial  Literacy, 
Washington DC, 27 February 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 As an educator myself, it's a pleasure to be here today to take part in this important event 
that  brings  people  together  from  educational  organizations  all  over  the  country,  with  the 
common  goal  of  educating  students  and  citizens  in  the  fundamentals  of  economic  and 
financial  literacy.  As  many  of  you  know,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  had  a  long  and  fruitful 
relationship  with  the  National  Council  on  Economic  Education  (NCEE),  through  our  many 
Reserve Bank collaborative efforts around the country, and through leadership at the national 
level.  This  leadership  is  evidenced,  in  part,  by  the  involvement  of  my  former  and  present 
colleagues  on  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  Cathy  Minehan  and  Gary  Stern,  who 
currently  serve  as  NCEE  board  members.  Cathy,  of  course,  is  the  former  president  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, a bank that under her leadership has played a key role in 
furthering economic education in our New England states. Gary is president of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, from where he has served not only as a long-time member on 
NCEE's board, but also as its chair. And they are just two of the many Federal Reserve Bank 
presidents and officials who have worked to foster and improve economic education with the 
National Council over the years.  
There can hardly be a better time to make the case for economic and financial literacy than 
right now. Others have doubtless stood before an audience like you in years past and made 
the same case, but now we face a downturn in our housing industry fueled, at least in part, 
by  unwise  mortgage  borrowing  and,  at  times,  abusive  lending  practices.  Improving 
consumers'  knowledge  of  the  home  mortgage  process  will  better  equip  them  to  avoid 
unsuitable mortgages in the future. Our national economy has been strained by this housing 
slowdown  and  other  forces,  causing  policymakers  and  others  to  debate  what  response  is 
necessary. Also, during this election season, we are reminded of the importance of economic 
issues. Just a brief consideration of these three cases shows that a better-educated citizenry 
can  not  only  contribute  to  a  better  functioning  economy,  but  also  to  a  more-effective 
government.  
On  the  first  point,  many  lessons  can  be  drawn  from  the  downward  swing  in  the  housing 
industry, ranging from those that individual consumers can learn at the micro level, to those 
that  financial  companies  can  learn  about  investment  and  oversight.  In  that  regard,  the 
Federal Reserve has proposed new rules to strengthen regulatory oversight and to protect 
consumers in the future, and we continue to assess this episode to determine what more can 
be done to help homebuyers and homeowners. Of course, one of the most effective ways to 
help  consumers  is  to  empower  them  with  information.  And  this  gets  to  our  first  case  for 
economic  and  financial  literacy:  Improving  consumers'  economic  decision  making  will 
enhance  the  effectiveness  of  new  rules  and  regulations.  And  while  we  at  the  Federal 
Reserve are charged with regulatory duties, we certainly see the value of education and the 
positive  impact  it  can  have  on  the  broader  economy.  While  the  current  troubles  in  the 
housing industry stem from a number of causes, a better-informed citizenry would likely have 
resulted in more-prudent decision making and, consequently, less harm to the economy. 
In the matter of the national economy, here the call for economic education is based on the 
idea that a better-informed citizenry makes for better economic policymaking. This is a subtle 
argument,  but  its  logic  is  no  less  clear.  As  my  friend  Alan  Blinder,  the  noted  Princeton 
BIS Review 24/2008 
 1
economist and textbook author, as well as the former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve's 
Board of Governors, has said, an uneducated citizenry can lead to simplistic policy solutions, 
and those solutions are usually suboptimal. "The fact that the basic level of economic literacy 
in the country, indeed in the world, is so low," Alan has said, "is one of the things that leaves 
the  political  process  so  vulnerable  to  this  malady."1  Now,  even  Alan  would  admit  that  it's 
difficult to draw a direct line from economic literacy to economic policymaking, but politicians 
listen to their constituents at home, just as they are supposed to do. And at a time when our 
elected officials are confronted with a myriad of options to address a slowing economy, or 
when they consider the increasing fears about a globalizing economy, it's fair to ask whether 
they are getting good economic counsel from their constituents. This is not to say that there 
is  only  one  valid  answer  for  these  complicated  questions,  but  it  does  mean  that  we  get  a 
better  answer  when  we  are  all  better  informed.  Let  me  reinforce  this  point  by  sharing  this 
quote from Ben Bernanke, Chairman of the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors: 
The  Federal  Reserve's  mission  of  conducting  monetary  policy  and 
maintaining  a  stable  financial  system  depends  upon  the  participation  and 
support of an educated public. Accomplishing this mission involves trade-
offs  and  tough  decisions.  As  the  Fed  pursues  the  monetary  policy 
objectives  that  have  been  set  out  for  us  by  Congress  –  to  pursue  price 
stability, maximum employment, and moderate long-term interest rates – it 
is  essential  that  the  public  understand  our  objectives  and  our  actions. 
Educating the public about the reasoning behind our decisions helps build 
confidence in our economic system – another critical factor in keeping our 
economy running smoothly.2  
Chairman Bernanke made those comments nearly two years ago, but the message is no less 
relevant today. 
Let's now consider our third case for economic and financial literacy – the role of citizens as 
voters. Americans elect a president every four years and we also send representatives and 
senators to Washington. As is so often the case, the pundits and the opinion polls tell us that 
the  top  issues  on  voters'  minds  this  year  are  those  relating  to  the  economy.  What  do  the 
candidates  have  to  say  about  how,  if  at  all,  the  federal  government  should  address  the 
lagging national economy? How about issues relating to trade? Taxes? Income inequality? 
Even issues that are not often described as economic – such as health care, education, and 
the environment – are informed by an understanding of economic principles. All these issues 
are  better  understood  by  an  appreciation  of  tradeoffs,  cost-benefit  ratios,  and  opportunity 
cost, to name just a few core economic tools and principles.  
Finally,  as we  are  so  often  told,  people  vote  with  their  pocketbooks.  And  not  only do  they 
vote  with  their  pocketbooks,  they  also  make  a  lot  of  pocketbook  decisions  every  day  that 
have  an  impact  on  the  health  of  the  economy,  such  as  whether  to  take  on  a  particular 
mortgage, how much to save and invest, whether to lease or buy a car, and how to manage 
credit cards. This brings us back to the importance of financial literacy. The choices we make 
as  individuals  –  as  consumers,  investors,  and  even  voters  –  are  linked  to  the  broader 
economy in ways that we don't always appreciate. However, one thing is certain – we make 
better  decisions  if  we  are  better  informed,  and  the  whole  economy  benefits.  That's  the 
promise  of  economic  education  –  to  get  back  to  the  title  of  this  session  –  that  it  not  only 
improves the lives of individual consumers, but that it also makes for more-effective policy 
and a better economy. Delivering on that promise is the hard part, of course, but that's where 
the National Council comes in. We at the Federal Reserve are proud of our relationship with 
                                                 
1   Blinder, Alan S, (1994), "Interview with Alan S. Blinder," The Region, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 
December, 1994. 
2   Bernanke, Ben (2006), "A Message from Chairman Bernanke," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, July, 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2008
the  National  Council  and  with  other  educational  organizations  around  the  country,  and  we 
look forward to continuing this important work. The task at hand is not easy, as all of you 
know, but the returns are high.  
BIS Review 24/2008 
 3
