José Manuel González-Páramo: Some lessons from the global financial 
turmoil 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the IIF Conference on “Global Financial Turmoil: Next Steps for 
the Industry”, London, 9 September 2008. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in London at the IIF Conference. I would like to thank 
the Institute of International Finance for inviting me and providing me with the opportunity to 
share  with  you  some  views  about  the  financial  market  turbulences,  how  we  –  as  central 
bankers – have addressed them and some of the lessons learned so far. 
International transmission of liquidity shocks 
2.  
Although the turbulences are still present and their consequences, or even their origins, have 
not  been  fully  analysed  or  identified  yet,  the  rapid  transmission  of  liquidity  shocks  at  the 
international  level  stands  out  for  further  reflection.  Clearly,  underlying  the  international 
transmission mechanism is the fact that interbank markets are linked across countries by the 
activity  and  funding  needs  of  banks  doing  cross-border  business  on  a  large  geographical 
scale  and  holding  assets  and  liabilities  denominated  in  varying  currencies.  Liquidity 
conditions in interbank markets are therefore correlated at the global level, because many of 
the key players are subject to common shocks, and this probably is a key factor explaining 
similar liquidity conditions across money markets. 
At the risk of pointing out the obvious, let me stress that liquidity shocks are not exclusive to 
stress situations. Under normal conditions, however, market illiquidity is typically short-lived 
in particular since it creates profit opportunities for traders who, by providing extra funding 
liquidity,  support  the  price  discovery  process  and  bring  the  market  to  functioning  again.  In 
contrast, during a severe turbulence the disruption of the mechanisms channelling liquidity – 
be it through assets prices or the balance sheet of financial institutions – may also profoundly 
and  lastingly  perturb  the  functioning  of  markets,  ultimately  creating  risks  for  systemic 
imbalances. The current episode is an example of this. Even the interbank market, which is 
considered the deepest and most liquid of all markets, has been “frozen” long-lastingly. This 
has happened not primarily due to a lack of liquidity, but because of uncertainties as to the 
size and locations of losses created by the opaque transfer of credit risk brought about by 
complex securitisation mechanisms.  
Such uncertainty has heightened counterparty credit risk concerns and prevented banks from 
lending to each other. Moreover, it has brought to the fore the increased interaction between 
market liquidity and funding liquidity. By market liquidity I mean the ability to trade an asset 
quickly and at low costs with little impact on its price, whereas by funding liquidity I refer to 
the ease for economic units, in this case especially banks, to meet payment obligations with 
internal or external funds as they fall due. 
The trend among large banks, especially among the major global banks, has been towards 
greater reliance on wholesale market sources of funding. Instead of relying on retail deposits, 
banks are increasingly dependent on interbank borrowing, both unsecured and collateralised, 
short  and  long-term  debt,  and,  as  an  ultimate  line  of  defence,  on  the  sale  of  marketable 
securities.  This  has  made  access  to  liquidity  more  dependent  on  market  conditions. 
Moreover,  the  range  of  systemically  relevant  institutions  has  become  broader.  In  the 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 1
literature on “traditional” banking crises, the focus has been on the systemic implications of a 
deposit  run.  However,  non-deposit  taking  investment  banks  and  primary  dealers  play  a 
systemic  role  in  their  crucial  broker-dealer  function,  too.  They  perform  a  key  role  in 
maintaining market liquidity in a broad range of unsecured and secured markets. If they face 
funding  liquidity  constraints,  market  liquidity  will  be  widely  affected,  with  potential  negative 
repercussions for the banking sector.  
The interaction between market liquidity and funding liquidity is best illustrated by a concrete 
example: should the market liquidity of a particular asset be low, it will also be more difficult 
to use it as collateral to raise funds, for instance in the repo market. The flip side of the coin 
is  that  difficulties  in  raising  funds  by  large  market  makers  then  may  in  turn  further  reduce 
market liquidity. Thus, severe events or shocks, such as a credit crunch negatively affecting 
market  liquidity  may  trigger  a  negative  feedback  process  between  market  liquidity  and 
funding liquidity. Indeed, during the turbulences, market liquidity first declined for a number of 
assets closely related to the market for sub-prime mortgage backed securities – the core of 
the  recent  turbulence.  It  then  went  on  to  affect  all  kinds  of  structured  finance  products, 
including re-pricing of plain-vanilla ABS and RMBS securities. Problems in the ABS market 
spilled over to the market for asset-backed commercial papers. The re-pricing of securitised 
instruments and loss of confidence in turn negatively affected liquidity in the secured non-
government  repurchase  agreement  markets  as  many  banks  no  longer  wanted  to  accept 
securitised  products  as  collateral.  Only  government  bonds  remained  fairly  liquid,  although 
some  price  differentiation  across  countries  has  been  seen  due  to  differences  in  public 
finances. It became obvious that the deteriorating market liquidity had a negative impact on 
funding  liquidity:  the  originate-and-distribute  banking  business  model  took  a  hit  due  to  an 
almost complete dry-up of the securitisation market. 
This  environment  poses  challenges  for  central  banks,  as  addressing  funding  liquidity 
shortages  may  require  assisting  market  liquidity.  Clearly,  the  nature  of  the  turbulence 
matters: concerns for market liquidity itself could in principle be addressed by central bank 
actions, whereas central bank liquidity operations would be ill positioned to tackle individual 
counterparty solvency concerns.1 Along these lines, let me explain how we as central banks 
responded  to  changing  needs  with  operational  measures  and  increased  international  co-
operation.  
Central bank responses 
3.  
Let  me  sketch  with  a  broad  brush  the  various  actions  the  major  central  banks  have 
implemented in the course of the turbulences. Clearly, the responses varied across central 
banks, reflecting differences in the extent to which markets have been hit by the turbulences, 
and differences in the design of their operational frameworks. But in general terms, central 
banks tried to address the liquidity squeeze in similar ways, acting on four fronts: 
First, central banks acted to keep short-term money market rates in line with their policy rates 
(or  targets)  through  more  active  reserve  management,  reassuring  banks  of  their  orderly 
access  to  overnight  funds.  They  increased  the  frequency  of  operations  to  respond  with 
greater sensitivity to shifts in the demand for reserves.  
Second,  central  banks  sought  to  ease  pressures  in  broader  funding  markets  through  a 
combination of measures: 
• 
They  increased  the  supply  of  longer-term  funds  via  discretionary  operations  to 
accommodate the demand for term funds. 
                                                 
1   See “Central bank operations in response to the financial turbulences”, CGFS Papers, No 31, July 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2008
   Most  of  the  central  banks  expanded  to  varying  degrees  the  collateral  accepted  in 
collateralised lending operations, and included in some cases securitised assets that 
have been particularly affected by the liquidity squeeze.  
Moreover, they widened and improved the access of counterparties to collateralised 
lending from the central bank, to facilitate the distribution of central bank funds and 
increased the scale of those operations. 
Some  central  banks  increased  securities  lending  to  improve  the  functioning  of 
interbank repo markets. 
increased 
Third,  central  banks 
through  enhanced 
communication and collective market monitoring, and through co-ordinated actions to provide 
longer-term funds. Finally, some central banks also calibrated their monetary policy stance to 
take into account any impact the unfolding credit market turbulences might have on inflation 
and real activity. 
their  co-operative  efforts  both 
to 
framework 
the  built-in 
flexibility  of 
its  operational 
Responses of the Eurosystem 
3.1.  
Going more into depth, let me describe how the Eurosystem responded with its operational 
measures to banks’ changed liquidity demand.  
In  line  with  other  affected  central  banks,  the  Eurosystem  resorted  to  a  more  pro-active 
liquidity  management  to  maintain  a  proper  control  of  short-term  interest  rates.  However, 
owing 
for  monetary  policy 
implementation, the Eurosystem could address the impaired functioning of the money market 
through  relatively  minor,  technical  adjustments  to  its  normal  operations,  while  at  the  same 
time utilising the full latitude of its operational framework. 
In  particular,  it  adjusted  the  distribution  of  liquidity  supplied  over  the  course  of  the 
maintenance period, in contrast to normal times, by frontloading the supply of liquidity at the 
beginning  of  the  period  and  reducing  it  later,  so  that  the  total  amount  of  liquidity  over  an 
entire maintenance period remained unchanged.  
Furthermore,  the  amount  of  refinancing  provided  via  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
(LTROs) increased significantly with a view to smooth conditions in the term money market. 
Since  April,  the  Eurosystem  has  further  diversified  the  LTRO  maturity  structure  by  also 
offering  LTROs  with  a  6  month  maturity.  The  amount  of  refinancing  provided  via  the  one-
week  main  refinancing  operations  (MROs)  was  reduced  correspondingly,  so  that  the  total 
amount of outstanding refinancing has remained unchanged. This measure was welcomed 
by market participants, although the amount of outstanding 6-month LTROs (currently €50 
billion) is admittedly relatively small to account for all the demand for term refinancing in the 
money  market.  As  a  result  of  these  measures,  the  average  level  of  EONIA  has  remained 
close  to  the  minimum  bid  rate,  though  with  a  higher  volatility  than  before  the  start  of  the 
turbulences. 
Moreover, in addition to the main aim of controlling very short term rates, three features of 
the  operational  framework  in  combination  with  a  lengthening  of  the  maturity  profile  in  the 
regular  repo  operations  have  allowed  the  Eurosystem  to  address  funding  constraints 
indirectly also in term money and asset markets: 
Firstly,  access  of  a  broad  range  of  counterparties  to  central  bank  liquidity,  not  only  at  the 
marginal  lending  facility  but  also  at  the  regular  temporary  open  market  operations. 
Counterparty  eligibility  criteria  are  defined  in  general  terms  so  that  a  wide  range  of 
institutions,  small  saving  banks  and  co-operative  banks  can  access  central  bank  liquidity 
directly. This feature of the operational framework has helped during the turbulences, as it 
allowed the Eurosystem to step in and effectively mitigate funding liquidity risk for a broad 
range of counterparties when short-term interbank markets stopped functioning properly.  
BIS Review 107/2008 
 3
Secondly, acceptance of a broad range of collateral not only in the marginal lending facility 
and  intraday  credit  operations,  but  also  in  temporary  open  market  operations.  As  a 
consequence,  sufficiency  of  collateral  has  not  been  a  constraint,  facilitating  access  for  a 
broad range of counterparties to central bank money. Moreover, the collateral framework has 
allowed counterparties to economise on the use of central government bonds with the central 
bank, which has been often the only collateral counterparties could still use in repo markets. 
And it has to some extent eased refinancing pressures for assets, such as ABSs, that faced 
a nearly complete withdrawal of third party investors, since they can be brought forward as 
collateral in credit operations of the Eurosystem. This includes also ABSs that counterparties 
have  originated  themselves  and  retained  on  their  balance  sheet.  The  Eurosystem  accepts 
only ABSs based on a true sale and that are bankruptcy remote from the originator. These 
requirements should in principle ensure a delinkage of the issuer from the originator. 
Thirdly,  the  Eurosystem  provides  the  bulk  of  its  refinancing  via  temporary  open  market 
operations. Consequently they are of a large scale, and allow the central bank to temporarily 
take over a significant part of the intermediation function of markets if needed.  
Increased international cooperation 
3.2  
As  pointed  out  before,  in  addition  to  domestic  operational  responses,  central  banks  have 
strengthened  their  cooperation  as  the  turbulence  developed,  first  through  enhanced 
information  sharing  and  collective  monitoring  of  market  developments  and  later  on  by 
coordinated steps to provide liquidity.  One  example of joint actions between central banks 
during  this  period  is  the  by  now  familiar  US  dollar  Term  Auction  Facility,  which  started  in 
December of last year, in which the ECB agreed with the US Federal Reserve to grant loans 
in  dollars  to  euro  area  banks  with  a  maturity  of  one  month  against  collateral  eligible  for 
Eurosystem  credit  operations.  As  you  know,  Eurosystem  loans  were  financed  through  a 
currency  arrangement  (swap  line)  with  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  granted  at  a  fixed  rate 
equal  to  the  marginal  rate  of  the  simultaneous  Federal  Reserve  tenders.  The  first  two 
operations,  for  an  amount  of  USD  10  billion  each,  were  settled  in  December  2007  and 
renewed  in  January  2008.  Similar  operations  were  also  carried  out  by  the  Swiss  National 
Bank.  These  liquidity-providing  operations  did  not  have  a  direct  effect  on  euro  liquidity 
conditions, but were conducted to address the funding of euro area banks in US dollars and 
aimed at improving global funding conditions.  
Since  these  coordinated  actions,  the  G-10  central  banks  have  continued  to  work  closely 
together  and  to  consult  regularly  on  liquidity  pressures  in  funding  markets.  Owing  to 
continued pressures observed in the money market, the ECB, as well as the Swiss National 
Bank, resumed in March 2008 the US dollar liquidity providing operations in connection with 
the Federal Reserve Term Auction Facility, every second week for as long as needed, and 
for an increased amount of USD 15 billion each. This amount was further increased to USD 
25 billion each on 2 May 2008, and in August the Eurosystem agreed to extend the maturity 
of a fraction of the TAF operations to 84 days.  
It is important to stress that the action in connection with the TAF marked, to my knowledge, 
the  first  systematic  and  multilateral  central  bank  co-operation  in  the  money  market  field,  a 
market  which  is  central  to  the  implementation  of  a  central  bank’s  monetary  policy.  In  my 
view,  the  TAF  operations  have  been  successful,  as  they  were  well  received  by  market 
participants’ high demand, and succeeded to address the liquidity challenges in the global 
term money markets.  
One  interesting  remark  around  the  participation  in  the  TAF  is  why  banks  would  prefer  to 
participate in the European USD auctions instead of obtaining the USD directly from the Fed 
via  their  TAF  auctions.  There  are  several  possible  explanations  to  this.  First,  and  rather 
obvious,  some  European  banks  have  no  direct  access  to  the  Fed  and  its  TAF  auctions. 
Second, the European central banks participating in the TAF have different lists of eligible 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2008
collateral  which  for  some  banks  have  made  the  access  to  USD  easier.  Third,  European 
auctions for US dollars provide a better timing for European banks.  
Lessons for central banks  
4.  
Going forward, what preliminary lessons can we draw as central bankers from the ongoing 
turbulence? 
Lessons for the implementation of monetary policy 
4.1 
In  the  past  common  central  bank  wisdom  was  to  say  that  there  is  no  unique  way  to 
implement  monetary  policy.  The  currently  prolonged  dislocation  of  interbank  markets  and 
asset markets more broadly has though shown that there are certain key operational features 
that facilitate the implementation of monetary policy in such conditions. In order to distribute 
reserves effectively when the interbank market is impaired, central banks should be capable 
of  providing  access  to  collateralised  lending  operations  to  a  broad  set  of  counterparties 
against  a  broad  range  of  collateral  and  on  a  large  scale.  Whether  those  features  should 
become part of the regular operational framework or are introduced on demand in distressed 
market conditions, is ultimately the choice of each individual central bank.  
The recent developments have provided also central banks with a wealth of information that 
has  highlighted  a  number  of  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system,  namely  in  the  areas  of 
transparency,  valuation,  risk  management  practices,  and  market  functioning.  The  lessons 
learned affect also the way central banks mitigate risks in monetary policy operations. 
As  regards  the  Eurosystem,  we  are  of  the  belief  that  our  flexible  operational  framework, 
including  the  collateral  component,  has  served  us  well  until  now,  and  has  helped  us  to 
weather  a  number  of  tests,  including  the  latest  of  a  prolonged  liquidity  squeeze  in  a  wide 
range  of  unsecured  and  secured  markets.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  there  is  no 
scope for refinement and further enhancement. 
One very recent example is the fine-tuning of our risk control framework in the context of our 
bi-annual  review  of  the  adequacy  of  the  risk  control  measures.  The  Eurosystem  needs  to 
make  sure  that  the  collateral  and  risk  control  framework  are  monitored  and  adjusted  over 
time  to  ensure  that  an  adequate  level  of  risk  tolerance  is  met.  This  ensures  that  the 
Eurosystem  remains  adequately  protected  against  financial  risks  across  time,  which  is  an 
obligation for the Eurosystem enshrined in its statutes.  
The results of previous reviews of the risk control framework were reflected in the 2004 and 
2006 editions of the General Documentation. In February 2004, different liquidity categories 
were introduced to better reflect the risks associated with different eligible asset classes. In 
2006,  specific  eligibility  criteria  regarding  asset-backed  securities  were  established  that 
excluded  instruments  such  as  synthetic  CDOs  and  cash  CDOs  containing  other  synthetic 
tranches of ABSs. 
The  2008  biennial  review  introduced  an  additional  set  of  risk  control  measures  aiming  at 
ensuring  that  the  collateral  continues  to  meet  the  Eurosystem’s  risk  tolerance  level,  while 
allowing  at  the  same  time  the  effective  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  The  new  risk 
control measures, communicated by the ECB on 4 September and entering into force on 1 
February  2009  reflect,  inter  alia,  improvements  in  the  methodological  framework,  the 
assessment  of  market  and  liquidity  risk  characteristics  of  eligible  assets,  the  actual  use  of 
eligible assets by counterparties and new developments in financial instruments. 
I would like to highlight in particular the decision to require better rating disclosure standards. 
To  be  eligible  as  collateral  for  Eurosystem  credit  operations,  asset-backed-securities  will 
need  a  rating  that  must  be  explained  in  a  publicly  available  credit  rating  report,  being  a 
detailed  pre-sale  or  new  issue  report,  which  should  include  inter  alia  a  comprehensive 
analysis of structural and legal aspects and a detailed collateral pool assessment. Moreover, 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 5
rating agencies – and the Eurosystem believes this is very important – would need to publish 
rating reviews of asset backed securities at least on a quarterly basis. 
The Eurosystem has witnessed in recent times a deterioration in the disclosure standards of 
rating  agencies  for  some  of  the  ABS  that  are  eligible  for  its  credit  operations.  The  new 
measure  requires  enhanced  disclosure  standards  in  order  to  be  able  to  perform  eligibility 
assessments  that  take  into  account  inter  alia  the  assessment  and  analysis  conducted  by 
rating agencies. Of particular importance for the Eurosystem is that the performance of ABS 
transactions  is  monitored  on  a  regular  basis.  By  requiring  that  the  result  of  the  rating 
assessment as well as the regular surveillance reports are made public, the Eurosystem can 
support the functioning of ABS markets more widely through enhanced transparency, which 
is a pre-requisite to restore investor confidence. 
Other important changes to the risk control include the introduction of a uniform haircut of 
12% to asset-backed securities for all residual maturities and all coupon types, as well as a 
valuation mark-down of 5% to all asset-backed securities that are theoretically valued by the 
Eurosystem.  On  the  one  hand,  the  introduction  of  an  uniform  12%  haircut  responds  to  a 
careful  analysis  of  the  liquidity  characteristics  of  asset-backed  securities,  which  provided 
evidence  that  an  upwards  adjustment  of  haircuts  for  asset-backed  securities  with  short 
maturities was advisable. The observation of the significant draw-downs in some ABS prices 
experienced over the last year, even in quite short periods of time, has reinforced this view. 
On the other hand, the application of a 5% valuation markdown to theoretically valued asset 
backed  securities  reflects  recent  experience  showing  that  the  valuation  of  asset-backed 
securities  can  be  subject  to  significant  uncertainties  especially  when  there  are  no  market 
prices that could provide a reference for intrinsic value. By introducing both measures, which 
have been motivated entirely by the desire to maintain an adequate level of risk tolerance, 
the  Eurosystem  can  contribute  to  the  restoration  of  normal  conditions  in  the  functioning  of 
asset backed primary markets. 
4.2.   Measures to enhance the international distribution of liquidity 
The current turbulence has also demonstrated that global channels for distributing liquidity 
across borders may become seriously impaired. To prepare for that possibility, central banks 
should  take  steps  to  strengthen  their  capacity  to  counter  problems  in  the  international 
distribution  of  liquidity.  It  is  interesting  for  me  to  see  the  high  degree  of  consensus  about 
future  measures,  comparing  the  seven  recommendations  for  the  central  bank  community 
from your Final Report of the IIF Committee on Market Best Practises, with those seven of 
the  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System’s  report  on  Central  bank  operations  in 
response  to  the  financial  turmoil.  Both  reports  point  out  to  the  need  of  establishing  or 
maintaining  standing  currency  swap  lines.  From  a  technical  point  of  view,  the  coordinated 
distribution of foreign currency to the domestic bank sector through swap lines is a feasible 
solution, presenting some potential advantages, including rapid implementation, expeditious 
settlement and immediate access to the liquidity by banks, and could be very important in 
emergency  situations.  Moreover,  such  swap  lines  could  provide  flexibility  in  choosing  the 
best  way  for  redistribution  of  foreign  currency  funds.  Also,  the  implementation  can  –  and 
must  be  designed  in  such  a  way  that  it  does  not  conflict  with  domestic  monetary  policy 
implementation. 
Both reports also consider developing and maintaining the ability to accept foreign currency 
denominated  assets,  which  is  more  complicated  than  maintaining  a  swap  line  but  could 
support  the  efficient  management  of  collateral  of  internationally  active  banks  with  multi-
currency liquidity demands. To understand this, it needs to be borne in mind that settlement 
–  a  step  that  goes  largely  unnoticed,  but  is  of  critical  importance  –  can  become  a 
constraining factor. When collateral is available in the market where the central bank granting 
credit  is  located,  the  basic  step  of  delivery  takes  a  few  seconds.  However,  in  the  global 
financial  market  major  banks  with  large  international  portfolios  may  need  liquidity  in  one 
country or currency, and hold eligible collateral in another currency and in another country. 
6 
 BIS Review 107/2008
 4.3. 
Cross-border  mechanisms  are  in  place  between  the  infrastructures  of  major  markets  and 
allow banks to move collateral where needed. These mechanisms normally meet the market 
needs, since in routine situations there is no particular “urgency” to deliver collateral. 
However, in an emergency situation, things may be very different. Liquidity needs may arise 
suddenly  and  within  a  short  time,  and  standard  transfer  procedures  may  simply  not  be 
effective or quick enough, or recourse to troubled or volatile markets may be overly costly for 
the collateral borrower. With its collateral stuck in one country and being unable to deliver it 
to the relevant central bank, a global bank may have to make costly choices to find a solution 
to its liquidity strains. And the situation may get possibly worse if, for example, the liquidity is 
needed in a market located to the west of the one where the collateral-holder is located. In 
some  cases,  time-zone  differences  may  reduce  to  less  than  two  or  three  hours  the  time 
available for a transfer.  
Easing  liquidity  pressure  for  large  internationally  active  banks  by  broadening  the  range  of 
acceptable  collateral  may  contribute  to  alleviating  potential  liquidity  contagion  risks  in 
payment systems, where the bulk of activity normally comes from the largest players, thus 
having a positive influence on financial stability. However, it should be noted that accepting 
foreign currency collateral also implies additional legal and financial risks in the conduct of 
monetary policy operations. Hence, this is an area where further work is needed. 
A third possibility, which the central banks of the G-10 countries are studying through their 
Committee of Payment and Settlement Systems, is to explore ways to ease the frictions in 
the existing models for cross-border transfer of collateral. Here various questions are on the 
table: for instance,  
• 
how to increase flexibility in central banks’ and infrastructures’ availability to counter 
for time-zone frictions, or  
how  to  support  –  through  stricter  central  banks  co-operation  –  the  settlement 
process of foreign liquidity transactions. 
Deeper understanding of interdependencies between market infrastructure 
and market participants 
As part of their work to further deepen their understanding of the mechanism of transmission 
of shocks, central banks are also doing extensive work on the interdependencies between 
market infrastructure and market participants.  
Financial  markets  rely  and  depend  on  increasingly  complex  infrastructures.  Payment 
systems,  central  securities  depositories,  central  counterparties  and  their  participants  are 
interconnected by a complex network of technical, operational and financial relations.2 Not 
only  markets  rely  on  infrastructures  but,  in  turn,  modern  infrastructures  also  increasingly 
depend on well functioning, orderly and efficient markets.  
Most  of  these  interdependencies  were  introduced  to  reduce  undue  exposure  to  risks,  and 
contribute to the safer and more efficient environment that we enjoy today compared to the 
past. Still, when international markets, clearing and settlement systems and participants are 
strictly interconnected, the potential for spreading contagion across the globe via this network 
of relations should not be underestimated. 
In  our  ever-changing  environment,  understanding  shocks  transmission  mechanisms  and 
engaging in a positive dialogue with infrastructures operators and market participants are two 
tasks of central bankers that are time-consuming, resource-absorbing and on-going.  
                                                 
2   See  the  Report  on  the  interdependencies  of  payment  and  settlement  systems,  CPSS  Publications  No  84, 
June 2008, available at http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss84.htm. 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 7
Perhaps not that visible, but rewarding indeed. For instance, the increasing attention being 
devoted to the field of operational risk and business continuity has made the financial system 
resilient to a number of otherwise potentially disrupting threats. Let me give you a practical 
example: during the turmoil although some clearing and settlement systems were individually 
challenged  by  unusual  transactions  volumes,  the  system  as  a  whole  coped  well  thanks  to 
effective  capacity-planning,  appropriate  risk  management,  and  stress  testing  activities 
undertaken well before, not at the time, of the outbreak of the tensions.  
the  progress 
thorough  review  of 
Lessons for regulators and market participants 
5.  
Both  public  and  private  fora  have  made  significant  efforts  to  identify  weaknesses  in  the 
financial  sector  and  develop  measures  to  restore  its  smooth  functioning.  Against  this 
background, I would like to mention the recommendations of the Financial Stability Forum’s 
(FSF)  report  on  Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional  Resilience  as  they  represent  a  main 
reference  point  at  the  global  level  for  measures  aimed  at  addressing  the  weaknesses 
revealed by the turmoil in the financial markets. 
The short-term measures put forward by the FSF and endorsed by the G7 in April this year 
were  set  up  as  immediate  priorities  and  thus  had  a  time  horizon  of  100  days  for  their 
implementation. These comprised: (i) the full disclosure of credit institutions’ risk exposures 
in their mid-year reporting, using the leading disclosure practices set out in the FSF’s report; 
(ii)  immediate  action  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB)  to  improve 
accounting and disclosure standards for off-balance sheet items and to enhance guidance on 
fair value accounting in times of stress; (iii) the enhancement of risk management practices 
of  financial  institutions,  including  stress  testing  and  strengthening  capital  positions,  when 
needed; (iv) the revision of liquidity risk management guidelines by the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision; and (v) the revision of the code of conduct for rating agencies by the 
IOSCO.  
While  a  more 
these 
recommendations  is  due  for  the  G7  meeting  in  October,  the  preliminary  assessment  has 
been  encouraging.  Financial  institutions  have  made  progress  in  improving  their  financial 
reporting, following leading market practices and the so called “FSF template” providing for 
more meaningful quantitative and qualitative disclosures. Furthermore, guidance in this area 
has been prepared and is currently being further developed by both public fora – such as the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  at  international  level  and  the  Committee  of 
European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) in the EU – and private sector initiatives, including 
the  recommendations  of  the  European  and  the  American  Securitisation  Fora,  aiming  at 
standardising  disclosure  practices  and  at  enhancing  the  accessibility,  usability  and 
comparability of information. To conclude my reference to the major initiatives in the area of 
valuation  and  transparency,  the  IASB  is  accelerating  its  work  to  enhance  accounting  and 
disclosure standards of off-balance sheet entities and to develop guidance for valuation in 
illiquid markets.  
In the same vein. progress has been observed in the area of liquidity management and the 
enhancement  of  the  tools  for  the  oversight  of  rating  agencies.  In  the  field  of  liquidity 
management,  the  Basel  Committee  and  the  CEBS  have  issued  consultation  papers  on 
banks’  liquidity  risk  management  and  supervision.  As  regards  rating  agencies,  the  IOSCO 
published  the  revised  code  of  conduct  and  the  European  Commission  is  considering 
regulatory initiatives for their authorisation and supervision. 
From the above, it becomes evident that a lot of work is under way aimed at restoring market 
functioning, which is backed by high level political momentum (G7 and G10 as well as the 
ECOFIN  at  EU  level).  Regarding  immediate  priorities,  I  am  of  the  view,  as  I  already 
mentioned,  that  significant  progress  has  been  achieved.  Now  the  focus  is  increasingly 
shifting  towards  effective  and  congruent  implementation,  which  is  the  ultimate  objective 
implementation  of 
the 
in 
8 
 BIS Review 107/2008
against which the success of the reforms would be assessed. To this end, international and 
EU committees have to play a critical role while political momentum needs to be preserved.  
At  the  same  time,  policy  work  is  under  way  on  other  important  areas  which  have  been 
characterised as medium-term priorities. Let me make a reference to the following topics that 
I  see  as  of  critical  importance  also  from  a  central  banking  perspective:  (i)  strengthening 
prudential  oversight  of  capital  and  risk  management;  (ii)  strengthening  the  authorities’ 
responsiveness to risks; and (iii) developing robust arrangements for dealing with stress in 
the financial system. 
Effective  and  timely  implementation  of  the  new  Basel  II  framework  and  the  revision  of  the 
detected  shortcomings  thereof,  are  expected  to  realign  the  flawed  regulatory  incentives  in 
certain areas, and thus contribute to enhancing systemic resilience. To this end, assessing 
the  potential  procyclical  impact  of  Basel  II  should  be  among  the  primary  interests  of 
supervisory authorities and central banks. 
Now,  let  me  highlight  the  importance  of  improving  cooperation  and  the  exchange  of 
information  between  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks  on  financial  stability  issues. 
The recent financial market turmoil has confirmed the importance of a smooth and efficient 
relationship  between  the  central  banking  and  supervisory  functions.  In  financial  stress 
situations,  supervisory  information  remains  essential  for  the  effectiveness  of  the  central 
bank’s  financial  stability  assessments.  Conversely,  supervisors  should  benefit  from  the 
systemic  perspective  of  central  banks  when  considering  their  actions  vis-à-vis  individual 
institutions.  This  is  the  rationale  behind  the  specific  FSF  recommendation  to  enhance  the 
interplay between central banks and supervisory authorities.  
Strengthening the arrangements for crisis management, including the involvement of central 
banks in contingency planning of major financial institutions, is in this respect one of the most 
important  lessons  highlighted  by  the  FSF.  In  this  context,  the  ECB  supports  the  ongoing 
initiatives  under  the  guidance  of  the  FSF  aiming  at  ensuring  that  authorities  share 
international experiences and lessons about crisis management. These experiences should 
then be used as the basis to extract some good practices of crisis management that are of 
wide international relevance.  
Let  me  stress  that  availability  of  information  is  critical  to  maintain  incentives  along  the 
securitisation  chain  and  to  enable  market  participants  to  make  informed  decisions.  Our 
recently introduced requirement to improve the information content of pre-sale reports and to 
make them and the ongoing surveillance reports publicly available are one step to improve 
transparency. In addition, a sufficiently detailed disclosure of borrower characteristics and the 
performance of the loans over time would be important to revitalise the market. This is also of 
critical  importance  to  us  in  our  function  as  collateral  taker.  Here  I  would  like  to  echo  the 
recommendations on transparency in securitisation markets made by the Financial Stability 
Forum3  to  have  standardised  information  about  the  pools  of  assets  underlying  structured 
credit  products.  I  would  also  like  to  applaud  your  own  work  and  recommendations  on 
transparency  and  disclosure  issues  in  the  securitisation  markets.  The  responsibility  of 
identifying  areas  of  improvement  and  providing  useful  disclosures  allowing  investors’ 
accurate  assessment  of  the  risk/return  profile  of  financial  institutions  clearly  rests  primarily 
with the industry.  
Final remarks 
6.  
Let me finally offer you some concluding remarks. Policy making bodies are encouraging and 
monitoring the market-led initiatives and are evaluating the adequacy of these measures as 
                                                 
3   See  “Report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  on  Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional  Resilience”,  FSF,  April 
2008. 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 9
well as their implementation to assess whether it needs to be done more. Having said that, I 
would like to underscore again that the interventions of public authorities cannot substitute 
the need for the market to enhance disclosure by providing information that will facilitate the 
assessment  of  the  situation  of  financial  institutions  and  financial  instruments.  This  will 
eventually lead to reinstatement of confidence in the ability of the financial system to manage 
risks properly. 
Despite  the  rich  flora  of  various  market-  and  regulatory-led  initiatives,  which  I  truly 
acknowledge,  there  is  no  room  for  complacency,  either  from  your  perspective  or  from  the 
policy side. Serious efforts are needed to restore deep and orderly functioning markets which 
offer  true  secured  funding  possibilities.  We  therefore  very  much  welcome  the  different 
initiatives and proposals made by various market associations, such as your institute. Your 
final  report  on  market  best  practises  earlier  in  July  includes  a  bouquet  of  various 
recommendations  that  are  important  to  restore  the  market  functioning  again.  It  is  thus  of 
utmost  importance  that  individual  market  participants,  independently  of  IIF  membership, 
follow these recommendations. At the same time, there should be no stretching of timetables 
for enhancing disclosure, including of off-balance sheet instruments, as this is essential to 
bring market confidence back. 
Thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS Review 107/2008
