Yves Mersch: Globalisation – can Europe manage it? 
Introductory speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg and 
President  of  the  Bridge  Forum  Dialogue,  at  the  Conference  “Globalisation:  Can  Europe 
manage it?”, Luxembourg, 22 January 2008. 
 Your Royal Highnesses, 
Mr. Minister, 
Mr. President of the European Court of Auditors, 
Mr. Vice President of the European Central Bank, 
Your Excellencies, Representatives of the European and National Institutions, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you today. I would like to start by thanking you for 
participating in this event to discuss a crucial issue that has gained increasing prominence 
and touches upon many aspects of our lives and our economy: “Globalisation: Can Europe 
manage it?”. 
I should also like to thank both the Bridge Forum Dialogue and the BCL staff who contributed 
with their efforts and support to the organisation of this event. 
The integration of emerging economies into world markets, the offshoring of production and 
services, the rising global competition in markets, and the growing awareness that economic 
stability  and  development,  but  also  policy  issues  related  to  energy,  the  environment  or 
migration  require  a  global  perspective  and  at  times  even  cooperative  responses,  have  put 
globalisation at the centre of international policy debates. 
According to different sets of surveys inside Europe, the strongest supporters of globalisation 
seem  to  be  the  Nordic  countries,  such  as  Denmark  and  Sweden,  and  new  EU  member 
states,  such  as  the  Czech  Republic  and  Poland  (with  77%,  59%,  50%  and  47%  of  the 
population who regard globalisation as “an opportunity”). Opposition seems to be strongest in 
France and in Greece (with 64% of both countries’ population considering globalisation as “a 
threat”). 
Within  countries,  surveys  carried  out  in  Asian  and  European  countries  suggest  that  risk-
averse  respondents  tend  to  oppose  globalisation  most.  Moreover,  support  for  government 
safety nets also appears to be positively correlated with opposition to globalisation. What is 
perhaps more surprising is that exposure to international competition plays less of a role. 
Political orientation is not found to matter decisively either, as supporters and opponents can 
be found across the whole political spectrum. 
The rapid development of trading in tasks and offshoring in the course of last decade’s 
wave of globalisation has contributed to make the distributional effects of globalisation more 
unpredictable in mature economies. 
The  globalisation  of  finance  has  been  even  swifter  than  that  of  trade,  with  cross-border 
financial flows between mature economies almost tripling over the last quarter of a century. 
In parallel, financial innovation has developed faster than the regulatory framework. 
What lessons to draw? 
This conference should provide the forum with an enlightening discussion on the issue, and 
with  an  opportunity  to  share  your  views  and  experience,  as  academics,  central  bankers, 
economists and representatives of EU institutions constitute the audience. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 1
Having set the scene for I trust a stimulating discussion on such a complex topic, I am very 
honoured to have with us three eminent authorities on globalisation issues. Let me say just a 
few words about our distinguished guest speakers. 
First is Professor Ken Rogoff. He is a Professor of Economics at Harvard University. As 
you  know,  he  has  previously  been  Chief  Economist  and  Director  of  Research  of  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) from 2001 to 2003 and beforehand he has served as an 
economist at the IMF and also at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Professor  Rogoff  has  published  extensively  on  policy  issues  in  international  finance, 
including both exchange rates and international monetary policy. 
Let  me  also  welcome  Lucas  Papademos,  the  Vice-President  of  the  ECB  since  2002. 
Previously, he was Governor of the Bank of Greece from 1994 to 2002 and he served as a 
Senior Economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in 1980. Lucas Papademos has 
also been a Professor of Economics at the University of Athens since 1988, and he is author 
of  numerous  articles  and  essays  on  both  economic  and  monetary  policies.  Let  me  also 
mention that among other competences, he is in charge of financial stability issues within the 
Executive Board of the ECB. 
Our  third  speaker  is  Lars  Heikensten.  He  has  been  a  member  of  the  European  Court  of 
Auditors since November 2005. He previously was Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank from 
2003 to 2005, and prior to that Deputy Governor since 1995. He had been Chief Economist 
at Svenska Handelsbanken between 1992 and 1995, and had served as Under-Secretary for 
Economic  Affairs  at  the  Swedish  Ministry  of  Finance  between  1990  and  1992.  Mr 
Heikensten,  wrote  academic  papers  and  books,  and  conducted  research  in  the  area  of 
industrial policy, labour market and foreign aid. 
Again, I would like to thank the three of you, for coming to discuss globalisation. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  the  conference  organisation.  Professor  Rogoff  will  be  our  first 
speaker, followed by Lucas Papademos and then Lars Heikensten. 
Thereafter, a discussion will follow. 
You  will  understand  that  under  present  circumstances  and  high  market  volatility,  the 
speakers  would  like  to  focus  on  questions  directly  related  to  the  subject  of  tonight’s 
conference. 
I  beg  for  understanding  that  we  decline  to  comment  the  most  recent  market  or  policy 
developments. 
Let’s welcome Professor Rogoff. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2008
