Rundheersing Bheenick: The triumph of hope? 
Opening address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the 
7th Meeting of Governors of the Eastern African Chapter of the Association of African Central 
Banks, Port Louis, 15 July 2008. 
 A very good evening to all of you. And a very warm welcome to my fellow Governors, former 
Governors,  central  bankers,  other  overseas  visitors,  and  the  representatives  of  the  fourth 
estate, who are with us this evening.  
We are here to share our experience on monetary matters and to anticipate our convergence 
into  a  closer  union  as  we  together  pursue  the  road  map  agreed  for  the  African  Monetary 
Programme. Happy as I am to see such a gathering of those involved in central banks in the 
sub-region, I am sure I speak for you all, when I say, we look forward to the day when we are 
joined by our friends from those other parts of our sub-region, who are not with us tonight. 
We are missing tonight governors from the Horn of Africa and from the Seychelles. 
If  we  are  to  travel  together  we  need  to  integrate  the  hopes  and  the  experience  of  all  the 
countries in our region, not just those that have made it here today, or who are thriving best.  
I feel very privileged and honoured to say just a few words of greeting and to provide some 
preliminary observations at the start of this 7th meeting of Governors of the Eastern Africa 
chapter of the Association of African Central Banks. 
For  my  colleagues  and  I  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  this  meeting  assumes  even  greater 
significance, as we are celebrating this year the fortieth anniversary of the Independence of 
the State of Mauritius. Whilst the Bank of Mauritius is one year older than the Independent 
State, the Independence of our Monetary Policy Committee remains in its infancy. Though I 
am bound to ask if it is early showing signs of emerging as an enfant terrible! Our Millennium 
Development  Goal  target  figure  for  Infant  Mortality  is  well  down  into  single  digits;  I  am 
determined that our MPC will not be lost in its infancy. Hopefully cutting infant mortality rate 
can be twinned by cutting our inflation rate, hovering as it is here just below the double digit 
mark. I see from the country reports on our convergence programme that Mauritius has sadly 
not  the  lowest  inflation  rate  in  this  company.  But  mercifully  none  here  has  moved  into  the 
dizzy  levels  of  the  regional  astronomical  inflation  record.  Some  may  see  the  control  of 
inflation as a fiercely complex technical matter. But I continually wonder if there much room 
for wildly differing opinions on monetary policy and its management. Do we need really need 
to take a vote on whether the world is flat or on the proof of Pythagoras’ theorem? 
The menu  
Not wishing to disturb your digestion, I shall pass lightly over the menu for the coming days. I 
trust  you  will  find  this  more  light  and  enjoyable,  than  the  heavy  diet  of  national  Budget 
speeches and debates that have been challenging your gastric juices over recent weeks. For 
those who have found these too troubling, I use the word loosely, I can reassure you, that 
your  Finance  Acts  themselves  will  be  a  relief  when  passed;  there  is  nothing  more  binding 
than an Act of Parliament!  
We have chosen for our conference menu, three extra delightful dishes: 
• 
• 
• 
Monetary policy challenges in the region, 
Financial sector stability and development, and finally 
Exchange rate management with capital flows problems. 
BIS Review 91/2008 
 1
The  latter  is  the  dish  we  have  chosen  in  Mauritius,  for  our  contribution  to  this  banking 
culinary  festival.  These  dishes  have  been  added  to  our  normal  menu  after  extensive 
consultations with my fellow Governor from Kenya, Professor N’Dugu, who sadly is not able 
to be with us tonight, due to a last minute hitch. But that is the menu ahead. It is not really for 
this evening. So to whet your appetites, I thought I might, in way of an appetizer, explore a 
special “smorgasbord” concerned with that old conundrum: 
“Sed quis custodiet ipsos Custodes?” 
I hesitate to raise the spectre of Juvenal, who satirically posed, some 2000 years ago, the 
very question. A question that may haunt us yet, as we take one further step on that long 
road  to  convergence  on  economic  and  monetary  union.  If  I  may  freely  translate,  for  those 
whose Latin escapes them tonight, and for those of the fourth estate, who never encountered 
it; Juvenal was asking: 
“But who will govern the governors?”  
Governance for governors 
Many of you will know that the IMF itself has boldly announced that it is reforming its forms of 
governance,  to  provide  more  accountability  and  more  power  to  the  people,  who  are  its 
constituents. I have been reflecting on this, within the context of the choices in governance 
that are open to central banks at national level and the prospects and choices that are ahead 
for the region.  
At our last meeting, you may recall, we planted a tree ( to be precise a Dombeya Friedmani 
tree); located at Verange Sur Morne. Le Morne itself I am delighted to say is now a UNESCO 
National  Heritage  site,  celebrating  that  period  in  our  history,  when  the  slaves,  from 
continental Africa, fought for their freedom. Dombeya Freidmani, is an apt name for our tree, 
for it is both a reminder of one of the giants of the monetary revolution, Milton Freidman, and 
the  name  marks  our  hopes  for  future  regional  banking  independence!  Our  tree  of 
Independence is doing well, nurtured by our experts. But like us, it has yet to mature, and we 
can only dream of its potential fruits.  
I am told by our Minister of Finance in Mauritius, that it is harvest time for the economy. I can 
only  reply  that  we  have  yet  early  seedlings  in  our  regional  banking estate.  Their  continual 
growth is less certain than that of inflation in the price we must pay to nurture them. We thus 
must remain cautious about the futures market for the flowering and fruition of our regional 
banking union.  
So in banking what should good Governance mean for us? What are the key decisions that 
need to be made in providing the framework for our governance? What is independence and 
what forms can it take? There may be no one prescription; my point is to highlight some of 
the issues. I note that the Commonwealth Secretariat1, at their recent heads of government 
meeting, urged members to review three broad options for the revision of the Bretton Woods 
Institutions.  Difficulties  are  engaging  the  FED,  Jean  Claude  Trichet  in  the  Euro-zone, 
Sweden and further afield at the Reserve Bank of India. Across the continents of the world, 
at  international,  regional  and  national  level,  there  is  growing  debate  on  banking  and  its 
governance.  Even  the  UK’s  iconic  1997  model  of  separation  of  powers,  is  coming  under 
review. The current global monetary and fiscal difficulties are fuelling the fire.2 Rising oil, food 
                                                 
1   Professor N Woods (2008) A Commonwealth Initiative to Support Reform of the IMF and World Bank, paper 
presented  at  Commonwealth  Heads  of  Government  meeting,  June.  Also  see  related  Marlborough  House 
Statement 10 June 2008.  
2   Credibility at Stake The Economist 14 June 2008, p 39-40; also see BBC business news Inflation in Eurozone 
at new high, www.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business 7/4/2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2008
and commodity prices and the speculative impact of futures trading, are adding to the heat 
and  the  rising  inflationary  pressures.  Major  commercial  banks  are  tottering  and  other 
financial institutions are going to the wall.  
Issues for debate 
So  now  in  our  national  and  sub-regional  debate  about  arrangements  for  the  future,  let  us 
touch on some issues that are now being seen in a new light, not so much of principle, but in 
terms  of  the  performance  and  results  that  ensue.  We  are  fast  moving  from  management 
arrangements based on the theory of banking, to results-based governance.  
In our own Bank of Mauritius Act 2004, members of the MPC have a statutory duty not to be 
subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority, in the discharge of their 
duties.  But  what  are  the  sanctions  to  enforce  this  duty  if  they  should  be  tempted  or 
persuaded  to  take  a  line  fed  to  them  by  business  or  the  Government  itself.  How  can  we 
govern to achieve evidence based results if jobbery prevails? 
Questions for governance 
Let now us explore a little some of the hot questions on governance of central and regional 
banks. 
• 
Who should decide interest rates? Should a Central Bank be truly independent on 
these technical matters or its assessments continually second-guessed by political 
placemen appointed by the government? 
Who  should  supervise  commercial  and  other  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions? Is this the proper field for the central bank or as in the UK should that 
role be displaced to a financial services authority?  
What  is  the  meaning  of  “policy”  and  “strategy”  reserved  for  the  Boards  of 
Banks and how does it differ from “policy objectives” enshrined in the Bank 
constitution?  Should  “policy”  be  allowed  to  stray  into  the  field  of  “operational 
management”, where this is entrusted to the Governors and their staff? Should the 
Board  have  its  fingers  in  the  appointment  of  staff,  the  organisation  of  staff  and 
decisions on the detailed deployment of the budget of the central bank? 
Who should hire and fire the governors and on what grounds? What are the 
implications for governance in the choice of options, whether by direct appointment 
by the Board of the Central Bank; or direct appointment by the Minister of Finance; 
or direct appointment by the PM or the Head of State? 
Who should appoint the Board of the Central Bank? If, as is often the case, the 
only  shareholder  is  the  government,  and  for  other  reasons  the  Bank  must  have 
operational autonomy, how do we ensure an effective separation of powers? 
How should voting be regulated on the Board of a central Bank, whether on a 
national or on the regional bank we are contemplating? What matters should be 
decided by unanimity, what by a simple majority? Should we consider proportional 
representation, consensus, or, for the regional matters, touching on discrete national 
interests,  should  we  have  a  requirement  for  even  double-majority  voting,  that  is, 
after an agreement by the Bank, a reference back to each nation for ratification ? 
What  should  be  the  tenure  of  office  for  Boards  and  Governors?  Should  they 
have fixed, or open tenure like some judges dependent on “good behaviour”; should 
these  jobs  be  open  to  competition  on  merit,  and  with  freer  movement  of  labour, 
should the choices for employment with national and regional banks be limited on 
grounds of nationality? This issue is hotly debated now with the World Bank and the 
      BIS Review 91/2008 
 3
IMF, where, at least for the Fund, the next Managing Director will be appointed in a 
different manner than has been the case since its creation. 
How is accountability to be ensured? Is that a matter solely for the Board, or the 
shareholders;  at  national  level  should  there  be  a  cross-party  Parliamentary 
committee of scrutiny; and what do we envisage for our regional bank to safeguard 
probity and avoid even the suspicion of loose practice? 
What is transparency? Should documents be open to examination by the Board, or 
by  Parliament  or  indeed  by  the  people,  under  freedom  of  information?  How  far 
should  voting  behavior  be  reported;  should  it  be  just  the  overall  outcome  or  the 
detailed voting by individual members, as in many Parliaments? 
Who should be the shareholders? Should this be limited to the states or opened 
to  the  private  sector  and  to  others;  and,  with  the  rise  in  shareholder  interest  in 
management  in  many  companies,  what  should  be  the  shareholder  rights  and 
powers in central and regional banks?  
Are  central  banks  for  the  Governments,  or  for  the  people?  How  should  this 
choice be reflected in the forms of governance? 
    Architecture and performance 
These are some of the issues emerging, haltingly, on the agenda at national, regional and 
international levels. The mere fact of raising the questions suggests some answers, or some 
possible  avenues  for  searching  for  them.  In  the  final  statement  from  the  Commonwealth 
meeting in June, this year, reflecting on the performance of the Bretton Woods institutions, 
the judgment was unequivocal: 
“…such institutions do not have adequate capacity, governance structures, 
or built-in responsiveness either to anticipate or to address global needs in 
a timely fashion…” 
This  critique  is  essentially  about  the  functioning  of  the  financial  architecture  not  the 
architecture itself. It is the proof of the pudding test! It is not merely what is on the menu, nor 
just what is in the recipe itself, but how it affects the palate! The design standards may be 
seen as providing a necessary framework for the rocket; but does it get take-off and does it 
reach  its  target?  Those  are  the  ultimate  requirements  in  rocket  science:  it  is  necessary  to 
have  a  viable  design  but  the  ultimate  test  is  in  the  performance  itself.  Or  as  Marchamont 
Nedham put it, in 1657, in his Letters from Utopia3: 
“There is no everlasting Principle in Government, as to any one particular 
Form…;…it…must  be  alterable  according  to  the  variety  of  emergent 
Circumstances and Accidents; so that no certain Form can be prescribed at 
all  times,  seeing  that  which  may  be  commendable  at  one  time,  may  be 
most condemnable at another.” 
Or as Alexander Pope put it, perhaps, more succinctly in verse: 
“For forms of Government let fools contest; 
What e’re is best administered is best.”4
Thus, in designing systems for the governance of Banks, we should be concerned with what 
delivers  the  goods,  the  very  outcomes.  The  task  before  us  is  to  explore,  in  the  variety  of 
                                                 
3   Worden B (2007) Literature and Politics in Cromwellian England, Oxford.  
4   Pope A (1734) Essay on Man, Epistle 4.  
4 
 BIS Review 91/2008
experience available, what works best, looking at developed and less developed countries, 
looking  from  the  North  to  the  South,  from  the  East  to  the  West.  We  may  recall  that  for 
example in West Africa they have had an economic and monetary Union since 1994. There 
was a Rand monetary area. There was a French franc area, the CFA. All these examples 
can enrich our debate, even if they do not provide the specific building blocks we need.  
We  should  explore  in  all  this  experience  the  association  between  Forms  and  Outcomes. 
Then we can better see what are the necessary and the sufficient conditions for getting the 
results  we  seek.  The  issue,  it  seems  to  me,  is  not  so  much  in  the  architecture,  but  in  the 
durable  capacity  of  the  systems  for  delivering  results.  We  must  build  for  resilience  of  the 
systems. They must be secure in the face of accidents and unforeseen circumstances. We 
need to recognize the importance of biological models and their capacity for adaptation. Or 
perhaps we need more pointedly to acknowledge both the binding power of statutory law and 
the more subtle capacities of Common Law that survive, resilient, through the manifold tests 
of time.  
Performance criteria 
The  Commonwealth  Heads  of  Government  at  their  meeting  in  June  this  year  formally 
addressed the governance of international banks that: 
“global crises require truly global and universal response…” 
And they called on these institutions to exhibit: 
more legitimacy, fairer representation, more responsiveness, flexibility, 
transparency, accountability and effectiveness…  
They  made  a  commitment  to  pursue  these  matters  with  the  UN  and  in  other  international 
fora, as a matter of urgency. But for us now, this very critique of governance of international 
banks can provide the tests for our future plans. Are we giving enough weight in our plans for 
regional union to these seven critical tests:  
legitimacy, representation, responsiveness, flexibility, transparency, 
accountability and, above all, effectiveness? 
How do we score on these test at national level? Tough talk from the Commonwealth; tough 
tests for us! Yet are these not the very pertinent principles we should adopt for governing the 
Governors?  As  we  look  forward  to  our  regional  banking  and  our  closer  monetary 
engagement,  what  import  do  these  performance  criteria  have  for  any  future  contract  of 
marriage?  What  do  these  principles  imply,  indeed,  for  the  governance  of  central  banks  at 
national  level?  Will  they  help  to  provide  a  new  more  relevant  architecture,  to  ensure  the 
resilience we shall need, to confront the looming crises of confidence and sustainability in our 
region and beyond? For as A P Herbert, that wit and lawyer of yester-year, once remarked: 
“The critical period in matrimony is breakfast-time” 
The cyber-state 
Financial  services  and  their  ICT  dependent  back-up  are  rapidly  becoming  the  over-riding 
powers in our economies. Our leaders here refer to our “cyber” city. Now that word “cyber”, 
derives from the Greek, meaning “steersman”. It has become a metaphor for guiding the ship 
of state. But after breakfast when we go ahead in regional banking, if the governments are at 
the helm; the private sector, the engine, are the central banks to be confined to be merely the 
brakes? 
The trouble with the IMF and the World Bank is not in their lack of capacity for applying or 
releasing the brakes, but they ran off the road when they tried their hand at navigation and 
driving. This sorry tale has lessons for us at national level at the interface of the governance 
BIS Review 91/2008 
 5
of  banking,  finance  and  political  government.  The  lessons  are  even  more  pertinent  as  we 
move towards the new vision of the regional and global banking roles for the future.  
The continental financial plates have been undergoing an intractable process of geophysical 
shifts.  The  fulcrum  has  migrated  from  Washington  to  Dubai  and  Beijing.  It  is  not  just  the 
Washington consensus that has collapsed, under the rising tide of globalization. We are now 
engulfed  in  a  climate  change  in  economic  and  financial  affairs.  Superseding  Authority  and 
History,  we  now  have  the  evidence  based  test  of  performance.  We  now  have  the  call  for 
essential legitimacy, relevance and effectiveness.  
Complaints on the Bretton Woods Institutions are not new. But the difference is that these 
protests have at last reached the ears and conscience of those running the Bretton Woods 
Institutions  themselves!  The  charges  are  manifold  but  in  the  midst  of  the  current  crises  in 
global finance, the worst charge against any bank is that it has become  
“a fire brigade that is too far away.”  
Emerging  economies  and  developing  countries  have  become  so  disenchanted  with  the 
existing global financial architecture, not least countries in this region, that there is emerging 
what Professor Woods has termed  
“Anger in Africa” 
towards those ageing financial global dinosaurs. No wonder at it, so locked in the past are 
they  seen  to  have  become,  so  inflexible  and  prescriptive,  so  inept  at  responding  to  a 
changing world. 
A long engagement 
As we look at our tasks ahead, we might do so in the light of that common family experience 
of preparing for the marriage of a daughter or son. Joy tempered with Realism. So I guess 
we  are  in  for  a  rather  long  engagement  in  sub-regional  banking.  This  is  our  seventh 
encounter  and  at  present  we  are  just  about  holding  hands.  The  prospect  of  formal 
registration and the very act of consummation is, have no fear, yet a long way off. 
But as George Meredith ironically declared:  
“Kissing don’t last: cookery do!” 
Thus if we are to progress from flirtation to commitment, we must enter the kitchen, roll up 
our sleeves and encounter the heat, global warming and all!  
Beyond the looking glass 
For  this  our  7th  meeting  here  in  Mauritius  we  have  a  clear  agenda  on  important  current 
aspects of monetary and financial matters. At this time when banking has become a rather 
hot  issue  of  geopolitics,  we  might  wish  to  heed  the  grinding  of  the  underlying  geopolitical 
plates. It is, I believe, an opportune moment.  
Let us, then, over these days, give some thought to the implications of the structural issues 
of  governance,  I  have  touched  on  tonight.  Let  us  reflect  on  the  guiding  principles  which 
should govern the longer-term strategy of our central banks. For we are moving step by step, 
from merely holding hands, towards that undiscovered country, the terrors and delights of a 
regional monetary and economic matrimonial bed!  
As we peer then, beyond that looking glass, to glimpse the reality of that distant event, we 
should endeavour to ensure that our future marriage becomes more than a mere  
6 
 BIS Review 91/2008
“.. triumph of hope over experience”5
For as we navigate through today’s troubled waters, we should reflect on Harold Nicholson’s 
prescription for surviving such matrimony when he once opined: 
“The great secret of a successful marriage is to treat all disasters as incidents and 
none of the incidents as disasters” 
Let us now together rise; I call on you to raise your glasses to our long, fruitful, disaster-free 
engagement, and to our absent friends. 
                                                 
5   Dr Samuel Johnson. 
BIS Review 91/2008 
 7
