Jürgen Stark: The contribution of monetary policy and financial statistics 
to the conduct of monetary policy 
Statement  by  Mr  Jürgen  Stark,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the 4th ECB Conference on Statistics “A strategic vision for statistics – challenges 
for the next 10 years”, Frankfurt am Main, 24 April 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  contribute  to  this  conference.  As  the  Executive  Board  member 
responsible for economics at the ECB, I am acutely aware of the dependence of the analysis 
underpinning  our  monetary  policy  decisions  on  the  quality  and  breadth  of  the  available 
statistics.  
We all recall the famous aphorism – variously attributed to Benjamin Disraeli and Mark Twain 
–  that  “there  are  lies,  damned  lies  and  statistics”.  I  trust  that  our  discussions  during  this 
conference will dispel the implied concern about the use of statistical information. After all, 
without high quality data, on what would analysis rest? 
In my remarks today, I would like to highlight a number of important statistical requirements 
for  the  effective  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  focusing  in  particular  on  the  ECB’s  monetary 
analysis. Developing monetary and financial statistics is of course an important responsibility 
of the ECB itself, so there is an element of “keeping our own house” in order in what I will 
say. At the same time, I am aware that our need for high quality statistics places a burden on 
reporting agents – on banks, firms and households – at a time when they already face many 
other challenges.  
Monetary policy: objective and strategy 
My  contribution  today  takes  as  its  starting  point  the  primary  objective  of  the  ECB  and  its 
single monetary policy, namely the maintenance of price stability in the euro area.  
In pursuit of this objective, the Governing Council follows its monetary policy strategy.  
One  crucial  element  of  the  strategy  is  the  ECB’s  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability.  I 
would  like  to  first  reflect  briefly  on  some  statistical  issues  behind  our  definition  of  price 
stability. 
In  1998,  the  Governing  Council  defined  price  stability  as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Price (or HICP) for the euro area of below 2%. In 2003, the 
Governing  Council  confirmed  this  definition,  while  clarifying  that  it  aimed  for  annual  HICP 
inflation “below, but close to, 2%” over the medium term.  
The HICP was chosen as the index used to define price stability because it is a state-of-the-
art  measure  of  the  price  of  households’  monetary  consumption  expenditures  in  the  euro 
area.  The  HICP  meets  high  standards  as  regards  credibility,  accuracy  and  reliability.  It  is 
further  available  in  a  timely  manner  and  at  high  frequency.  These  are  crucial  conditions  a 
price index has to fulfil to adequately support monetary policy making.  
Of  course,  improvement  of  the  HICP  along  any  of  these  dimensions  is  welcome,  as  it  will 
deepen our understanding of price developments and improve the reliability of our definition 
of price stability.  
At present, discussions are taking place about the possible extension of the HICP to include 
Owner Occupied Housing (OOH) costs. This could address one of the short-comings of the 
HICP, namely the exclusion of price changes for housing costs faced by home-owners.  
BIS Review 50/2008 
 1
However,  including  owner-occupied  housing  expenditures  is  likely  to  create  measurement 
problems,  as  well  as  posing  significant  challenges  to  the  timeliness  and  frequency  of  the 
extended  HICP  series.  More  importantly,  some  of  the  available  statistical  treatments  of 
owner-occupied housing costs would introduce an asset price or interest rate component into 
the price index, which could be conceptually problematic for the conduct of monetary policy. 
An  in-depth  technical  analysis  of  various  approaches  to  including  owner-occupied  housing 
expenditures in the HICP is ongoing. It is still too early for a final assessment.  
The other crucial part of the strategy is the two pillar framework for identifying and assessing 
risks  to  price  stability.  As  you  all  know,  an  economic  analysis,  which  assesses  the 
implications of cyclical economic dynamics and shocks on the risks to price stability at short 
to medium-term horizons, is cross-checked by a monetary analysis, that is focused on the 
identification  of  monetary  trends  that  influence  price  developments  over  the  medium  to 
longer term.  
Notwithstanding  the  considerable  efforts  of  those  involved  in  the  preparation  of  Monetary 
Union, at the start of Stage III in 1999 significant gaps and weaknesses in the statistics then 
available still existed. As a result, the uncertainty surrounding the assessment of economic 
and monetary conditions was inevitably higher, with the paucity of statistics compounding the 
already  significant  challenges  for  analysis  created  by  the  behavioural  changes  associated 
with the regime change constituted by Monetary Union.  
A  concerted  effort  to  collect  and  construct  additional  data  has  significantly  improved  the 
statistical  situation.  Indeed,  uncertainty  created  by  the  lack  of  statistical  information  has 
dissipated over time.  
But, at the same time, our experience at the ECB has been that better data in one field does 
not permit any scaling down of effort in improving data in other areas. On the contrary, in the 
face of the constant and evolving challenges posed to monetary policy makers, better data 
simply facilitates the necessary deeper, broader and richer analysis that is always required in 
order to take decisions that can serve the ECB’s mandate. 
Ample  proof  is  surely  provided  by  the  experience  of  the  past  few  months.  Central  banks 
throughout the world have faced financial turmoil and tensions in the banking sector. Taking 
monetary policy decisions in this environment demands thorough knowledge and analysis of 
monetary and financial factors and thus, in turn, an adequate statistical base covering these 
areas.  
With  these  general  considerations  in  mind,  I  now  turn  to  the  ECB’s  monetary  analysis  in 
greater detail. 
Enhancing the monetary analysis  
The prominent role for money in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy derives from the robust 
empirical  relationship  between  monetary  growth  and  inflation  over  longer  horizons.  For  a 
central  bank  with  a  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability,  a  close  analysis  of  monetary 
dynamics is a natural component of a comprehensive framework to analyse inflationary risks. 
But  the  question  remains  of  how  to  employ  the  relationship  between  money  and  prices 
operationally to guide monetary policy decisions. 
At the ECB, we have found it possible to extract important, policy-relevant information from 
the monetary developments in real time.  
Central to the real time extraction of policy-relevant information from monetary developments 
is a broad-based approach to monetary analysis. It draws in the first instance on data from 
the  MFI  balance  sheet  but  also  encompasses  a  wide  variety  of  other,  complementary 
sources, notably financial statistics such as MFI interest rates, securities issuance data, the 
Eurosystem bank lending survey, and others.  
2 
 BIS Review 50/2008
Such a comprehensive and detailed analysis of a broad range of data serves to identify and 
monitor  underlying  trends  in  the  monetary  data  that  are  relevant  for  the  outlook  for  price 
stability and thus for monetary policy decisions.1
Analysing the channels through which monetary developments influence inflation dynamics 
is obviously central: 
• 
Money and credit dynamics play an important role in the evolution of asset prices.2 
Monetary analysis may even help to identify asset price misalignments which – as 
the  Japanese  experience  in  the  1990s  attests  –  can  ultimately  unwind  in  ways 
detrimental to macroeconomic and price stability.  
Moreover,  by  providing  insight  into  the  portfolio  behaviour  of  money-holders  and 
banks, monetary analysis also enriches our assessment of private sector attitudes to 
risk, which play an important part in spending and pricing decisions.  
Furthermore,  money  and,  particularly,  credit  developments  are  an  important 
component of the financing conditions facing firms and households, which can have 
significant  implications  for  consumption  and  investment  decisions  that  drive  the 
business cycle. 
  Understanding these channels better is at the heart of the agenda to enhance the monetary 
analysis that is being pursued by Eurosystem staff at the behest of the Governing Council.3  
Four  avenues  for  further  research  in  order  to  deepen  our  monetary  analysis  have  been 
identified.  
First, new money demand equations are being developed, which can better explain monetary 
developments observed over the past few years.  
Second,  the  indicator  properties  of  monetary  developments  for  inflation  are  being 
investigated in greater detail, with a focus on the relationship over longer horizons.  
Third,  the  Governing  Council  has  commissioned  further  work  on  structural  models  of  the 
economy that incorporate an important role for monetary and financial variables.  
Finally,  the  Governing  Council  seeks  tools  that  will  aid  its  cross-checking  of  the  economic 
and monetary analyses, which is central to the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. Scenarios 
constructed using structural models are one such approach, while the integrative framework 
provided by the new euro area accounts is another.  
Work on these four avenues is ongoing.  
Our ambitious agenda not only challenges those  developing the monetary analysis; it also 
creates new data demands and statistical requirements. It is to those that I now turn. 
Statistical requirements for enhancing the monetary analysis 
What are the statistical requirements for enhancing the monetary analysis? 
                                                 
1   See “Monetary analysis in real time”, ECB Monthly Bulletin October 2004 and B. Fischer, et al. (2008) “Money 
and monetary policy: The ECB experience 1999-2006” in eds. A. Beyer and L. Reichlin The role of money – 
Money and monetary policy in the twenty-first century (ECB). 
2   See R. Adalid and C. Detken (2007) “Liquidity shocks and asset price boom/bust cycles”, ECB working paper 
no. 732. 
3   See J. Stark “Enhancing the monetary analysis”, speech at the conference “The ECB and its watchers IX”, 
Frankfurt 7 September 2007 (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070907_1.en.html). 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 3
inflation  risk 
the  policy-relevant  money-based 
First,  the  availability  of  long  runs  of  historical  data  is  crucial  to  the  development  of 
appropriate models and tools. There is thus a vital need for long monetary time series that 
are consistent over time.  
Meeting  this  requirement  is  crucial  to  developing  a  better  understanding  of  the  leading 
indicator properties of money for future price developments over longer horizons, and thus 
for  constructing 
indicators.  Moreover, 
conventional techniques to estimate money demand models rely on long time series, which 
are often not available for the relevant variables, such as wealth, in the euro area.  
Second,  a  sufficient  degree  of  homogeneity  in  statistical  definitions  and  concepts  used 
across  countries  must  be  achieved.  Notwithstanding  the  considerable  efforts  made  to 
harmonise  the  monetary  series  in  the  run  up  to  Stage  III,  significant  analytical  challenges 
continue to exist in this respect, given the remaining significant differences in retail financial 
systems across the euro area.  
Third, undertaking the real-time analysis requires the provision of timely data. This includes, 
when  necessary,  anonymised  information  on  specific  one-off  or  special  transactions  that 
influence the aggregate series. Notwithstanding the medium-term orientation of the monetary 
analysis, obtaining data – notably for the MFI balance sheet – at a monthly frequency and in 
a timely fashion is crucial to determine promptly the current underlying trend in monetary and 
credit  expansion.  This  is  because  of  the  well-known  “end-point  problem”  in  time  series 
analysis, whereby the latest observations have a very high weight in determining the turning 
points in the evolution of the series. These turning points in the data are obviously crucial 
from  the  policy  perspective,  since  they  may  lead  to  turning  points  in  the  evolution  of  the 
policy stance, as was the case in 2005. Obtaining data with a long lag or only on a quarterly 
basis implies that the identification of turning points in monetary trends is delayed relative to 
a situation where monthly data are available promptly. 
Fourth,  a  rich  data  set  is  needed.  Data  that  have  proved  useful  in  developing  a  rich 
understanding of monetary developments at the ECB include all aspects of the MFI balance 
sheet: the components of M3; the counterparts to M3 (notably loans and credit); holdings of 
M3 deposits by institutional sector; and contributions to M3 deposits by the residency of the 
issuing bank.  
In particular, in deepening our understanding of money demand, one promising approach is 
to  distinguish  between  deposits  held  by  households,  non-financial  corporations  and  non-
monetary  financial  institutions.  This  obviously  requires  sectoral  monetary  data.  Research 
undertaken by ECB staff suggests that the responsiveness of money holdings to interest rate 
or  income  changes  varies  widely  across  sectors,  and  that some  patterns  in  the  aggregate 
monetary data are better explained by building up from the sectoral level.4
Fifth,  consistency  of  the  monetary  data  with  other  sources  of  relevant  data  is  crucial. 
Maintaining consistency of the monetary data with other data sources can facilitate the cross-
checking of the monetary analysis with the economic analysis (e.g. in the context of the euro 
area  accounts).  Consistency  among  various  data  sets  also  supports  the  estimation  of 
structural  models  that  embed  monetary  and  financial  frictions  within  a  real  economy 
framework.  
Improving  consistency  between  the  concepts  underlying  the  construction  of  the  monetary 
data and those used by banks when reporting for accounting and regulatory purposes is also 
desirable. Not only should this serve to lessen the burden imposed on reporting agents, but it 
may  also  help  to  avoid  confusion  in  the  interpretation  of  the  data  that  can  emerge  when 
superficially similar concepts have quite different economic meanings and relevance. 
                                                 
4   See J. von Landesberger (2007), “Sectoral money demand models for the euro area based on a common set 
of determinants”, ECB working paper no. 741. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2008
Sixth, better primary information on both banks and counterparty sectors is needed. 
The ECB has taken a number of important initiatives in this regard.  
• 
The  Eurosystem  bank  lending  survey  is  now  a  well-established  source  of 
information on financing conditions, which complements and enhances the regular 
analysis of loan and credit flows. Consideration is currently being given to surveys of 
the corporate and household sectors that would provide a new source of information 
on financial developments, the cost and availability of credit and portfolio behaviour. 
Obtaining new primary data on the balance sheets of financial institutions other than 
banks  would  be  particularly  welcome.  One  feature  of  the  monetary  data  in  recent 
years  has  been  the  rising  share  of  non-monetary  financial  institutions  in  money 
holdings, which would be better understood on the basis of a more comprehensive 
analysis of the balance sheets of such institutions.  
More  generally,  developing  more  comprehensive  balance  sheet  statistics  and,  in 
particular,  measures  of  sectoral  wealth  are  important.  Such  data  can  support  the 
refinement of money demand models. Indeed, to make progress with our agenda for 
enhancing the monetary analysis, statistical work is urgently required to improve the 
available sectoral wealth data, in particular by providing longer time series that will 
money holding to be modelled as part of a wider portfolio decision. 
  Seventh, it is important that the statistical framework for the monetary data maintains a high 
degree of clarity and stability in its definition of concepts, so that central bank staff and policy 
makers can be precise in their analysis and assessment. Unless we can develop a thorough 
understanding of the meaning of the data, interpretation will prove impossible. 
Eighth,  sufficient  flexibility  is  required  to  encompass  the  new  instruments  and  behaviour 
implied  by  financial  innovation.  If  necessary,  statistics  must  be  promptly  and  regularly 
updated in the face of rapid financial innovation and broader structural change.  
Of course, a trade-off exists between the stability and flexibility of the statistical framework. 
Careful  management  of  this  trade-off  is  required  in  order  to  make  monetary  series 
meaningful for policy purposes in real time.  
In  particular,  it  is  apparent  that  the  statistical  framework  needs  to  incorporate  new 
instruments  and  business  models  resulting  from  financial  innovation  in  a  manner  that 
maintains  consistency  between  key  aggregates  (such  as  M1,  M3  or  MFI  loans)  and  the 
policy-relevant underlying economic concepts (such as liquidity, money or financing). Yet if 
such  updating  implied  almost  continuous  changes  to  the  definition  of  key  aggregates,  a 
consistent analysis of the data over time would be impossible. 
Of  course,  I  could  go  on  and  on:  statisticians  and  reporting  agents  know  all  too  well  that 
economists and policy makers’ data requirements are, in principle, inexhaustible. The merits 
and costs procedure adopted by the Governing Council to assess new statistical regulations 
reflects the need to cap this insatiable demand.  
Today  I  will  limit  myself  to  nine  requirements,  and  thereby  come  to  my  final  point.  In 
designing and constructing monetary and financial statistics for monetary policy purposes, it 
is crucial that close cooperation and active dialogue is maintained among reporting agents, 
statisticians  at  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks,  users  of  the  statistics  and  policy 
makers. This is a point I will take up again in my conclusion.  
Before  coming  to  that,  please  allow  me  to  make  a  number  of  remarks  about  the  role  of 
monetary  analysis  in  the  current  period  of  financial  turmoil,  drawing  on  the  general 
requirements  I  have  just  listed  to  identify  a  number  of  specific  implications  for  the 
construction of the monetary statistics that have arisen in this context. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 5
Preliminary lessons from the ongoing financial turmoil  
Since  the  emergence  of  financial  tensions  in  early  August  2007,  the  ECB’s  monetary 
analysis has proved a crucial bulwark for the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area.  
In  particular,  the  monetary  analysis  has  helped  to  maintain  the  necessarily  medium-term 
orientation  of  monetary  policy,  at  a  time  when  the  power  of  the  short-term  forces  at  play 
threatened to overwhelm it. Moreover, the monetary analysis has served to maintain a focus 
on  nominal  developments  –  that  is,  the  inflation  outlook  at  longer  horizons  –  over  which 
central banks can exert control and for which they ultimately need to take responsibility. The 
monetary analysis has thus helped the ECB to maintain the orientation of monetary policy 
towards its primary objective.  
Moreover, the recent financial market turmoil has re-emphasised the importance and special 
nature  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  determination  of 
macroeconomic outcomes. Contrary to the attitude taken in some academic critiques of the 
ECB’s  monetary  policy  framework,  developments  over  the  past  few  months  surely 
demonstrate that banks play a distinctive role in creating “monetary liquidity” that, in turn, is 
an important determinant of developments in credit and asset markets, in the evolution of the 
economy  and  ultimately  of  price  dynamics.  Suggestions  that  securitisation  and  off-balance 
sheet  activity  rendered  the  analysis  of  bank  balance  sheet  meaningless  have  now  been 
revealed as absurd. Attempts to shift activity off-balance sheet proved to be a chimera, as 
the  financial  turmoil  forced  re-intermediation  of  loans  and  credit  risk  onto  the  MFI  balance 
sheet. 
In practical terms, analysis of the MFI balance sheet has provided an important “close to real 
time” insight into the behaviour of financial institutions, at a time when the macroeconomic 
outlook (including prospects for price stability) and the transmission of monetary policy were 
seen to be potentially strongly influenced by the behaviour of banks and the possibility of a 
“credit crunch”. In particular, a close analysis of the monetary data provided evidence that 
the flow of bank loans to households and corporations was not significantly impaired by the 
money  market  tensions  observed  in  the  second  half  of  2007  and  early  2008,  thereby 
tempering  the  messages  coming  from  other  data  sources,  such  as  the  Eurosystem  bank 
lending survey and MFI interest rate statistics. This analysis has proved to be an important 
input  into  the  assessment  of  financing  conditions  and  thus  in  the  analysis  of  cyclical 
dynamics of the economy, under both baseline and variant scenarios. 
As  this  brief  description  illustrates,  the  financial  turmoil  episode  has  demonstrated  the 
importance  of  a  number  of  the  general  principles  governing  monetary  analysis  with 
implications for our statistical requirements in this area.  
Adopting  a  broad-based  approach  to  analysis  has  proved  fundamental.  By  implication, 
integrating the analysis of monetary data with information from a wide variety of sources – in 
particular, a wide set of financial statistics for both prices and quantities and the bank lending 
survey – has been crucial. Moreover, to have impact on policy discussion, conclusions drawn 
from  analysis  of  the  monetary  and  credit  data  regarding  loan  supply  conditions  must  be 
available in close to real time, supporting the need for timely monthly reporting of monetary 
statistics. 
Of course, in current challenging circumstances, it remains too early to judge the success of 
our  monetary  analysis  and,  by  implication,  the  quality  of  the  information  derived  from  the 
existing body of monetary statistics.  
Nonetheless, three points can and should be made on the basis of our experience since last 
August: 
First, the close analysis of the monetary data derived from the MFI balance sheet has proved 
crucial in understanding the nature of the turmoil and the challenges it poses for monetary 
policy. It has both served to maintain a focus on the longer-term inflationary trends that are 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2008
fundamental to effective monetary policy making, while also deepening our understanding of 
financial conditions and their cyclical implications.  
Second, the turmoil has identified a number of lacunae in the statistical basis for the analysis 
– for example, regarding the extent of credit risk transfer from bank balance sheets – that 
need to be addressed.  
Third, from the outset of Monetary Union, the ECB has maintained both the necessary staff 
expertise  and  the  required  statistical  base  for  a  thorough  monetary  analysis.  Maintaining 
such continuity is required if the monetary analysis is to be insightful when – as is certainly 
the case now – monetary and financial factors are at the heart of the policy discussion.  
These are important lessons to be drawn from the ECB experience. 
to 
Concluding remarks 
Sceptics have often questioned the information content of monetary data and thus criticised 
the  role  played  by  monetary  analysis  in  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy.  Often  such 
critiques are based on only a casual knowledge of the euro area data.  
Based  on  the  ECB  experience,  the  ability  to  extract  policy-relevant  information  from  the 
monetary data depends on two elements:  
First, high quality data must be available.  
Second, high quality analysis of the data is required on an ongoing basis.  
It is apparent that a self-reinforcing virtuous cycle can be created, whereby better data serve 
better analysis, which in turn identifies necessary improvements to the data. The continuous 
nature  of  the  process  underpinning  this  virtuous  cycle  is  crucial:  once  halted,  even  a 
successful  monetary  analysis  may  prove  hard 
restart.  Maintaining  continuous 
improvement in the data and the analysis is central to our agenda to “enhance the monetary 
analysis”. 
By the same token, the potential for a destructive vicious cycle also exists. Poor quality data 
breeds poor analysis. Attempts to improve monetary statistics thus yield lower returns, and 
investment in such improvements diminishes. The resulting deterioration in the quality of the 
data in turn leads to a further deterioration in the impact of the analysis, thereby feeding the 
vicious spiral. 
Based  on  the  Anglo-Saxon  experience  with  financial  innovation,  many  critics  argue  that 
monetary data has little or no information content and should be discarded from monetary 
policy  considerations.  What  I  would  like  to  emphasise  today  is  that  there  is  nothing 
necessary  about  this  conclusion.  It  is  neither  a  theoretical  necessity  nor  an  empirical 
inevitability caused by some irresistible exogenous force. Rather, the information content of 
monetary  statistics  and  the  value  of  monetary  analysis  are  questions  of  practice:  they  are 
determined endogenously, with greater efforts on the analytical and statistical side leading to 
more meaningful results and more policy-relevant conclusions. 
In close collaboration with statisticians and reporting agents, within the Eurosystem we have 
and  are  making  this  investment  in  enhancing  the  monetary  analysis.  This  investment  has 
paid  important  dividends  in  guiding  monetary  policy  decisions  –  no  more  so  than  in  the 
current challenging conditions of financial turmoil.  
Looking  forward,  we  seek  your  help  in  maintaining  the  momentum  of  the  virtuous  cycle of 
continuous improvement in monetary analysis, which will support monetary policy decisions 
from  which  we  all  benefit.  By  enhancing  its  monetary  analysis  through  both  statistical  and 
analytical advances, the ECB is well prepared to meet current and future challenges. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 7
