Frederic S Mishkin: Leveraged losses – lessons from the mortgage 
meltdown  
Speech  by  Mr  Frederic  S  Mishkin,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the US Monetary Policy Forum, New York, 29 February 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found 
on the US Federal Reserve System’s website. 
 The  paper  being  discussed  today,  "Leveraged  Losses: Lessons  from  the  Mortgage 
Meltdown," by David Greenlaw, Jan Hatzius, Anil Kashyap, and Hyun Song Shin, examines 
the following puzzle: How could the recent residential mortgage-market meltdown, which the 
authors estimate will lead to credit losses of around $400 billion – less than 2 percent of the 
outstanding  $22  trillion  in  U.S.  equities  –  possibly  have  such  large  negative  effects  on 
economic activity in the United States? After all, a 2 percent decline in stock market prices 
sometimes happens on a daily basis and yet leads to hardly a ripple in the U.S. economy.  
The authors conclude that these losses have such a large potential impact because they are 
borne by highly leveraged financial institutions, primarily banks. Their theory is basically as 
follows: Because banks have so much leverage, they contract their lending by a multiple of 
their credit losses in order to restore their balance sheets. The resulting contraction in bank 
lending  then  leads  to  a  substantial  decline  in  aggregate  spending,  because  bank  loans 
cannot  be  replaced  by  credit  from  other  sources.  Banks  are  "special"  –  that  is,  they  have 
intermediation capabilities not fully shared by other financial market participants, and those 
capabilities allow banks to overcome informational barriers between borrowers and lenders 
and thus make loans that otherwise could not be made.  
I find the basic story the paper tells to be reasonably plausible and, therefore, find the paper 
to be valuable. I do, however, want to put the analysis of the paper in a broader perspective 
and provide some different views on their results.1  
The residential mortgage meltdown: a financial development perspective 
The  first  part  of  the  paper  provides  a  nice  summary  of  how  recent  events  in  the  credit 
markets  led  to  the  subprime  meltdown.  Let  me  offer  my  own  view  on  how  the  recent 
disruptions to financial markets have many features in common with typical cycles in financial 
development.  
Financial markets perform the essential economic function of channeling funds to those who 
have productive investment opportunities (which can include consumer purchases of goods 
and houses). As I have argued elsewhere,2 this function of financial markets is critical to a 
well-functioning  economy;  without  it,  countries,  and  their  populations,  cannot  get  rich. 
Enabling financial markets to effectively perform this essential function is by no means easy; 
financial markets must solve information problems to ensure that funds actually go to those 
with  productive  investments,  so  that  they  can  pay  back  those  who  have  lent  to  them. 
Financial development involves innovations or liberalization of financial markets that improve 
                                                 
1  
I thank Andreas Lehnert for his excellent assistance and helpful comments. My remarks reflect only my own 
views  and  are  not  intended  to  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  of  anyone  else 
associated with the Federal Reserve System. 
2   Frederic  S.  Mishkin  (2006),  The  Next  Great  Globalization:  How  Disadvantaged  Nations  Can  Harness  Their 
Financial Systems to Get Rich, Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 1
the flow of information. Unfortunately, however, financial liberalization and innovation, often 
have flaws and do not solve information problems as well as markets may have hoped they 
would. When these flaws become evident, financial markets sometimes seize up, often with 
very negative consequences for the economy. 
I  would  argue  that  we  have  been  experiencing  exactly  such  a  cycle  in  recent  years. 
Advances in information and communications technology have allowed for faster and more 
disaggregated  mortgage  underwriting  decisions.  A  mortgage  broker  with  an  Internet 
connection could quickly fill out an online form and price a loan for a customer with the help 
of credit-scoring technology. The same technological improvements would allow the resulting 
loan  to  be  cheaply  bundled  with  other  mortgages  to  produce  mortgage-backed  securities, 
which could then be sold off to investors. Advances in financial engineering could take the 
securitization process even further by aggregating slices of mortgage-backed securities into 
more  complicated  structured  products,  such  as  collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDOs),  to 
tailor the credit risks of various types of assets to risk profiles desired by different kinds of 
investors. 
As has been true of many financial innovations in the past, the benefits of this disaggregated 
originate-to-distribute  model  may  have  been  obvious,  but  the  problems  less  so.  The 
originate-to-distribute model, unfortunately, created some severe incentive problems, which 
are referred to as principal-agent problems, or more simply as agency problems, in which the 
agent (the originator of the loans) did not have the incentives to act fully in the interest of the 
principal  (the  ultimate  holder  of  the  loan).  Originators  had  every  incentive  to  maintain 
origination  volume,  because  that  would  allow  them  to  earn  substantial  fees,  but  they  had 
weak  incentives  to  maintain  loan  quality.  When  loans  went  bad,  originators  lost  money, 
mainly because of the warranties they provided on loans; however, those warranties often 
expired as quickly as ninety days after origination. Furthermore, unlike traditional players in 
mortgage markets, originators often saw little value in their charters, because they often had 
little  capital  tied  up  in  their  firm.  When  hit  with  a  wave  of  early  payment  defaults  and  the 
associated warranty claims, they simply went out of business. While the lending boom lasted, 
however, originators earned large profits.  
Many securitizers of mortgage-backed securities and resecuritizers, such as CDO managers, 
also, in retrospect, appear to have been motivated more by issuance and arrangement fees 
and less by concern for the longer-run performance of these securities.  
These agency problems combined to lower underwriting standards, so that borrowers with 
weaker financial histories had access to larger loans. When the housing market cooled and 
house  prices  no  longer  rose  at  a  rapid  pace,  these  subprime  borrowers  found  themselves 
unable  to  either  repay  their  loans  or  refinance  out  of  them.  Investors  apparently  failed  to 
realize the importance of these agency problems and, it seems, did not insist on practices to 
align the incentives of originators, securitizers, and resecuritizers with the underlying risks. 
When  these  problems  came  to  light  with  the  end  of  the  house-price  boom,  investors  – 
including leveraged financial institutions – took large losses as mortgage-related assets were 
marked down in anticipation of high defaults. The market for newly issued subprime and alt-A 
mortgage-backed  securities  virtually  closed.  In  addition,  investors  realized  that  they  were 
sadly  mistaken  regarding  their  assumption  that  structured  credit  products  with  high  credit 
ratings  embodied  very  little  risk.  The  unprecedented  losses  on,  and  downgrades  of,  those 
products suggested that they were far more opaque than investors had suspected, and that 
investors had had too much confidence in the ability of the credit rating agencies to assess 
the  true  risk  of  these  securities.  The  result  was  that  the  originate-to-distribute  business 
model, as well as structured credit products more broadly, have come into question. In turn, 
this  situation  has  had  a  chilling  effect  on  securities  markets  and  has  put  pressure  on  the 
balance sheets of leveraged financial institutions. 
Although the perspective I have outlined here is consistent with the story told in the paper, it 
does emphasize that there are two parts of the recent disruption in the credit market: credit 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2008
losses  at  banks  and  the  near-collapse  of  broad  classes  of  securities  markets.  This 
perspective  raises  the  issue,  which  I  will  return  to  later,  of  whether  the  negative 
consequences of the decline in intermediation required both of these elements to be present. 
Estimating mortgage-credit losses 
The paper performs a very useful function by providing estimates of the credit losses likely to 
be realized on the current stock of outstanding loans. Not only is this calculation crucial for 
their  analysis,  it  is  a  useful  survey  of  three  different  methodologies  for  arriving  at  loss 
estimates. The authors first use a standard vintage curve analysis on outstanding mortgage-
backed securities. Although this method makes the strong assumption that future loss curves 
will follow the same shape as previous loss curves, albeit at much higher levels, it provides a 
reasonable rough guess of the magnitudes of the losses.  
The  second  method  the  authors  use  is  ABX  pricing  of  subprime  mortgages  plus  standard 
loss  estimates  on  prime  and  near-prime  mortgages  to  come  up  with  loss  estimates.  ABX 
prices,  in  principle,  ought  to  reflect  the  up-to-the-minute  credit  losses  expected  by  market 
participants as well as changes in the price of liquidity and market risk. Indeed, I was worried 
that  ABX  pricing  might  overestimate  credit  losses  because  it  carries  premiums  for  these 
other risks, and trading may be light. For example, the AAA-rated tranches of recent vintages 
are trading for around sixty-six cents on the dollar, which seems to build in either extreme 
credit-loss  estimates  or  compensation  for  other  risks.  However,  the  authors  weight  the 
various vintages and tranches of the ABX by outstanding dollar amounts and get reasonable 
estimates, which suggests that this approach to estimating mortgage-credit losses may have 
some value.  
The authors' third method is quite clever and uses state-level foreclosure models to estimate 
how  declines  in  house  prices  would  increase  foreclosure  starts  and  thus  lead  to  losses. 
Figure 1 displays a reasonably tight relationship between the rate of foreclosures started in 
the  third  quarter  of  2007  and  the  previous  four-quarter  change  in  house  prices  in  the  fifty 
states  and  the  District  of  Columbia.  This  figure  provides  some  backing  for  their  approach, 
which, in effect, uses the historical relationship between house price declines and foreclosure 
starts in states that have had significant house price declines to estimate the likely effect of 
current projected house price declines on foreclosure starts. However, their method requires 
the assumption that future foreclosures will respond to house prices as they have in the past. 
In  addition,  past  experience  was  with  prime  mortgages,  because  there  was  little  subprime 
lending.  Will  foreclosures  in  the  subprime  market  in  the  current  episode  have  a  similar 
pattern of behavior to that which has occurred for prime mortgages? 
Although each method of calculating mortgage credit losses has problems, the beauty of the 
authors' approach is that they go at the problem in very different ways. It is striking that three 
very different methodologies produce similar estimates of around $400 billion in total credit 
losses over the next couple of years. The authors then estimate that roughly half of mortgage 
loans  are  held  by  U.S.  leveraged  financial  institutions,  which  include  commercial  banks, 
thrifts, hedge funds, the government-sponsored enterprises, and others, and come up with 
losses to this sector of around $200 billion. This estimate might not be unreasonable, but it is 
very rough, because it assumes that institutions do not differ significantly in the kinds of risk 
they  take  on  and  that  mortgage-related  securities  are  evenly  distributed  across  these 
financial institutions. 
Effect of credit losses on domestic lending 
The authors go on to show that what might appear to be a small amount of losses to financial 
institutions can lead to an amplified decline in domestic lending. This amplification can then 
explain  how  modest  losses  can  lead  to  a  substantial  effect  on  the  overall  economy.  Their 
calculation is fairly straightforward. They assume that leveraged financial institutions have a 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 3
target 10-to-1 leverage ratio, so that each dollar of a loss of capital will lead to a contraction 
of their balance sheet, and hence lending, by $10. Assuming that institutions can make up 
half of their $200 billion mortgage credit losses by raising new capital, leaving them with a 
decline of capital of around $100 billion, they come up with a contraction of domestic lending 
near $1 trillion. Actually, the authors' calculation is a bit more complicated than my simple 
characterization. They assume that the target leverage of banks and others decreases, as it 
has  in  previous  lending  cycles,  but  they  also  net  out  reduced  lending  from  one  leveraged 
entity to another. On balance, under their baseline scenario, they predict that lending to the 
unleveraged sector will decline by about $910 billion. 
These  mechanical  calculations  are  useful,  but  they  miss  some  important  subtleties.  First, 
small losses can hit key institutions, such as bond and mortgage insurers, and have large, 
unpredictable effects. Second, if leveraged financial institutions such as banks were the only 
ones that had credit losses and, as a result, cut back lending, other institutions or securities 
issuance  could  replace  some  of  the  lost  lending.  Put  another  way,  although  banks  are 
special  because  they  have  advantages  in  processing  information  and  making  loans,  a  big 
contraction in their assets would not necessarily choke off all lending. Banks are special, but 
not  that  special.  As  I  discussed  earlier,  a  key  characteristic  of  this  episode  of  financial 
disruption  is  that  it  has  spread  far  beyond  leveraged  financial  institutions.  It  has  led  to  a 
sharp decline in securities issuance; this decline has to be an important part of the story of 
why  the  current  financial  market  turmoil  is  affecting  economic  activity.  In  other  words, 
mortgage credit losses are a problem because they are hitting bank balance sheets at the 
same time that the securitization market is experiencing difficulties. 
Effect of decreased leveraged institution lending on aggregate spending 
The  paper  then  examines  the  well-known  correlation  between  growth  in  debt  and  gross 
domestic  product  (GDP)  to  estimate  the  effect  of  the  $910  billion  decline  in  leveraged 
institution lending on economic growth. The authors first estimate an ordinary-least-squares 
(OLS)  regression  of  quarterly  GDP  growth  on  four  lags  of  GDP  growth  and  the  past  four-
quarter growth rate of domestic nonfinancial debt growth. They find that if debt growth falls 
by 1 percentage point and stays below baseline for a year, quarterly GDP growth is predicted 
to fall by 0.14 percentage point initially and by 0.22 percentage point over time. The authors 
rightfully  recognize,  however,  that  the  coefficient  on  debt  growth  may  be  biased  upward 
because of reverse causality – that is, causality might run from higher economic growth to 
higher  debt  growth,  because  when  desired  purchases  increase,  households  and  business 
finance them by borrowing more. Another way of stating the problem is that the debt-growth 
coefficient may not only reflect the affects of changes in credit supply but also changes in the 
demand for credit. 
To deal with the possible bias in the OLS regression and estimate the effect of credit supply 
on economic growth, the authors appropriately turn to instrumental variable (IV) estimation 
by  instrumenting  debt  growth  in  their  regression  with  two  instruments,  the  Treasury-
Eurodollar (TED) spread and the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on the willingness of 
banks to make installment loans. The IV estimate of the coefficient on debt growth more than 
doubles,  so  that  a  1  percentage  point  decline  in  debt  growth  predicts  a  decline  of  0.34 
percentage  point  in  GDP  initially  and  0.44  percentage  points  in  the  long  run.  Because  a 
standard  reverse  causality  story  from  GDP  growth  to  debt  growth  suggests  that  the  OLS 
estimate of the debt-growth coefficient is upwardly biased, the finding that the IV estimate is 
larger than the OLS estimate is indeed quite surprising. 
This  surprising  finding  raises  several  questions.  It  can  call  into  question  the  validity  of  the 
instruments, which, to be valid, need to be correlated with debt growth and yet be unaffected 
by  economic  growth.  This  assumption,  however,  is  unlikely  to  be  correct  because  poor 
prospects  for  economic  growth  surely  raise  credit  risk,  thereby  leading  to  a  higher  TED 
spread and less willingness to lend on the part of banks. Thus, a higher TED spread and less 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2008
willingness to lend may reflect the likelihood of tougher economic times ahead and not an 
exogenous shift in credit supply. 
The final calculation in the paper is to combine the authors' IV estimates with their estimate 
of the decline in lending from leveraged institutions of $910 billion to estimate the impact on 
GDP growth. The $910 billion drop in debt against a $30.3 trillion amount of nonfinancial debt 
outstanding is a 3 percentage point drop in nonfinancial debt growth, which when multiplied 
by  the  0.44  long-run  coefficient  on  debt  growth,  lead  to  a  slowing  of  GDP  growth  of  1.3 
percentage points over the following year. 
Although this number is not implausible, there are reasons to be suspicious of it. On the one 
hand,  even  if  you  accept  the  IV  coefficient  estimate,  despite  the  reasons  to  doubt  its 
accuracy, it might overstate the impact of the decline in leveraged institution lending on the 
economy;  as  mentioned  earlier,  other  sources  of  lending  might  come  online  if  leveraged 
institutions stop lending. On the other hand, the estimated impact on the economy could be 
too low. As I have discussed, the disruption to the financial system is far broader than just to 
leveraged institutions. To the extent that the meltdown in the mortgage market has revealed 
even  deeper  problems  in  the  financial  system,  the  negative  impact  on  economic  activity 
could be even larger. 
Conclusion 
I very much enjoyed reading this paper. Many of the calculations in the paper are especially 
useful and help us get a better handle on how the recent turmoil in credit markets can affect 
the economy. I agree with the basic story that the authors tell, which is that relatively small 
losses  in  one  sector  of  the  credit  market  can  have  an  outsized  impact  on  aggregate 
economic activity if they cause a disruption to the financial system that leads to an amplified 
impact  on  lending.  However,  as  my  comments  suggest,  the  authors  may  not  have  the  full 
story. It is not just the impact on leveraged financial institutions that matter, but on the overall 
ability  of  the  financial  system  to  channel  funds  to  those  institutions  with  productive 
investment opportunities. 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 5
Figure 1 
 6 
 BIS Review 25/2008
