Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: SME Credit Bureau in the financial landscape 
of Malaysia 
Keynote address by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia, at the SME Credit Bureau Seminar, Kuala Lumpur, 27 May 2008. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  this  morning.  I  would  like  to  express  my 
appreciation  to  the  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  or  CGC,  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the 
keynote address. It is encouraging to see many financial institutions and small and medium 
enterprises  (SMEs)  in  the  audience.  The  Bureau  is  also  Malaysia’s  first,  under  a  joint 
initiative  of  CGC  and  Dun  and  Bradstreet  Malaysia  Sdn.  Bhd.,  a  subsidiary  of  Dun  and 
Bradstreet Corporation in the US, which has vast experience in establishing and operating 
credit bureaus globally. 
The development of a strong and dynamic SME sector is a priority on the national economic 
agenda. The reasons for this are clear when one considers that 99.2% of the total business 
establishments in Malaysia are SMEs. The SME sector currently employs about 5.6 million 
people, and contributes about 32% of gross domestic product.  
Given  its  economic  potential,  the  Government  has  accorded  significant  emphasis  to 
developing and strengthening the SME sector, to enhance its contribution to the economy. 
The  Government  took  a  major  stride  forward  in  June  2004  with  the  establishment  of  the 
National  SME  Development  Council.  It  may  surprise  some  of  you  to  know  that  there  are 
fifteen  Government  Ministries  and  38  Agencies  involved  in  supporting  the  development  of 
SMEs.  The  formation  of  the  Council  was  therefore  a  mammoth  undertaking  that  clearly 
signals the commitment of the Government to the SME agenda. The Council, chaired by the 
Prime  Minister  and  supported  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  as  the  Secretariat,  provides  the 
policy  direction  of  the  programmes  to  support  the  SMEs,  and  ensures  the  effective 
implementation and coordination of these programmes.  
The national SME strategy is focused on the development of high performance and resilient 
SMEs under three broad strategic thrusts, namely, strengthening the enabling infrastructure; 
enhancing  the  capacity  and  capability  of  SMEs;  and  enhancing  access  to  financing.  Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  initiatives  to  ensure  that  SMEs,  at  different 
stages of the business life cycle, have adequate access to financing. These included among 
others, 
the 
establishment of two venture capital funds of RM150 million each for the agriculture sector 
and the establishment of the Small Debt Resolution Scheme.  
The  various  measures  have  already  yielded  positive  results.  SMEs  today  have  greater 
access  to  financing,  with  financial  institutions  being  the  main  SME  financing  provider.  In 
2007,  banking  institutions  approved  RM55.1  billion  in  new  financing  to  more  than  109,000 
SME accounts. SME financing continues to remain robust. For the first three months of 2008 
alone,  a  total  of  RM12.4  billion  in  new  financing  was  approved  to  more  than  34,000  SME 
accounts.  As  at  end-March  2008,  SME  financing  outstanding  by  banking  institutions 
amounted  to  RM118.8  billion.  Indeed,  an  increasing  number  of  banking  institutions  have 
announced strategic plans focusing specifically on the SME sector. This has seen the share 
of  SME  financing  increase  significantly  from  30%  of  total  business  financing  of  banking 
institutions in 1999 to 44% at end-March 2008.  
Within  the  overall  SME  financing  landscape  in  Malaysia,  the  CGC  has  been  positioned  to 
play a key role. Established at the initiative of Bank Negara in 1972, CGC set out to address 
one of the main constraints of SMEs in accessing financing, which is the lack of collateral. 
Since  then,  CGC  with  Bank  Negara  as  its  main  shareholder  and  with  shareholders  funds 
amounting to RM2.7 billion and guaranteed financing outstanding of RM10.2 billion at end-
to  develop  a  vibrant  and  sustainable  microfinance 
initiatives 
industry, 
BIS Review 67/2008 
 1
March  2008,  has  evolved  itself  as  an  integral  part  of  the  financial  landscape,  with  the 
financial capacity to deliver its mandate.  
In 2005, Bank Negara embarked on a strategy to transform CGC beyond that as a provider 
of  credit  guarantees  to  enhance  the  contribution  of  the  fast-growing  SME  sector  to  the 
national  economy.  CGC  is  being  now  positioned  to  provide  a  wider  range  of  credit 
enhancement  products.  More  importantly,  it  is  also  being  positioned  to  provide  advisory 
services on financial and business development to SMEs. This represents a significant shift 
in  CGC’s  strategic  orientation  and  is  validated  by  studies  of  the  experiences  in  other 
countries  that  have  found  such  advisory  support  to  be  critical  in  enhancing  the  viability  of 
SMEs.  
A  number  of  recent  initiatives  under  CGC’s  transformation  plan  deserve  mention.  These 
include  widening  the  scope  of  guarantees  to  also  cover  financing  by  Islamic  banks  and 
development financial institutions, introducing a new guarantee scheme for start-up SMEs, 
participating  in  Malaysia’s  first  synthetic  securitisation  of  SME  loans,  introducing  an  equity 
financing arm, and introducing risk-based models for determining guarantee fees.  
The  establishment  of  the  SME  Credit  Bureau  is  indeed  a  watershed  event  in  CGC’s 
evolution.  As  a  source  of  credible  and  reliable  credit  information  that  serves  the  needs  of 
both the SMEs and the potential financiers, it is a natural progression of CGC's continuous 
effort to enhance access to financing by SMEs. The establishment of a SME Credit Bureau 
by CGC and D&B would no doubt complement the other initiatives of the Government and 
the financial sector.  
The significance of the SME Credit Bureau lies in dispelling the general misconception that 
SMEs  pose  higher  financial  risk  to  financiers,  lack  financial  management  disciplines  and 
would  be  unable  to  provide  relevant  financial  information  to  their  financiers  to  facilitate 
assessment and monitoring of loans extended to them. Yet, SMEs are often skeptical of the 
benefits of credit bureaus, believing them to hurt rather than assist SMEs in obtaining access 
to financing. The reality is very different.  
Our own experience in Malaysia with the Centralised Credit Reference Information System or 
CCRIS  that  is  managed  by  Bank  Negara,  and  the  experience  in  other  developed  and 
developing  countries  where  SMEs  form  the  backbone  of  the  economy  have  shown  that 
greater access to credit information has in fact contributed to greater access to financing and 
reduced loan processing times. By enriching the information available to financiers to support 
credit risk assessments, the asset quality of financial institutions are also improved, thereby 
reducing  the  cost  of  financing  to  borrowers  and  enhancing  the  capacity  of  financial 
institutions  to  continue  extending  credit  to  deserving  SMEs.  Allow  me  to  elaborate  the 
benefits to SMEs, with particular reference to the SME Credit Bureau:  
Firstly, the Bureau assists the SMEs to build track records. One of the key factors in credit 
evaluation is the historical conduct of accounts. SMEs that have no previous banking history 
would not have the “reputational collateral” that would otherwise give them easier access to 
financing. The SME Credit Bureau will be able to address this information gap by collecting 
and  disseminating  information  from  a  wider  base,  including  trade  credit  data  that  captures 
the  dealings  between  SMEs  and  their  suppliers.  In  this  manner,  SMEs  which  have  no 
financial relationships with banks, but which have strong credit standing among their trade 
creditors  and  suppliers,  will  be  rewarded  through  favourable  ratings  that  can  be  used  to 
support financing applications when the need arises.  
Secondly, SMEs with good track records will not only enjoy a wider acceptance from banks, 
they  will  also  be  able  to  access  financing  on  more  favourable  terms,  and  obtain  faster 
decisions  on  their  financing  applications.  This  is  because  the  Bureau  acts  as  a  one-stop 
center for banks to obtain consolidated information on SMEs, which is currently scattered, 
and will take longer for banks to obtain and verify individually. We have already seen how 
this  can  work  in  the  case  of  consumer  financing,  where  real-time  and  comprehensive 
information  on  consumers’  credit  exposures  and  history  that  is  available  from  CCRIS  has 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2008
significantly  shortened  loan-processing  times.  With  greater  availability  of  information  on 
SMEs, the processing time for SME loans can be similarly shortened.  
Thirdly, the Bureau includes and takes into account both positive and negative information on 
SMEs. Certain third party information that financial institutions use in the evaluation of credit 
applications  only  provides  negative  information  on  the  business  conducts.  Examples  are 
information on bankruptcy and legal suits, which are sometimes not updated and may result 
in  a  biased  assessment  of  creditworthiness.  By  collecting  and  disseminating  both  positive 
and  negative  information,  the  SME  Credit  Bureau  will  benefit  SME  loan  applicants  by 
providing  a  more  balanced  view  of  SMEs’  credit  standings.  In  an  objective  rating  process, 
credit  bureaus  typically  accord  greater  weight  to  the  more  recent  credit  information  or 
behavior. Negative records in the past can thus be mitigated by more current and consistent 
good track records.  
Lastly  and  perhaps  of  most  value  to  SMEs,  is  the  insights  that  SMEs  would  gain  from  a 
better  understanding  of  their  financial  deficiencies  which  lead  to  rejections  of  financing 
applications by financial institutions. This can be deduced from the analysis provided through 
the Bureau ratings and reports. The credit reports would also serve as a convenient tool for 
SMEs  to  carry  out  a  self-evaluation  to  identify  areas  that  need  improvement  and  initiate 
adequate remedial actions to increase their competitiveness. SMEs are thereby empowered 
to improve their own profile, with correspondingly enhanced prospects for the SME sector as 
a whole.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  it  is  also  encouraging  to  see  a  considerable  turnout  by  financial 
institutions at this seminar. This underscores the sustained and growing attention by financial 
institutions in the SME sector that is critical to provide the enabling environment for the SME 
sector  to  thrive.  Bank  Negara  has  seen  a  paradigm  change  in  the  way  in  which  financial 
institutions  approach  the  business  of  SME  financing.  Banks  have,  and  continue  to  invest 
significantly,  in  supporting  SME  financing  niches,  and  the  organisational  changes  that  we 
have  seen  have  been  pervasive  in  many  banks.  These  banks  have  acquired  tremendous 
insights on effective strategies for successful interfaces with SME customers. In some banks, 
completely new business cultures for their SME segments have evolved as a result which 
bodes well for the SME industry.  
The information provided by the SME Credit Bureau can further support efforts by banks to 
strengthen risk management for their SME portfolios, regardless of the level of sophistication 
and size of the institutions. Banks with an SME credit model already in place can benefit from 
the  Bureau  information  in  various  ways.  For  example,  as  the  Bureau  rating  is  determined 
based  on  diverse  information  obtained  from  various  sources  including  CCRIS,  trade  credit 
data and the Companies Commission of Malaysia, banks can use such information to bridge 
any information gaps and address the limited pool of internal data available for their internal 
models.  Such  gaps  currently  exist,  as  banks  in  general  are  highly  dependent  on  borrower 
information  alone.  In  addition,  given  the  diversity  of  information  available  within  the  SME 
Credit  Bureau,  banks  would  now  have  access  to  information  on  various  economic  sectors 
that may not be available within existing credit portfolios. At the same time, Bureau ratings 
could  be  used  by  the  banks  to  validate  the  robustness  of  their  own  internal  models  by 
comparing  the  ratings  produced  between  their  internal  ratings  and  that  by  the  SME  Credit 
Bureau.  
For smaller and less sophisticated banks, the Bureau information will supplement the current 
SME credit assessment methodology that is traditionally qualitative in nature. Such banks will 
be able to obtain quantitative information from the Bureau database to enhance the overall 
credit evaluation process, thereby supporting more informed and objective credit decisions. 
The  benefit  is  not  limited  only  to  enhancing  credit  evaluation,  but  also  provides  the 
foundation for more effective portfolio analysis and management on an ongoing basis that 
are the hallmarks of any effective risk management system. For example, the overall quality 
of  the  SME  portfolio  can  be  monitored  based  on  information  available  from  the  Bureau  to 
BIS Review 67/2008 
 3
support  analyses  on  the  distribution  of  financing  by  rating,  migration  analysis  and  stress 
tests. The findings from portfolio analysis supported by the bureau information would assist 
SME financiers to better price their SME financing and facilitate more effective allocations of 
capital.  
Moving forward, one of the roles that the SME Credit Bureau can effectively play is to provide 
market  research  and  reports  on  the  SME  industry.  This  will  expand  its  user  base  beyond 
SME financiers and creditors to include policy makers, economic and investment analysts, 
and even academic scholars.  
The credit information infrastructure in Malaysia is advance, relative to other countries in a 
similar stage of economic development. Our main credit information database currently is the 
CCRIS  that  captures  information  on  all  credit  facilities  extended  by  licensed  banking 
institutions in Malaysia , as well as other institutions regulated by Bank Negara. While access 
to  CCRIS  is  limited  for  the  time  being  mostly  to  regulated  financial  institutions,  we  are 
encouraged by the progress made by private bureaus, such as the SME Credit Bureau, in 
providing access to credit information to a wider user base, as well as developing new value 
added products and services.  
With the expanded role of private credit bureaus comes the responsibility to protect privacy 
and ensure the accuracy and timeliness of credit information. The Government is in the final 
process of developing the regulatory framework for the protection of credit information and 
other  personal  data.  In  addition  to  according  greater  protection  to  consumers,  the 
Government is formulating the new credit reporting law and regulatory framework to achieve 
an appropriate balance between consumers’ right to privacy and financiers’ right to access 
credit information. To preserve this balance, SMEs will need to provide consent to financial 
institutions, for them to obtain the ratings from the SME Credit Bureau. As described earlier, 
the sharing of credit information will benefit the majority of SMEs, primarily through expanded 
access  to  credit,  shorter  processing  times  and  lower  borrowing  costs.  Therefore,  while 
participation is optional, it would be in the best interests of businesses to participate in this 
effort and be more forthcoming in providing the information that in the final analysis will be 
beneficial not just to individual SMEs, but for the development of the SME sector as a whole.  
From Bank Negara’s perspective, the information compiled by private credit bureaus would 
provide  us  with  more  information  on  the  financial,  household  and  corporate  sectors  for 
financial surveillance and policy calibration purposes. The more comprehensive and granular 
information  will  enable  Bank  Negara  to  detect  emerging  risks  or  vulnerabilities  within  the 
respective  sectors  at  an  earlier  stage,  and  enable  us  to  implement  pre-emptive  policy 
measures with greater speed and precision.  
Indeed, the SME Credit Bureau initiative represents a convergence of different objectives by 
various stakeholders, namely the Government, SME financiers and creditors, CGC and D&B. 
It is a big step in bridging the current gaps in the availability of credit information on SMEs. 
Nevertheless,  the  real  and  largest  beneficiaries  of  the  initiative  would  be  the  SMEs 
themselves.  
On this note, I would like to congratulate CGC and Dun & Bradstreet Malaysia Sdn. Bhd. in 
their new venture. I am also confident that this will open up a new chapter in the history of 
credit  bureaus  and  enable  these  entities  to  play  an  even  greater  role  in  the  future 
development  of  the  financial  industry  in  Malaysia,  and  consequently,  enhance  access  to 
financing by SMEs.  
4 
 BIS Review 67/2008
