Bandid Nijathaworn: Economic volatility in the Year of the Rat 
Speech by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at a seminar on 
“Economic  Volatility  in  the  Year  of  the  Rat,  Fight  or  Flight”,  organised  by  the  Foreign 
Correspondents’ Club of Thailand, Bangkok, 6 March 2008. 
 Thank you and good evening, 
Let me begin first by thanking the FCCT for the invitation. It must have been a long while 
since I last visited or spoke at a FCCT event, so it is good to be back. 
Tonight’s topic is economic volatility in the year of the Rat. According to Chinese astrology, 
Rat  is  an  auspicious  animal,  and  the  year  of  the  rat  is  usually  a  year  of  plenty,  bringing 
opportunity and good prospects. So, I think we have a good start. And judging from what has 
been happening, this year looks to be interesting and challenging both for the markets and 
policymakers. 
At  this  time,  we  are  seeing  widespread  fears  of  recession  in  the  US,  a  deepening  of  the 
credit problem, and stubbornly high oil prices. These developments are definitely a negative 
setting  for  the  global  economy  and  financial  markets.  Tonight,  my  talk  will  focus on  global 
economic volatility and possible implications for Thailand. And I want to do this by offering a 
perspective on how we see things developing from a financial regulator’s point of view. 
First, the US economy. Latest economic data from the US are not positive. There are more 
weak  numbers  than  good  ones,  with  signs  of  economic  slowdown  becoming  increasingly 
visible. Drawing on the information up to the end of February, the key elements of the latest 
data include continued correction in the housing market, further fall in consumer confidence, 
slowdown in consumer spending and private investment, and weaker employment numbers. 
The good news is that exports in the US are holding up well, and the financial conditions of 
companies,  especially  the  non-financial  companies,  are  intact.  But  going  forward,  the 
correction in the housing market is likely to continue, which will weigh on economic activities. 
On the financial market side, things also are not looking up. CDX spread continues to rise, 
indicating increased risk premium in the CDO market. And as confidence in the market for 
securitized  credit  is  yet  to  return,  more  writedown  can  be  expected.  Next,  as  economic 
activities in the US slow down, the quality of bank’s other assets such as commercial real 
estate  and  consumer  loans  may  come  under  greater  pressure,  affecting  bank  profitability. 
With  profit  declining,  banks  may  become  more  risk  averse  to  protect  capital,  putting  more 
pressure on credit extension and the real economy. 
So, latest US data point to a weaker outlook ahead with more downside risks in the near-
term. The risks include further correction in the housing market, continued tightening of the 
credit conditions, and further decline in economic activities. 
Outside the US, the economic picture looks less negative. While the adjustments in housing 
market  are  also  ongoing  in  Europe,  and  some  European  Banks  have  reported  losses  in 
CDOs,  the  impact  on  economic  activities  is  expected  to  be  more  limited.  For  example, 
Consensus Forecasts in February, revised downward the Euro Zone’s GDP growth for 2008 
by  only  0.3  percentage  points  from  December  compared  with  a  0.5  percentage  point 
downward  revision  for  the  US.  For  Southeast  Asia,  the  impact  is  also  forecasted  to  be 
limited. Latest consensus forecasts for Southeast Asia’s GDP growth is 5.7 percent for 2008, 
declining slightly from the forecast of 5.9 percent in December last year. 
These forecasts, together with the latest data, suggest that, in the short-term, things will likely 
get  worse  before  they  get  better,  and  the  slowing  of  growth  in  the  US  will  impact  growth 
globally.  The  key  question,  at  this  time,  is  how  deep  can  things  get  before  we  see  a 
turnaround.  This  is  definitely  an  important,  but  a  difficult  question  to  answer.  Market 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 1
participants  as  usual  will  have  a  range  of  views,  and  I  personally  do  not  intend  to  offer 
another  prediction.  Instead,  I  want  to  share  with  you  my  thoughts  on  the  current 
developments and on what this will mean for Thailand. 
To  begin,  one  context  that  I  think  is  useful  in  understanding  the  current  turmoil  is  the 
unwinding of the global imbalance, triggered by corrections in the US housing market that 
began  in  2006,  and  is  now  ongoing.  Such  unwinding  is  a  necessary  process  to  clear 
excesses and reduce financial leverages that have been built up in the form of high level of 
the US’s current account deficits. 
Economically speaking, to reduce the deficits, the value of the US dollar needs to fall and the 
levels of US long-term interest rates need to rise. Exchange rate adjustment is very much 
ongoing. The US dollar has declined by about 8.0 percent in nominal effective terms since 
2006. And reflecting this, the US current account began to show improvements last year, and 
is expected to improve further as we go forward. 
Experiences from the recent episodes of current account adjustments elsewhere, including 
the one here in Thailand after 1997, show that this process of adjustment can be long, with a 
potential for substantial dislocations to economic activities, especially if proper policies are 
not put in place. Important in this context is the dynamic of the interactions between the real 
economy  and  the  financial  sector  that  tend  to  feed  on  each  other  either  positively  or 
negatively. 
Therefore,  to  address  the  current  challenge,  it  is  important  that  policymakers  pay  close 
attention to this dynamic especially on the issues of liquidity, the health of the banking sector, 
the  conditions  for  a  normalization  of  business  activities,  and  the  ability  to  service  debt  by 
households. In my view, policymakers in the US have moved relatively quickly on all these 
fronts, which is positive for the markets. 
Let me turn now to the implications for Thailand. 
Being  a  small  open  economy,  Thailand  will  not  be  able  to  avoid  the  impact  of  the  global 
slowdown or the increase in economic volatilities. The US now forms about 12 percent of our 
export markets. 
As for the direct impact of the sub-prime, the exposure of the Thai banking system to CDO is 
very limited. Total investment by Thai banks on all CDOs is 0.26 percent of bank’s total asset 
in June last year, of which 0.03 percent was sub-prime related. Such exposure has declined 
further  in  December,  and  banks  that  have  CDO  investments  have  increased  their 
provisionings accordingly. At the end December last year, the BIS ratio for capital adequacy 
for the Thai banking system was 14.6 percent, well above the minimum requirement of 8.5 
percent. 
More important concern, however, is the indirect economic and financial impacts through (i) 
possible exports decline as the result of global economy slowdown, (ii) a tightening of global 
liquidity, and (iii) possible increase in the volatility of capital flows, as risk is being repriced by 
global  investors.  These  indirect  impacts  have  a  potential  to  impart  more  volatility  to  our 
markets, depending on the magnitude of the global slowdown. So far, no adverse impact has 
emerged, but with more downside risk and uncertainty ahead, it is important that one is not 
complacent and is alert for all possible impacts and outcomes. 
This point was fully recognized by the Bank of Thailand’s Monetary Policy Committee in its 
meeting last month. The MPC’s post-meeting statement made clear of the need to monitor 
the  situation  in  the  global  market  closely  so  that  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  can  be 
appropriately and flexibly calibrated to ensure price stability and steady growth. 
Finally,  the  last  point  I  want  to  stress  is  that  the  ability  of  the  Thai  economy  to  weather 
external  shocks  and  global  slowdown  at  this  time  are  now  much  greater  compared  to  the 
situations say ten years ago. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2008
First, the country’s economic fundamentals have improved from the crisis years, with solid 
external positions marked by current account surpluses, high level of international reserves, 
and much lower level of external debt. This stronger financial position will enhance the ability 
of the economy to cushion itself against external shocks. 
Second, our banking sector is in excellent shape, with good profitability, strong capital base, 
and improved asset quality. The corporate sector is also in good financial shape with strong 
earnings  and  low  financial  leverage.  These  qualities  will  make  the  private  sector  more 
resilient to the impact of economic volatilities from outside. 
And third, policy regime in Thailand has become more flexible, especially the exchange rate, 
with  market  force  now  playing  a  dominant  role  in  allocating  resources.  Such  attribute 
provides the private sector with a mechanism to efficiently adjust to the impact of external 
shocks. 
I  am  confident  that  these  improved  fundamentals  will  help  lessen  the  impact  of  the  global 
slowdown on the economy, enhance the ability of the private sector to manage and deal with 
economic  volatility,  and  provide  the  economy  with  a  strong  foundation  to  continue  with 
stronger growth and stability in the years ahead. 
This is all I want to say this evening. I hope it has been useful. And I want to end by wishing 
the year of the Rat to be a year of plenty, bringing opportunities and good prospects to all of 
you at the FCCT. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 29/2008 
 3
