Christian Noyer: International financial stability and the role of central 
banks in the crisis 
Address by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Plenary session: “The 
international economy in transition” of the Montreal Conference, Montreal, 9 June 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  take  part  in  this  conference  and  to  set  out,  before  such  a 
distinguished audience, my thoughts on the role of central banks regarding financial stability 
in the current environment. 
I should like to organise these thoughts around the following five questions: 
1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
Do central banks have a role to play regarding financial stability? 
What have they done since the start of the financial turmoil in the summer of 2007? 
Were they right to take these steps? 
Why have they responded differently as regards their monetary policy stance? 
What lessons can we learn for the future? 
Do central banks have a role to play regarding financial stability? 
1)  
This question might appear paradoxical when we recall that historically the raison d’être of 
central  banks  has  been  to  ensure  financial  stability,  that  is,  the  smooth  functioning  of 
financial  markets  and  payment  systems.  In  this  context,  they  play  the  role  of  the  ultimate 
liquidity provider, in other words, of lender of last resort. 
However, some people now regard this role as inconsistent with that which in the meantime 
has universally become the primary task of central banks, i.e. ensuring price stability. Three 
main arguments are generally put forward to support this view: 
- 
interest 
rates  at  a 
The  first  is  that  central  banks  have  only  one  instrument  at  their  disposal,  i.e.  the 
interest rate, and that this instrument, by virtue of Tinbergen’s Principle, can only be 
assigned  to  a  single  objective,  that  of  price  stability.  Other  means  –  particularly 
regulatory or prudential measures – would be better suited to and more effective in 
ensuring  financial  stability.  But  the  current  crisis  demonstrates  that  central  banks 
actually have several instruments at their disposal. Indeed, liquidity management in 
periods of financial turmoil needs to be separated from the issue of the monetary 
policy stance. To put it more clearly, the monetary policy stance simply consists in 
setting  key 
the  central  bank’s 
macroeconomic objectives, whilst liquidity management aims to enable the money 
market,  and  financial  markets  in  general,  to  function  “normally”  so  that  monetary 
policy impulses may be efficiently transmitted to the rest of the economy. 
The  second  argument  is  policy-based  in  nature  and  postulates  that  monetary 
stability is a necessary and sufficient prerequisite for ensuring financial stability. The 
latter would then be a welcome consequence of the implementation of an inflation 
targeting strategy, which consists in only responding to shocks that have a lasting 
impact on medium-term price stability. Here again, the argument does not hold up in 
the  face  of  the  facts  since  the  financial  crisis  unfolded  in  an  environment  of  low 
interest rates and contained inflationary pressures in spite of soaring property and 
commodity prices, in short, in a context where price stability seemed well secured. 
The  same  was  true  for  the  previous  bubble  that  formed  on  stock  markets.  A  low 
level  consistent  with 
 BIS Review 78/2008 
 1
 interest  rate  environment,  which  often  makes  agents  less  vigilant  about  risk  or 
makes them less able to gauge it, combined with very strong central bank credibility, 
is in no way a guarantee of financial stability. This is one of the manifestations of 
what some economists have termed the paradox of credibility. 
The  third  argument  relates  to  the  extraordinary  transformation  that  our  financial 
systems  have  undergone  over  the  past  few  years,  with  a  growing,  if  not 
predominant,  role  for  market  financing  at  the  expense  of  bank  intermediation.  Yet 
the operational framework of central banks, by means of which they perform their 
role  of  lender  of  last  resort,  is  mainly  focused  on  banks,  and  retail  banks  in 
particular. Here again, the facts prove the opposite. The crisis has shown that banks 
remain  at  the  heart  of  the  financial  system  and  that,  as  a  consequence,  the 
operational  framework  of  central  banks  remains  entirely  effective.  In  addition,  this 
framework  makes  it  possible  to  reach  other  market  participants,  such  as  broker-
dealers and investment banks. 
What have central banks done since the start of the financial turmoil? 
2)  
The  overall  impression  in  the  press  is  that  central  banks  have  injected  vast  amounts  of 
liquidity into the banking system in order to face up to the crisis. This is not true to reality. In 
volume terms, the amount of liquidity allocated by the Eurosystem has posted slow growth 
since the summer of 2007. 
On the other hand, during the crisis, some central banks, such as the Fed and the Bank of 
England, have had to make adjustments to their operational framework, while others, like the 
ECB,  have  been  able  to  rely  on  their  existing  framework,  up  until  very  recently.  This  has 
resulted in a remarkable convergence of central banks’ operational frameworks and fields of 
intervention around four main areas: 
- 
a  lengthening  of  maturities  for  central  bank  lending:  these  maturities  have  been 
increased  from  a  few  weeks  to  a  few  months.  In  the  case  of  the  Eurosystem,  a 
major  share  of  refinancing  operations  have  a  maturity  of  three  months,  and, 
recently, a six-month facility has been introduced; 
a  widening  of  the  range  of  eligible  collateral,  i.e.  the  securities  used as  collateral. 
Securities  such  as  ABS  and  RMBS,  which  have  always  been  accepted  by  the 
Eurosystem, are now accepted by all other major central banks; 
an extension of the list of eligible counterparties, in particular in the United States, 
where investment banks now have access to the Fed’s lending facility; 
a greater degree of coordination between central banks: this not only includes joint 
statements aimed at reassuring the markets about the provision of liquidity when the 
need arises, but also the signing of swap agreements between central banks. This 
facility enables any European bank which needs US dollars to pursue its activities to 
secure this funding from the ECB or the SNB. 
   Were central banks right to take these steps? 
3)  
The fast spillover of the US subprime crisis to other market segments, and subsequently to 
other countries through the seizing up of the commercial paper market and the major strains 
on  money  and  interbank  markets,  called  for  rapid  central  bank  intervention.  This  not  only 
included  providing  liquidity  to  the  market  as  a  whole  but  also,  in  some  countries,  granting 
emergency liquidity assistance to systemic institutions. 
These interventions have raised a number of questions: did not central banks, by adapting 
their  operational  framework  to  fit  the  circumstances,  increase  moral  hazard?  Did  they  not 
unduly save institutions that did not deserve to be saved, in particular those which had taken 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2008
excessive risks? Did they comply with the traditional principles expounded by Bagehot many 
years  ago,  i.e.  lend  to  temporarily  illiquid  but  solvent  financial  institutions,  lend  at  penalty 
rates  against  sound  collateral,  and  provide  liquidity  to  any  institution  satisfying  the 
aforementioned solvency and collateral criteria? 
These  essential  questions  are,  however,  mainly  academic.  Today,  they  take  on  different 
dimensions.  Indeed,  all  financial  crises  cause  a  downward  spiral  in  asset  prices,  which 
before  long  transforms  a  temporarily  illiquid  institution  into  an  insolvent  institution,  making 
Bagehot’s initial distinction difficult to apply. This situation is exacerbated in our developed 
financial  systems  by  the  joint  application  of  new  accounting  standards  requiring  fair  value 
measurement  for  financial  assets  and  prudential  arrangements  that  may  prove  partly  pro-
cyclical.  In  this  context,  central  banks  have  the  clear  duty  of  preventing  the  market  from 
seizing up, with incalculable consequences for other financial players and more generally for 
the real economy. 
However, it should be borne in mind that the central banks’ criteria for accepting assets as 
collateral  for  their  refinancing  operations  are  particularly  restrictive  and  penalising,  and 
comply  with  the  traditional  principles  that  I  have  just  mentioned.  In  particular,  the  value  of 
these  securities  must  be  at  least  equal  to  the  amount  lent  and  the  accrued  interest,  after 
applying a haircut to take account of a possible decline in their market value during the repo. 
4)  
Why have the central banks responded differently as regards their monetary 
policy stance? 
As regards the central banks’ response to the crisis, although they converged in their short-
term  liquidity  management  methods,  they  nonetheless  responded  differently  in  terms  of 
monetary policy. 
The underlying reasons for this divergence are both due to the nature of the shocks that the 
economies are facing and the mechanisms of their propagation to the real economy and to 
nominal variables. 
Over the recent period, the industrialised economies have undergone three common shocks: 
rocketing real-estate prices at least in a number of countries, soaring commodity prices and 
finally the financial crisis triggered last summer. 
They have also experienced specific shocks: the real-estate crisis in the United States in a 
context  of  household  overindebtedness,  for  example.  In  the  latter  case,  the  economic 
slowdown already underway since mid-2006 and the expected consequences of the credit 
crisis  on  economic  activity  over  the  medium  term  has  led  the  US  monetary  authorities  to 
change  their  monetary  policy  stance.  The  very  different  situation  in  the  euro  area,  where 
activity remained favourable, has led the ECB to keep its monetary policy stance unchanged 
in spite of the uncertainties generated by the financial crisis in a context also characterised 
by persistent inflationary tensions. 
What lessons can we learn for the future? 
5)  
At  the  current  juncture,  financial  turmoil  is  still  affecting  the  markets.  However,  after  more 
than nine months, I think it is already possible to draw first conclusions in three main areas: 
- 
First, the close co-operation between central banks on the one hand and between 
the  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks  on  the  other  hand  seems,  in  my 
opinion, to be a determining factor for efficient crisis management. This point was 
indeed  underscored  during  the  recent  work  carried  out  by  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum. I must say in this respect that the French model of banking supervision, in 
which  banking  supervisors  have  close  ties  with  the  central  bank,  has  once  again 
proven its worth in the current context. The necessity of this proximity has also been 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 3
increased by the new accounting and prudential standards which have proven to be 
pro-cyclical and in which liquidity and solvency are intertwined. In this context, when 
in a financial crisis, it is crucial to cross-check, at every moment, information on the 
evolution of banks balance sheet and data on money market functioning in order to 
assess the risks to financial stability. Such an assessment enables to adapt, as far 
as needed, the refinancing policy of the central bank, in order to alleviate tensions in 
the  market;  those  tension  being  a  threat  both  to  financial  stability  and  to  the 
effectiveness of the transmission of monetary policy. 
Second,  with  regard  to  monetary  policy,  let  me  reiterate  that  one  must  carefully 
distinguish  between  the  monetary  policy  stance  on  the  one  hand,  which  should 
remain  focused  on  the  macroeconomic  objective  of  price  stability  in  the  medium 
term, and the refinancing conditions of the banking system on the other hand, that 
may have to be adapted in times of financial turmoil. Moreover, a solid anchoring of 
inflation expectations seems to me particularly crucial in a period of economic and 
financial uncertainty. 
Last but not least, in my view, regulatory issues related to the increase of financial 
innovation over the recent period of rapid market growth should now be a matter of 
primary concern. Moreover, the return of greater market discipline, closer monitoring 
of risks by market participants and quite simply the use of commonsense principles, 
such as acknowledging that there is no such thing as low risk/high return assets, are 
in my view prerequisites for a return of confidence to the markets. 
BIS Review 78/2008
  4 
 