Randall S Kroszner: Protecting homeowners and sustaining 
homeownership 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  National  Association  of  Hispanic  Real  Estate  Professionals 
Legislative Conference 2008, Washington DC, 27 March 2008. 
 The mortgage market has long been a source of strength in the U.S. economy, but it is facing 
significant challenges, especially in the subprime segment that serves consumers who have 
shorter or weaker credit records. As of January 2008, the most recent month for which data 
are available, about 24 percent of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) were ninety 
or  more  days  delinquent,  twice  the  level  one  year  earlier.1  Roughly  190,000  foreclosures 
were  started  on  these  mortgages  in  the  fourth  quarter,  up  11  percent  from  the  previous 
quarter.2 The significance of the problems with subprime loan performance is evident in the 
unusually  high  rate  of  defaults  within  a  few  months  of  loan  origination,  known  as  early 
payment  defaults.  In  January  2008,  nearly  9  percent  of  subprime  ARMs  originated  in  the 
previous six months were already ninety or more days delinquent, twice the rate of the year 
before and nearly four times the rate two years earlier.3  
These problems have many causes, but the role of abusive lending practices is of particular 
concern. Such practices have led many people into homeownership that they cannot sustain, 
and  have  had  adverse  effects  on  their  neighbors  and  communities  as  defaults  and 
foreclosures can lead to declines in the values of surrounding properties. Practices that have 
hurt  consumers  have  also  undermined  the  confidence  of  investors  and  contributed  to  a 
virtual  shutdown  of  the  subprime  market  with  consequences  for  other  segments  of  the 
mortgage  market.  As  a  result,  it  is  difficult  for  many  borrowers,  especially  in  the  subprime 
space, to obtain home loans. The implications of diminished access to mortgage credit are of 
particular concern to the audience today, given that the subprime market was the source of 
home purchase loans extended to many in the Hispanic community.  
These events have highlighted the shared interest of mortgage borrowers, their communities, 
lenders,  and  investors  in  protecting  borrowers  from  abusive  practices  and  preserving  their 
choices. Abusive loans that strip their equity or cause them to lose their homes must not be 
tolerated.  Protecting  borrowers  with  responsible  underwriting  standards  also  protects  the 
integrity  and  proper  functioning  of  the  mortgage  market  by  increasing  investor  confidence 
Effective consumer protection produces a complementary benefit for consumers by making 
more  capital  available  to  meet  their  needs.  Similarly,  systematic  efforts  to  keep  borrowers 
who may have trouble meeting their loan obligations in their homes on a sustainable basis, 
by providing more certainty to the market, can have the complementary benefit of ensuring 
the flow of capital for potential borrowers. 
With these principles in mind, I will discuss current initiatives to mitigate foreclosures. Then I 
will  spend  most  of  my  time  discussing  the  Board's  recent  initiative  in  proposing  new 
regulations that apply to all mortgage lenders, not just federally supervised banks, that are 
designed to prevent abuse, unfairness, and deception in residential mortgage lending. The 
expansive  scope  of  this  proposal  is  essential  to  ensure  that  consumer  protections  convey 
                                                 
1   Board staff calculation based on data from First American LoanPerformance. 
2   Board staff calculation based on data from the Mortgage Bankers Association. 
3   Board staff calculation based on data from First American LoanPerformance. 
BIS Review 34/2008 
 1
across the mortgage market, regardless of whether a borrower receives a loan from a bank, 
an independent mortgage company, or through a mortgage broker. 
Preventing unnecessary foreclosures 
Given the high cost of foreclosures to lenders and investors and the disruption and distress 
that  foreclosure  can  cause  to  consumers,  their  families,  and  their  communities,  it  is  in 
everyone's  interest  to  avoid  foreclosures  whenever  other  viable  options  exist.  With  large 
numbers of borrowers facing potential repayment problems, it is in the interest of borrowers 
and investors alike for the industry to develop prudent loan modification programs and other 
assistance to help borrowers on a systematic and sustainable basis.  
As you know, there are various initiatives underway to help borrowers struggling with their 
mortgages. NeighborWorks America and the Homeownership Preservation Foundation offer 
financial  counseling  services  through  the  Homeowners  HOPE  hotline.  The  Hope  Now 
Alliance,  a  broad-based  coalition  of  government  sponsored  enterprises,  industry  trade 
associations, counseling agencies, and mortgage servicers, is making efforts to find ways to 
help  borrowers  through  loan  modification  plans.  The  Federal  Housing  Administration  has 
established the FHASecure plan to provide qualified borrowers who are delinquent because 
of an interest rate reset and who have some equity in the home the opportunity to refinance 
into an FHA-insured mortgage.  
I  have  been  an  active  proponent  of  such  streamlined  systematic  approaches  to  reduce 
transactions  costs  and  to  help  mitigate  foreclosure  risk,  and  I  strongly  encourage  market 
participants to adopt and to implement these fast-track modification proposals as quickly as 
possible.  I  applaud  these  efforts  but  also  recognize  that  much  more  must  be  done. 
Challenges remain, for example, with respect to ongoing constraints on servicing capacity to 
expedite  work  outs.  Servicers  must  undertake  the  investment  to  overcome  the  capacity 
challenges and provide transparent and timely measures of the results. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  working  with  financial  institutions  and  community  groups 
around  the  country  to  address  the  challenges  posed  by  problem  loans.  For  instance,  we 
have  been  providing  community  coalitions,  counseling  agencies,  fellow  regulators,  and 
others  with  detailed  analyses  identifying  neighborhoods  at  high  risk  of  foreclosures.  By 
understanding those areas with concentrations of subprime mortgages, delinquencies, and 
foreclosures,  community  leaders  can  better  target  their  scarce  resources  to  borrowers  in 
need of counseling and other interventions that may help forestall foreclosure. Communities 
are also working to find ways to address the challenges that foreclosed homes can present, 
such  as  decreased  home  values  and  vacant  properties  that  can  deteriorate  from  neglect. 
Toward  this  end,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  recently  engaged  in  a  partnership  with 
NeighborWorks America to help identify strategies to help stabilize neighborhoods.  
It is essential that organizations with access to at-risk homeowners, particularly those who 
may have additional challenges, such as language barriers, engage in foreclosure prevention 
initiatives  to  help  keep  families  in  their  homes  and  stabilize  communities.  The  Federal 
Reserve has worked to support consumers by providing them with the information they need 
to understand and shop for banking products, as well as to file a complaint against a bank. 
Many of these consumer education brochures are available in Spanish.  
Importantly,  we  have  just  launched  a  Spanish-language  version  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Consumer Help Center to help better meet the needs of Spanish-speaking consumers. We 
have seen a dramatic increase in the number of consumers contacting us since we launched 
this centralized call center and website in November 2007, and now we have the capability to 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2008
reach  even  greater  numbers  by  providing  information  and  assistance  to  Spanish-speaking 
consumers at 888-851-1920.4  
The Board's proposal 
I will now focus on the Board's recent proposal for stricter regulations prohibiting abusive and 
deceptive  practices  in  the  mortgage  market  under  authority  of  the  Home  Ownership  and 
Equity  Protection  Act  (HOEPA).  This  proposal  is  intended  to  protect  consumers  and  to 
preserve consumer choice by targeting protections to borrowers who face the most risk. We 
have also sought to ensure that these standards are clear for lenders to reduce unintended 
consequences  for  consumers.  Though  clear,  the  standards  are  intended  to  be  not  overly 
prescriptive,  so  as  to  preserve  access  to  responsible  credit  while  amply  protecting 
consumers. Our proposal is also comprehensive, covering most mortgage loans with certain 
protections  and  the  entire  subprime  market  with  certain  more  specific  regulations.  While 
comprehensive,  the  proposal  would  focus  protections  where  the  risks  are  greatest  and 
preserve consumers' access to responsible credit. 
Our  effort  to  produce  robust,  clear,  and  comprehensive  rules  was  based  on  a  rigorous 
analysis  of  available  qualitative  and  quantitative  data.  We  have  put  this  proposal  out  for 
public  comment  until  April  8  and  eagerly  seek  suggestions  to  be  able  to  craft  the  best 
possible final rule. 
Comprehensive scope 
Let  me  say  more  about  the  comprehensive  scope  of  this  proposal.  It  would  apply  stricter 
regulations to higher-priced mortgage loans, which we have defined broadly, and it covers all 
types of mortgage lenders, unlike guidance that only applies to federally insured banks. We 
were  particularly  interested  in  ensuring  that  protections  remain  strong  over  time  as  loan 
products and lending practices change. Our analysis of the data suggested that the troubles 
in  the  mortgage  market  generally  arise  not  from  a  single  practice  in  isolation,  but  instead 
from  the  complex  ways  that  risk  factors  and  underwriting  practices  can  affect  each  other, 
sometimes  called  "risk  layering."  Therefore,  we  have  proposed  using  a  loan's  annual 
percentage rate, or APR, to determine whether the loan is covered by stricter regulations.5 
Because the APR is closely correlated to risk, the proposed protections would cover loans 
with higher risks rather than single out particular risk factors or underwriting practices. 
With the APR thresholds we have proposed, we expect that the new protections would cover 
the entire subprime mortgage market and the riskier end of the "near prime" market, the latter 
also known as the "alt-A" market. Covering part of the alt-A market would anticipate possible 
actions by lenders to avoid restrictions on subprime loans priced near the threshold. It would 
also address real risks to consumers in the alt-A segment. This segment grew very rapidly, 
and  it  layered  risks,  such  as  undocumented  income,  on  top  of  other  risks,  such  as 
nontraditional  loan  structures  allowing  borrowers  to  defer  paying  principal  and  interest. 
However, we have heard from commenters who have expressed concern that in the current 
market  environment,  the  proposed  trigger  could  cover  the  market  too  broadly,  and  we  will 
carefully  consider  the  issues  they  raise  and  other  possible  approaches  to  achieve  our 
objective.  
                                                 
4   Federal 
Reserve 
Help 
www.federalreserveconsumerhelp.gov/index_sp.cfm. 
Consumer 
can 
be 
accessed 
online 
at 
5   Under  the  proposal,  a  "higher-priced  mortgage  loan"  would  have  an  APR  that  exceeds  the  yield  on 
comparable  Treasury  securities  by  three  or  more  percentage  points  for  first-lien  loans,  or  five  or  more 
percentage points for subordinate-lien loans. 
BIS Review 34/2008 
 3
Our public hearings and our analysis identified problems not just in higher-priced loans, but 
also  in  the  broader  mortgage  market.  Thus,  our  proposal  addresses  unfair  or  deceptive 
practices  for  the  vast  majority  of  mortgage  loans  secured  by  a  consumer's  primary  home. 
Areas  targeted  this  broadly  include  broker  steering,  appraisal  coercion,  unwarranted 
servicing fees, and deceptive advertising. I'll touch on broker steering toward the end of my 
remarks. 
Robust approach to affordability 
Extending  credit  that  borrowers  can  afford  to  repay  is  a  fundamental  pillar  of  responsible 
lending. Across the whole range of higher-priced mortgage loans, our proposal offers three 
rules  that,  working  in  combination,  would  help  ensure  that  borrowers  can  afford  their 
payments. First, is a requirement that a lender maintain responsible underwriting practices 
that  genuinely  assess  borrowers'  ability  to  repay.  This  general  requirement  would  be 
complemented by a specific requirement to verify the income and assets of the borrower that 
are  relied  upon  in  making  the  loan.  A  third  rule  would  require  lenders  to  escrow  property 
taxes and homeowners insurance to help borrowers meet these obligations. 
This robust approach to affordability would help ensure that the subprime market promotes 
sustainable  homeownership.  Just  as  important,  it  would  also  help  protect  consumers  from 
abusive refinancings that strip equity. Clear lending standards have the further advantages of 
increasing investor confidence in the mortgage market and helping to revive the flow of credit 
to consumers with shorter or weaker credit records. 
Assessment of repayment ability 
Now I want to discuss the major elements of our proposed regulations for higher-priced loans 
in  a  little  more  depth,  starting  with  the  requirement  to  assess  repayment  ability.  The 
regulations would prohibit a lender from engaging in a pattern or practice of making higher-
priced loans based on the value of the borrower's house rather than on the borrower's ability 
to repay from income, or from assets other than the house. This prohibition is intentionally 
broad to capture all risks to loan performance and the different ways that these risks can be 
layered.  Moreover,  the  proposal  avoids  prescribing  quantitative  underwriting  requirements. 
For  example,  the  proposal  would  prohibit  a  pattern  or  practice  of  disregarding  the  ratio  of 
applicants'  income  to  their  debt,  but  it  does  not  prescribe  a  maximum  ratio  because  the 
appropriate number depends heavily on other risk factors, which vary from loan to loan. At 
the same time, the proposal does offer specifics. For example, it would create a presumption 
that a lender had violated the regulations if it engaged in a pattern or practice of failing to 
underwrite at the fully-indexed rate.6  
Our  proposed  regulations  would  be  more  robust  and  comprehensive  than  the  subprime 
guidance the agencies issued last year. The regulations would apply to all mortgage lenders, 
including  independent  mortgage  companies.  Moreover,  the  regulations  would  be  legally 
enforceable  by  supervisory  and  enforcement  agencies.  Just  as  important,  the  regulations, 
unlike the guidance, would be legally enforceable by consumers who could recover statutory 
and actual damages for violations. 
The proposed requirement to assess repayment ability is intended to protect consumers from 
abusive  practices  while  maintaining  their  access  to  responsible  credit.  We  recognize  that 
                                                 
6   On an adjustable-rate mortgage, the fully-indexed rate is the sum of the value of the applicable index as of 
loan origination and the margin specified in the loan agreement. For example, a typical 2/28 mortgage issued 
in 2006 might have a fully-indexed rate of 11.37. This assumes that the mortgage was linked to the six-month 
LIBOR, that LIBOR was at its 2006 average value of 5.37 percent, and that the mortgage had a margin of six 
percentage points. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2008
satisfying both objectives at the same time is a challenge. The proposed rule's potential for 
consumer actions, coupled with its careful avoidance of prescribing quantitative underwriting 
thresholds,  could  raise  compliance  and  litigation  risk.  In  turn,  this  could  raise  the  cost  of 
credit for higher-risk borrowers or limit the availability of responsible credit. That is why we 
have proposed prohibiting a "pattern or practice" of disregarding repayment ability rather than 
attaching  a  risk  of  legal  liability  to  every  individual  loan  that  does  not  perform.  Some 
commentators  have  argued  that  the  pattern  or  practice  requirement  creates  a  higher 
standard of proof that can make it more difficult and costly for consumers to pursue litigation. 
We  have  specifically  sought  comment  on  this  provision  and  look  forward  to  perspectives 
offered by the industry and consumer groups. 
Income verification 
When  we  looked  closely  at  why  so  many  borrowers  had  mortgages  that  they  struggled  to 
repay  so  soon  after  taking  out  the  loan,  the  prevalence  of  "stated-income"  lending  was  a 
clear  culprit.  Substantial  anecdotal  evidence  indicates  that  failing  to  verify  income  invited 
fraud. Moreover, when we looked at the loan-level data we saw a clear correlation between 
"low-doc" or "no-doc" lending and performance problems, particularly early payment defaults. 
That  is  why  we  have  proposed  to  complement  a  broad  requirement  to  assess  repayment 
ability with a specific requirement to verify the income or assets a lender relies on to make a 
credit decision. We recognize that stated-income lending may have a proper place when not 
layered  on  top  of  too  many  other  risks.  Therefore,  we  would  target  the  verification 
requirement to higher-priced loans, including the higher-priced end of the alt-A market, where 
the risks of stated-income lending could be layered on top of too many other risks.  
The proposal identifies standard documents that would be acceptable, such as W-2 forms. It 
also allows, however, any third party documents that provide reasonably reliable evidence of 
income.  Some  consumers  may  have  access  to  only  nonstandard  documents  and  others, 
such as self-employed entrepreneurs, may have some difficulty documenting their income. 
This rule is meant to preserve consumer choice by allowing the market to identify credible 
nontraditional documentation of consumer income – for example, check-cashing receipts. To 
help ensure that the proposal preserves access to credit for the full range of consumers, we 
have sought public comment on this issue. 
Escrows for taxes and insurance 
Another  part  of  our  proposal  for  higher-priced  loans  –  a  requirement  to  escrow  taxes  and 
insurance – would also help ensure that borrowers can afford their payments. Escrowing has 
become standard practice in the prime  market, and the case for making it standard in the 
subprime market, too, appears compelling. Consumers with shorter or weaker credit histories 
may be less likely to appreciate the sizable burden that taxes and insurance can add to the 
cost of homeownership, or more vulnerable to being misled by payment quotes that leave out 
these amounts. Moreover, when we looked at the data, we saw in the unusually high level of 
early payment defaults possible evidence that the lack of escrows hurt consumers who did 
not have experience paying property tax and insurance bills. 
We have proposed to address the problem with a requirement to escrow taxes and insurance 
on  higher-priced  loans,  accompanied  by  a  limited  allowance  for  opt-out.  We  wanted  the 
regulations  to  prevent  irresponsible  efforts  to  encourage  borrowers  to  opt  out.  So  the  rule 
would not permit opt-out at the closing table, but instead would require that twelve months 
pass before a consumer may opt out. The twelve-month waiting period would also apply if a 
consumer  refinanced  into  another  high-cost  loan,  reducing  the  likelihood  that  consumers 
would refinance solely to decrease monthly payments by eliminating escrowing of taxes and 
insurance.  In  this  respect  the  proposal  is  intended  to  preserve  consumer  choice  while 
protecting consumers from unaffordable mortgage obligations.  
BIS Review 34/2008 
 5
Prepayment penalties  
Having discussed the rules that would promote affordability, I want to say a word about our 
proposed rule on prepayment penalties. These penalties can take a toll on consumers who 
have riskier loans, and many consumers may not even be aware their loans have a penalty. 
Accordingly, we have proposed a ban on prepayment penalties in circumstances of a high 
degree of risk to the consumer, and we are also addressing transparency concerns. 
The proposed rule would ban prepayment penalties where they are most likely to prevent a 
consumer from refinancing a loan that has a particularly burdensome payment. Specifically, 
a penalty would be prohibited where the borrower's debt-to-income ratio exceeds 50 percent, 
and a penalty would have to expire before a loan's payment could increase. The rule would 
also  ban  prepayment  penalties  where  they  are  more  likely  to  be  part  of  a  "loan  flipping" 
scheme – specifically, where a lender or its affiliate refinances the lender's own loan. 
Banning penalties altogether could cause all borrowers, including those who do not prepay, 
to bear the  full cost of investors' prepayment risk, which could raise questions of fairness, 
and it could reduce consumer choice. We recognize there are differing views on this and look 
forward to gaining those perspectives through the comment process. 
Steering 
I  have  so  far  discussed  the  elements  of  our  proposal  that  would  seek  to  ensure  that 
underwriting  practices  and  loan  terms  on  higher-priced  loans  do  not  present  unwarranted 
risks  to  consumers.  There  is  another  potential  source  of  risk  to  consumers  that  I  want  to 
address that is related to "steering" – the risk that when they use the services of a mortgage 
broker, they do not appreciate the extent to which the broker's interests may diverge from the 
consumer's interests because of "yield spread premiums."7
The growth of the market for brokerage services has no doubt increased competition in the 
market for mortgage loans, to the benefit of consumers. Moreover, the yield spread premium, 
a payment from a lender to a broker based on the loan's interest rate, is sometimes the best 
way for a consumer to fund the cost of a broker's services. However, when a lender pays a 
broker  for  a  loan  that  has  a  higher  rate,  that  payment  can  create  a  conflict  of  interest 
between the broker and the consumer. This conflict is problematic if the consumer does not 
know  it  exists  or  assumes,  incorrectly,  that  the  broker  is  obligated  to  put  the  consumer's 
interests  first.  In  such  cases,  the  consumer  cannot  protect  his  or  her  own  interests,  and 
competition for loans and for brokerage services does not work effectively. 
Therefore, we have proposed to prohibit a lender, for both prime and subprime loans, from 
paying  a  broker  any  more  than  the  consumer  had  expressly  agreed  that  the  broker  would 
receive. This agreement must be executed up-front, before the consumer has submitted an 
application and become invested in closing the deal. The combination of stricter regulation 
and better disclosure that we are proposing should help reduce a broker's incentive to steer a 
consumer to a higher rate, empower consumers to shop and negotiate among brokers, and 
preserve consumers' option to use the services of a broker. 
Better and earlier information for consumers 
Lastly,  to  protect  consumers  and  promote  competition,  our  proposed  regulation  would 
prohibit  misleading  mortgage  advertising  and  require  that  consumers  receive  loan-specific 
                                                 
7   A  "yield  spread  premium"  is  the  present  dollar  value  of  the  difference  between  the  lowest  interest  rate  the 
wholesale  lender  would  have  accepted  on  a  particular  transaction  and  the  interest  rate  the  broker  actually 
obtained for the lender. This dollar amount is usually paid to the mortgage broker. It may also be applied to 
other loan-related costs, but the Board’s proposal concerns only the amount paid to the broker. 
6 
 BIS Review 34/2008
disclosures early in the application process, when they can use the information to shop more 
effectively. We recognize, however, that we face a challenge in ensuring that disclosures for 
mortgage  loans  remain  effective.  We  have  begun  a  comprehensive  program  of  rigorous 
consumer testing of potential improvements to current disclosures. 
Conclusion 
There are more elements of our comprehensive proposal that I do not have time today to 
discuss, such as a prohibition against coercing appraisers and restrictions on unwarranted 
servicing fees. We anticipate vigorous public comment on this proposal, and once we have 
carefully considered all the input we receive, we will move expeditiously to a final rule. As I 
noted  at  the  outset,  effective  consumer  protection  can  help  to  restore  confidence  in  the 
mortgage  markets  and  help  to  preserve  the  flow  of  capital  to  consumers  who  wish  to 
purchase a home. 
It is not too early to emphasize that the effectiveness of the final rule will depend critically on 
effective enforcement. The Federal Reserve will do its part to ensure compliance among the 
institutions  it  supervises.  We  also  have  been  instrumental  in  launching  a  pilot  project  with 
other federal and state agencies to conduct consumer compliance reviews of non-depository 
lenders and other industry participants. I am sure we will be aided in these efforts by a new 
system for registering and tracking mortgage brokers recently launched by the Conference of 
State Bank Supervisors. 
While we work to build effective consumer protections and enforcement regimes for future 
consumers, we will also continue our efforts, and encourage the initiatives many others are 
undertaking, to limit unnecessary foreclosures for consumers who are hurting now.  
BIS Review 34/2008 
 7
