Mario Draghi: An overview of banking in Italy 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Italian Banking Association 
Annual Meeting, Rome, 9 July 2008. 
 Rising inflation and the outlook for the world economy 
Expansionary monetary policies together with severe tensions in the market for oil are at the 
origin of the present international economic and financial difficulties. The protracted monetary 
expansion in the United States and other countries spread to the main emerging countries 
because their currencies are pegged to the dollar. The fragilità of the markets originated in 
the gaps in the regulatory framework and was worsened by perverse incentives that fueled 
the tumultuous growth of the financial industry. But, as with the weakness of the dollar, the 
roots can also be found in overly accommodating monetary policies. The massive flight of 
capital from no longer profitable financial investments and the depreciation of the dollar have 
contributed to the rise in the price of oil, which is based on the structural tensions underlying 
this market.  
The price of crude oil has been rising since the beginning of the decade; in real terms it has 
already gone beyond its previous all-time peak in 1979-80; it is still rising. The fundamental 
cause  has  been  the  sharp  increase  in  the  emerging  countries’  demand  for  energy,  with 
supply  struggling  to  keep  up.  Demand  is  inelastic  in  the  short  term  owing  to  technical 
constraints. Supply is even more inelastic because of the increasing cost of discovering and 
developing  new  fields,  rigidity  in  refining  and  transport,  and  unresolved  geopolitical 
difficulties. But this is not enough to explain the latest price surges. That abundant liquidity 
worldwide has played a part is confirmed by our estimates, which indicate that the fall in real 
interest rates since last summer may explain about a quarter of the subsequent rise in world 
crude oil prices.  
This not only puts pressure on current and expected inflation, it also poses a threat to world 
growth itself. The transfer of resources to the oil-producing countries, only offset in part by an 
increase  in  their  imports,  is  holding  down  growth  in  the  industrialized  countries.  Higher 
inflation,  due  also  to  food  prices,  is  depressing  the  real  value  of  wages  and  therefore 
consumption.  
International financial markets, influenced by the more uncertain economic outlook and the 
increases in the price of crude oil, remain fragile. After a return to lower levels in March, risk 
premiums for corporate bonds and banks’ credit default swaps have begun to rise again. The 
market for structured credit products has not recovered; money market spreads are still wide. 
The major international banks have begun to put their balance sheets in order, by reducing 
their  exposure  to  the  riskiest  instruments  and  to  a  large  extent  covering  their  losses  by 
injections  of  capital.  But  this  capital  strengthening  is  not  yet  sufficient,  it  threatens  to  be 
hindered  by  further  falls  in  house  and  stock  market  prices.  In  the  United  States,  rising 
insolvency  rates  and  the  possibility  that  poor  economic  conditions  could  undermine  the 
quality of corporate loans are causes for concern.  
It is important not to repeat the economic policy errors made in response to the oil shocks of 
the  1970s.  In  some  countries,  an  initially  expansive  monetary  policy  destabilized  inflation 
expectations;  a  sharp  restriction  had  to  follow.  The  consequences,  partly  because  of 
widespread indexation, were persistently high inflation, enormous fluctuations in real interest 
rates and severe repercussions on economic activity.  
Compared with thirty years ago, an oil shock has less of an effect on the economies of the 
consumer  countries  today,  not  only  thanks  to  greater  energy  efficiency  and  more  flexible 
markets  but  also  because  of  the  credibility  that  monetary  policies  have  acquired.  We 
BIS Review 100/2008 
 1
estimate that with monetary union the impact of an increase in the price of oil on consumer 
price inflation in Italy has been reduced fivefold by comparison with the 1980s and 1990s. 
The  credibility  of  monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  this  achievement.  It  needs  to  be 
preserved in the advanced countries and pursued in the emerging countries, by heightening 
awareness of the seriousness of the risk of inflation and the growing inadequacy of pegging 
exchange rates to the dollar. 
Inflation and monetary policy in Europe 
The  rate  of  inflation  has  increased  in  all  the  major  countries.  Although  “core”  inflation  – 
excluding energy and food products – is lower, the warning signals are growing.  
Consumer  price  inflation  in  the  euro  area  had  already  reached  the  highest  level  since  the 
start of the 1990s in May (3.7 per cent); on the basis of provisional data, it rose to 4 per cent 
in  June.  There  has  been  a  sharp  acceleration  in  Italy,  too.  According  to  Eurosystem 
forecasts,  the  rise  in  inflation  in  the  area  will  be  temporary  but  more  persistent  than  was 
predicted  several  months  ago.  Inflation  is  now  expected  to  subside  only  gradually  in  the 
course of 2009, remaining higher than 2 per cent for quite some time.  
The idea that the rise in inflation is permanent must not take hold. On the eve of the meeting 
of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank on 3 July, the risks of an increase in 
inflation appeared to have grown. Albeit in a context of wage moderation, the first signs of an 
acceleration  in  costs  were  visible.  Other  warning  signals  were  coming  from  market 
expectations:  inflation  expectations  measured  on  the  basis  of  long-term  index-linked 
government bonds were tending to rise; the prices of inflation swaps signaled growing fears 
of inflation for long-term maturities as well. Against this background, the Governing Council 
of the ECB decided to raise reference rates by 0.25 percentage points. In the days following 
the rate hike, inflation expectations derived from the financial markets ceased their upward 
trend; it appears that they are now beginning to fall back.  
By  taking  timely  action  we  intend  to  help  to  avert  the  risk  that  the  rise  in  the  international 
prices  of  energy  and  food  products  might  set  off  a  spiral  between  expectations  and  the 
setting of wages and prices, and to bring inflation gradually back down to levels consistent 
with price stability in the medium term.  
Households’ disposable income is defended by combating the rise in inflation, which erodes 
purchasing power, lowers the real value of financial wealth and is a drag on consumption and 
growth. We estimate that in Italy the acceleration in prices recorded since last summer has 
reduced the growth in disposable income by more than one percentage point, by three points 
if the losses of the real value of financial wealth are also taken into account; it can reduce 
consumption by more than two points by the end of next year.  
Average per capita earnings of employees, after tax and social security contributions, are not 
much  higher  today  in  real  terms  than  they  were  fifteen  years  ago.  Meanwhile,  unit  labour 
costs have increased by more than 30 per cent, compared with about 20 per cent in France 
and practically nil in Germany. This gap between the spending capacity of workers and the 
competitive capacity of firms reflects the meagre growth in productivity, the persistently high 
level of taxation and social security contributions, and the effect of inflation; it is at the root of 
the stagnation of our economy.  
Price stability is a prerequisite for the resumption of growth. A price-wage spiral would be an 
illusory  remedy  and  one  that  monetary  policy  must  oppose.  If  monetary  policy  is  credible, 
even  if  it  cannot  insulate  the  economy  from  the  fluctuations  of  commodity  prices,  it  can 
cushion  their  effects  on  expectations  and  domestic  prices.  A  prompt  monetary  adjustment 
reduces the risk of tardy but violent corrections. 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2008
Italian banks’ income and capital 
Excluding  capital  gains  and  extraordinary  income,  the  profits  of  the  five  largest  Italian 
banking groups fell in the first three months of this year by about a third compared with the 
same  period  of  2007;  the  rate  of  return  on  equity  fell  on  an  annual  basis  by  nearly  five 
percentage points, to about 9 per cent. The deterioration began in the third quarter of last 
year.  Contributory  factors  included  the  decline  in  fee  income,  caused  mainly  by  the 
contraction  in  asset  management  activity,  the  losses  on  securities  trading  and  portfolio 
writedowns.  
In 2007 the tier 1 capital ratio of the largest groups fell slightly, from 6.8 to 6.5 per cent on 
average, although it remained above the regulatory minimum.  
Loan quality has remained stable up to now. The ratio of non-performing loans to balance 
sheet assets for the groups as a whole remains close to 5 per cent; for bad debts alone, the 
ratio  is  close  to  3  per  cent.  More  than  60  per  cent  of  the  nominal  value  of  bad  debts  is 
covered by write-downs. The ratio of new bad debts to outstanding loans holds at about 1 
per cent for firms and 0.8 per cent for consumer households, levels that can be considered 
normal.  
The impact of the international financial turbulence on the accounts of Italian banks has been 
relatively limited so far. However, income and profitability will continue to be affected if the 
tensions  do  not  ease.  The  cost  of  funding  on  international  markets  remains  high.  The 
slowdown in economic activity could have an impact on loan growth and quality, weighing on 
profitability on a risk-adjusted basis. The exposure of Italian firms and households to interest 
rate risk is particularly large, given the high proportion of loans at short term or indexed to 
short-term  rates:  some  90  per  cent  of  the  total  for  firms  and  more  than  70  per  cent  of 
mortgage loans to households. The uncertainty of the macroeconomic and financial picture 
demands that banks adopt a prudent policy of provisioning against future losses. 
The measure regarding the partial non-deductibility of banks’ interest expense is equivalent 
to an increase in funding costs of nearly 10 basis points. It is difficult to predict how this cost 
will be divided: depending on the evolution of market conditions, it could fall on the terms and 
conditions offered to depositors and borrowers, profits distributed or resources allocated to 
reserves. 
Banking supervision 
The Basel II capital adequacy rules went into force in Italy in January 2007; since the start of 
this year they have applied to the entire banking system. 
From 2001 onwards the Bank of Italy had asked the major Italian banking groups to overfulfill 
the minimum capital requirement, in order to provide for the risks not covered by the Basel I 
accounting  standards.  This  ensured  that  the  massive  process  of  concentration  within  the 
Italian banking industry could take place without jeopardizing balance-sheet soundness. With 
the  new  rules  of  Basel  II,  however,  and  in  today’s  market  environment,  capital  soundness 
takes on an even more important role, and the banks have been invited to proceed to the 
necessary  strengthening.  This  autumn  intermediaries  will  also  be  required  to  specify  the 
additional capital safeguards to be constituted, where necessary, as part of the obligations 
laid down under the second pillar of Basel II.  
It is essential that banks be in a position at all times to evaluate the impact of improbable but 
devastating events on income and on capital as well as to gauge the possible interactions 
among different types of risk: credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk and interest rate risk. The 
Bank of Italy has asked the leading banks to make stress testing a regular practice. The first 
results, although they are reassuring on the whole, revealed that in some cases the liquidity 
safeguards against extreme events were not adequate. These banks were asked to restore 
an adequate level of liquidity without delay. 
BIS Review 100/2008 
 3
New rules on bank governance came into effect recently; one of their provisions requires that 
the  criteria  for  the  remuneration  of  bank  managers  be  designed  so  as  to  avoid  perverse 
incentives  in  the  matter  of  risk  taking  and  risk  management.  With  the  cooperation  of  the 
banks’  compliance  units,  we  shall  assess  the  consistency  of  incentive  schemes  with  the 
principles laid down by the new rules.  
Transparency  and  information  comparability  are  essential  to  reducing  the  uncertainty  that 
weighs on market trends. In accord with the other G7 national supervisory authorities, and in 
implementation  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  on  16  June  we 
asked Italian banks to include in their mid-year financial statements a detailed treatment of 
their risks in connection with subprime mortgage loans and structured finance, thus retaining 
and extending a procedure that had already been instituted in Italy for the annual financial 
reports for 2007. 
In  line  with  the  indications  of  the  Basel  Committee  we  have  asked  the  leading  groups  to 
adopt integrated systems of liquidity risk analysis and control providing for effective liaison 
between risk management and treasury management.  
Preparation  for  critical  contingencies  continues.  In  coordination  with  the  other  supervisory 
authorities,  we  are  conducting  crisis  simulation  exercises  and  specifying  the  data  flows  to 
activate in the event of an emergency.  
Coordination  between  the  different  countries’  authorities  and  convergence  of  supervisory 
practice  reduce  the  cost  of  supervision  over  international  banks,  helping  to  foster  the 
integration of the European market in banking services. This is another reason for speeding 
up coordination. At the same time Community directives are progressively harmonizing the 
regulation  of  financial  markets  and  products  and  consumer  protection.  But  there  remain 
significant differences in corporate, commercial and bankruptcy law. Action by European and 
national  legislators  is  indispensable  to  strengthen  the  single  market  and  simplify  crisis 
response. 
The restructuring of the banking system 
Our  system  took  full  advantage  of  the  opportunity  presented  by  the  favourable  financial 
situation of the past years to conceive and carry out major banking mergers, which would be 
much harder to effect in today’s market conditions. The end-product must be a system that is 
sounder, more efficient, with a wider range of higher-quality services, and in which banking 
intermediation is less costly for the economy.  
Swift execution of planned mergers and continuous verification of the results are essential, 
especially  in  the  current  market  situation.  Above  all,  the  rapid  integration  of  information 
systems  is  a  prerequisite  not  only  for  efficiency  gains  but  also  for  risk  control,  which  is 
increasingly  necessary  with  the  growing  complexity  of  business  operations  and  expansion 
into new markets.  
It is still early for a full assessment of the impact of mergers on banks and customers. The 
data available show that at 31 March this year the economic results of the four main groups 
involved  in  mergers  were  substantially  in  line  with  their  business  plans.  These  indicate, 
however, that the greater part of the benefits of the mergers carried out in 2007 – estimated 
at €3.9 billion a year when fully achieved – will not be realized until subsequent years. The 
extraordinary  costs  of  the  mergers,  consisting  largely  of  severance  benefits  for  redundant 
personnel, came to €3.3 billion and were mostly charged to the accounts for 2006 and 2007.  
In  order  for  customers  to  benefit  from  mergers  and  acquisitions,  it  is  important  that  the 
increase in concentration not weaken competitive pressures. In the 1990s, a period marked 
by intense and growing competition but also by many mergers, the resulting efficiency gains 
were  passed  on  to  customers,  albeit  with  a  lag.  In  the  end  the  banks  involved  in  the 
concentrations offered their customers more favourable terms both on deposits and on loans. 
4 
 BIS Review 100/2008
it 
to 
important 
to  choose, 
is  especially 
The  network  economies  stemming  from  mergers  enable  banks  to  extend  their  distribution 
channels,  with  a  reduction  in  charges  for  some  kinds  of  transaction,  such  as  cash 
withdrawals,  and  to  broaden  and  rationalize  their  product  range.  Concrete  progress  has 
already  been  made.  Today,  in  order  to  intensify  the  competitive  pressure  and  enhance 
customers’  ability 
facilitate  client  mobility. 
Contributions  to  this  end  have  come  from  the  rules  introduced  in  recent  years  on  current 
account closing charges and the early repayment and portability of mortgage loans, from the 
Bank of Italy’s action on behalf of transparency and fairness in banking products, and from 
the other authorities’ action in defence of transparency and competition.  
Local  mutual  banks  continue  to  have  significant  weight  within  the  Italian  credit  system.  In 
recent years over 400 independent mutual banks have expanded the scope of their business 
within the credit market, especially with firms, exploiting their dense network and a banking 
model centred on continuity in customer relations.  
Globalization heightens the need, for mutual banks, like others, to adapt their services to the 
needs of small and medium-sized enterprises, to increase their operating efficiency and to 
improve  their  risk  control  and  management.  In  other  countries  mutual  banking  uses 
integrated systems to overcome the disadvantages of small size by centralizing production 
and  ancillary  services.  Italian  mutual  banks  must  continue  their  efforts  to  work  out  new 
organizational  solutions  that  can  enhance  the  integration  and  efficiency  of  the  network 
without prejudice to the independence of individual banks.  
Customer relations 
I have remarked on other occasions that correct relations with customers, in addition to being 
a  legal  obligation,  are  a  strategic  factor  in  the  soundness  of  banks.  The  most  pressing 
problems concern the portability of mortgages, the maximum-overdraft fee, the transparency 
of contractual conditions and the regulation of brokers and agents.  
Regarding  mortgages,  the  legislation  introduced  in  the  last  few  years  and  the  recent 
initiatives undertaken by the Government and the Italian Banking Association have laid the 
foundations  for  the  actual  convertibility  of  loan  contracts  within  banks  and  their  external 
portability.  Banks  must  implement  these  initiatives  without  delay,  provide  the  necessary 
assistance to customers and seize the attendant competitive opportunities.  
Steps  should  be  taken  to  replace  the  maximum-overdraft  fee  with  transparent  forms  of 
remuneration commensurate with the size of the loan commitment.  
I believe that by now banks are fully aware of the need to act promptly and effectively on 
these two fronts, not least to safeguard the system’s reputation.  
The present rules on the transparency of contractual conditions for banking customers were 
instituted  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  in  2003;  in  recent  years  they  have  helped  to  increase  the 
correctness  of  banking  relations.  We  will  hold  a  public  consultation  on  a  revised  set  of 
regulations,  which  will  take  account  of  past  experience,  the  evolution  of  the  market  and 
legislative  developments.  We  are  determined  to  overcome  operational  rigidities,  make 
informative documentation clearer, simpler and more effective and improve the comparability 
of  the  conditions  offered  by  intermediaries.  As  in  the  past,  consumer  associations  will  be 
involved in the process.  
The drying up of wholesale supply channels has led banks to place new issues primarily with 
retail  customers.  The  more  complex  and  atypical  forms  of  fund-raising  are  at  times 
associated  with  scant  transparency  and  high  costs:  they  must  be  offered  to  selected 
customers only, who should be made fully aware of the characteristics and risk profiles of the 
issues.  To  avoid  legal  and  reputational  risks,  banks  must  adhere  scrupulously  to  this 
principle; it is essential that the compliance functions initiate their operations.  
BIS Review 100/2008 
 5
In recent years in Italy, as in the rest of Europe, banks and other intermediaries have turned 
increasingly  to  credit  brokers  and  financial  services  agents,  above  all  to  establish  initial 
contacts with potential customers. In some cases this activity can lead to irregular practices 
and weigh heavily on transaction costs. The correctness and professionalism with which it is 
performed is crucial for the reputation of intermediaries that use these services; the objective 
of  extending  the  sales  network  must  go  hand  in  hand  with  that  of  providing  appropriate 
services and assuring transparency and economy. We have already drawn the attention of 
banks to the need to activate all the necessary safeguards. There is, however, an equally 
pressing need for the adoption of legal measures to raise the standards of professionalism 
and  transparency  of  brokers  and  agents,  so  as  to  address  the  considerable  rise  in  their 
number  and  avoid  any  risk  of  proximity  with  usury  and  other  illegal  activities.  Here,  the 
transposition  of  the  European  directive  on  consumer  credit  represents  an  opportunity  for 
legislators.  
Between 2003 and 2007 we completed over 4,000 controls of transparency at branches of 
banks,  financial  intermediaries  and  Banco  Posta.  Last  year  these  inspections  were 
intensified  in  frequency  (their  number  increased  by  over  20  per  cent),  and  in  the  criteria 
applied,  which  focused  to  an  even  greater  extent  on  verifying  substantive  compliance.  In 
addition to imposing the fines for non-compliance, where appropriate the Bank of Italy called 
on intermediaries to reimburse any charges that had been improperly debited to customers. 
From 2007 onwards a much more dynamic approach has been adopted to the handling of 
complaints sent to the Bank of Italy by bank customers who believe they have been treated 
incorrectly.  There  are  nearly  5,000  such  complaints  per  year.  The  Banking  Supervision 
Department checks that the banks involved respond promptly and adequately.  
However, for the protection rules to be fully effective, it is necessary to create the conditions 
for an increase in bank customers’ knowledge of the characteristics of the financial products 
in which they invest their savings, the yields they can expect, and the nature and size of the 
risks  they  run.  Several  surveys  have  shown  the  existence  of  gaps  to  be  filled.  Recently, 
authorities,  trade  associations  –  including  ABI  –  and  consumer  associations  have  taken 
initiatives in this field. As of last year the Bank of Italy has devoted a section of its website to 
financial  education;  in  addition,  we  have  launched,  in  cooperation  with  the  Ministry  of 
Education,  a  training  programme  for  school  teachers,  so  that  economic  and  financial 
education can be included in the syllabus. 
The governance of banks 
On  the  basis  of  the  rules  the  Bank  of  Italy  laid  down  in  March,  banks  must  submit  a 
governance plan and approve the necessary bylaw amendments by June 2009.  
The Bank of Italy does not prefer one or another of the board models provided for by civil 
law; it nonetheless takes a firm line in ensuring that, no matter which mode is chosen, the 
principles  of  sound  and  prudent  management  are  complied  with  in  the  bylaws  and  in 
practice.  
To the same end, the rules that we have adopted require banks to introduce limits on the 
positions that their corporate officers can hold on other governing bodies; they also prohibit 
members of control bodies from having operating responsibilities in other group companies 
or strategic affiliates. The presence of persons on more than one board of directors is to be 
considered  natural  within  a  group.  Responsibility  for  assessing  any  competition  issues 
arising from the presence of directors on the boards of more than one company lies with the 
Antitrust Authority, with which we are ready to cooperate, so as to coordinate interventions in 
the matters for which we are respectively competent.  
The  prevention  of  conflicts  of  interest  is  also  achieved  through  limits  and  conditions  for 
banks’  assumption  of  related  party  risks.  A  set  of  rules  has  just  been  submitted  to  the 
Interministerial Committee for Credit and Savings. For its part, Consob is drawing up rules, 
6 
 BIS Review 100/2008
applicable to all listed companies and companies with shares widely distributed among the 
public,  which  assign  a  key  role  to  the  independent  directors  in  transactions  with  related 
parties. Together with Consob, we shall ensure that the rules are coordinated and limit the 
compliance burden on intermediaries. 
Overcoming the asset management crisis 
The group that we established with asset management companies, and with the participation 
of the Government and Consob, to propose measures to counter the decline of the Italian 
asset management industry, is about to complete its work.  
A first conclusion is that it is necessary to intervene on the tax distortions that penalize Italian 
investment funds. As is the case elsewhere, they should be taxed on distributed profits and 
realized capital gains, not on their accrued results.  
The  distortions  produced  by  transparency  legislation,  which  is  particularly  stringent  for 
investment  funds,  must  be  eliminated.  It  is  not  a  question  of  reducing  the  safeguards 
applicable to investment funds, but of increasing, substantively and not just formally, those 
applicable  to  other  financial  products.  In  particular,  for  insurance  policies  of  a  financial 
nature, more information must be disclosed on their liquidity; for bank bonds, customers must 
be  given  clearer  and  more  complete  information  on  the  costs,  risks  and  liquidity  of  the 
investment and on the yield of the instrument compared with that of other securities. The fair 
value  determined  by  the  issuer  bank  must  be  reported  periodically  to  the  purchasers, 
especially for unlisted instruments for which the issuer’s commitment to buy them back is the 
main  guarantee  of  the  possibility  of  liquidating  the  investment.  New  rules  on  fairness  and 
transparency  for  the  distribution  of  illiquid  financial  products  have  been  announced  by 
Consob; intermediaries will have to comply with them without delay.  
The independence of asset management companies is essential. The reduction of conflicts 
of  interest  must  be  furthered  by  a  self-regulatory  code  of  conduct  that  strengthens  this 
characteristic.  It  is  indispensable  that  independent  directors  hold  the  majority  of  seats  on 
these  companies’  boards.  By  the  autumn,  using  our  powers,  we  will  adopt  measures  to 
separate the running of bank-controlled asset management companies more completely from 
that of the banking group to which they belong, by clarifying the limits and purposes of the 
parent company’s powers of guidance.  
Lastly,  and  I  come  to  the  hardest  task,  it  is  necessary  to  upgrade  the  manner  in  which 
financial products are offered to investors, in order to realize in full the principle contained in 
the Consolidated Law on Finance that intermediaries must act in the customer’s interest. The 
service  of  providing  financial  advice  must  be  defined  more  sharply  and  made  more 
professional,  promoting  competition  and  transparency.  The  provision  of  investment  advice 
must  be  clearly  distinguished  from  the  placement  of  own  products,  carried  out  in  the 
customer’s interest and not be limited to pushing house products. Savers who do not intend 
to incur the cost of advice must nonetheless be given, in the course of placement activity, a 
simple  but effective  explanation  of  risks,  costs  and  returns,  with  a  check, calibrated  to  the 
complexity  of  products,  on  their  suitability  to  the  characteristics  of  the  customer.  An 
appropriate  degree  of  professional  competence  must  be  ensured  not  only  for  financial 
salesmen but also for counter staff. The role of self-regulation is essential in this field, too.  
New  rules  are  necessary  but  not  sufficient.  The  renewed  growth  of  the  financial  industry 
depends ultimately on the competitiveness of operators, on the promptness with which they 
grasp  the  opportunities  offered  by  innovation  and  respond  to  the  challenge  of  the  ever-
increasing integration of the sector’s markets and productive structures, including by means 
of mergers. It is necessary to look far ahead. It has been clear for years that defending a 
local  niche,  a  captive  clientele,  is  no  longer  a  winning  strategy.  Today,  it  is  not  even  an 
effective means of defence.  
BIS Review 100/2008 
 7
