Jean-Claude Trichet: Enhancing the EU arrangements for financial 
stability 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
session  "European  Financial  Supervision,  Crisis  Management  on  Financial  Markets", 
European Parliament, Brussels, 23 January 2008. 
 Mesdames et Messieurs les membres du Parlement Européen et des parlements nationaux,  
Je  me  réjouis  d'apparaître  devant  vous  aujourd’hui  et  de  pouvoir  m’exprimer  sur  la 
surveillance  prudentielle  et  la  gestion  des  crises  financières.  Je  commencerai  mon 
intervention  par  rappeler 
l’Union 
Européenne  pour  garantir  la  stabilité  du  système  financier.  Je  présenterai  ensuite  les 
évolutions récentes dans ce domaine qui doivent être prises en compte lors de l’élaboration 
des  arrangements  de  stabilité  financière.  Ausgehend  von  diesen  Überlegungen  werde  ich 
über  die  Hauptelemente  sprechen,  die  meiner  Meinung  nach  für  die  Verbesserung  dieser 
Regelungen  wichtig  sind.  Schließen  werde  ich  mit  einigen  Beobachtungen  zu  den 
Auswirkungen  der  Finanzmarktturbulenzen  auf  den  EU-Rahmen  zur  Sicherung  der 
Finanzstabilität. 
les  principaux  aspects  du  cadre 
institutionnel  de 
The EU framework for safeguarding financial stability 
1.  
Let me start by recalling the main components of any framework for safeguarding financial 
stability.  At  the  national  level,  a  financial  stability  framework  is  based  on  three  main 
components: crisis prevention, crisis management and crisis resolution.  
The first component, crisis prevention, is ensured by the exercise of supervisory and central 
banking functions. Supervisory functions regard the surveillance of the safety and soundness 
of  individual  financial  institutions.  Central  banking  functions  include  the  financial  stability 
assessment aiming at identifying sources of risks and vulnerabilities and their potential effect 
on  the  financial  system,  as  well  as  the  oversight  of  payment  and  securities  settlement 
systems.  
The second component relates to crisis management. It may be defined as the set of tools 
that public authorities may deploy when and if a disturbance occurs in the financial system. 
Supervisors  may,  for  instance,  take  measures  regarding  the  management  of  a  financial 
institution, require additional capital from shareholders, or impose reorganisation measures. 
Central  banks  may  take  actions  aiming  at  restoring  normal  liquidity  conditions  in  money 
markets or at ensuring the smooth operation of market infrastructures.  
Finally, the third component, namely crisis resolution, relates to the arrangements aiming at 
an orderly handling of a financial institution facing solvency problems and the protection of 
the rights of creditors, notably depositors. In this case, treasuries have also an important role 
to play if and when the injection of public money is required. 
There  is  evidently  a  close  interrelation  between  these  three  components  of  the  financial 
stability  framework.  For  instance,  the  effectiveness  of  crisis  management  and  resolution 
largely depends on the existence of an efficient supervisory and central banking framework 
able  to  identify  and  react  at  an  early  stage  to  potential  threats  to  financial  stability. 
Conversely,  the  effectiveness  of  supervisory  action  depends  also  on  the  existence  of 
appropriate arrangements to support an orderly exit from the market by insolvent institutions. 
Indeed, the fact that institutions could exit the market if they are affected severely by a crisis 
provides  a  powerful  incentive  for  them  to  optimise  risk  management  and  draw  up  proper 
business  plans.  At  the  EU  level,  a  key  element  is  the  cross-border  dimension  which 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 1
characterises all three components of the financial stability framework. This dimension calls 
for  a  smooth  and  efficient  cross-border  interplay  within  and  among  the  set  of  authorities 
involved  in  crisis  prevention,  management  and  resolution.  In  this  respect,  as  a  general 
observation,  I  would  only  say  that  the  existence  of  the  Eurosystem  provides  an  extremely 
strong  and  effective  decision  making  in  the  area  of  central  banking,  while  the  Level  3 
Committees  are  expected  to  develop  their  own  cooperative  network  in  the  field  of 
supervision.  
Key developments in the European financial system  
2.  
Against  this  background,  let  me  point  out  that  the  European  financial  system  has 
experienced fundamental developments in the past years, which have a particular bearing on 
the EU financial stability arrangements. I would like to highlight three of them. 
First, the overall progress in European financial integration. The ECB’s analysis, conveyed 
through  our  annual  report  “Financial  Integration  in  Europe”  demonstrates  that  financial 
integration  has  advanced  significantly  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  at  the  level  of 
financial  markets,  market  infrastructures  and  financial  institutions.  Progress  has  however 
differed  considerably  across  market  segments.  The  euro  area  money  market  has  been 
strongly integrated since the introduction of the single currency, supported by the integrated 
market infrastructure for large-value payments. As to the wholesale banking segment, there 
are  clear  indications  of  strong  progress  in  financial  integration  as  well.  For  example,  the 
share  of  securities  issued  in  other  euro  area  countries  and  held  by  monetary  financial 
institutions has strongly increased in the last ten years. By contrast, retail banking markets 
have remained fragmented.  
Second,  the  growing  prominence  of  EU  banking  groups  with  significant  cross-border 
activities. EU banks with significant cross-border activity hold a sizeable and rising share of 
total EU banking assets. Although the number of EU banking groups with significant cross-
border  activities  increased  only  slightly  between  2001  and  2005,  their  consolidated  assets 
grew by 54% and their share in the overall consolidated EU banking assets increased from 
around 54% to 68%.  
Third, the high pace of financial innovation which resulted in the rapid growth of new types of 
financial  instruments  for  transferring  risk  and  of  structured  credit  markets.  In  turn,  this 
fostered the activities of non-bank intermediaries, many of which are highly leveraged and, 
mostly, non-regulated. These developments have facilitated the transfer and redistribution of 
risks across the financial system, thus increasing its efficiency and potentially its resilience to 
shocks. At the same time, as recent events have shown, the growing complexity of financial 
instruments and the opacity of exposures of financial institutions can give rise to increased 
uncertainty  regarding  the  degree  of  risk  involved,  the  ultimate  bearer  of  the  risk,  and  the 
extent of potential losses. As we presently see in periods of turbulence, this complexity and 
opacity may prompt a further propagation of initial shocks and a more generalised contagion.  
Enhancing the EU financial stability arrangements 
3.  
The  structural  developments  in  the  European  financial  system,  which  I  have  just  outlined, 
entail challenges to the EU financial stability framework. In a nutshell, given the increasing 
interlinkages  between  markets,  market  infrastructures  and  institutions  in  the  EU  financial 
system,  potential  disturbances  have  EU-wide  effects.  Therefore,  the  EU  financial  stability 
framework should be able to detect effectively risks to the stability of the EU financial system 
as a whole and to handle efficiently any crisis with a cross-border dimension.  
As  you  are  well  aware,  there  are  a  number  of  policy  initiatives  at  the  EU  level,  both  pre-
dating and following the financial market turbulence, in order to refine and reinforce over the 
medium-term  the  ability  of  existing  arrangements  to  cope  with  such  challenges.  These 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2008
initiatives include the strengthening of the financial crisis management arrangements, in line 
with  the  strategic  roadmap  adopted  by  the  ECOFIN  in  October  last  year,  and  the 
enhancement of the Lamfalussy framework for regulation and supervision, as agreed by the 
ECOFIN  Council last  December.  In  April  we  will  discuss  these  policy  initiatives  in order  to 
assess their adequacy and consider possible further progress.  
In this context, I would like to emphasise a few elements which I regard as important in the 
process of enhancing the EU financial stability arrangements. 
First, concerning the general objectives of this process, I would argue that, while the primary 
objective of the EU financial stability framework should evidently be to safeguard effectively 
financial stability, it should also contribute to removing the remaining obstacles to financial 
integration.  This  mainly  requires  identifying  and  reducing  to  a  minimum  the  existing 
divergences in national laws and also in supervisory requirements and practices, which still 
hinder the effective functioning of the single financial market. Whereas since the inception of 
the  Lamfalussy  framework  there  has  been  good  progress  in  regulatory  and  supervisory 
convergence  in  the  EU,  further  measures  are  necessary  on  (i)  the  harmonisation  of 
regulatory requirements at the EU level, also through the elimination of the so-called “gold-
plating”,  namely  the  addition  by  Member  States  of  unnecessary  national  layers  to  EU 
regulation, and (ii) the consistent implementation of the supervisory requirements, agreed by 
Level  3  Committees,  and  the  development  of  streamlined  and  coherent  supervisory 
processes by national supervisors, with the support of Level 3 Committees. 
Second, the improvement of the financial stability arrangements should build on the existing 
largely  national  responsibilities  for  financial  stability,  thus  focusing  on  reinforcing  the  EU 
mechanisms  for  cross-border  co-ordination  and  co-operation  between  the  responsible 
authorities. In this respect, the Lamfalussy framework provides the appropriate institutional 
setting.  One  of  its  key  advantages  is  the  combination  of  a  decentralised  set-up  of 
responsibilities for financial stability with the co-ordination mechanisms provided by the Level 
3 Committees. A decentralised approach allows drawing on the advantages of geographical 
proximity and of the established experience and knowledge of local authorities. However, in 
order  to  be  effective,  this  approach  requires  the  significant  reinforcement  of  the  role  and 
operating  mechanisms  of  Level  3  Committees  so  as  to  achieve  the  required  high  level  of 
cross-border convergence, co-operation and information-sharing among national supervisory 
authorities.  
Third, concerning the crisis prevention leg of the EU financial stability framework, it is crucial 
to  ensure  a  smooth  interplay  between  central  banks  and  banking  supervisors  in  order  to 
ensure that potential threats to EU systemic stability are detected at an early stage and dealt 
with  in  a  prompt  and  co-ordinated  manner.  Appropriate  sharing  of  information  and 
assessments  between  central  banks  and  supervisors  is  needed  to  detect  and  evaluate 
potential  risks  to  EU  systemic  stability.  To  that  end,  a  closer  link  between  the  financial 
stability  assessment  of  central  banks  and  the  supervision  of  major  cross-border  banking 
groups undertaken by the colleges of supervisors would be helpful.  
It  is  also  important  to  ensure  an  effective  coordination  of  policy  actions  between  central 
banks and supervisory authorities in case a systemic threat is identified.  
Against this background, the Eurosystem strongly supports the ECOFIN conclusions adopted 
in  October  2007,  whereby  the  Council  invites  the  Commission  to  assess  possible 
clarifications in the legal framework for the exchange of information between supervisors and 
central banks.  
Fourth, in order to ensure effective crisis management and resolution at the EU level, it is 
crucial that all responsible authorities maintain a high degree of preparedness to handle the 
complexity  of  a  cross-border  crisis  situation,  while  preserving  the  necessary  flexibility  of 
action.  Every  crisis  situation  is  unique  and  the  arrangements  for  crisis  management  and 
resolution cannot anticipate the full range of causes, propagation channels and outcomes of 
financial disturbances. Moreover, setting out ex-ante detailed arrangements on how to deal 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 3
with  and  resolve  crises  can  unduly  constrain  the  flexibility  of  action  of  supervisors,  central 
banks  and  also  treasuries  in  a  stress  situation.  Instead,  the  emphasis  should  be  on 
enhancing preparedness. This may be achieved, among other things, through stress-testing 
exercises  aiming  at  verifying  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  under  stress  conditions 
and  through  financial  crisis  simulation  exercises  aiming  at  assessing  the  effectiveness  of 
existing arrangements. In this respect, the periodic conduct of simulation exercises at the EU 
level is a positive aspect. Also the Eurosystem devotes particular efforts to this area. It has 
conducted already two simulations which tested the effectiveness of its own arrangements 
and plans to conduct others in the future.  
Finally,  I  should  emphasise  that  the  EU  arrangements  should  also  take  into  account  the 
global dimension of financial stability. I do not need to dwell much on this aspect, since the 
financial  market  turbulence  provides  a  vivid  reminder  of  how  a  disturbance  in  a  particular 
market segment can propagate across many markets and countries. 
This  entails  that  the  EU  arrangements  should  also  include  mechanisms  which  support  the 
co-operation  between  authorities  from  the  EU  and  from  third-countries  in  addressing 
common concerns.  
In this respect central banks can claim a long-standing tradition of effective co-operation on a 
global basis. This has been illustrated recently by the joint initiatives of various central banks 
to address tensions in the money market.  
Conclusions 
4.  
Let  me  conclude  with  the  possible  lessons  from  the  present  significant  financial  market 
correction for the EU financial stability arrangements. 
Careful  reflection  is  taking  place  at  the  European  and  global  level  with  regard  to  the 
identification of the main determinants of the present market correction as well as the policy 
lessons  which  will  have  to  be  drawn  by  public  authorities  with  regard  to  the  measures 
necessary to avoid the recurrence of such major turbulent episodes in the future.  
First, although it is too early to draw definitive conclusions in this respect taking into account 
the  fact  that  the  present  market  correction  is  particularly  complex,  multidimensional,  and 
ongoing, it seems to me that we know already a number of areas where it is certain that we 
will have to engineer significant improvements.  
- 
There  will  be  very  important  lessons  to  be  drawn  by  credit  institutions  in  terms  of 
their risk management systems. The experience of the turmoil has highlighted that 
some categories of risks have been underestimated by banks including liquidity risk 
relating  to  liquidity  commitments  to  conduits  and  SIVs,  concentration  risk  in 
structured  products  and  reputational  risk  associated  with  sponsoring  special 
purpose vehicles. The current regulatory framework based on Basel II might need 
some refinement to take these aspects into account. 
There will also be lessons to be drawn in terms of the structure of incentives in all 
stages of the securitisation process and the “originate to distribute” model. All the 
relevant players – including originators of loans, arrangers of securitised products, 
rating  agencies,  conduits  and  SIVs,  and  final  investors  –  should  have  the  right 
incentives to undertake a proper assessment and monitoring of risks.  
Regarding  the  role  of  public  authorities,  let  me  mention  three  aspects.  First,  it  is 
important  to  permanently  identify  the  various  risks  at  stake  in  the  global  financial 
system. And from that standpoint I have to say that Central Banks had diagnosed a 
significant underpricing of risks in a large array of markets and have been public on 
that.  It  remains  complex  and  difficult  to  identify  the  triggering  event  of  a  market 
correction  and  the  nature  and  scale  of  propagation  channels.  This  reinforces  the 
notion  that  the  main  objectives  of  a  financial  stability  framework  should  be  to 
  4 
 BIS Review 9/2008
promote  to  the  maximum  possible  extent  sound  risk  management  practices,  to 
strengthen the resilience and shock absorption capacity of financial institutions and 
to have efficient crisis management arrangements in place.  
Second, the experience of the turmoil emphasises the importance of a smooth and effective 
interplay  in  terms  of  cooperation  and  information  exchange  among  supervisory  authorities 
and between them and central banks in the detection of threats to the stability of financial 
system, the assessment of the unfolding of a stress situation and the decision on possible 
policy action to counter potential negative impacts. I will say that the present experience fully 
confirms the position taken a long time ago by the Eurosystem according to which a close 
institutional  link  between  central  banks  and  banking  surveillance  authorities  is  extremely 
important. 
Third,  I  trust  that  in  all  circumstances,  but  even  more  particularly  in  demanding  times  of 
significant market correction and turbulences, it is the responsibility of the Central Bank to 
solidly  anchor  inflation  expectations  to  avoid  additional  volatility  in  already  highly  volatile 
markets. Also important is for the Central Bank to ensure an orderly functioning of the money 
markets  at  the  level  of  interest  rates  required  for  anchoring  the  inflation  expectations.  It  is 
what  the  ECB  has  been  doing  since  the  beginning  of  the  turbulences,  namely  since  the 
beginning of August last year.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 5
