Durmuş Yılmaz: The role of competition policy and practices in attaining 
macroeconomic objectives 
Speech by Mr Durmus Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, on 
the  occasion  of  the  11th  Anniversary  of  the  Turkish  Competition  Authority,  Ankara, 
26 March 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  greet  you  all.  We  have  convened  here  on  the  occasion  of 
celebrating  the  11th  Anniversary  of  a  distinguished  institution  of  Turkey.  The  Turkish 
Competition Authority has served its critical function in the development process of Turkey 
with the studies it has conducted. Let me take this opportunity at the very beginning of my 
speech  to  say  that  I  believe  the  contributions  of  the  Competition  Authority  to  Turkey’s 
development will continue in an increased capacity in the upcoming periods. 
The  main  objective  of  public  policies  is  to  increase  prosperity.  Under  the  current 
circumstances, where economies are becoming increasingly interrelated, raising the level of 
prosperity of our country is contingent on increasing the share it gets from the global value 
added. 
In the post-2001 period, the Turkish economy grew by approximately 7 percent on a year-on-
year  basis  and  considerably  increased  its  share  in  the  world  export  market.  During  this 
period, the private sector was the engine for growth, with the greatest contribution from the 
industrial  sector.  In  the  23-quarter  periods  of  uninterrupted  growth  process,  private  sector 
investments increased by 150 percent in real terms. Exports, which had been USD 31 billion 
at  end-2001,  reached  USD  107  billion  by  end-2007.  Moreover,  Turkey  has  attracted  more 
than USD 40 billion-worth of foreign direct investments in the last two years. 
The complementary effects of macroeconomic and microeconomic policies are observed in 
economic progress. Monetary policy focusing on the achievement and maintenance of price 
stability  as  well  as  resolute  budget  implementations  has  played  a  critical  role  in  the 
establishment of macroeconomic stability. At the same time, reforms towards a more robust 
banking  sector  structure,  adjustments 
investment  environment, 
privatizations,  liberalizations  in  basic  infrastructure  sectors  and  improvements  in  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  functions  of  the  public  sector  have  all  led  to  a  significant 
improvement in the production, investment, competition and business environment of Turkey. 
Thus, in the last two years, Turkey moved up a total of 18 steps and ranked 53rd among 131 
countries in the Global Competitiveness Index prepared by the World Economic Forum. 
Studies made indicate the necessity of reforms in the microeconomic level to maintain high 
and sustainable growth rates in an environment of macroeconomic stability. Achievements 
made both in the fight against inflation and in easing the budget deficit and public debt were 
only made possible with great effort and sacrifices. However, the road ahead calls for more 
effort. We have to use our resources more efficiently in order to converge with the developed 
countries. To that end, investments in human capital aimed at improving the quality of the 
labor force in our country should be intensified and competition should be enhanced through 
effective regulations and implementations, especially in the goods market. 
The  Competition  Authority  is  one  of  the  main  institutional  building  blocks  of  the  “open 
economy growth model” implemented in the period after 1980 and is based on strengthening 
the market economy. 
Competition policies and price stability, which is the core objective of the Central Bank, are 
strongly related. In an environment where competition conditions are ensured, monopolistic 
market behaviors will not be possible. Simplifying the entry and exit of firms to the various 
improved 
for  an 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 1
sectors and increasing transparency are the main factors preventing pricing habits that are 
based on a high profit margin. 
Additionally, due to pressures from both domestic and foreign competition, firms choose to 
implement strategies with the aim of increasing productivity, which in turn triggers innovation 
and  technological  development  and  contributes  to  the  acceleration  of  the  potential  growth 
rate  of  our  country.  If  firms  increase  profitability  through  measures  that  decrease  costs 
instead of increasing prices, our country can reach higher growth rates in an environment of 
low inflation. 
Various instruments can be utilized to establish an effective competition environment in an 
economy.  The  most  outstanding  of  these  can  be  listed  as:  establishing  macroeconomic 
stability, liberalization of foreign trade, facilitating firms’ – including companies owned by non-
residents – entry into and exit from sectors, easing tax and other public burdens, establishing 
an  effectively-operating  regulation-supervision  structure,  preventing  unregistered  economic 
activity,  ensuring  transparency  and  preventing  monopolistic  behaviors  by  reinforcing  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  institutional  structure,  ensuring  transparency  in  the  public 
purchases of goods and services and ensuring an effectively-operating judicial system. 
Significant progress has been made in these areas recently. However, there still is more to 
be done. 
I believe that the concept of competition should be explored not only using general indicators 
but also at the level of sub-items. Achievements have been made in lifting the hurdles before 
the  liberalization  of  foreign  trade  and  entry/exit  of  new  firms  to  the  sectors.  However,  the 
studies conducted by the Central Bank show that the foreign competition pressure exerted by 
imports is not enough to reduce the price-cost margin in the Turkish manufacturing industry. 
This is the case in sectors populated by firms  with high market shares and thus with high 
concentration  ratios.  It  is  observed  that  in  sectors  lacking  a  well-established  competition 
environment, the competition pressure exerted by imports is relatively low and the downward 
pressure exerted by imports on domestic prices is not strong enough despite the high share 
of imports. 
Another example revealing the significance of the competition policy for the Central Bank is 
related  to  the  unregistered  economy.  As  you  all  know,  unregistered  employment  is  about 
50% in our country. This rate is higher in agriculture, construction and the services sector, 
where  inflation  is  relatively  higher.  Unregistered  economic  activities  prevent  firms  from 
attaining the most efficient scale of production and producing at the lowest unit cost. Firms 
failing to attain the lowest cost scale price their products at a relatively higher level. One of 
the factors influential in this is the financial burden brought about by registration procedures. 
In order to remain unregistered, firms are not willing to grow in scale. They also abstain from 
applying for bank credits and delay technological renovations due to financial hardship. On 
the other hand, the competitive power of registered firms is eroded against their competitors, 
which take advantage of remaining unregistered. Besides, growing in scale becomes harder 
for these registered firms. 
Major reforms were made in Turkey in 2003 to improve the business environment. The most 
remarkable of these are the regulations to reduce the procedures in starting businesses and 
to ensure that all the required transactions are carried out under the body of a sole authority. 
As a matter of fact, the results of the “Doing Business” report by the World Bank reveals that 
our country ranks fairly high compared to other countries in terms of the duration for starting 
businesses,  reservation  of  ownership,  enforcing  contracts  and  paying  taxes.  The  concrete 
consequences of these reforms are apparent in the number of newly launched businesses in 
the period following the year 2003. However, as pointed out in the same report, Turkey is at 
the bottom of the list in terms of costs for starting businesses (issuing licenses and permits 
after  starting  the  business),  regulations  for  firms  exiting  the  industry,  licensing  procedures, 
ease of recruiting and employing workers. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2008
We can list transport vehicles, white goods and consumer-oriented electronic products such 
as radio and television as the sectors where Turkey’s competitive power is relatively high at 
present. The increased market share of China and India in these sectors poses a potential 
risk  for  the Turkish  economy.  In  response  to  these  risks, some  structural  reforms  oriented 
towards  domestic  markets  have  been  made,  particularly  during  the  process  of  Turkey’s 
accession to the EU. These regulations aim to ensure the integration of the Turkish economy 
with the EU on a sectoral basis and to strengthen the competitive power of our firms. 
It  is  not  merely  the  relatively  low  labor  costs  that  allow  our  firms  to  assume  a  position  as 
important actors in international markets. Providing a stable macroeconomic structure for our 
economy is a must, but it is not enough. The qualified manpower of our country should be 
increased,  our  firms  should  be  institutionally  open  to  new  developments  and  our  industry 
should also adopt a structure that is not only demanding but also producing technology. To 
this  end,  it  is  of  great  importance  to  implement  well-designed  microeconomic  reforms 
decisively. 
Competition  policy  is  certainly  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  these  reforms.  Encouraging  the 
entry  of  new  firms  equipped  with  the  latest  technology  and  institutional  structure  into  the 
market constitutes one of the pillars of a well-designed competition policy, whereas the other 
pillar is to facilitate the elimination of sluggish firms, which have difficulty adapting to changes 
In a competitive environment, firms will begin to allocate more resources to activities focusing 
on productivity gains and enriching the product range. It is clear that the ability to access, 
produce and use information is very important nowadays. In such an environment, only those 
firms, which closely follow the changes in consumer tendencies, have flexible organizational 
structures,  are  institutionalized,  are  ready  to  cooperate  with  other  firms  and  their  research 
units,  and  draw  up  their  resource  allocation  plans  with  a  long-term  perspective  aimed  at 
enhancing the production capacity, will prevail in the arena of global competition. 
To  sum  up,  in  the  recent  period,  important  steps  have  been  taken  to  create  an  efficient 
competition  environment  in  the  Turkish  economy.  Indicators  such  as  the  growth  rate,  the 
increase in productivity, direct foreign capital inflows and the number of new firms reflect the 
outcomes of these steps. However, there are still many reforms and regulations to be made. 
In this framework, it is important that policies regarding the enhancement of the competition 
environment go beyond general implementations and are established by taking into account 
the sub-items and their interaction with each other. There is no doubt that information sharing 
and  cooperation  among  public  institutions  make  up  an  important  part  of  these  policies. 
Naturally, the Turkish Competition Authority and the Central Bank are among these public 
institutions. Strong relations among public institutions including the last two are critical for the 
Central Bank to reach price stability and for Turkey to attain a higher level of prosperity. 
Before  ending  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  my  belief  that  the  Turkish  Competition 
Authority will further contribute to the level of prosperity in Turkey in the upcoming years. I 
would like to thank everyone who had a hand in the organization of this conference and for 
your attention. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 3
