V Leeladhar: The Indian banking industry – a retrospect of select aspects 
Address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, on the occasion 
of the birth-centenary celebrations of Mr M Ct M Chettyar, founder of the Indian Overseas 
Bank, Chennai, 2 August 2008. 
Dear Friends, 
 It is my pleasure to be here on the occasion of the birth centenary celebrations of late Shri M. 
Ct.  M.  Chidambaram  Chettyar.  I  am  thankful  to  the  organisers  for  affording  me  this 
opportunity to share some of my thoughts with this august audience. As you all know, Shri 
Chettyar was the visionary founder of the Indian Overseas Bank. He established the bank in 
the  pre-independence  era  in  the  February  1937,  when  the  banking  industry  in  the  country 
was indeed in its infancy. What is noteworthy is that Shri Chettyar not only had the vision of 
starting a bank in the early part of the 20th century but he did so when he was not even 30 
years  of  age.  And  rather  interestingly,  the  bank  was  inaugurated  with  opening  of  three 
branches,  including  a  foreign  branch  in  the  erstwhile  Rangoon  (now  Myanmar),  on  the 
inaugural  day  itself.  The  bank  had  also  recorded  rapid  growth  in  the  early  days  of  its 
formation and within 10 years of its inception, by the time of our independence in 1947, it had 
45  branches  –  including  seven  branches  abroad.  Perhaps,  those  were  the  early  signs  of 
globalisation of the Indian banking industry through the cross-border branch presence of an 
Indian bank. I understand that the bank, along with its Officers’ Association and the Workmen 
Union,  has  formed  a  Sakthi  IOB  Chidambaram  Chettiyar  Memorial  Trust  in  1995  to 
commemorate  its  founder,  and  that  the  Trust  is  doing  yeoman  service  in  empowering  the 
downtrodden women in the country by providing them multi-faceted vocational training. I am 
sure the envisaged birth-centenary celebration of the founder of the bank is a fitting tribute to 
his  immense  contribution  to  the  Indian  banking  sector  in  general  and  to  the  growth  and 
development of the Indian Overseas Bank over the past several decades.   
2.  The  bank  has  indeed  come  a  long  way  since  its  nationalisation  in  1969  and  has  many 
achievements  to  its  credit.  As  against  195  branches  in  1969,  its  branch  network  now 
comprises 2153 branches. Its deposits and advances have multiplied manifold, aggregating 
over Rs.79,000 crore and Rs. 56,000 crore, respectively, as on March 31, 2008 compared to 
the  corresponding  figures  of  about  Rs.  68  crore  and  Rs.  45  crore,  at  the  time  of 
nationalisation.  I  understand  that  the  IOB  had  the  distinction  of  being  the  first  bank  in  the 
Indian banking industry to obtain ISO 9001 Certification for its Computer Policy and Planning 
Department in September 1999. The bank also made its maiden IPO in September 1999 and 
the Government’s ownership currently stands at 75 per cent. I do hope that the bank would 
maintain its growth momentum in the days to come and be able to realise the vision of its 
founder on a larger scale.  
3.  In  the  backdrop  of  growth  and  development  of  the  Indian  Overseas  Bank,  I  believe,  a 
broader perspective of the Indian banking industry would be of interest to this audience. Let 
me, therefore, take this opportunity today to present a broad overview of the achievements 
and progress made by the Indian banking sector in the last two decades and the emerging 
frontiers of the Indian banking system, in the post-reform era. 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 1
The transformation of the Indian banking sector 
4.  As  you  are  aware,  the  financial  sector  reforms  in  the  country  were  initiated  in  the 
beginning of the 1990s. The reforms have brought about a sea change in the profile of the 
banking sector. Our implementation of the reforms process has had several unique features. 
Our financial sector reforms were undertaken early in the reform cycle. Notably, the reforms 
process was not driven by any banking crisis, nor was it the outcome of any external support 
package. Besides, the design of the reforms was crafted through domestic expertise, taking 
on board the international experiences in this respect. The reforms were carefully sequenced 
with  respect  to  the  instruments  to  be  used  and  the  objectives  to  be  achieved.  Thus, 
prudential  norms  and  supervisory  strengthening  were  introduced  early  in  the  reform  cycle, 
followed by interest-rate deregulation and a gradual lowering of statutory pre-emptions. The 
more  complex  aspects  of  legal  and  accounting  measures  were  ushered  in  subsequently 
when the basic tenets of the reforms were already in place. 
5.  The  public  sector  banks  continue  to  be  a  dominant  part  of  the  banking  system.  As  on 
March 31, 2008, the PSBs accounted for 69.9 per cent of the aggregate assets and 72.7 per 
cent  of  the  aggregate  advances  of  the  Scheduled  commercial  banking  system.  A  unique 
feature  of  the  reform  of  the  public  sector  banks  was  the  process  of  their  financial 
restructuring.  The  banks  were  recapitalised  by  the  government  to  meet  prudential  norms 
through  recapitalisation  bonds.  The  mechanism  of  hiving  off  bad  loans  to  a  separate 
government  asset  management  company  was  not  considered  appropriate  in  view  of  the 
moral  hazard.  The  subsequent  divestment  of  equity  and  offer  to  private  shareholders  was 
undertaken through a public offer and not by sale to strategic investors. Consequently, all the 
public  sector  banks,  which  issued  shares  to  private  shareholders,  have  been  listed  on  the 
exchanges and are subject to the same disclosure and market discipline standards as other 
listed  entities.  To  address  the  problem  of  distressed  assets,  a  mechanism  has  been 
developed to allow sale of these assets to Asset Reconstruction Companies which operate 
as independent commercial entities. 
6. As regard the prudential regulatory framework for the banking system, we have come a 
long way from the administered interest rate regime to deregulated interest rates, from the 
system  of  Health  Codes  for  an  eight-fold,  judgmental  loan  classification  to  the  prudential 
asset classification based on objective criteria, from the concept of simple statutory minimum 
capital and capital-deposit ratio to the risk-sensitive capital adequacy norms – initially under 
Basel I framework and now under the Basel II regime. There is much greater focus now on 
improving the corporate governance set up through “fit and proper” criteria, on encouraging 
integrated  risk  management  systems  in  the  banks  and  on  promoting  market  discipline 
through more transparent disclosure standards. The policy endeavor has all along been to 
benchmark our regulatory norms with the international best practices, of course, keeping in 
view the domestic imperatives and the country context. The consultative approach of the RBI 
in  formulating  the  prudential  regulations  has  been  the  hallmark  of  the  current  regulatory 
regime which enables taking account of a wide diversity of views on the issues at hand. 
7. The implementation of reforms has had an all round salutary impact on the financial health 
of  the  banking  system,  as  evidenced  by  the  significant  improvements  in  a  number  of 
prudential  parameters.  Let  me  briefly  highlight  the  improvements  in  a  few  salient  financial 
indicators of the banking system.  
The average capital adequacy ratio for the scheduled commercial banks, which was around 
two  per  cent  in  1997,  had  increased  to  13.08  per  cent  as  on  March  31,  2008.  The 
improvement in the capital adequacy ratio has come about despite significant growth in the 
aggregate  asset  of  the  banking  system.  This  level  of  capital  ratio  in  the  Indian  banking 
system compares quite well with the banking system in many other countries – though the 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2008
capital  adequacy  of  some  of  the  banks  in  the  developed  countries  has  remained  under 
considerable strain in the recent past in the aftermath of the sub-prime crisis.  
In  regard  to  the  asset  quality  also,  the  gross  NPAs  of  the  scheduled  commercial  banks, 
which were as high as 15.7 per cent at end-March 1997, declined significantly to 2.4 per cent 
as at end-March 2008. The net NPAs of these banks during the same period declined from 
8.1  per  cent  to  1.08  per  cent.  These  figures  too  compare  favourably  with  the  international 
trends and have been driven by the improvements in loan loss provisioning by the banks as 
also  by  the  improved  recovery  climate  enabled  by  the  legislative  environment.  What  is 
noteworthy  is  that  the  NPA  ratios  have  recorded  remarkable  improvements  despite 
progressive tightening of the asset classification norms by the RBI over the years.  
The  reform  measures  have  also  resulted  in  an  improvement  in  the  profitability  of  banks. 
The Return on Assets (RoA) of scheduled commercial banks increased from 0.4 per cent in 
the year 1991-92 to 0.99 per cent in 2007-08. The Indian banks would appear well placed in 
this regard too vis-à-vis the broad range of RoA for the international banks.  
The banking sector reforms also emphasised the need to improve productivity of the banks 
through appropriate rationalisation measures so as to reduce the operating cost and improve 
the profitability. A variety of initiatives were taken by the banks, including adoption of modern 
technology, which has resulted in improved productivity. The Business per Employee (BPE), 
as  a  measure  of  productivity,  for  the  public  sector  banks  has  registered  considerable 
improvement.  The  BPE  for  the  public  sector  banks,  which  was  Rs.  95  lakh  in  1998-99, 
almost doubled to Rs. 188 lakh in 2002 and more than re-doubled to Rs. 496 lakh in 2007.  
8. It needs to be noted that the turnaround in the financial performance of the public sector 
banks,  pursuant  to  the  banking  sector  reforms,  has  resulted  in  the  market  valuation  of 
government holdings in these banks far exceeding the initial recapitalisation cost – which is 
something unique to the Indian banking system. Thus, the recapitalisation of banks by the 
government  has  not  been  merely  a  “holding  out”  operation  by  the  majority  owner  of  the 
banks.  The  Indian  experience  has  shown  that  a  strong,  pragmatic  and  non-discriminatory 
regulatory  framework  coupled  with  the  market  discipline  effected  through  the  listing  of  the 
equity  shares  and  operational  autonomy  provided  to  the  banks,  can  have  a  significant 
positive impact on the functioning of the public sector banks. 
The task ahead 
9.  Let  me  now  turn  to  some  of  the  areas  where  the  public  sector  banks  face  certain 
challenges  and  hence,  need  to  work  further  to  achieve  the  desired  results,  particularly  in 
regard to fuller leveraging of the available technology for rendering better banking services to 
the public at large.  
Awareness of electronic payment products 
10. As is well known, the financial sector has witnessed a quantum jump in the availability of 
technological  solutions  for  delivery  of  financial  services,  and  the  RBI  too  has  launched 
several payment system products for improving the efficiency of the payment system. It is, 
however,  the  general  perception  that  the  awareness  of  these  products  in  the  system  has 
remained rather limited. This lack of awareness is not confined to only  to the members of 
public at large. It is not uncommon to find that even the branch staff, having direct interface 
with the banking customers, is not aware of these products and services offered by the bank. 
This  has,  therefore,  resulted  in  the  continued  reliance  of  the  members  of  public  on  the 
traditional  methods  for  availing  of  various  banking  services  and  the  benefits  of  technology 
have not fully percolated to the level of the customers. I would, therefore, like to urge upon 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 3
you  to  take  appropriate  measures  to  increase  the  awareness  of  the  electronic  payment 
products – not only among the clientele of the banks but also among the banks’ own staff so 
that  the  members  of  public  can  be properly  guided  and  efficient  and  hassle-free customer 
service is rendered to them.  
National Electronic Fund Transfer 
11.  As  you  are  aware,  the  NEFT  was  launched  by  the  RBI  in  November  2005  as  a  more 
secure, nation-wide retail electronic payment system to facilitate funds transfer by the bank 
customers,  between  the  networked  bank  branches  in  the  country.  It  has,  however,  been 
observed that the public sector banks are not the most active users of this product and the 
majority of NEFT outward transactions are originated by a few new-generation private sector 
banks  and  foreign  banks.  For  instance,  in  June  2008,  while  these  banks,  as  a  segment, 
accounted for a little over 43 per cent each of the aggregate volume of outward and inward 
NEFT transactions, the share of public sector banks in total outward NEFT transactions was 
rather low at a little over 12 per cent, of which half the volume was the contribution of the 
State Bank of India. The RBI has been pursuing the matter with the PSBs for increasing their 
participation in the NEFT system in terms of the number of NEFT-enabled branches and the 
number  of  NEFT  transactions  originated  by  them.  I  would  like  to  urge  upon  the  bankers 
present  here  to  initiate  appropriate  measures  to  stimulate  greater  usage  of  this  payment 
medium and thereby, improve their share in this regard. 
In  order  to  popularise  the  e-payments  in  the  country,  the  RBI,  on  its  part,  has  waived  the 
service  charges  to  be  levied  on  the  member  banks,  till  March  31,  2009,  in  respect  of  the 
RTGS and NEFT transactions. The RBI also provides, free of charge, intra-day liquidity to 
the banks for the RTGS transactions. The service charges to be levied by banks from their 
customers for RTGS & NEFT have, however, been deregulated and left to discretion of the 
individual bank. It has been our experience that while some of the banks have rationalised 
their service charges and a few have made it even cost-free to the customers, there are also 
certain banks that have fixed multiples slabs or unreasonably high service charges, at times 
linked to the amount of the transaction, for providing these services to their customers – even 
though the RBI provides these services to the banks free of charge. I would therefore, like to 
take this opportunity to impress upon such banks the need to have proper appreciation of the 
underlying policy intent of the RBI in waiving the charges for these services, and to adopt a 
pragmatic approach in determining their own service charges for providing these electronic 
payment products to their customers.  
ATM networks 
12.  As  many  of  you  might  know,  the  National  Financial  Switch  (NFS)  network  started  its 
operations on August 27, 2004 and is owned and operated by Institute for Development and 
Research  in  Banking  Technology  (IDRBT),  Hyderabad.  NFS  is  one  of  the  several  shared 
ATM networks which interconnect the banks’ ATM switches together and thus, enable inter-
operability of the ATM cards issued by any bank across the entire network. While there are a 
few  other  ATM  networks  also  functioning  in  the  country,  the  NFS  has  emerged  to  be  the 
largest one, with a network of 28,773 ATMs of 31 banks, including 16 public sector banks. 
The primary objective of any ATM network, like the NFS, is to make the ATM deployment 
more economical and viable for banks by pooling their respective ATM resources. The main 
advantage of an ATM network is that it obviates the need for having bank-specific multiple 
ATM installations in the same geographical area, thereby reducing the entailed costs for the 
banks  but  without  compromising  on  the  reach  of  the  banks  to  their  customers.  From  the 
customers’ perspective, the ATM card of any bank can be used in any ATM – which enables 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2008
more convenient and wider ATM access to the bank customers of varied banks in different 
geographical areas. 
As regards the charges for use of the ATMs connected through any of the ATM networks in 
the  country,  while  the  balance  enquiry  by  the  customers  is  free  of  any  charges,  the  cash 
withdrawal from such ATMs, which currently attracts a nominal charge, would also become 
cost free for the customers from April 1, 2009,. Thus, the networking of the ATMs across the 
country, by leveraging the technology, is indeed a very customer-friendly development.  
May I also mention for record that as at end-June 2008, the number of ATMs in the country 
stood  at  36,314  of  which  the  number  of  ATMs  deployed  by  the  PSBs,  new-private-sector, 
old-private-sector  and 
foreign  banks  was  22,525,  10,552,  2,189  and  1048  ATMs, 
respectively. At the system level, the banks had planned the installation of another 10,560 
ATMs during 2008-09. During the quarter ended June 2008, the daily average number of hits 
on  the  ATMs  of  the  PSBs  aggregated  31,31,431,  with  the  daily  average  amount  of 
transactions at Rs. 759.81 crore as against the corresponding figure of 14,91,399 and over 
Rs.  385  crore  for  the  (old  and  new)  private  sector  banks,  of  which  the  new  private  sector 
banks accounted for a loin’s share at 12,84, 071 hits and around Rs. 329 crore in the value 
of daily transactions.  
Credit cards 
13. As you are aware, there has been phenomenal increase in the number of credit cards 
issued by the banks in India during the last few years and a majority of the PSBs has been in 
the  credit  card  business  since  long.  The  number  of  credit  cards  outstanding  at  the  end  of 
June 2008 was 27.02 million as against 24.39 million in June 2007. Of these, the number of 
credit cards issued by public sector banks was 3.8 million, of which 3.09 million cards were 
issued by the SBI Cards – a joint venture of GE Money and SBI. The usage of credit cards 
has also recorded an increase of 10.73 per cent during the year this period, which is mainly 
at  the  Point  of  Sale  (POS)  terminals.  In  June  2008,  the  number  of  transactions  by  credit 
cards at POS terminals was 20.6 million as against 17.2 million transactions in June 2007, 
reflecting an increase of almost 20 per cent during the year. The amount involved in these 
transactions recorded a growth of 25.6 per cent during the year ended June 2008 with the 
aggregate value of such transactions at Rs. 5261.63 crore. 
While the increasing usage of the credit cards is a welcome development in as much as it 
reduces reliance on currency for settlement of transactions, it also entails certain additional 
elements of operational risk and can be a potential source of customer complaints. The RBI, 
based on the complaints received from the credit card holders, had undertaken a study of the 
credit card operations of the banks. The RBI has since advised the banks in July 2008, the 
recommendations emerging from the study, for implementation. These recommendations are 
fairly  wide  ranging  and  encompass  several  issues  in  the  areas  of  card  issuance,  card 
statements,  interest  and  other  chares  on  the  cards,  using  the  services  of  direct  selling  / 
marketing agents, redressal of customers’ grievances, reporting of default information of the 
card holder to the CIBIL, etc. I would urge the banks to put in place necessary mechanism to 
ensure  meticulous  compliance  with  these  instructions  of  the  RBI  so  as  to  minimise,  if  not 
eliminate, the risks and customer complaints in the area of credit card operations. 
Satellite banking 
14.  As  you  might  be  aware,  having  regard  to  much  greater  reliability  of  a  satellite-based 
communication  link  for  interconnecting  the  branches  of  the  banks,  particularly  in  the  hilly 
areas and difficult terrain where terrestrial communication link is difficult to provide, the RBI 
had constituted a Technical Group to examine the proposal for providing satellite connectivity 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 5
to  the  bank  branches  in  such  areas.  The  objective  is  to  enable  greater  penetration  of  the 
electronic payment products in the hinterland areas also, by facilitating the integration of the 
rural  and  remote  branches  with  the  core  banking  solution  platform  of  the  banks  and  help 
them  providing  efficient  banking  services  to  their  customers.  Under  the  proposal,  the  RBI 
would be bearing a part of the leased rentals for the satellite connectivity, provided the banks 
use  it  for  connecting  their  branches  in  the  North  Eastern  States  and  in  the  under-banked 
districts in the rest of the country. Thus, the RBI would be providing an incentive to the banks 
for  adopting  the  satellite  communication  technology  for  networking  their  branches  in  the 
remote areas. A discussion paper on this scheme was placed on RBI website in June 2008 
for  public  comments.  The  comments  received  were  examined  and  the  modalities  of 
implementing  the  incentive  scheme  are  being  worked  out  in  consultation  with  the  Indian 
Banks’ Association. I would, however, like to take this opportunity to encourage the banks to 
be in readiness to embrace this latest technology for further improving the delivery of banking 
services,  especially  in  the  remote  parts  of  the  country,  with  a  view  to  enhancing  financial 
inclusion.  
Financial inclusion 
15. Last but not the least, let me now dwell briefly on the issue of financial inclusion, in which 
the banks have a major role to play. Given the socio-demographic complexities in India, the 
policy  endeavour  of  the  RBI  has  been  to  adopt  a  multi-institutional  and  multi-instrument 
approach to comprehensively address the issue of financial inclusion in all its dimensions, 
going beyond mere availability of credit to the masses. The term ‘financial inclusion’ needs to 
be understood in a broader perspective to mean the provision of the full range of affordable 
financial  services,  viz.,  access  to  payments  and  remittance  facilities,  savings,  loans  and 
insurance  services  by  the  formal  financial  system  to  those  who  tend  to  be  excluded  from 
these services. The RBI, while recognising the concerns in regard to the banking practices 
that  tend  to  exclude  rather  than  attract  vast  sections  of  population,  has  been  urging  the 
banks to review their existing practices to align them with the objective of achieving greater 
financial  inclusion.  The  RBI  too  has  taken  a  number  of  measures  with  the  objective  of 
attracting  the  financially  excluded  population  into  the  formalised  financial  system.  Let  me 
briefly recount some of the measures taken in this direction.  
With a view to achieving greater financial inclusion, banks were advised in November 2005 
to make available a basic banking ‘no frills’ account either with ‘nil’ or very low minimum 
balances as well as charges that would make such accounts accessible to vast sections of 
population. All the public and the private sector banks as well as the foreign banks, except 
those  not  having  significant  retail  presence,  are  reported  to  have  introduced  the  basic 
banking 'no-frills' account.  
With the objective of providing hassle-free credit to the banks’ constituents in rural and semi 
urban  areas,  the  banks  were  advised  in  December  2005,  to  consider  introduction  of  a 
General Credit Card (GCC) to such constituents. The card was to have a credit limit of up to 
Rs. 25000/-, based on the assessment of income and cash flows of the household without 
insistence  on  security  or  purpose  or  end-use  of  credit.  The  credit  facility  was  to  be  in  the 
nature  of  revolving  credit  entitling  the  holder  to  withdraw  up  to  the  limit  sanctioned.  The 
banks are required to charge appropriate and reasonable Interest rate on the facility. 
In  January  2006,  banks  were  permitted  to  utilise  the  services  of  non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs/SHGs), micro-finance institutions and other civil society organisations 
as  intermediaries  in  providing  financial  and  banking  services  through  the  use  of  business 
facilitator and business correspondent (BC) models. The BC model allows banks to do 
‘cash in - cash out’ transactions at the location of the BC and allows branchless banking. 
6 
 BIS Review 96/2008
The  matter  of  issuing  passbooks  to  the  small  depositors  has  been  a  nagging  issue  for 
sometime  past.  As  we  all  know,  the  pass  books  provide  the  account  holders  a  ready 
reckoner  of  the  transactions  in  their  accounts  and  is  a  convenient  reference  document  – 
which can not be substituted by periodical bank account statements, particularly by the small 
account  holders.  Since  non-issuance  of  the  pass  books  to  the  small  customers  could 
indirectly lead to their financial exclusion, the RBI had advised the banks in October 2006 to 
invariably offer the pass book facility to all its savings bank account holders (individuals) and 
not  to  levy  any  charge  from  the  customers  therefor.  I  do  hope  that  the  banks,  particularly 
those with greater reliance on technology, have instituted necessary measures to ensure that 
non-provision of pass books does not become yet another source of financial exclusion.  
With  a  view  to  facilitating  the  opening  of  bank  accounts  by  the  common  man  through  a 
simplified KYC procedure, in the Mid-Term Review of the Annual Policy of the RBI for the 
year  2006-07,  it  was  announced  that  the  "banks  could  open  accounts  of  low  balance  / 
turnover (where the balance does not exceed Rs. 50,000/- in all the accounts taken together 
and the total credit in all the accounts taken together is not expected to exceed rupees two 
lakh in a year) only with self certification of address by the customers and his photograph." 
However,  this  policy  announcement  is  yet  to  be  operationalised  as  the  matter  is  under 
consideration  of  the  Government  in  the  light  of  the  provisions  of  the  Rules  framed  under 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act.  
Promoting credit counselling and financial education of the clientele of the banks is also 
an area that deserves due attention of the banking community. Towards this objective, the 
banks  were  also  advised  by  the  RBI  to  make  available  all  printed  material  used  by  retail 
customers  in  the  concerned  regional  language.  As  far  as  RBI  itself  is  concerned,  it  has 
launched  on  18  June  2007,  a  multilingual  website  in  13  Indian  languages  on  all  matters 
concerning banking and the common person so that the language does not become a barrier 
to acquiring financial education by the public at large. 
Conclusion 
16. I have tried to present a broad over view of the progress achieved by the Indian banking 
sector in the post-reform era over past two decades or so. While we have no doubt made 
significant  progress  on  several  fronts  in  the  banking  arena,  the  enduring  challenge  of 
ensuring much greater financial inclusion, to my mind, is the mightiest one facing the banking 
industry  and  also  the  RBI,  as  the  regulator  and  supervisor  of  the  banking  system. 
Appropriate  leveraging  of  technological  innovations  holds  the  promise  of  providing  a  cost-
effective  solution  to  this  challenge.  I  am  sure  the  Indian  banking  industry  would  make 
concerted  efforts  at  evolving  and  embracing  ‘appropriate  technology’  to  secure  fullest 
financial inclusion of the Indian populace, in the days to come.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 7
