Glenn Stevens: Economic prospects in 2008 – an Antipodean view 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  Australian 
Business, London, 18 January 2008. 
 It is a pleasure to be here in London to speak with you today. As Australians recharge their 
batteries over the summer break, after a long year of coping with an economy operating at 
full stretch, people in this part of the world are hard at work trying to assess the outlook for 
the world economy. 
The year 2007 as a whole was another one of pretty good growth in the world economy, with 
the  PPP  weighted  IMF  series  for  global  GDP  thought  to  have  risen  by  4¾  per  cent, 
compared  with  an  average  of  about  4  per  cent  per  annum  since  the  beginning  of  this 
decade.1  For  the  G7  economies  the  outcome  was  a  bit  below  average  but  the  emerging 
world continued to grow strongly. 
Yet as the year closed, and the fallout from the risky practices in the US housing market was 
becoming clearer, questions were arising over the outlook for 2008. There is no shortage of 
opinions  on  the  outlook  for  the  US  economy.  Hence  I  will  be  brief  on  that  question.  The 
question I would like to address at more length is what the implications of any change to the 
US outlook might be for the world economy, and for the Asian region in particular, which of 
course  is  important  for  Australia.  I  would  like  to  conclude  with  some  observations  about 
inflation. 
The US economy 
In the face of the large downturn in housing construction and a fall in house prices, the US 
economy  has  in  fact  done  remarkably  well  so  far  to  keep  growing.  Reasonable  growth  in 
consumption, strong capital spending by businesses and a turnaround in the trade accounts 
have  been  key  factors.  The  decline  in  the  US  dollar  is  presumably  assisting  the  latter.  In 
other  words,  the  floating  exchange  rate  is  playing  its  proper  role  of  responding  to  the 
differences in macroeconomic circumstances between the US and elsewhere. 
Nonetheless,  it  is  a  reasonable  presumption  that  the  US  now  faces  a  period  of  below 
average performance as the problems in the housing market are digested. The excess stock 
of dwellings has to be worked off; the bad loans have to be recognised and written down; 
and  to  the  extent  that  the  recognition  of  all  this  damages  the  balance  sheets  of  major 
financial institutions  (not  all  of  which  are  American),  repair  work  is  in order.  It  has  already 
commenced, with a number of the most significant globally active banks seeking significant 
capital injections from cash rich investors. 
Arguably, these banks are now putting in place belatedly the capital that should have been 
devoted  to  these  activities  all  along.  Even  if  we  accept  that  there  were  some  genuine 
advances towards more optimal risk sharing through the development of securitisation and 
its associated structures, it cannot be denied that there was a capital saving associated with 
the conduct of business through off balance sheet entities: banks had to put up less capital 
ex  ante  than  the  risks  really  warranted.  That  earlier  business  advantage  is  now  being 
unwound as much of the credit risk comes back to the banks. It seems a reasonable bet that 
more capital will be required over the years ahead. 
                                                 
1   These  PPP  weighted  growth  rates  reflect  the  results  from  the  recent  International  Comparison  Program 
announcement on relative prices. 
BIS Review 7/2008 
 1
So the US economy is in a period of adjustment, as is the banking core of the international 
financial system. Even with the renowned flexibility of both, and good policies, this will take a 
bit of time. Just how long remains uncertain.  
The global economy 
The  question  then  is  how  much  impact  a  period  of  US  weakness  will  have  on  the  global 
economy. I think it makes sense to think about the answer along two dimensions. 
The first is “spillovers” – essentially sequential causal connections whereby slower activity in 
a major country like the US affects its trading partners via reduced US demand for goods and 
services in international trade. This would, other things equal, slow economic activity in those 
trading partner countries, which in turn would slow their demand for goods and services, and 
so  on.  Of  course,  all  else  may  not  be  equal  –  other  shocks  and  adjustments  might  be 
occurring in the other direction in other countries. An obvious possibility is economic policy: it 
may be open to policy makers in those other countries to respond to weaker US demand by 
running  more  expansionary  policies  at  home.  Whether  it  is  or  not  would  depend  on  their 
overall macroeconomic situation and their policy regime. 
The second dimension is the extent of commonality in the originating event that triggers the 
whole  adjustment  to  begin  with.  So  if,  for  example,  it  were  the  case  that  a  “credit  crunch” 
occurred simultaneously in many countries, there would be a contractionary impact around 
the world even before any spillover effects via trade got going. Obviously, that would be a 
much  more  serious  situation,  since  policy  makers  in  each  country  would  be  seeking  to 
combat declining domestic demand as well as declining foreign demand. Combating credit 
crunches in particular can be very difficult. 
I think we can take it as given that there will be trade spillovers from the weaker US economy 
to the developing world and to other developed countries in due course, even though there is 
not a lot of evidence of such an effect in the data we have as yet. The spillovers will not just 
be from the US either. The fact that the euro area appears to be slowing a bit, with the UK 
also expected to slow before long, means that the core industrial countries as a group may, 
over  the  period  ahead,  impart  noticeably  less  impetus  to  global  growth  than  they  have  in 
recent years. How big a difference that will ultimately make we cannot know for sure, given 
the apparent increased internal dynamism of much of the emerging world, and given that we 
do not know what policy responses those countries may make. 
But the bigger question is the extent to which a range of countries also experience the same 
shock as the US. It is in answering this question that we need to consider the financial events 
of the past year or so. The essential elements are well known by an audience in this city. 
Over some years, the availability of credit increased in many countries. In the US in particular 
this  phenomenon  saw  a  large  extension  of  credit  into  the  sub  prime  space  in  the  housing 
market. This was all aided by the securitisation process and the search for yield, which had 
its genesis in the high saving rates in other parts of the world. 
While  most  of  these  sub  prime  borrowers  have  in  fact  been  servicing  their  loans  quite 
adequately,  flaws  in  the  process  saw  standards  slip  towards  the  end  of  this  cycle.  As  the 
problems came to light, pressure came to bear on various entities. Institutions with exposure 
to  sub  prime  mortgage  assets,  holders  and  intending  issuers  of  structured  products  in 
general,  SIVs,  conduits  and  other  intermediaries  that  relied  on  wholesale  funding  were  all 
tested. Core banking institutions that sponsored off balance sheet entities very quickly found 
funding  pressures  transferred  back  to  them.  Doubts  over  asset  quality,  uncertainty  over 
funding and generally reduced appetite for risk suddenly erupted last August into a scramble 
for liquidity. These pressures have been seen in most of the developed economies, though 
they have been most acute in the US, the UK, the euro area and Canada. 
For  at  least  some  of  the  G7  economies,  then,  these  events  would  appear  to  have  the 
characteristic of a common shock, in the form of a rise in the market cost of finance and, in 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2008
some  cases,  perhaps,  the  possibility  of  a  wider  withdrawal  of  credit.  Even  though  it  was 
American  borrowers  who  could  not  repay,  lenders  much  further  afield  were  affected.  It  is 
against this backdrop that forecasters are bringing down their growth estimates for 2008 in 
some  of  the  major  countries,  and  policy  makers  there  are  growing  more  concerned  about 
downside risks to growth. 
Suppose then that the G7 group faces the prospect of softer growth in 2008 due at least in 
part to these financial factors. There will be spillovers from this via trade. But is the financial 
shock also common to the emerging world, and to Asia in particular – a region that has been 
a spur to global growth in recent years? 
To  date,  at  least,  it  would  appear  not.  Asian  investors  appear  to  have  relatively  small 
exposures to the sub prime loans per se. Banks in the region typically rely less than their 
developed country counterparts on wholesale funding, so the liquidity squeeze has been less 
of a problem for them. The cost of debt to Asian borrowers, as measured by sovereign bond 
yields,  has  not  risen  much  at  all.  Nor  has  the  cost  of  equity  capital,  if  the  levels  of  Asian 
share price indices are anything to go by. The economic growth of most of east Asia has to 
date remained pretty solid as well. 
None of that is any guarantee of plain sailing in the future. Nonetheless, it is a good start to 
weathering  whatever  the  effects  of  slower  growth  in  the  developed  world  might  be.  If  the 
financial shock that some of the G7 economies have experienced, and which they fear could 
intensify, has not been replicated in Asia, then the effects on Asia should be limited mainly to 
those  coming  through  the  trade  channel,  and  perhaps  via  general  business  confidence 
linkages. 
The  trade  channel  remains  important,  of  course,  for  some  key  Asian  countries. There  has 
been a big rise in intra Asian trade over the past decade, but much of that trade is basically a 
production  chain  whose  output  is  still  destined  for  the  major  country  markets.  So 
developments  outside  the  region  are  still  very  important.  But  some  moderation  in  the 
externally  generated  part  of  growth  is  a  manageable  issue  for  Asian  policy  makers.  In 
countries  where  inflation  has  been  a  little  on  the  high  side,  they  can  allow  it  to  reduce 
pressure on prices. In other cases, they would be in a position to allow more expansionary 
settings for domestic demand. 
Much  hinges  on  events  in  China,  an  economy  that  now  has  a  very  prominent  effect  on 
conditions  in  the  Asian  region.  Over  the  past  couple  of  years  the  Chinese  economy  has 
continued to boom, asset prices have surged and the authorities have struggled to contain 
the ebullience. Some of China's growth has been courtesy of a rise in exports but, even if 
that contribution to growth diminished, China would still be growing very strongly as domestic 
spending has been rising rapidly. With very high saving rates at present, there would appear 
to  be  plenty  of  scope  for  further  rises  in  consumption  spending  over  time,  as  the  Chinese 
people become accustomed to higher incomes. 
A slower pace of growth in the G7 will presumably trim this growth to some extent. But my 
guess is that China can cope with that. The Chinese authorities may even welcome some 
moderation in growth. If China does suffer a serious interruption to growth at some point – 
and all economies do from time to time – it is more likely, in my judgement, to be caused by 
some domestic problem than by the sort of events we are witnessing in the developed world 
at present. For Australians, it will be just as important over the years ahead to keep an eye 
out for imbalances in the Chinese economy as to watch the problems of the US economy. 
All told, it seems likely that, after several strong years, global growth will be noticeably slower 
in  2008.  Much  of  this  slowing  will  be  driven  by  weaker  outcomes  in  the  developed  world, 
particularly in countries facing tighter credit conditions. Some of the G7 economies are likely 
to experience a period of growth well below trend. It seems likely that this will affect emerging 
market  and  other  economies  mainly  via  trade  linkages.  At  this  stage,  it  is  not  clear  how 
significant this effect will be, but it seems prudent to assume that we will be moving from a 
position where growth in the global economy has been well above trend to one where it will 
BIS Review 7/2008 
 3
be no more than trend. Some moderation in the pace of global expansion is welcome, given 
the pressure on prices for energy and raw materials we have seen in recent years. But the 
full picture for this phase of the international cycle will become clearer only over time. 
Australia 
What then of the outlook for Australia? 
The  continuing  rise  of  Chinese  and  other  incomes  through  those  levels  at  which  resource 
usage intensifies significantly has meant strong and persistent demand over recent years for 
the mineral resources with which Australia is abundantly blessed. At this point, there appears 
to be a widespread expectation that contract prices for some key resources will rise in 2008. 
If they do, Australia’s terms of trade, which have already risen by about 40 per cent over the 
past five years, would move higher still. Perhaps this general set of forces at work is behind 
the  striking  difference  in  confidence  one  encounters  when  travelling  from  the  Pacific  time 
zone to the European one. 
It is not as though Australian investors and borrowers have escaped completely unscathed 
from the turmoil abroad. While their direct exposure to the US sub prime market has been 
limited, we have seen additional demand for liquidity put upward pressure on term funding 
rates for financial institutions, though to a smaller extent than in Europe or the US and the 
pressures  are  now  easing  somewhat.  Firms  whose  business  models  relied  on  short  term 
debt funding have been tested; a couple have, for practical purposes, left the scene. 
Yet these events have been absorbed thus far with little disruption in the broader economy. 
The availability of credit to sound borrowers has not been impaired. It costs a bit more, but 
that  is  in  the  context  of  a  fully  employed  economy  struggling  to  meet  demand.  The  key 
banking  institutions  are  strongly  capitalised,  have  adequate  liquidity  and  relatively  little 
exposure  to  the  problems  in  the  US  housing  market.  Business  and  consumer  confidence 
both  remain  high.  In  the  local  housing  market  over  the  past  year,  we  have  seen  prices 
accelerate in several cities in the eastern states. The economy grew significantly faster than 
trend over the same period. As a central bank, while we have been careful to ensure ample 
liquidity in the money market at a time of international uncertainty and re pricing of risk, we 
have remained concerned about the outlook for inflation, which is likely to be uncomfortably 
high in the near term. 
Based on what we can see at present, my judgement is that the direct financial effects of the 
global turmoil on Australia are likely to be confined mainly to the impact on borrowing costs 
of the liquidity squeeze of recent months, which has pushed up the cost of wholesale finance 
a bit in addition to the effects of monetary policy changes. Taking into account the strength of 
demand, this increase in borrowing costs does not seem likely to pose a particular problem 
for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  There  is  no  evidence,  moreover,  of  a  “credit  crunch”  in  the 
domestic financial sector. On the contrary, thus far the core elements of the domestic system 
have stepped into the potential gap left by the capital markets. 
All this could change if the credit tightening abroad takes a serious turn further for the worse. 
But  failing  that,  over  the  horizon  of  the  next  year  or  so,  the  main  further  impact  of 
international  events  is  likely  to  be  through  two  channels.  The  first  is  the  effects  on  global 
economic growth, and particularly the growth of China. The second channel is the potential 
intangible effect on business confidence, which could operate to the extent that Australian 
business  leaders  take  a  cue  from  their  counterparts  in  the  US  and  Europe.  In  both  cases 
there is, thus far, no evidence of any significant impact, but it may be too soon to see it yet. 
Inflation 
As we consider the potential risks for economic activity over the year ahead, it is important to 
keep inflation in the picture too. The rapid pace of global growth in recent years has seen a 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2008
pick  up  in  some  key  prices.  Prices  for  foodstuffs,  energy  and  raw  materials  for  industrial 
processes are quite high. The synchronised nature of the increases has been quite marked 
as well, in a fashion eerily reminiscent of the early 1970s. 
What  is  different  on  this  occasion is  the  way  that  labour costs  have  behaved.  In  the  early 
1970s,  labour  costs  exploded  in  many  countries  as  inflation  expectations  began  to  rise, 
economic policies were too ambitious on growth, and labour unions reached the peak of their 
power. By and large, labour costs have been quite contained in the present episode, even in 
cases of tight labour markets like Australia's. 
This  owes  something  to  the  openness  of  the  global  trading  system  and  also  to  the  way 
labour market institutions have evolved. The fact that inflation expectations have been low 
and  pretty  stable  has  also  helped.  Central  banks  have  played  a  key  role  in  anchoring 
expectations. 
One risk is that the effect on CPIs of rises in commodity prices could disturb the balance. It is 
customary in many parts of the developed world to strip out the effects of food and energy 
prices on CPIs, on the assumption that such movements are usually due to temporary supply 
disturbances and hence will reverse. But the predominant reason for many of the commodity 
price rises is demand – not just developed country demand, but that in the developing world. 
The  demand  has  proved  to  be  persistent,  rather  than  temporary.  In  the  event  that  labour 
costs  begin  to  respond  to  the  headline  inflation  price  rises  that  have  already  occurred,  it 
would prove more difficult to contain underlying price inflation in the industrial countries. In 
developing countries, moreover, where food is a big share of the basic consumption basket, 
the  rise  in  food  prices  may  present  a  particular  challenge.  While  slower  growth  in  global 
demand, led by the major countries, and possible supply responses may ease pressure on 
some commodity prices, most of them remain very high at this stage. 
It is conceivable, therefore, that a somewhat less favourable short term relationship between 
economic  growth  and  inflation  than  the  world  enjoyed  over  the  past  decade  might  be 
experienced for a time. This outcome, were it to occur, would make for a more challenging 
environment for macroeconomic policy makers. It would limit the extent to which monetary 
policies could respond to the downside risks to economic growth in the short term without 
risking a rise in the trend rate of inflation and a pick up in inflation expectations. 
I  believe  that  central  banks  everywhere  are  acutely  conscious  of  this.  I  would  venture, 
however, that the tolerance among some parts of the investment community for a cautious 
approach by policy is not high, if some of the commentary we read is any guide. This, too, 
adds to the delicacy of the tasks facing policy makers. But it is important to stress that, were 
trend  inflation  to  rise  as  a  result  of  too  ambitious  an  approach  to  supporting  short  term 
growth,  financial  prices  would  actually  be  among  those  most  vulnerable  to  adjustment  as 
long term interest rates rose.  
Conclusion 
2008 opens with the financial turmoil of the second half of last year fresh in our minds. Those 
events,  and  the  deeper  issues  that  triggered  them,  have  mainly  affected  some  of  the  G7 
economies  and  have  cast  a  shadow  over  their  growth  outlook  in  the  near  term.  Emerging 
market economies have been less affected; in fact, in parts of Asia the main policy challenge 
has been to deal with the threat of overheating. 
Will  growth  performance  for  these  different  parts  of  the  world  continue  to  diverge?  Or  will 
they  converge  again  –  and  if  so,  how?  And  how  successful  will  we  –  all  of  us  –  be  in 
containing  the  inflationary  tendencies  which  have  been  evident  up  to  now?  These  will  be 
among the key economic questions for 2008. At the moment, we do not know the answers. 
One way or another, 2008 could turn out to be an interesting year. 
On that note, I wish all of you a happy new year and good judgement in the period ahead.  
BIS Review 7/2008 
 5
