Paul Jenkins: Trends and challenges in the global economy and what 
they mean for Canada and Ontario 
Remarks by Mr Paul Jenkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the London 
Chamber of Commerce, London, Ontario, 2 April 2008. 
 Good morning. First, I would like to thank the London Chamber of Commerce for inviting us 
here today. It's a pleasure for me to be back in London, given my close family ties and my 
years at the University of Western Ontario. 
As  is  the  case  for  so  many  cities  and  regions  in  Canada,  London's  economy  and  that  of 
southwestern Ontario are directly affected by changes in the global economy. And, as with 
so many things in life, the better we understand the forces of change, the better equipped we 
are to deal with them.  
What I'd like to do this morning is discuss some of the key trends in the global economy, as 
well as the challenges they present, and then talk about some of the implications for Canada 
and for Ontario. And because one of the main reasons that we have come to London is to 
hear your thoughts and concerns, I'll leave plenty of time for your comments and questions. 
Macroeconomic trends in the global economy 
The  turbulence  in  global  financial  markets,  which  has  been  with  us  since  last  August, 
continues to be a major focus. But rather than starting there, allow me to first step back and 
provide a perspective that covers the past five or six years. From 2002 to 2007, the world 
economy expanded strongly, growing by an average of 4.6 per cent per year, measured in 
terms of real GDP. The growth of world trade was even more impressive, at about 7 per cent 
on an annual average basis. This period of robust growth benefited most nations, and was 
strongest  in  emerging-market  countries  such  as  China,  India,  and  Brazil.  In  industrialized 
countries, growth was also steady and solid.  
What we are now confronting is a marked slowdown in global economic growth, emanating 
primarily from the sharp correction under way in the U.S. housing market and the associated 
tightening in credit conditions linked to the collapse of the U.S. subprime-mortgage market. I 
will come back to discuss these financial developments in a moment. But in keeping with the 
theme of taking a longer-term perspective, it's important to note that some slowing in global 
economic  growth  was  necessary.  After  five  to  six  years  of  nearly  unprecedented  growth, 
levels of economic activity around the globe were straining capacity limits and beginning to 
put upward pressure on inflation. 
These pressures can be seen in the sharp run-up in commodity prices. Compared with the 
beginning of 2002, U.S.-dollar prices are more than 5 times higher for crude oil, and more 
than triple for metals and grains. In real terms (that is, compared with the increase in overall 
consumer prices) the price of crude oil has more than quadrupled over  this period, and is 
now above the levels reached in the 1970s and early 1980s. 
The impact of these elevated commodity prices on consumer prices can be seen in the latest 
numbers on total consumer price inflation. In the United States, the United Kingdom and the 
euro  zone,  total  CPI  inflation  is  currently  at  4.0  per  cent,  2.5  per  cent,  and  3.5  per  cent, 
respectively. Emerging-market countries are also facing rising price pressures. Core inflation, 
which excludes the effects of rising food and energy prices is, however, running closer to 2 
per cent in industrial countries. With global economic growth slowing, it is unlikely that the 
higher prices of food and energy will spill over into prices and costs more generally, but this 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 1
risk  is  something  central  banks  are  watching  closely.  In  other  words,  central  banks  are 
focused on keeping inflation expectations well anchored. 
Challenges in the global economy 
With that backdrop, let me now discuss three key challenges facing the global economy and, 
by  extension,  Canada  and  Ontario:  first,  the  slowdown  of  the  U.S.  economy  and  the 
associated financial turbulence; second, global trade imbalances; and third, competition from 
emerging-market countries.  
The  most  immediate  challenge  facing  the  global  economy  is  the  marked  slowdown  in  the 
U.S.  economy.  This  slowdown  involves  several  interconnected  elements,  and,  given  our 
close trade links to the United States, has very direct consequences for Canada.  
One element is the sharp and protracted correction under way in the U.S. housing sector. 
This correction stems from the fact that house building had risen to unsustainable levels and 
from  the  related  implosion  of  the  subprime-mortgage  market  with  its  weak  underwriting 
standards.  Construction,  sales,  and  prices  in  the  housing  market  have  fallen  dramatically, 
and inventories of unsold houses remain high. 
Another  element  is,  of  course,  the  financial  turbulence  and  changes  in  credit  markets  that 
we've  witnessed over the past eight months.  Given the complexity of this situation, let me 
spend a little more time on it. 
To understand the cause of this turbulence, it's again useful to look back over the past five or 
six years. During this period, a decline in inflation, together with an excess of global savings 
relative  to  desired  investment,  resulted  in  real  interest  rates  that  were  low  by  historical 
standards.  It  was  also  a  period,  as  I  noted  earlier,  of  strong,  steady  global  economic 
expansion.  
In  this  macroeconomic  setting,  spreads  between  higher-risk  and  lower-risk  investments 
declined.  At  the  same  time,  a  variety  of  new  financial  instruments,  such  as  new  types  of 
asset-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations, were introduced. Investors who 
were looking to enhance their returns were attracted to these products. This led to greater 
leverage (that is, debt financing) and to investors taking on risks that many clearly did not 
fully understand. 
The  link  back  to  the  United  States  is  that  many  of  these  new,  or  structured,  products  had 
subprime  mortgages  embedded  in  them.  Once  delinquencies  and  defaults  on  these 
mortgages  started  to  mount,  and  given  the  opacity  of  these  investment  products,  risk 
premiums started to widen, market liquidity started to dry up, and credit conditions tightened. 
And these financial market reactions were felt globally. I will quickly add, however, that the 
pressures  in  Canadian  financial  markets  have  been  less  intense  because  of  the  relatively 
healthy balance sheets of households, firms, and financial institutions in Canada.  
The  entire  episode,  which  is  by  no  means  fully  played  out,  can  be  seen  as  an  overdue 
repricing of risk, a recognition of losses, and a recapitalization of balance sheets. Governor 
Carney spoke recently about this topic, so I won't dwell on it here, but suffice it so say that 
these  events  highlight  the  need  for  change  in  both  the  private  and  public  sectors  so  that 
markets  can  return  to  more  normal  functioning.  In  the  private  sector,  the  most  pressing 
needs  for  change  include  greater  transparency  in  financial  products,  improved  risk  and 
liquidity  management,  and  more  rational,  better-aligned  incentives.  For  our  part,  we  at  the 
Bank are taking steps to support the functioning of markets by expanding the list of eligible 
collateral  that  we  will  accept  in  our  Standing  Liquidity  Facility,  by  examining  types  of  term 
operations  and  term  lending,  and  by  modernizing  our  legislative  authority  to  support  the 
stability of the financial system. 
The  second  challenge  facing  the  global  economy  and  Canada  has  to  do  with  the  large 
current  account  imbalances  that  exist  today.  In  a  nutshell,  the  United  States  has  been 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2008
running a very sizable current account deficit for a number of years, while most of the rest of 
the world – especially Asia and oil-exporting countries – has been running current account 
surpluses.  Large  imbalances  such  as  these  are  not  sustainable  over  long  periods,  so  the 
question arises: what needs to be done to effect an orderly resolution? 
Two main adjustments are needed. First, those countries with large surpluses need to rely 
more on domestic demand as a source of growth, and those with deficits (mainly the United 
States)  need  to  increase  their  national  savings  rate.  Second,  there  is  a  need  for  more 
exchange rate flexibility. This is particularly the case for China, but also more broadly across 
Southeast  Asia.  China  continues  to  resist  exchange  rate  flexibility,  and  thus  adjustment, 
through  the  accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  which  now  total  US$1.5  trillion.  I 
want  to  quickly  add  that  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility  is  in  China's  own  best  interest.  It 
would greatly enhance their ability to manage their own economy, including dealing with their 
mounting inflationary pressures.  
The third major challenge is the integration of China and India into the global economy. Not 
surprisingly, some perceive the growing economic clout of and competition from China and 
India as a threat, especially as both countries increasingly produce more high-value-added 
goods and services. But the growth of emerging-market economies represents a tremendous 
opportunity for Canadian businesses. We need to exploit our comparative advantages and 
see these rapidly expanding markets as places to do business.  
So,  that's  a  quick  look  at  some  of  the  trends  in  and  the  challenges  posed  by  the  global 
economy. Let me now turn to the home front and discuss some key economic issues facing 
Canada and Ontario, in light of these global developments.  
Canada and Ontario in the global economy 
These  global  economic  trends  represent  significant  and,  in  a  very  real  way,  competing  or 
contrasting,  forces  shaping  developments  here  at  home.  Strong  commodity  prices  are 
generating a substantial boost to incomes in Canada. In economic jargon, we have had an 
increase in our terms of trade – the prices of the products we sell internationally are rising 
faster  than  the  prices  of  the  products  we  import.  The  resulting  rise  in  real  incomes  is 
providing  support  for  domestic  demand  in  Canada,  which  has  been  showing  up  in  rising 
consumption,  construction  spending,  investment  in  machinery  and  equipment,  and,  more 
broadly, in employment gains.  
At the same time, the weakness of the U.S. economy, the strength of our dollar (reflecting 
the  increase  in  our  terms  of  trade  and  the  relative  weakness  of  the  U.S.  dollar),  and 
competition from Asia have led to flat to declining exports, especially in the manufacturing 
sector. 
Thus,  overall,  what  we  have  had  in  Canada  is  strong  domestic  demand  offsetting  a  weak 
traded-goods  sector.  Monetary  policy  has  been  calibrated  based  on  judgments  about  the 
relative strengths of these competing forces, with an eye firmly fixed on the policy objective 
of keeping inflation at our 2 per cent target. Currently, total CPI inflation in Canada is 1.8 per 
cent. Excluding the one-time effect of the January GST cut, total CPI inflation is 2.4 per cent, 
and core inflation (which excludes the more volatile components) is 1.5 per cent.  
Staying on top of all the forces at play is an essential preoccupation of the Bank of Canada. 
As we said in our last policy press release a month ago, the correction in the U.S. housing 
sector,  knock-on  effects  of  this  correction  to  other  parts  of  the  U.S.  economy,  and  the 
tightening  of  credit  conditions  in  global  financial  markets  have  led  us  to  conclude  that  the 
risks  surrounding  the  Canadian  economy  have  shifted  to  the  downside,  resulting  in  our 
decision to lower our policy interest rate by 50 basis points to 3.5 per cent. We also said that 
further monetary stimulus is likely to be required in the near term to keep aggregate supply 
and demand in balance and to achieve the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term.  
BIS Review 38/2008 
 3
With that global and national perspective, I'll now talk about some of the issues, challenges, 
and opportunities facing the Ontario economy.  
Ontario's economy is being confronted by both cyclical and structural economic forces. On 
the cyclical front, we have the marked slowdown in the U.S. economy. This has had a direct 
impact  on  the  province's  forest  products  industry  –  from  lumber,  to  doors,  windows,  and 
building materials generally – and on the automotive industry. But these and other industries 
are feeling the effects of strong structural forces. Clearly, competition from emerging-market 
countries is one of those forces.  
Because of these cyclical and structural forces, demand has turned away from a number of 
products that Ontario has traditionally produced. In other words, relative prices have moved 
against some key segments of the Ontario economy. To draw a comparison to the national 
situation,  one  could  say  that  there  has  been  an  adverse  movement  in  Ontario's  terms  of 
trade. Of course, the rise in value of the Canadian dollar over the past five or six years has 
been an important part of these relative price movements.  
At  the  same  time,  some  sectors  of  the  province's  economy  are  benefiting  from  these 
changes  in  relative  prices,  including  the  mining  and  agrifood  sectors.  We  must  also 
remember that the manufacturing sector is not homogenous – the high-tech sector standing 
out as an example. And Ontario has strong financial services and health services sectors.  
What this adds up to is the need for adjustment within the Ontario economy in response to 
these global forces. Adjustment is not easy. But London and its surrounding area does seem 
to me to stand out as an example of the importance of having the flexibility to respond and 
adjust to changing circumstances. Some 20 years ago, manufacturing accounted for 20 per 
cent of the jobs in London, compared with 14 per cent today. This decline has been more 
than  offset  over  the  past  20  years  by  employment  gains  in  financial,  business,  and 
professional  services,  and  in  transportation  and  warehousing.  In  addition,  we  have  seen 
significant investments, including in the manufacturing base of this community, in technology 
that supports world-class operations. The result for London over this period has been rising 
employment and rising real incomes. 
Good  macroeconomic  management  is  certainly  part  of  what  is  needed  to  help  provinces, 
cities, and communities adjust to global change. This includes sound fiscal policies, policies 
that help to reduce public sector debt levels relative to the size of the economy. The Bank of 
Canada  also  has  an  important  role  to  play.  The  Bank's  monetary  policy  aims  at  keeping 
inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable.  This,  in  turn,  helps  households,  businesses,  and 
governments to read price signals more clearly, respond to relative price movements more 
promptly, and allocate production resources more efficiently. When relative prices move to 
the  extent  that  they  have  in  recent  years,  markets  are  essentially  telling  us  that  there  has 
been a fundamental change in the type of products that the rest of the world wants to buy 
from  Canada.  In  setting  monetary  policy,  our  job  is  to  understand  what  this  means  for 
Canada's  overall  economic  picture,  which  implies  a  focus  that  is  national  in  nature  and 
scope. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  the  first  point  I  wish  to  make  is  the  importance  of  allowing  market-based 
adjustment mechanisms to work. Markets send price signals that indicate the best way for 
resources  to  be  allocated.  Second,  it  is  also  important  for  households,  businesses,  and 
governments to take a medium- to longer-term perspective in making decisions. The global 
forces at play are not going to disappear any time soon.  
We  therefore  need  to  encourage  flexibility  and  adaptability  in  the  Canadian  and  Ontario 
economies. In other words, more needs to be done to enhance the functioning of our internal 
markets.  Policies  that  support  flexibility  can  obviously  help  economies  adjust  to  cyclical 
economic  shocks.  But  encouraging  flexibility  can  also  have  a  longer-term  payoff.  When 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2008
policies  provide  an  environment  where  initiative  and  innovation  can  flourish,  the  Canadian 
economy is able to adapt to longer-term global forces in ways that continuously exploit our 
comparative advantages.  
Thank  you  for  your  attention.  I  would  now  be  happy  to  respond  to  your  questions  and 
comments. 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 5
