Stanley Fischer: A salute to the country on its 60th birthday 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Forbes 
Conference, Ramat Gan, 14 April 2008.  
 In my remarks today, I would like to speak about the special period the Israeli economy is 
currently passing through and what is required from policymakers and the business sector to 
get through this period of the slowdown in global growth relatively unscathed. 
The Israeli economy is presently confronting a very complex situation. The Western world, 
and especially the United States, is in the throes of a serious financial crisis, which is causing 
a  significant  slowdown  in  growth  in  the  United  States,  and  hence  also  in  Europe,  and  a 
decrease in the volume of world trade. 
The Israeli economy will also certainly be affected by the slowdown in global growth. 
This will probably come from two directions: 
a) 
Through  the  influence  of  the  financial  markets.  Even  though  the  financial  crisis 
hardly  touched  the  Israeli  financial  system,  it  is  having  an  impact.  This  is  seen  in 
price falls in the share market and a rise in the risk premium on the bond market. 
We can thus expect a reduction in consumer demand due to the “wealth effect” – 
the  effect  of  a  fall  in  the  value  of  households’  assets  on  their  purchases  –  and  a 
decline in real investments resulting from the increase in firms' costs of borrowing in 
the capital market. 
Through the slowdown in Israeli exports, in the context of the decrease in worldwide 
demand,  particularly  in  the  United  States,  and  the  strengthening  of  the  shekel 
against the dollar. 
b) 
Taking the above into account, the Bank of Israel's forecast of the rate of growth in 2008 is 
3.2  percent.  Although  this  is  lower  than  the  rate  we  have  been  accustomed  to  since  the 
middle of 2003, it is similar to the average growth rate recorded in Israel over the past 25 
years, and is higher than that expected in the developed countries – particularly the United 
States and Europe. 
In other words, the Bank’s forecast, in line with that of nearly all forecasters, is that Israel’s 
economy  will  continue  to  grow  at  a  good  pace,  despite  the  difficult  times  in  which  the 
advanced economies find themselves. 
The  question  thus  arises  what  the  policymakers  –  i.e.,  the  government,  especially  the 
Ministry  of  Finance,  and  the  Bank  of  Israel  –  and  the  business  sector  should  be  doing  to 
minimize the harm to the economy. 
We should emphasize that whatever is done has to be consistent with the macroeconomic 
policy  we  have  adopted  in  recent  years  and  to  which  we  have  committed  ourselves.  This 
policy has been fundamental to the impressive success of the economy in the last few years. 
If we continue with this macroeconomic policy, we can rest assured that the confidence in the 
economy  of  the  business  sectors  in  Israel  and  abroad  and  of  Israeli  households  will  be 
maintained.  In  that  situation  Israeli  and  foreign  investors  will  continue  to  invest  in  the 
economy, and households will continue to consume. Together with this, the business sector 
needs to organize itself in advance to cope better with the changing conditions – I mean by 
searching for new markets, streamlining procedures etc. The data relating to 2007 indicate 
that exporters have indeed made a start in this direction, and exports to Europe and the East 
have risen faster than those to the US. 
This macroeconomic policy rests on two major pillars: 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 1
a) 
b) 
Continuation  of  the  budgetary  policy  based  on  the  expenditure  targets  and  deficit 
that  were  determined  –  the  aim  of  which  is  to  continue  to  reduce  the  high 
government  debt/GDP  ratio.  This  policy  contributes  to  the  activity  of  the  business 
sector as the engine of economic growth, which helps to boost Israeli and foreign 
investors' confidence in the economy and thereby also to support financial stability. 
As far as the budget is concerned, the correct approach at this stage is to allow the 
automatic stabilizers to function. This means that even if tax revenues this year fall 
below  the  level  forecast  in  the  budget  due  the  slowdown  in  growth,  it  will  not  be 
necessary to raise tax rates or to cut expenditure, even if this results in a certain rise 
in the budget deficit. On the other hand, reducing taxes beyond this and beyond the 
path to which we have committed ourselves is liable to undermine the credibility of 
the economic policy. 
The  last  thing  the  economy  needs,  particularly  now,  is  a  loss  of  credibility  in  the 
government's macroeconomic policy. This would cost us dear, through a rise in the 
interest  rates  determined  by  the  capital  markets,  which  would  ultimately  deal  a 
further blow to growth and employment. 
The  step  currently  taken  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  regarding  accelerated 
depreciation as an incentive to companies to invest now rather than wait till the end 
of the slowdown in growth is a good move that will help the economy get through 
this period successfully. 
I would like to point out that the Ministry of Finance does not have an easy job at this 
time, in light of the pressures exerted to undertake weird and wonderful measures, 
which  do  not  always  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  the  policy  goals.  These 
pressures  notwithstanding,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  is  adhering  to  the  correct  and 
prudent policy without yielding to demands for unproductive hyperactive steps. 
Continuation of the Bank of Israel's interest policy, aimed essentially at maintaining 
price stability.  
In this respect there has not been, there is not, and there will not be any change in 
the Bank's view of the maintenance of price stability as its major objective. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  contribute  to  the  government's  other 
economic goals, especially growth and employment, as long as doing so does not 
adversely impact on the objective of price stability. The Bank will also continue to 
support financial stability. 
This issue, the Bank of Israel’s objectives, leads me to the Bank’s role in the economy. The 
perception of the Bank of Israel's policy objectives is expressed in the modern approach to 
central banking, according to which the central bank is an independent institution, with clear 
division of labor and responsibility between the government, and especially the Ministry of 
Finance, on the one hand, and the central bank on the other. 
The  independence  of  the  central  bank  is  vital  for  the  success  of  the  economy.  This  is 
because  of  the  irresistible  temptation  for  governments  to  ask  their  central  banks  to  print 
money to finance their activities, rather than imposing taxes on the population. 
The request to print money can take on different guises, such as a request to cut the interest 
rate – which initially, under certain circumstances and in the short run may boost growth, but 
which eventually, after what may be a very short period, leads to inflation. Other examples 
could include a request to finance a particular industry, or to purchase government bonds, or 
to write off government debts. 
This danger is particularly acute in democracies, because democratic governments – in all 
countries  and  at  all  times  –  generally  have  a  short  horizon,  especially  when  elections  are 
approaching. Hence, despite the fact that printing money ultimately brings inflation, it is not 
the  focus  of  their  concern,  despite  the  destructive  impact  it  has  on  the  economy  and  the 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2008
society. In other words, governments in democratic countries have an inflationary tendency. 
Some  of  us  well  remember  Israel’s  economy  thirty  years  ago,  and  the  crises  that  resulted 
from that tendency. 
Price stability should thus be placed in the hands of a professional independent institution 
that is free of any political consideration and involvement, and that will operate with a long-
term perspective. The political systems in advanced countries understood how important this 
is, and granted independence to their central banks. 
There  is  a  vast  amount  of  research  showing  that  an  economy  performs  better  when  the 
central  bank  is  independent.  Central  bank  independence  is  thus  important  for  the 
achievement of sustainable growth, price stability, and financial stability. 
Hence,  central  bank  independence  is  one  of  the  considerations  of  domestic  and  foreign 
investors in deciding where to invest. This consideration is expressed, among other things, in 
the  country's  rating  and  in  the  costs  incurred  by  the  government  and  the  private  sector  in 
raising capital. 
It  is  also  important  that  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  be  accompanied  by  fruitful 
cooperation between it and the government, including the Ministry of Finance. On this point I 
would like to mention the excellent cooperation between the Minister of Finance and me, and 
between the senior personnel in the Ministry of Finance and the Bank. 
The  modern  approach  to  central  bank  independence  is  expressed  in  the  laws  relating  to 
modern central banks in advanced countries worldwide. This is also the approach underlying 
the new Bank of Israel bill which we are drafting in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance 
and with the support of the Prime Minister. This law will comply with the accepted standards 
of central banks in advanced countries, and will also, and mainly, serve the economy, the 
state and its citizens in the best possible way. 
I hope that the government will present the new bill to the Knesset in the very near future. 
This  will  be  a  further  milestone  in  building  the  foundations  of  an  advanced  and  modern 
economy in Israel. 
That will be an achievement the State of Israel and its citizens can be proud of as the country 
celebrates its 60th anniversary. 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 3
