Tarisa Watanagase: Searching for a second wind – overcoming short-
term obstacles for long-term prosperity 
Dinner  talk  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Foreign 
Correspondents Club of Thailand, Bangkok, 24 July 2008. 
 Distinguished FCCT Members and Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to begin by thanking members of the FCCT Board, for inviting me to deliver this 
dinner talk. Today, I am very pleased to have an opportunity to share with you how I see the 
Thai economy evolving at the moment. The Bank of Thailand relies very much on the press 
in our communication to the public and this includes foreign correspondents in addition to the 
domestic ones. Therefore, whether you are aware of it or not, you are our partners in central 
bank’s public communication process.  
At the outset, I would like to reaffirm that the Monetary Policy Committee’s collective decision 
to raise policy rate Wednesday last week was in the best interest of the Thai economy over 
the  medium  term.  And,  my  talk  today  will  aim  to  address  two  important  questions,  which 
everybody may have in his or her mind, on the future prospect of the Thai economy. These 
questions  are  first  whether  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  monetary  policy  is  right  for  the  current 
economic  situation  and  secondly  whether  Thailand  has  the  capacity  to  overcome  the 
numerous challenges and regain dynamism in the near future.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
At this moment, high oil prices have put both advanced and developing economies alike in a 
very  tough  spot.  Unfortunately,  for  Thailand,  when  it  comes  to  oil  shocks,  we  are  not  as 
resilient as many other economies as our economy depends heavily on oil. In fact, Thailand’s 
oil  dependency  ratio,  although  has  been  falling,  remained  among  the  highest  in  the  world 
since our logistic system has been neglected for sometime.  
Prior to the recent hike in oil prices, Thailand was on the path to recovery. Indeed, economic 
growth picked up since the third quarter of last year with an expansion from 4.7 percent to 
5.7  percent  and  6.0  percent  in  the  subsequent  quarters,  respectively.  Domestic  demand 
strengthened; consumption, investment and imports, all accelerated while exports performed 
rather well. This was a clear recovery pattern. Up to the end of the first quarter, the sentiment 
was lifted to a better prospect for Thailand, with many expecting average 6 percent growth 
for this year. 
Unfortunately, the story did not end there. Oil prices soared again, passing the 120USD mark 
in May. Despite some correction last week, oil prices remain much higher than where they 
were the beginning of this year. Compounding this negative external shock was the return of 
street protests. Many expect both political uncertainties and oil prices to affect consumption 
and investment, but the latter to also have adverse impacts on our future ability to produce or 
what economists often call “productivity.”  
To  add  even  more  bad  news,  higher  oil  prices  caused  headline  inflation  to  accelerate, 
registering 8.9 percent in June – the highest rate for the last 10 years. Given all available 
indicators, it is very likely that inflation will remain elevated for a while. Periods of rebounding 
consumer and businesses’ confidence seem to have come to an end – a picture that many of 
you may have currently embraced. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Despite the adverse domestic and external shocks, the Thai economy has so far continued 
to perform well. Latest economic indicators for the first two months of this quarter showed 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 1
continued expansion of both domestic spending and exports. On the supply side, production 
and  prices  of  major  crops  grew  markedly,  resulting  in  an  acceleration  of  farm  income. 
Manufacturing  production  and  the  tourism  sector  also  expanded  well.  The  continued 
economic  expansion  has  facilitated  greater  pass-through  from  producer  prices  to  prices  of 
other goods, lifting inflation further beyond the initial cost shocks. 
Given  the  ongoing  trend  in  inflation  rate,  however,  the  economy  in  this  second  half  of  the 
year  will  likely  be  less  robust.  There  are  some  indications  that  the  rise  in  the  cost  of 
production  and  the  acceleration  of  inflation  have  begun  to  affect  the  economy’s  growth 
momentum. The weakest area of the economy at the moment is probably private investment 
which has been continuously decelerating for a few months now. But the surging inflation has 
also  put  private  consumption  increasingly  at  risk.  Indeed,  the  latest  issue  of  Asia  Pacific 
Consensus  Forecasts  shows  Thailand’s  GDP  growth  falling  over  the  next  three  quarters 
before recovering in the second quarter of 2009. 
Against this backdrop, the policy priority is to head off the rising inflationary pressure while 
keeping a close eye on downside risks to growth. This is normally already very difficult in the 
presence of cost-push shocks that create a short-run trade-off between inflation and output 
stabilization. What further complicates the current situation is that a prolonged period of oil 
shocks  and  inflation  tends  to  divest  funds  from,  as  well  as  discourage,  fixed  capital 
investment  and  hence  deteriorates  what  economists  refer  to  as  the  economy’s  potential 
output. This issue is especially important when the economy is energy inefficient. 
Let me elaborate further. Conceptually, potential output is the level of output which can be 
sustained  over  an  extended  period  without  exerting  upward  or  downward  pressure  on 
inflation.  When  the  actual  level  of  output  is  above  potential  output,  inflation  tends  to  rise. 
Conversely, when the actual level of output is below potential output, inflation tends to fall. In 
this regard, the task of monetary policy can be loosely described as getting the economy’s 
actual  output  as  close  as  possible  to  potential  output  –  tightening  when  actual  growth 
exceeds potential and loosening when actual growth falls short of potential. 
Now, if potential output also falls in the face of persistent supply shocks, then it is possible for 
inflation to persist even when actual output growth is moderating. For concreteness, imagine 
a car going at a 100-kilometer-per-hour speed limit on a highway turning onto a local street 
where the speed limit is now 60 kilometers per hour. Even if the driver reduces the speed of 
the  car  to  75  kilometers  per  hour,  a  25%  reduction  perhaps  as  a  result  of  a  narrower 
roadway,  he  will  still  be  charged  with  speeding.  In  real-world  policy  making,  this  is  what 
happened to the United States in the 1970s when falling potential output resulted in high and 
persistent  inflation  despite  the  slowing  economy.  At  the  time,  the  Federal  Reserve 
overestimated the U.S. potential output during the oil shocks and unknowingly pursued policy 
that kept the economy going at the rate in excess of the reduced potential.  
The current tightening monetary policy of most central banks around the globe amid supply 
shocks  reflects  much  of  these  concerns.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  growing  beyond 
potential  for  too  long  is  a  serious  threat  to  economic  stability.  To  use  monetary  policy  to 
accommodate growth when potential output is deteriorating would aggravate inflation and the 
subsequent disinflation effort would entail substantial costs. The U.S. disinflation experience 
in  the  early  1980s  was  the  prime  example  of  this.  Known  memorably  as  the  Volcker 
disinflation, the Federal Reserve took about four years to bring down inflation, but at a cost of 
the 1981-2 recession which was the most severe in the post-World War II period.  
Of  course,  one  could  argue  that  monetary  policy  is  ineffective  against  supply  shocks  and 
therefore raising the interest rate would only further hurt the economy. It is true that monetary 
policy  is  a  demand  management  tool.  It  is  true  that  the  best  remedy  to  tackle  any  supply 
shock should be one from the supply-side policy that mitigates its impact on production costs 
and  the  economy’s  potential  output.  However,  most  supply-side  policies  take  time.  For 
example, it takes many years to improve the logistic system, education and skill attainment of 
the labor force, and institutional quality.  
2 
 BIS Review 98/2008
On the other hand, alleviation measures such as promoting the use of alternative energy has 
had a limited impact on inflation. In the short run therefore, what is left as a clear option is to 
adjust  the  demand  accordingly  to  ensure  stability  in  the  immediate  future  as  well  as  the 
medium term. After all, it is also true that inflation is a monetary phenomenon and should be 
corrected by monetary policy. 
To make my point clearer, let me compare the current situation with the cake eating analogy. 
Suppose that you gain happiness from eating cakes. I guess we all do. But one day you find 
out that you have diabetes. If you continue to eat the same amount of cakes, your health will 
be at risk in the near future. If you want to continue eating cakes, the solution is simply to get 
a  direct  medicine  that  lowers  the  sugar  level  in  your  blood.  But  what  if  the  effect  of  the 
medicine takes a long time to become effective? For his survival, the patient has no option 
but to reduce the amount of cakes intake. This is exactly what the monetary policy is doing. It 
is  a  demand  management  tool  to  augment  supply  measures  that  take  time  to  make  an 
impact. If the effect of supply-side policy, the direct medicine for supply shock, is limited and 
rising inflation is a threat to the health of the economy, one must forego the happiness today 
for a better future tomorrow.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
You  may  then  ask  where  the  evidence  of  the  demand  pressure  is.  Looking  around, 
everywhere people seem to be tightening their belts and saving for the rainy days. Here, I 
would  like  to  highlight  the  readily  accessible  indicators  on  capacity  utilization  and 
unemployment. Partly due to strong demand for Thai products abroad, the average capacity 
utilization  rate  for  the  first  five  months  of  this  year  was  the  highest  since  the  1997  crisis. 
Meanwhile, despite the unofficial figure of 2-2.5 million labour immigrants, the unemployment 
rate has been hovering around 1.5% during the past four months. In fact, internationally, it is 
very difficult to find countries with similar or lower unemployment rates than Thailand. The 
tightness of the labor market has manifested itself in the form of rising unit labor costs which 
in the first quarter of this year rose higher than productivity growth. This could be a sign of 
possible wage-price inflation. 
Intuitive as it may seem, the cake eating analogy as well as several simple analogies you 
may  have  heard  from  our  critics  is  not  the  whole  story.  What  is  missing  in  them  is  the 
reference  to  inflation  expectations.  Our  critics  seem  to  have  completely  disregarded  the 
important  and  long-lasting  role  of  inflation  expectations.  Strangely,  concerns  on  inflation 
expectations, which feature prominently in the public discussion in other countries, seem to 
be relatively absent in this country. With your help, we can raise the level of public discussion 
about the forces underlying inflation here. 
Again,  central  banks  may  be  accused  of  being  concerned  on  issues  like  inflation 
expectations  that  seem  more  academic  than  real.  On  this,  I  wish  to  emphasize  that  a 
valuable  lesson  from  the  previous  two  oil  shocks  thirty  years  ago  is  the  role  of  inflation 
expectations in inflation developments.  
It is now well established that, independent of demand and supply shocks, an increase in the 
public’s long-term inflation expectations leads to higher inflation and lower output. Failure to 
keep  inflation  expectations  in  check  will lead  to  persistent  increases  in  the  price  level  well 
after  supply  shocks  vanishes. This  is  why  modern  central banks  pay so  much  attention  to 
ensure that inflation expectations do not run away. In general, how well a central bank can 
anchor  the  public’s  inflation  expectations  will  depend  on  the  extent  in  which  the  public 
perceived the central bank’s seriousness in fighting inflation. Such credibility hinges critically 
on  the  central  banks’  actions  and  what  the  public  expect  it  to  do.  Words  like  “behind  the 
curve” are often used to describe central banks that move too slowly to curb public’s inflation 
expectations. 
Central bank, unlike the government which has a fixed term, has a greater incentive to care 
for  economic  stability.  While  the  government  tends  to  be  more  myopic  in  their  policies, 
central bank is mandated to optimize the benefits across horizon. History has taught us that 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 3
a  popular  central  bank  is  not  always  the  most  credible  central  bank.  A  pro-growth  central 
bank  is  prone  to  inflationary  bias  which  undermines  its  credibility  in  fighting  inflation. 
Disinflation would then become more costly. 
Inflation targeting is one framework to discipline the central bank by paying attention to price 
stability. It has been working very well for us and for many other countries in the world that 
have adopted the regime. But the challenge today is to find the right sacrifice ratio between 
economic  growth  and  inflation.  In  addition,  the  central  bank  must  ensure  that  inflation 
expectation is under control and the adherence of inflation targeting framework can go a long 
way to ensure this. 
One  thing  people  often  misunderstand  about  inflation  targeting  is  that  we  only  care  about 
inflation. This misunderstanding is propagated in the media through a narrow interpretation of 
the  regime  by  some  of  its  critics.  For  example,  in  a  widely  quoted  article,  The  Failure  of 
Inflation Targeting, the 2001 Nobel Prize winner, Joseph Stiglitz writes that inflation targeting 
implies “whenever price growth exceeds a target level, interest rates should be raised” and 
hence is destined to failure. This is certainly not true since all inflation targeting central banks 
look  as  well  at  indicators  of  real  economic  stability  in  a  balancing  act.  The  framework  of 
inflation  targeting  as  is  currently  practiced  is  flexible  to  accommodate  secondary  policy 
objectives. One needs not to look further than our MPC statements that the Bank of Thailand 
is also concerned about economic growth in addition to price stability. Other things that we 
do look at include external stability, financial conditions of households, financial institutions , 
and corporate sectors, and fiscal sustainability. 
Another point that I would like to stress here is that, in the context of a small open economy 
like  ours,  taking  care  of  inflation  also  has  a  positive  impact  on  growth  through  a 
competitiveness  channel.  This  works  through  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  which  takes 
into  account  our  inflation  differentials  with  our  trading  partners  and  trading  competitors. 
Despite  the  recent  weakening  of  the  baht,  Thailand’s  real  effective  exchange  rate  actually 
appreciated  due 
therefore  erodes  price 
competitiveness  of  our  export  sector  which  is  perhaps  the  economy’s  only  reliable  growth 
engine at the moment. In the current environment where trying to squeeze more growth from 
domestic  demand  could  lead  to  the  situation  of  wage-price  spiral  where  wage  and  price 
increases  feed  in  each  other,  the  MPC’s  latest  decision  could  thus  also  be  viewed  as  an 
attempt to maintain growth along with price stability.  
 While there are certain limits to what inflation targeting can achieve, after all it is not a cure 
all medicine, the focus on price stability makes the regime suitable to the rapidly changing 
global environment. Just a few years ago, supply expansion in countries like China and India 
contributed to a downward pressure on global prices. Today, the tide has turned and it is now 
strong  demand  in  these  countries  that  fuel  rising  energy  and  commodity  prices.  Going 
forward, it is expected that global price swings may become more unpredictable, in terms of 
duration  and  turning  points.  In  this  context,  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  offers  the 
economy some protection from global price volatility. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me turn to address the second question on the future dynamism of Thai economy. In this 
regard, I would like to emphasize that the situation in Thailand is not as bad as you might 
think. In fact, the fundamentals and room for maneuvering the right policy mix remain strong. 
Allow me to elaborate. 
First,  Thailand  continues  to  preserve  a  strong external  position.  Our external  debt  to  GDP 
ratio  has  hit  an  all-time  low  since  1980,  recording  29.4  per  cent  last  year.  Our  foreign 
reserves have doubled within three years, increasing from 50 billion US Dollars by the end of 
2005 to more than 100 billion US Dollars at present day. The amount of foreign reserves is 
more than four times higher than short-term external debt. This gives us an ample room to 
safeguard against instability from volatile capital flow and exchange rate movements which 
are deemed out of line with the economic fundamentals if necessary. 
inflation.  High 
the  surge 
inflation 
to 
in 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2008
Second,  the  government’s  fiscal  position  continues  to  improve  as  reflected  by  the  falling 
trend of the public debt to GDP. Indeed, these improvements were the backbone of medium-
term economic stability and provide much cushion against various economic shocks in the 
short  term.  They  give  the  government  the  financial  flexibility  to  execute  policies  that 
temporarily alleviate the public’s inflation burden. It is no coincidence that over the past few 
years,  credit  rating  companies  have  affirmed  their  ratings  on  Thailand,  pointing  at  the 
strength of our fiscal and external position despite the economic downturn. Notwithstanding 
the difficult political climate in 2006, credit rating companies did not downgrade Thailand’s 
sovereign rating. Although a few agencies put Thailand on a negative watch list but those 
were removed a few months afterward. 
Third, the labor market shows no sign of rising unemployment rate, something that would be 
expected in a worsening business environment. But the tightness in the labor market may 
add inflationary pressure, a point in which I have already mentioned. 
Fourth,  the  private  sector  has  shown  much  resiliency  and  adaptability.  For  example,  in 
response  to  the  appreciation  of  the  baht,  exporters  have  made  increasing  uses  of  foreign 
exchange hedging instruments. At the same time, the increasingly diversified export market 
structure has provided Thai exporters with cushions against the current slowdown in major 
advanced  economies.  As  another  example,  many  private  firms,  burned  by  the  crisis 
experience,  no  longer  over-leverage  their  balance  sheets  and  turn  to  equity  and  retained 
earnings as major sources of funds.  
Fifth, the banking sector is now much healthier than even a few years ago. The BIS ratio of 
the  entire  banking  system  remained  high  at  15.3  per  cent  in  May.  Despite  the  economic 
slowdown, both ratios of gross NPL and net NPL to total loan declined slightly since the third 
quarter of last year. In fact, the outstanding amount of NPL declined in the last quarter. In 
addition, the implementation of IAS39 accounting standard in 2006-2007 and the preparation 
for the adoption of Basel II at the end of this year have together strengthened the stability of 
our  banking  system.  With  insignificant  exposures  to  collateralized  debt  obligation  (CDO) 
investments,  the  Thai  banking  sector  as  a  whole  is  also  immune  to  the  U.S.  sub-prime 
spillover.  
Last but not least, Thailand is among the world’s top places when it comes to the ease of 
starting and operating businesses. The recent report, “Doing Business 2008,” by the World 
Bank upgraded Thailand by two places. Despite all the storms we faced, we are now ranked 
at 15th place out of 178 countries for the most attractive destination to invest. This reflects a 
better  infrastructure  for  doing  businesses  in  Thailand.  The  improvement  was  cited  on  the 
back  of  E-Custom  system  introduced  since  October  2006.  Cost  reduction,  lesser  time 
consuming  and  fewer  procedures  for  imports  and  exports,  all  induce  efficiency  for 
international trades. Overall, we have strengthened the infrastructure or the micro aspects of 
doing businesses in Thailand. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In all, I believe that quality investors look at both economic performance and policy credibility. 
It  is  obvious  that  short-term  performance  is  not  difficult  to  achieve  but  a  consistent 
performance across horizon is a challenge. Getting the political will as well as policy mix and 
actions in the right direction is essential. The BOT has a clear stance and stands ready to 
secure the overall health of the Thai economy. The MPC has done its action last meeting 
and I believe we are on the right track. I need not remind you that Thailand is no stranger to 
difficult  challenges.  While  being  patient,  we  certainly  have  strong  fundamentals  for  the 
second wind. It is just a matter of time to come. 
At this critical juncture, the most the Bank of Thailand can do is to keep the macroeconomic 
environment  conducive  to  sustainable  growth  and  productivity  improvements.  The  key  to 
high-performance  economy  inevitably  lies  in  supply-side  policies  that  raise  the  economy’s 
potential growth.  
BIS Review 98/2008 
 5
The  fact  that  supply-side  policies  take  time  should  urge  the  government  to  hasten  such 
policies. However much conflict of interest between a fixed-term government and long-term 
policies may be, it is important to realize that raising productivity, and hence the economy’s 
potential  output,  is  ultimately  the  key  to  raise  economic  performance  without  provoking 
subsequent  instability.  As  mentioned  earlier,  Thailand  needs  to  be  more  resilient  to  oil 
shocks.  For  example,  it  is  now  a  good  opportunity  to  shape  up  our  logistic  system.  Much 
integration needs to be done to coordinate the use of rail, road, river, and air transportation. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
My  main  message  for  you  this  evening  is  that  the  key  for  a  successful  economy  is  to 
preserve  competitiveness  and  to  grow  at  the  potential  rate  as  well  as  raising  the  potential 
output. This is to ensure both the performance and the sustainability of an economy. Many 
central  banks  are  doing  this  through  inflation  targeting.  At  present,  the  risk  of  political 
uncertainty not only lies in terms of consumers and businesses’ confidence, but also in the 
efficiency  of  the  government  to  pursue  policies  that  raise  productivity.  As  negative  supply 
shocks persist, the better the job done by the government to enhance productivity, that is, to 
secure our potential output, the lesser the cost of economic stabilization. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 98/2008
