Rundheersing Bheenick: Comprehensive reflections on economic and 
financial activities in Mauritius during 2007 
Letter  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  to  stakeholders, 
Bank of Mauritius, 28 December 2007. 
 Dear Stakeholders 
As  you  may  be  aware,  in  its  endeavour  to  foster  a  rapid  and  sound  development  of  the 
financial  sector,  and  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has 
heightened  its  interaction  with  stakeholders  in  2007.  I  welcome  the  positive  response  of 
economic agents to the Bank’s new communication strategy and wish to emphasise that the 
Bank  is  committed  to  pursuing  this  strategy,  as  transparent  communication  is  crucial  in 
enhancing the credibility and impact of its policy decisions.  
The  participative  approach  adopted  by  the  Bank  has  permitted  prompt  handling  of  issues 
affecting the banking industry. The Bank hosted seven meetings of the Banking Committee 
in 2007, a  marked departure from  the previous quarterly schedule. Special meetings were 
convened  to  discuss  specific  issues  for  rapid  implementation.  I  have  to  thank  Chief 
Executives of banks for their collaboration and continued support in all the on-going projects. 
As  we  close  2007,  it  is  with  pleasure  that  I  review  developments  in  the  economic  and 
financial landscape during this year, and look forward to some of the most important tasks 
awaiting us in 2008.  
This year has seen a rebound in economic activity with real GDP growth rate forecast at 5.6 
per  cent  compared  to  an  estimated  5.0  per  cent  in  2006.  This  was  mainly  driven  by  the 
tourism and construction sectors where growth rates are forecast to jump from an estimated 
3.5 per cent and 5.2 per cent, respectively, in 2006 to 13.1 per cent and 15.0 per cent this 
year. These high growth rates compensated for (i) the slowdown to 3.5 per cent, from 4.0 per 
cent in 2006, forecast in Manufacturing despite a significant recovery noted in Textile, and (ii) 
the contraction of 6.8 per cent forecast in Agriculture, including sugarcane.  
Most  economic  indicators  have  improved  during  the  year.  Capital  formation,  excluding  the 
purchase of aircraft and marine vessel, accelerated. The unemployment rate went down to 
an estimated 8.8 per cent in 2007 compared to 9.1 per cent in 2006. The budget deficit fell to 
4.3  per  cent  of  GDP,  down  from  5.3  per  cent  in  2006,  as  Government  pursued  its  fiscal 
consolidation efforts. From January to October, broad money liabilities grew by 10.0 per cent 
while bank credit to the private sector increased by 5.2 per cent, compared to 8.6 per cent 
and 13.8 per cent in 2006. Inflation, which was at 8.9 per cent at end-2006, climbed to 10.7 
per cent in June before gradually trending down to stand at 9.1 per cent in November and is 
now expected to fall to 8.8 per cent in December. 
On  the  external  front,  during  the  first  three  quarters  of  this  year,  the  current  account 
registered a deficit of Rs8,659 million, with the deficit in the third quarter lower than the deficit 
recorded  during  the  same  period  last  year.  Foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  in  the  country 
from  January  to  September,  estimated  at  Rs9  billion,  was  already  higher  than  the  total  of 
Rs7.2 billion recorded in 2006. FDI flowed mainly from the United Kingdom and the United 
States  into  Tourism,  principally  the  Integrated  Resorts  Scheme.  As  a  result  of  the 
improvement  in  the  current  account  balance,  reflecting  combined  higher  surpluses  on  the 
services,  income  and  current  transfers  accounts,  and  higher  FDI  and  portfolio  flows,  the 
overall  balance  of  payments  showed  a  surplus  of  Rs12,114  million  up  to  September,  as 
against a deficit of Rs4,573 million in 2006. 
Against this background, expansion of the Financial Intermediation sector was sustained with 
a growth rate of 7.3 per cent forecast this year. The banking industry has been particularly 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 1
foreign-exchange  dealers 
dynamic, with the entry of new participants and existing banks carrying on the expansion of 
their local and regional branch network. Three licences to newcomers in the industry were 
due to be delivered this year. However, only one new licence has been issued. The other two 
proposed  licensees  have  instead  taken  over  two  existing  banks.  Three  new  branches 
opened in the country during the year and approval has been granted for the opening of a 
regional  branch.  In  addition,  27  new  Automated  Teller  Machines  were  installed  by  banks 
during the year. 
Market  players  continued  to  broaden  their  offer  of  banking  products  and  services  with 
competition growing fiercer for market share. New segments are opening up in the industry 
and next year will see additional entrants as the Bank is contemplating the issue of licences 
to more moneychangers. In this respect, the Bank has reviewed the regulations and licensing 
procedures  of  money-changers  and 
to  encourage  more 
competition and raise standards.  
In  general,  the  growth  in  banking  stems  not  only  from  domestic  operations  but  also  from 
international business. In fact, business conducted with non-residents has increased by 30 
per cent since last year, indicating that banking is surging beyond geographical boundaries, 
with  our  banks  able  to  compete  successfully  both  regionally  and  internationally.  It  may  be 
highlighted that out of total growth of Rs135 billion in total banking assets during the year, 
over 80 per cent is attributed to business conducted with non-residents and Global Business 
Licence holders. 
Banks are growing not only in size to meet the growing demands of a buoyant economy, but 
also  in  sophistication.  Needless  to  say,  increased  activity  in  the  sector  has  heightened 
competition  for  skilled  manpower,  giving  rise  to  lateral  staff  movement  and  even  staff 
poaching  in  many  cases.  Consequently,  the  sector  has  seen  a  sharp  rise  in  salaries  at 
middle-management and higher levels. 
The continuous evolution of the domestic financial environment and the need for domestic 
banks to keep up with competitors in an increasingly globalised economy has led the Bank to 
formulate  appropriate  strategies  in  various  domains  to  shape  the  Bank  for  the  future,  and 
review its internal organisation structure.  
In  2007,  the  Bank  implemented  a  number  of  changes  to  its  policy-making  process  and 
operations.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  was  set  up  on  23  April.  Following  the 
amendment  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  2004  in  August,  the  MPC  is  empowered  to 
formulate and determine the monetary policy of the Bank. The MPC consists of the Governor 
as Chairperson, the two Deputy Governors, two Board Directors, and three external persons 
having recognised experience in the field of economics, banking or finance, one of whom is a 
Professor  of  Monetary  Economics  at  the  University  of  Frankfurt,  Germany.  The  MPC  also 
benefits from the wide-ranging experience of an Adviser, a former Governor of the Bank of 
Argentina and the current Director of the Centre for Central Banking Studies of the Bank of 
England.  In  the  current  setup,  there  is  a  possibility  that  the  Bank’s  executives  may  find 
themselves in a minority position in the MPC.  
The  MPC  met  three  times  this  year  to  decide  on  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  The  key 
Repo rate was increased by 75 basis points at the June meeting as inflation was hovering in 
the double-digit region, and there were significant upside risks with regards to international 
commodity prices. The two subsequent meetings of the MPC maintained the tight stance of 
monetary policy taking into consideration domestic developments and the potential downside 
effects on the US economy of the sub-prime crisis. The outlook is that, barring any potential 
shocks stemming from high oil and commodity prices, inflation will continue on its downward 
trend.  
An important prerequisite in the fight against inflation is for the central bank to disseminate 
information effectively on monetary policy issues. As provided in the Bank of Mauritius Act 
2004, the Bank publishes a Monetary Policy Statement after each MPC meeting to explain 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2008
the  main  assessments  and  findings  of  the  MPC.  The  Statement  also  discloses  the  voting 
pattern of the MPC members. 
In the implementation of monetary policy, the Bank has as far as possible limited its market 
interventions  and  allowed  free  play  of  market  forces.  In  the  domestic  foreign  exchange 
market, the Bank intervened to sell foreign currencies for an amount of US$48.8 million to 
alleviate excess demand in the first two months of the year before purchasing an amount of 
US$252.8 million between February and April as the situation turned around and the rupee 
stabilised. With an appreciation in the rupee exchange rate of about 9.4 per cent against the 
US  dollar  from  January  up  to  November,  the  Bank  intervened  again  in  early  December  to 
purchase Euros 40.5 million from the market. In the same vein, the net foreign assets of the 
Bank are estimated at around Rs51 billion as at end-December, that is, an increase of some 
16 per cent since the beginning of January. 
In the domestic money market, this year provided the first occasion to test the new monetary 
policy framework introduced in December 2006. To reduce excess liquidity prevailing in the 
system and to keep the overnight interbank interest rates within the corridor around the key 
Repo rate, the Bank conducted a number of reverse repos and issued some Rs14 billion of 
Bank  of  Mauritius  Bills.  As  participation  at  the  weekly  auctions  did  not  always  reflect  the 
forecast excess liquidity positions of banks, and there seemed to be a risk that the Bank’s 
intervention  would  actually  lead  to  more  volatile  yields,  the  Bank  became  reluctant  to  use 
reverse repos after May.  
There seemed to be a wedge between effective excessive liquidity, as showed in the bidding 
behaviour of banks, and liquidity levels forecast by the Bank’s models. In an attempt to tackle 
this, a new facility in the form of a Special Deposit was established in November whereby 
banks were invited to deposit their excess funds with the Bank for a period of 14 days at a 
rate that was below the lower bound of the corridor. It is expected that further adjustments 
will be required in 2008 to the monetary policy framework to take into account the apparently 
quasi-permanent excess liquidity conditions in the domestic money market. 
In an effort to enhance market liquidity, improve the price-discovery process, and develop a 
more  effective  transmission  of  policy  decisions,  the  Bank  re-introduced  over-the-counter 
sales  of  Bills  and  Treasury  Notes  on  24  July.  The  number  of  primary  dealers  was  also 
increased  from  five  to  eight  to  spur  more  competition  in  the  secondary  market.  A  total  of 
Rs306 million of Bills and Notes have been sold over the counter to date. For comparison, 
since  January,  Bills  sold  on  the  Stock  Exchange  totalled  Rs118  million.  Generally,  the 
outcome of the measures to develop the secondary market has been fairly moderate but it 
constitutes a basis to build upon in the coming year. 
With a view to assisting the Bank to achieve its objectives, and given that real sector issues 
play an important part in monetary policy decisions, the Bank embarked in September on a 
series of consultations with private/real sector stakeholders to gauge their perceptions with 
regard to specific issues, such as the evolution of the main macroeconomic indicators, labour 
market  developments,  access  to  finance,  and  to  identify  the  domestic  and  external 
constraints they face. The Bank intends to maintain regular contact with stakeholders of the 
real sector as we need to weigh real sector issues more adequately in our policy decisions. 
The  implementation  of  Basel  II  by  the  March  2008  deadline  constituted  another  major 
challenge  for  the  Bank  this  year.  Substantial  progress  was  made  in  2007  towards  the 
implementation  of  the  standardised  approach  to  credit,  market  and  operational  risks.  The 
Bank has tried to adapt the Basel II framework to the specificities of the Mauritian banking 
sector, which is set to benefit substantially from the new capital adequacy framework. The 
Bank  adopted  a  collaborative  approach  with  commercial  banks  for  the  implementation  of 
Basel II, with working groups comprising both central bank and commercial bank Officers. A 
special Banking Committee meeting was held in September to review the implementation of 
Basel II by banks, which seem well poised to meet the set deadline. Although we are still at 
an early stage on this long journey, improvements in the risk management systems of banks 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 3
have  already  been  noted  as  the  requirements  of  Basel  II  are  gradually  being  applied  by 
banks. 
It  is  expected  that  Basel  II  compliance  will  create  the  required  platform  for  improving 
business  decisions  and  increasing  competitiveness  in  the  sector.  In  this  perspective,  and 
taking  into  consideration  changes  in  international  accounting  standards  and  the  legal 
framework, the Bank has been reviewing its Guidelines to enable a more effective capture of 
risk management and market disclosure. 
The challenge of Basel II has necessitated the training of staff in Basel II compliance. The 
Bank has deployed the necessary resources to that effect. The Bank, jointly with Deutsche 
Bank  (Mauritius)  Limited,  organised  a  training  course  aimed  at  the  Bank’s  staff  as  well  as 
staff of commercial banks on Basel II implementation. The Bank’s staff also attended courses 
offered by the Financial Stability Institute and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in 
Switzerland.  It  goes  without  saying  that  such  training  is  on-going  to  ensure  that  our  staff 
acquire specialised knowledge for successful implementation of Basel II.  
Still  on  the  supervisory  side,  and  as  part  of  the  process  of  promoting  a  more  structured 
collaboration and co-ordination between the two domestic regulatory and supervisory bodies, 
a Protocole D’Accord was signed on 12 July. A Joint Bank of Mauritius / Financial Services 
Commission  Co-ordination  Committee  was  set  up  to  activate  and  expand  on  the  existing 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  two  bodies  with  a  view  to  consolidating  the 
supervision of the financial sector and harmonising the regulatory framework.  
The  modernisation  of  the  cheque-clearing  system  in  Mauritius  has  reached  an  advanced 
stage, with the cheque truncation project expected to go live next year. Cheque truncation 
refers  to  the  process  by  which  cheques  are  cleared  electronically  without  any  physical 
movement. Banks can also utilise this technology to facilitate the clearing of cheques over 
the counter to provide a better service to their customers. Cheque truncation represents a 
paradigm  shift  in  the  processing  and  clearing  of  cheques  and  is  a  milestone  in  the 
modernisation  of  the  cheque  clearing  and  settlement  process  started  in  November  2002. 
Currently, it takes two days to clear a cheque after its presentation for clearing. Some 21,000 
cheques for an amount of Rs900 million are presented for clearing every day; this gives an 
indication of the scope for faster and more efficient cheque clearing.  
In its endeavour to enhance credit quality in the banking sector, the Bank is progressively 
lowering the reporting threshold for credit facilities at the Mauritius Credit Information Bureau 
(MCIB).  The  threshold,  which  stood  at  Rs100,000  for  individuals  and  Rs500,000  for 
corporates, was reduced to Rs25,000 for all categories in November, and as from 1 March 
2008,  the  threshold  will  be  abolished  altogether.  In  2008,  non-bank  deposit  taking 
institutions, in particular leasing companies, the Mauritius Housing Corporation, and possibly 
insurance and finance companies, will be joining the MCIB to enable a wider capture of credit 
data  for  better  decision-making.  It  is  expected  that  improving  overall  credit  quality  in  the 
financial sector will contribute to lower costs and narrow interest rate spreads, a subject of 
concern to us. As regards the MCIB itself, it should be noted that early this year, the Bank 
turned down the offer of a reputed rating agency to acquire the MCIB. 
During  the  year,  the  Bank  has  been  actively  setting  the  pace  for  the  implementation  of 
Islamic banking services in Mauritius so as to enrich the panoply of services already offered 
by the industry. The Banking Act 2004 was amended in August to accommodate the setting 
up of Islamic banking. In November, the Bank has been admitted as an Associate Member of 
the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board,  an  international  standard-setting  organisation  whose 
prime  objective  is  to  promote  and  enhance  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  Islamic 
financial services industry worldwide. 
The  Bank  is  presently  finalising  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that  will  govern 
institutions offering Islamic financial services. Existing banks can opt to offer such services 
through  a  window,  or  alternatively,  such  services  could  be  provided  through  a  full-fledged 
Islamic bank. Draft guidelines will be issued to the industry for consultation early next year. 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2008
in  September/October  and  has  already  submitted 
Striking  the  right  balance  between  regulation,  supervision  and  market  discipline  is  a  big 
challenge  for  all  regulators.  While  overregulation  may  impede  the  development  of  the 
financial  system  and  slow  down  growth,  deregulation  may  bring  about  banking  fragility. 
Therefore,  it  is  also  the  duty  of  all  market  players  to  act  in  a  responsible  manner.  The 
financial  system  of  Mauritius  was  evaluated  by  the  joint  IMF/World  Bank  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Programme (FSAP) mission during 2007. A first FSAP mission that assessed 
the overall financial sector in February has already submitted its Aide Memoire as well as an 
action  plan.  A  second  mission  conducted  a  thorough  examination  of  the  Anti  Money 
Laundering/Combating  the  Financing  of  Terrorism  (AML/CFT)  framework  and  practices  in 
Mauritius 
its  draft  report.  The 
recommendations  of  the  FSAP  missions  should  serve  as  a  basis  to  foster  sound 
development of the financial sector. 
The  Bank  has  also  received  Technical  Assistance  missions  from  the  IMF  on  Balance  of 
Payments  statistics  and  on  the  functioning  of  the  foreign  exchange  market.  In  addition,  a 
“Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes” mission of the IMF conducted a review 
of  Mauritius’  statistical  systems  and  assessed  its  data  dissemination  practices  against  the 
prescriptions  of  the  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standards  in  early  December.  Following 
discussions with data producing agencies, and responses from data users, the mission has 
developed a set of recommendations designed to increase our adherence to internationally 
accepted statistical practices and enhance the analytical usefulness of produced statistics. 
The Bank intends to implement these recommendations early next year. 
One area where progress has been limited during the year relates to the designation of an 
Officer to be the Ombudsman for banks, as provided by Section 96 of the Banking Act 2004. 
According  to  the  Act,  one  of  the  functions  of  the  Ombudsman  would  be  to  deal  with 
complaints against financial institutions by their customers. Consultations are on-going with 
the Commissioner for the Protection of Borrowers and the Mauritius Bankers Association to 
find a way forward on this issue. 
In 2007, the Bank continued its active involvement in regional and international fora. The 6th 
meeting of Governors of the Eastern Africa Sub-Regional Committee of the Association of 
African  Central  Banks  (AACB)  was  held  in  Mauritius  from  9  to  10  May  2007.  On  that 
occasion, the chairmanship of the Committee was passed on to the Bank for one year. The 
Bank  has  also  been  deeply  engaged  in  the  Southern  African  Development  Community 
(SADC)  and  the  Common  Market  for  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa  (COMESA)  committees 
and  workshops  to  achieve  macroeconomic  convergence,  among  other  goals.  The  Bank 
holds the permanent chair of the Sub-Committee of SADC Banking Supervisors.  
The  relationships  with  other  central  banks  in  the  region  were  further  reinforced  on  the 
occasion of our 40th anniversary when the Bank had the honour to receive Governor Y.V. 
Reddy from the Reserve Bank of India and Governor P. Acquah from the Bank of Ghana to 
deliver  memorial  lectures.  We  expect  even  more  co-operation  next  year  with  the  visits  of 
Governors from the central banks of Kenya, Belgium, and France.  
During the year, the Bank was represented at a number of meetings held by regional and 
international organisations. I attended the World Bank Group and the International Monetary 
Fund 2007 Spring and Annual Meetings held in Washington DC, USA. I also represented the 
Bank  at  several  meetings  of  Governors  of  central  banks,  notably  the  BIS  Annual  General 
Meeting in Switzerland, the BIS Roundtable of Governors in South Africa, and the meetings 
of Governors of francophone countries, of the Commonwealth, and of the AACB. I was also 
privileged to attend the Pre-Monetary Policy Committee Meeting of the Bank of England in 
November as a special guest of Governor King. 
The  First  Deputy  Governor  attended  the  meetings  of  the  Offshore  Group  of  Banking 
Supervisors on two occasions, in London and in Macao. He also represented the Governor 
at  the  FICCI  –  IBA  Conference  on  “Global  Banking  Paradigm  Shift”  in  India,  and  led  a 
delegation of ten officers from the Bank of Mauritius and commercial banks to Hong Kong 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 5
and  Singapore  on  a  fact-finding  mission  in  connexion  with  the  implementation  of  cheque 
truncation in Mauritius.  
The Second Deputy Governor attended the Meeting of the SADC Committee of Central Bank 
Officials  and  Governors  in  Tanzania,  as  well  as  the  AACB  meetings  in  Ethiopia.  He  also 
attended two conferences on Financial System Strategy and Opportunities and Challenges 
on  Development  for  Africa  in  the  Global  Arena  in  Nigeria  and  Ethiopia,  respectively.  He 
represented  the  Governor  on  two  occasions,  at  the  50th  Anniversary  Celebrations  of  the 
Bank of Ghana, and at the Board Meeting of the African Export-Import Bank in South Africa. 
The Chief Economist represented the Bank twice during the year in the SADC and COMESA 
Committees of Central Bank Governors. He also attended the Ad-Hoc Expert Group meeting 
of  the  UN  Economic  Commission  for  Africa-Southern  Africa  Office,  and  the  COMESA 
Committee of Central Bank Experts on Finance and Monetary Affairs. The Head of Corporate 
Services represented the Bank at a Symposium on Central Bank Independence.  
This  year,  the  Bank  celebrated  its  40th  anniversary  and  we  used  this  event  as  a  good 
opportunity to revamp the Bank’s corporate image. A number of activities were undertaken to 
this  end,  amongst  which  a  Charity  Dinner  to  aid  Epilepsy  and  Alzheimer  associations, 
sponsorship  of  the  Inter-Clubs  Youth  Championships  for  boys  and  girls,  a  blood  donation 
day, and the turning of the first sod for the establishment of a bamboo garden in the Midlands 
region.  
The  festivities  also  had  another  dimension.  The  Bank  initiated  a  Financial  Literacy 
Programme (FLP) aimed at raising the level of awareness among the public about the roles 
and functions of the Bank and of the financial system in general. The FLP, which is expected 
to be an on-going programme, comprised such activities as an Essay-writing Competition, a 
Monetary Policy Challenge, a series of memorial lectures with key guest speakers on money, 
banking and finance, and a Consumer Education week. A banknote design competition was 
launched in preparation for a new family of banknotes, and a special commemorative coin 
marking our 40th anniversary as well as a new twenty-rupee coin was launched. 
As it reached its 40th year, and in order to meet the challenges ahead with greater efficiency, 
the  Bank  engaged  in  a  major  restructuring  of  its  internal  organisation  with  the  help  of 
resource persons from Bank Negara Malaysia. The structure is now flatter, with the creation 
of Divisions within the Bank that are responsible for particular focused areas. The Bank has 
adopted an open and transparent staffing strategy, with the promotion of thirty-nine existing 
staff  and  recruitment  of  fourteen  additional  staff  from  outside  to  ensure  necessary 
competencies to build a workforce that would ultimately add value to the organisation and 
contribute directly towards the attainment of our organisational goals.  
The Bank has also enhanced its training strategy to develop the full effectiveness of our most 
important  resource,  our  people.  Sixty  members  of  staff  have  followed  training  courses  or 
seminars worldwide at, or under the auspice of, such institutions as the World Bank and the 
IMF, the United Nations, the BIS, SADC, and other central banks. 
The Bank’s communication strategy has been reviewed. Its website has been re-designed in 
line with latest developments in technology and information dissemination engines. The new 
website was launched in October 2007. It provides timelier information on a broader range of 
subjects.  
In  2008,  the  Bank  intends  to  revisit  its  approach  to  the  dissemination  of  data  and  other 
publications. The concept of a centralised database was introduced during the year and work 
has already started to that effect. We are being guided in that project by the Reserve Bank of 
India, and the central database should be operational towards the end of next year.  
As part of good corporate governance practices, thirteen statutory Board meetings were held 
during the year. For the first time, a two-day retreat regrouping Board Directors, our external 
legal counsel, and top Bank management was organised to discuss corporate governance 
issues.  The  event  was  held  in  Rodrigues,  and  we  were  pleased  to  have  among  us  the 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2008
Secretary-General of the Central Bank Governance Forum of the BIS as resource person to 
share his experience of other central banks on governance matters generally.  
For the year ended 30 June 2007, the Bank realised an operating surplus of Rs1,763 million. 
It remitted Rs900 million to Government, a 50 per cent increase over the amount transferred 
the preceding financial year, after making adequate provision for open market operations and 
effecting necessary statutory transfers.  
The  move  to  the  Bank  Tower,  our  new  premises,  has  almost  been  completed.  The  old 
building  will  be  refurbished  to  accommodate  a  Knowledge  Management  Centre,  an 
Auditorium, a Conference Room, and a Museum. The development of the Rodrigues branch 
was also a priority for the Bank during this year as we explored better ways of serving the 
community there. The foundation stone for a new building for the Rodrigues branch was laid 
on 24 November.  
While the international economic outlook may be marred by the recent sub-prime crisis, we 
expect  Mauritius  to  withstand  the  effects  of  the  crisis  reasonably  well.  Strong  growth  in 
tourism and a well-behaved currency augur well for 2008. Of course, we do not expect the 
sailing  to  be  plain.  The  Bank  has  already  expressed  its  concerns  about  the  financing 
arrangements for the Integrated Resorts Scheme and highlighted the need to guard against 
speculative  asset  bubbles.  Several  challenges,  notably  on  the  inflation  front,  and  those 
arising  from  the  erosion  of  our  trade  preferences  and  growing  global  competitiveness,  will 
provide  a  severe  test  for  the  resiliency  of  our  economy,  and  of  our  financial  sector  in 
particular, and indeed of our society and country as well.  
As this year closes, I wish to express my thanks to all those who have contributed in one way 
or another to the fulfilment of our mission throughout the year. In particular, I wish to thank 
Chief Executives of banks and the Mauritius Bankers Association for their collaboration and 
continued support in all the on-going projects, the Institute for Consumer Protection and the 
Association  des  Consommateurs  de  l’Ile  Maurice  for  their  help  during  the  Consumer 
Education week, the Honourable Minister of Agro Industry & Fisheries who leased a plot of 
land for the establishment of our bamboo garden, and the Island Commissioner of Rodrigues 
who leased the plot of land for the construction of our Rodrigues branch.  
In closing, I must record my gratitude to the Prime Minister for his constant support since he 
called upon me to take up the position of Governor of the Bank in mid-February. I must also 
extend  my  thanks  to  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Development, Board members, and members of the MPC for their help during the year. A 
special “thank you” to members of the staff of the Bank at all levels, and in particular to my 
Deputy Governors. 
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  we  have  moved  forward  on  many  fronts  during  this  year.  I  am 
confident that we will pursue our mission in the coming year with even greater dedication. 
May I wish you and your family a very happy New Year 2008. 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 7
