José Manuel González-Páramo: Evaluating the resilience of the 
Eurosystem’s operational framework under stress 
Closing remarks by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of 
the European Central Bank, at the Second Symposium of the ECB-CFS Research Network 
on 
in  Europe”,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
14 February 2008. 
“Capital  Markets  and  Financial 
Integration 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The ECB-CFS research network was launched almost six years ago to promote research on 
capital  markets  and  financial  integration  in  Europe.  The  network  has  been  extraordinarily 
successful in doing just that, by addressing a wide range of topics in a series of workshops 
and symposia.  
This symposium is taking place at a time when financial markets have been put under stress 
and  the  financial  world  is  struggling  with  the  consequences.  This  episode  clearly 
demonstrates  that  research  on  capital  markets  is  as  important  as  ever,  as  the  underlying 
causes  of  the  turmoil  and  their  consequences  need  to  be  identified  and  addressed.  I  will 
conclude  this  symposium  by  evaluating  the  resilience  of  the  Eurosystem’s  operational 
framework  under  stress,  drawing  tentative  conclusions  from  its  performance  during  the 
ongoing  turmoil  in  financial  markets.  In  this  respect,  I  would  like  to  underscore  the 
importance that central banks attach to well-developed capital markets, especially in stressful 
times. 
Introduction 
1.  
As  you  are  aware,  the  turmoil  originated  in  segments  of  the  financial  market  that  were 
seemingly  unrelated  to  the  Eurosystem’s  sphere  of  interest  and  were,  moreover,  in  a 
different part of the world. Still, the consequences of that turmoil for the Eurosystem’s ability 
to conduct monetary policy quickly became evident as those extreme developments spilled 
over into money markets and, in particular, had a strong impact on interbank lending in the 
Eurosystem money markets. 
A central bank’s ability to steer short-term money market rates is, of course, a prerequisite in 
order  for  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  to  function,  as  monetary  policy 
impulses are then transmitted to longer maturities. I will briefly outline some elements of the 
Eurosystem’s operational framework that have proved crucial in order for the ECB to be able 
to continue to influence short-term money market rates in spite of the difficult situation in the 
financial markets. I will argue that the Eurosystem’s framework has proven to be adequately 
equipped to address stressful situations of this type.  
The design of the ECB’s operational framework 
2.  
The operational framework of the Eurosystem was chosen with great care with a view to its 
smooth  functioning  in  both  normal  and  stressful  times.  It  aims  to  steer  short-term  money 
market rates close to the main policy rate in a smooth and efficient manner, with the primary 
aim  of  implementing  monetary  policy  decisions.  It  consists  of  some  elements  that  are 
regularly employed and others that can be activated should the need arise. 
In  particular,  the  framework  foresees,  on  the  one  hand,  regular  weekly  and  monthly  open 
market  operations,  which  are  the  standard  main  channels  for  the  flow  of  liquidity  to  the 
banking sector. At the same time, standing facilities are available to all counterparties at any 
time,  meaning  that  banks  can  deposit  or  borrow  overnight  liquidity  in  unlimited  amounts, 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 1
provided that they have adequate collateral available. On the other hand, the ECB can use 
the tools provided by the operational framework with a high degree of flexibility, should the 
need arise. Some of this flexibility has been employed in recent months – for instance in the 
occasional special provision or absorption of liquidity overnight, or, on one specific occasion, 
in a change in the duration of main refinancing operations. 
By comparison with other central banks, several features of the Eurosystem’s framework are 
noteworthy.  First,  the  outstanding  volume  in  refinancing  operations  is  fairly  large,  tending 
before the start of the turmoil to be around 20 times that of the Federal Reserve. This implies 
that banks need to borrow a fairly large amount from the ECB on a regular basis. Moreover, 
because  of  the  relatively  large  reserve  requirements  faced  by  Eurosystem  counterparties, 
this means that the ECB needs to intervene on a larger scale in exceptional circumstances. 
Second, the Eurosystem has a very large number of counterparties for its operations. And 
finally, the ECB accepts a wide range of collateral both in its open market operations and for 
its marginal lending facility. 
The design of the operational framework is closely related to the structure of the euro area 
capital  markets.  For  example,  the  large  set  of  eligible  collateral  ensures  that  market 
participants are not hampered in their participation in the Eurosystem’s operations as a result 
of  their  country  of  residence.  In  a  similar  vein,  the  large  number  of  counterparties  in  the 
Eurosystem’s operations ensures that the different degrees of concentration in the banking 
industries of the various countries does not affect banks’ access to liquidity. 
The operational framework not only reflects the structure of European capital markets; it also 
influences  it.  Again,  the  collateral  framework  serves  as  a  good  example.  Namely,  the  fact 
that an asset is eligible as collateral for the Eurosystem’s operations increases its value for 
the holder and leads to a premium reflecting this value. The operational framework thereby 
influences the pricing of assets, and possibly also market participants’ willingness to accept 
them. Moreover, the fact that there is a single list of acceptable collateral has contributed to 
an  increase  in  the  cross-border  use  of  collateral  and  thereby  played  an  important  role  in 
fostering European financial integration. 
Evaluation of the performance of the framework under stress 
3.  
Since its inception the operational framework of the Eurosystem has been put to the test on 
several occasions. One such occasion was the management of the cash changeover in early 
2002;  another  test  of  the  resilience  of  the  framework  came  after  the  terrorist  attacks  in 
September  2001.  The  present  market  turmoil  provides  a  new  challenge  to  the  framework, 
perhaps the biggest so far. Let me briefly summarise the way in which the different features 
of the framework have proved to be important. 
First of all, the flexibility of the operational framework has proven to be extremely valuable, 
because  it  has  allowed  the  ECB  to  adjust  its  liquidity  supply  at  any  time  in  line  with  the 
changing demand for central bank balances. 
In this regard, let me stress one particularly important feature of the framework, namely the 
strict  separation  of  actions  related  to  liquidity  policy  from  the  monetary  policy  stance.  The 
technical  measures  that  have  been  employed  over  recent  months  have  –  contrary  to 
widespread  belief  –  not  had  an  impact  on  the  overall  liquidity  provision,  defined  as  the 
banking sector’s current account holdings with us. This is because all the additional liquidity 
provided has subsequently been compensated for by means of the provision of less liquidity 
later on. What has changed has simply been the timing of the provision of liquidity to banks. 
It is important to stress this – particularly at the moment, with risks to price stability clearly on 
the upside – in order to avoid a misunderstanding regarding links between liquidity policy and 
inflation. 
The second feature of the framework that has proved to be very useful has been the large 
number of counterparties in the ECB’s operations. The ECB has been able to reach a large 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2008
number of banks in its open market operations at a time when the money market has been 
working  imperfectly.  As  a  result,  the  Eurosystem  has  continued  to  be  able  to  strongly 
influence money market rates. 
Third,  several  features  of  the  collateral  framework  have  been  important,  notably  the  wide 
range of eligible collateral, which has made it possible for banks (in their operations with the 
central  bank)  to  economise  on  those  few  assets,  such  as  government  bonds,  that  have 
continued to be tradable throughout the turmoil. In this respect, the framework has supported 
the continued functioning of capital markets in general. At the same time, the single list of 
collateral,  which  specifies  unambiguously  all  assets  that  are  eligible,  has  facilitated  banks’ 
liquidity management under stress. This has contributed to the continued smooth conduct of 
open market operations. 
Let me make clear that those assets that have been under general scrutiny over the last few 
months, such as risky forms of mortgage-backed commercial paper, are not included in the 
Eurosystem’s  list  of  eligible  collateral.  While  asset-backed  securities  are  accepted  as 
collateral in our operations, this applies only to the highest tranches of those securities, the 
credit risk of which is assessed as being very low. 
Conclusion 
4.  
I would like to conclude by stressing that the ECB has, with its regular set of tools, been able 
to stabilise short-term money market rates during the ongoing turmoil.  
Several features of the framework have been – and continue to be – important in this regard. 
In normal times, the regularity and predictability of operations (such as the conduct of weekly 
main refinancing operations with predictable allotment amounts) is useful in order to stabilise 
money market rates. Indeed, with the benefit of several years of experience, the Eurosystem 
and its counterparties have learned to interpret and predict each other’s actions. This has led 
to  stable  behaviour  in  banks’  participation  in  the  ECB’s  operations  and  the  smooth 
transmission of monetary policy signals.  
In stressful times, some other features have proved to be very useful. The flexibility of the 
framework  is  one  such  feature  (for  instance,  the  ability  to  conduct  special  fine-tuning 
operations  or  to  adjust  the  amount  of  liquidity  provided  in  main  refinancing  operations); 
another is the broad access to operations, in terms of both eligible collateral and the number 
of counterparties. 
The functioning of capital markets has supported the success of these operations. However, 
the continued low marketability of many assets limits the use of such assets as collateral in 
market transactions, and this has had implications for the markets’ willingness to lend and 
borrow  on  the  money  markets.  I  would  hope  that  capital  markets  will  continue  to  develop 
further in this respect so that markets are, in the future, even better equipped to cope with 
such a situation. 
Conclusion of the symposium  
5.  
Ladies and gentlemen, today’s symposium has very much helped to enrich our knowledge 
about  capital  markets  and  the  state  of  financial  integration  in  Europe,  and  we  have  all 
benefited  greatly  from  several  interesting  and  stimulating  discussions.  This  second 
symposium organised by the ECB-CFS research network is a forward-looking event. Just as 
the  previous  symposium,  which  took  place  in  Frankfurt  in  May  2004,  saw  the  network’s 
activities extended for another three years, this second symposium will launch the third stage 
of  the  ECB-CFS  network,  the  purpose  of  which  will  be  to  stimulate  research  cooperation 
between  distinguished  academics,  policy-makers  and  industry  experts,  looking  at:  financial 
systems  as  risk  allocators  and  risk  distributors;  the  integration  and  development  of  retail 
finance;  and  financial  modernisation,  governance  and  the  integration  of  the  European 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 3
financial  system  into  global  markets.  The  very  fact  that  the  network’s  activities  have  been 
further extended testifies to our certainty as regards its continuing success as a platform for 
policy-relevant financial research.  
In this regard, I would like to draw your attention to the next ECB-CFS conference, which will 
be hosted by Česká národní banka in Prague on 20 and 21 October 2008. The title of this 
event will be “The market for retail financial services: development, integration and economic 
effects”. Details of the programme and a call for papers can be found on our website. We 
look forward to receiving contributions of the same high quality as those presented over the 
last two days.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2008
