Frederic S Mishkin: Global financial turmoil and the world economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Frederic  S  Mishkin,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Caesarea  Forum  of  the  Israel  Democracy  Institute,  Eliat,  Israel, 
2 July 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 It is a great pleasure to be back in Israel. I last was here in 1971 and can see that much has 
changed since then. And it is a great honor to be introduced by the professor who taught me 
monetary theory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the 1970s. Let me also say 
that  over  the  past  year,  as  we  at  the  Federal  Reserve  have  had  to  deal  with  the  recent 
problems  in  financial  markets,  I  have  gained  an  even  deeper  appreciation  for  the  many 
contributions you made as the first deputy managing director of the International Monetary 
Fund, guiding its response to the Mexican crisis, the Russian default, the Asian crisis, the 
collapse of Long-Term Capital Management, Brazil's devaluation, and the early stages of the 
Argentine  crisis.  Your  expertise  in  managing  financial  crises  is  surely  unparalleled,  and 
having you in the central banking world right now helps us all sleep better at night.  
As  you  well  know,  financial  markets  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  have  been  under 
considerable strain for almost a year now. Speaking as a central banker soon to return to the 
relatively  tranquil  ivory  tower  of  Columbia  University,  I  don't  think  it  is  far  off  the  mark  to 
characterize the turmoil of the past year as one of the worst financial shocks that the United 
States  has  confronted  since  the  Great  Depression.  However,  although  the  U.S.  economy 
clearly has slowed, aggressive actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks as 
well  as  fiscal  stimulus  have  helped  us  weather  the  storm  better  than  we  would  have 
otherwise.  
Let me start with a brief overview of the financial market turmoil, and then I'll briefly discuss 
what central banks have done to help restore health to the financial system. Finally, I'll turn to 
the implications for monetary policy and the economic outlook.1  
The financial turmoil 
Well-functioning  financial  markets  are  crucial  to  maximizing  sustainable  economic  growth 
because they channel funds to the people with the most productive investment opportunities. 
However, financial markets can do their job well only when they solve information problems 
that would otherwise impede the efficient allocation of credit to worthy borrowers. The history 
of financial development can be characterized as a process in which innovation tends to lead 
to  improvements  in  the  quality  of  information,  and  this,  in  turn,  enables  new  financial 
products and markets to develop. Indeed, in the past decade or so, technological innovations 
and  financial  market  liberalization  improved  the  flow  of  information  and  capital  to  broader 
groups  of  people.  For  example,  the  microfinance  revolution  in  developing  countries  has 
made  capital  available  to  many  poor,  small  entrepreneurs.  In  the  United  States,  financial 
innovation has recently manifested itself partly in the development of the market for subprime 
mortgages. While that market had serious weaknesses that eventually imposed large costs 
on  many  borrowers  and  their  communities,  it  also  brought  considerable  benefits  to  many 
others who were able to take advantage of responsible products never before available. As a 
                                                 
1   David  Bowman,  Fang  Cai,  Linda  Kole,  Michael  Palumbo,  and  Dan  Sichel,  members  of  the  Board's  staff, 
contributed  to  the  preparation  of  these  remarks.  The  views  expressed  are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily 
represent the views of other members of the Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 1
result, they found themselves far better off financially than they probably would have been 
otherwise.  As  this  recent  experience  suggests,  financial  liberalization  and  innovation  bring 
many benefits but can also create information and incentive problems that lead to mistakes. 
When  mistakes  of  this  nature  become  evident,  financial  markets  can  seize  up,  with 
potentially significant adverse consequences for the economy.  
Advances in information technology and financial innovations in recent decades encouraged 
new  lending  products  and  faster  securitization  of  debt.  This  lowered  transaction  costs  and 
contributed  to  a  "democratization  of  credit"  –  that  is,  the  extension  of  credit  to  a  wider 
spectrum of possible borrowers than in the past. In the United States, a potential customer 
with an Internet connection could quickly fill out an online form, and a mortgage broker could 
rapidly price a loan with the help of credit-scoring technology. The resulting mortgages were 
bundled  together  to  produce  mortgage-backed  securities,  which  could  then  be  sold  off  to 
investors. Advances in financial engineering took the securitization process even further by 
carving  mortgage-backed  securities  into  more-complicated  structured  products,  such  as 
collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), or even CDOs of CDOs, with an eye to tailoring the 
credit risks of various types of assets to risk profiles desired by different kinds of investors. 
All seemed well as long as the economy – particularly, the housing market – was booming, 
and  credit  became  more  and  more  available.  But  when  the  housing  market  turned  down, 
substantial problems were exposed. 
The subprime crisis exposed problems with the securitization of mortgages. In particular, it 
became  painfully  clear  how  poor  the  underwriting  and  credit-risk  analysis  were  for  a  wide 
range  of  products.  Some  appraisers,  brokers,  and  investment  banks  were  motivated  by 
transaction fees and had little stake in the ultimate performance of the loans they helped to 
arrange.  Many  securitized  products  were  complex,  and  the  ownership  structure  of  the 
underlying  assets  was  opaque.  Investors  relied  heavily  on  credit  ratings  instead  of 
conducting due diligence themselves, and credit rating agencies failed to fulfill their raison 
d'etre.  The  result  has  been  rising  defaults,  particularly  in  the  subprime  mortgage  markets, 
with losses to both investors and financial institutions.  
The  ultimate  losses  from  the  recent  residential  mortgage-market  meltdown  have  been 
estimated  by  Wall  Street  analysts  at  about  $500  billion  –  less  than  3  percent  of  the 
outstanding  $22  trillion  in  U.S.  equities.2  Why  did  a  relatively  small  amount  of  losses  on 
subprime mortgage loans lead to such broad-based financial disruption? After all, a 3 percent 
decline in stock market prices sometimes happens on a daily basis with hardly a ripple in the 
U.S. economy. 
In part, the outsized impact of mortgage losses on broader financial markets probably stems 
from the fact that they exposed a more extensive set of problems in financial intermediation 
that were not limited to the original subprime loans. The liquidity shock that hit us in August 
has been described by one of my colleagues as a global margin call on virtually all leveraged 
positions.3 The liquidity shock quickly brought an end to the credit boom that preceded it, as 
a striking loss of confidence in credit ratings and an accompanying revaluation of risks led 
investors to pull back from a wide range of securities, especially structured credit products. 
Along the way, the inadequacies of the business models of many large financial institutions 
were exposed, and these models are now in the process of significant re-examination and 
rehabilitation. 
As  has  happened  in  the  past,  the  long-run  benefits  of  financial  innovations  were  easier  to 
anticipate 
the  problems.  The  originate-to-distribute  model  of  securitization, 
unfortunately, created some severe incentive problems – or agency problems – in which the 
than 
                                                 
2   These figures are taken from Greenlaw and others (2008). 
3   Warsh (2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2008
agent (the originator of the loans) did not have the incentives to act fully in the interest of the 
principal  (the  ultimate  holder  of  the  loan).  Notably,  the  incentive  structures  often  tied 
originator revenue to loan volume rather than to the quality of the loans being passed up the 
chain.  These  agency  problems  resulted  in  lower  underwriting  standards,  giving  borrowers 
with weaker financial positions access to larger loans than they should have had. Investors in 
mortgage-backed  securities  apparently  ignored  the  importance  of  these  agency  problems 
and  did  not  adequately  understand  the  risk  characteristics  of  the  securities  they  were 
holding.  The  practices  in  place  to  align  the  incentives  of  the  originators,  securitizers,  and 
resecuritizers with the underlying risks proved to be woefully inadequate.  
In retrospect, it is clear that investors were too reliant on credit ratings: Because many of the 
securities were rated very highly by the credit rating agencies, investors did not understand 
the  underlying  risk  and  had  a  false  sense  of  safety.  Many  structured  finance  products 
experienced multiple-tier downgrades, a development that is unheard of for more traditional 
securities  such  as  corporate  bonds.  This  episode  was  a  jarring  wake-up  call  to  investors 
regarding the risk properties of all structured finance products. The credit ratings agencies' 
failure to correctly assess these underlying risks further undermined investor confidence and 
worsened market worries about when the next shoe might drop. 
When these problems came to light, investors – including leveraged financial institutions – 
took large losses as the values of mortgage-related assets were marked down in anticipation 
of higher defaults on the underlying collateral. The market for newly issued subprime and alt-
A mortgage-backed securities virtually closed, and the availability of jumbo mortgages dried 
up.  Banks  were  caught  with  assets  they  couldn't  securitize,  which  put  further  pressure  on 
their capital positions.  
Central bank actions 
As  the  liquidity  crisis  began  in  August,  central  banks  immediately  responded  by  pumping 
large amounts of funds into overnight markets. The Federal Reserve conducted several large 
operations  in  the  federal  funds  market,  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  conducted 
special operations to inject overnight liquidity at the same time, as did the Bank of Japan, the 
Bank of Canada, and many other central banks. The Federal Open Market Committee also 
began to ease monetary policy in September as it grew concerned about the impact that the 
contraction in housing activity and a possible credit crunch could have on economic growth 
more  broadly.  These  actions  quickly  brought  overnight  interest  rates  down,  but  financial 
institutions remained reluctant to lend to each other for any but the very shortest maturities, 
prompting  central  banks  to  take  several  extraordinary  steps  to  help  support  longer-term 
funding markets.  
Many central banks increased their longer-maturity lending and expanded the set of assets 
they accepted as collateral to further help banks that found themselves with suddenly illiquid 
assets. The ECB, which had regularly auctioned longer-term funds, increased both the size 
and frequency of those auctions. The Bank of England and the Bank of Canada conducted 
similar term funding operations in their own currencies. The Federal Reserve announced the 
creation  of  the  Term  Auction  Facility  (TAF)  to  provide  secured  term  funding  to  eligible 
depository  institutions,  and  it  also  established  swap  lines  with  the  ECB  and  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  which  provided  dollar  funds  that  those  central  banks  could  lend  in  their 
jurisdictions.  
As market conditions once again worsened in March and investors pulled back from lending 
against  all  but  the  safest  assets,  the  Federal  Reserve  established  the  Term  Securities 
Lending  Facility,  which  allows  primary  dealers  to  swap  a  range  of  less-liquid  assets  for 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 3
Treasury  securities  in  the  Federal  Reserve's  portfolio  for  terms  of  about  one  month.4  The 
Bank  of  England  introduced  a  similar  type  of  facility  in  April  as  the  U.K.  mortgage  market 
showed increasing signs of stress, unveiling a plan to swap securities backed by mortgages 
for government bonds for a period of up to three years.  
Finally,  when  the  liquidity  position  of  Bear  Stearns  deteriorated  rapidly  in  mid-March,  the 
Federal  Reserve,  in  close  consultation  with  the  Treasury  Department,  judged  that  it  was 
appropriate  to  use  its  emergency  authority  to  provide  secured  funding  to  Bear  Stearns 
through JPMorgan Chase. To address liquidity at other primary dealers, the Federal Reserve 
again  used  its  emergency  lending  authority  to  create  the  Primary  Dealer  Credit  Facility 
(PDCF),  which  provides  a  backstop  source  of  liquidity  to  primary  dealers  similar  to  that 
available to depository institutions through the discount window. Borrowing from the PDCF to 
date  has  been  fairly  substantial.  Weekly-average  borrowing  levels  peaked  at  about 
$37 billion in late March but have subsequently declined. 
In sum, the Federal Reserve and other major central banks have taken aggressive actions 
that  have  helped  us  through  some  uncharted  territory.  Well-functioning,  liquid  financial 
markets  are  essential  to  economic  prosperity.  Had  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  central 
banks not stepped in and acted with appropriate vigor to provide liquidity, the consequences 
for the real economy very likely would have been quite severe. Public liquidity, however, is 
only an imperfect substitute for private liquidity. Although it is critical that the Federal Reserve 
acts as a lender of last resort when financial stability is threatened, the efficient allocation of 
capital is best promoted by competitive financial markets and institutions. However, the flow 
of credit has been impeded by the developments I outlined previously. Financial markets and 
institutions  will  be  able  to  resume  their  proper  roles  in  allocating  capital  and  supporting 
economic  growth  only  when  confidence  in  them  recovers.  And  it  is  clear  that  financial 
institutions  have  some  way  to  go  toward  reforming  business  models  and  practices.  Large 
financial institutions in the United States and Europe have reported credit losses and asset 
write-downs  amounting  to  more  than  $375  billion  and  have  been  working  to  repair  their 
balance sheets by raising new capital from a wide range of sources. This process will take 
time, but at least we can see some progress. 
This discussion brings us up to the present moment. The period of extreme stress seems to 
have abated, and financial markets are showing some tentative signs of revival. Reflecting 
pressures  in  short-term  bank  funding  markets,  London  interbank  offered  rates  over 
comparable-maturity  overnight  index  swap  rates  rose  to  near  record  highs  in  March  and 
April;  although  these  spreads  remain  high  by  historical  standards,  they  have  narrowed 
somewhat  over  the  past  two  months,  one  indication  that  conditions  may  be  improving. 
Spreads  between  yields  on  corporate  bonds  and  yields  on  Treasury  securities  have  also 
narrowed since March, as have spreads on credit default swaps for nonfinancial firms across 
a  wide  range  of  industries.  However,  significant  strains  persist.  Banks  are  tightening  their 
lending  standards,  and  conditions  could  worsen  again  should  the  economic  outlook 
deteriorate further. 
The economic outlook 
Let me now turn to a brief discussion of the current economic outlook and how the financial 
turmoil  we  have  recently  been  experiencing  has  affected  it.  Unfortunately,  just  as  the 
problems  in  financial  markets  have  begun  to  abate,  commodity  prices  have  reached  new 
heights, which clearly could take a toll on the U.S. economy as well as on the economies of 
our major trading partners. 
                                                 
4   Primary  dealers  are  banks  and  securities  broker-dealers  that  trade  in  U.S.  government  securities  with  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of  New  York. On  behalf  of the Federal  Reserve  System, the New York Fed's Open 
Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2008
in  real  residential 
U.S.  inflation  has  risen  recently,  largely  because  of  these  sharp  increases  in  global 
commodity  prices.  However,  thus  far,  the  high  costs  of  energy  and  other  primary 
commodities  have  not  led  to  much  increase  in  core  inflation,  partly  because  of  slackening 
domestic  demand,  and  there  is  little  evidence  that  these  costs  are  feeding  a  wage-price 
spiral. Nevertheless, the latest spike up in energy and food prices has raised the upside risk 
to  inflation  and  inflation  expectations,  which  we  are  closely  monitoring  and  seeking  to 
contain.  
In the United States, weakness in the housing market, which has been exacerbated by the 
financial turmoil, has been a substantial drag on the growth of real gross domestic product 
(GDP)  since  early  2006.  Declines 
investment  subtracted  about 
1 percentage point from the pace of GDP growth last year, and the demand for homes has 
remained  weak  so  far  this  year.  Residential  construction  continues  to  contract,  and  the 
overhang of unsold new homes remains quite large relative to sales, although it has not risen 
too much further in recent months. Different measures tell somewhat different stories, but it 
seems clear that U.S. home prices began decelerating a while back and have been posting 
outright declines in recent quarters. Mortgage defaults and foreclosures are at record highs 
and  delinquency  rates  are  at  their  highest  level  in  29  years,  which  could  keep  downward 
pressure on prices for some time to come.  
An adverse feedback loop has emerged in the housing sector, as severe difficulties in the 
mortgage  markets  have  significantly  limited  the  availability  of  mortgage  finance  for  many 
borrowers. The lack of mortgage credit, in turn, appears to have further driven down home 
sales  and  contributed  to  the  decline  in  house  prices.  However,  some  of  the  slowdown  in 
mortgage  lending  has  been  warranted.  There  is  a  distinction  to  be  made  between  a 
normalization of credit conditions from the very easy conditions that prevailed through mid-
2007 (which is a good thing from a medium-term perspective) and a full-blown credit crunch 
in which many clearly qualified borrowers are not provided access to credit. Notably, these 
sorts of results are also seen in Europe. Surveys by both the ECB and the Bank of England 
have indicated that banks are tightening lending standards, although credit is still flowing to 
at least some firms and households.  
Recent  data  suggest  that  the  U.S.  economy  has  proved  more  resilient  than  some  had 
anticipated. Although the labor market has softened and consumer sentiment has declined 
sharply  since  last  fall,  consumer  spending  has  thus  far  held  up  better  than  expected.  The 
economy  should  be  supported  by  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus,  a  reduced  drag  from 
residential  construction,  further  progress  in  the  repair  of  financial  and  credit  markets,  and 
still-solid  demand  from  abroad.  However,  the  economy  faces  challenges.  With  housing 
construction continuing to decline and energy prices continuing to rise, risks to growth still 
appear, to my eye, to be to the downside. Households face significant headwinds, including 
falling house prices, tighter credit, a softer job market, and higher energy prices. Businesses 
are  also  facing  challenges,  including  rapidly  escalating  costs  of  raw  materials  and  weaker 
domestic demand, although the strength of foreign demand for U.S. goods and services has 
offset the slowing of domestic sales to some extent. All that said, we seem to have avoided 
some of the worst possible outcomes so far. 
The economy has been quite resilient to the adverse shock from the recent financial turmoil, 
but the analysis of its sources I outlined earlier suggests that it will take a substantial amount 
of time to complete the cleanup of the financial mess and to get the financial system fully 
back  on  its  feet.  Although  some  of  the  most  complex  structured-finance  products  may  be 
gone  for  good,  securitization  will  only  recover  fully  when  new  business  models  solve  the 
agency  problems  that  were  inadequately  dealt  with  in  recent  years.  Development  of  these 
business models by lenders, dealers, regulators, and the credit rating agencies will take time. 
Furthermore, in my view, financial institutions, particularly banks, will probably play a crucial 
role  in  this process.  They  have  the  ability  to  originate  loans  and  make  sure  that  there  are 
incentives for accurate credit assessment of the underlying risks. To restore the public's faith, 
they  need  to  show  that  sufficient mechanisms  are  in  place  to  reasonably  assure  investors 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 5
that  financial  institutions  have  the  incentives  to  issue  good  credits.  Only  when  they  have 
rebuilt the confidence that investors previously had in them will banks be able to distribute 
securities backed by these loans. 
There is a catch in all of this, however. Financial institutions cannot expand their activities in 
these  markets  without  having  the  capital  to  do  so.  Unfortunately,  the  losses  they  have 
experienced recently have put pressure on their capital positions, and, although they are now 
actively raising capital, getting sufficient capital to fully take advantage of this new business 
will take some time.  
The resulting slow recovery of financial markets that I think is likely suggests that the U.S. 
economy will be subject to substantial headwinds for some time. Indeed, the situation may 
be  comparable  to  what  happened  in  the  early  1990s  when  the  weakened  condition  of  the 
banking industry in the United States led to a relatively slow recovery in economic activity. 
Thus,  growth  could  continue  to  be  quite  weak,  though  I  would  hope  it  would  pick  up  next 
year.  
As  I've  already  mentioned,  the  impacts  of  the  events  I've  been  discussing  have  not  been 
limited  to  the  United  States.  Although  European  growth  has  held  up  well  so  far,  it  now 
appears to be slowing, in part because the financial strains and rising commodity prices have 
weighed on consumer and business confidence and have weakened spending, but also as 
Europe's housing markets cool, especially in the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Spain. The 
headwinds from the financial turmoil I have described may affect them as well. In addition, 
monetary  policy  in  Europe  has  eased  considerably  less  as  inflation  has  continued  to  rise 
above  central  banks'  targets,  largely  driven  by  continued  sharp  increases  in  commodity 
prices.  
One  important  factor  behind  developments  in  recent  years  has  been  the  rapid  growth  in 
emerging  market  economies  such  as  China.  On  the  one  hand,  rapid  growth  in  Asia  has 
stimulated  strong  increases  in  import  demand,  cushioning  the  slowdowns  in  the  United 
States, Europe and Japan, but on the other hand, the rapid growth in demand has pushed up 
prices  for  commodities  that  are  in  short  supply.  Thus,  inflation  rates  in  many  emerging 
economies have risen sharply. The central banks in most parts of the world are at a crucial 
juncture: We must all be vigilant to keep inflation expectations anchored and inflation low. 
Conclusion 
The  recent  financial  turmoil  has  brought  the  Federal  Reserve  into  uncharted  waters.  We 
found it necessary to build some lifeboats, but we seem to have steered clear of the worst 
weather. The measures taken by the Federal Reserve and other central banks seem to have 
helped keep the economy afloat, but this episode of financial distress has raised important 
questions about the structure of financial regulation and the appropriate role of the lender of 
last resort. We expect to strengthen the financial system with an array of regulatory changes, 
which  includes  strengthening  of  capital  and  liquidity  rules,  more  disclosure  requirements, 
closer  supervision  of  the  measurement  and  management  of  firm-wide  risks,  and  steps  to 
increase the transparency and resilience of the financial infrastructure. Private investors and 
other market participants clearly also have crucial roles to play in strengthening the financial 
system. 
While the current turmoil is not yet over, we have seen some signs of improvement. We have 
learned much from this episode. I am confident that it will be studied for some time to come, 
and that we will forge a better financial system as a result. 
6 
 BIS Review 86/2008
References 
Greenlaw,  David,  Jan  Hatzius,  Anil  K.  Kashyap,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2008).  "Leveraged 
Losses:  Lessons  from  the  Mortgage  Market  Meltdown",  presentation  delivered  at  the  U.S. 
Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 29. 
Warsh,  Kevin  (2008).  "Financial  Market  Turmoil  and  the  Federal  Reserve:  The  Plot 
Thickens",  speech  delivered  at  the  New  York  University  School  of  Law  Global  Economic 
Policy Forum, New York, April 14. 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 7
