Ben S Bernanke: The economy and financial markets 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 14 February 2008. 
 Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to be 
here to offer my views on financial conditions, the near-term economic outlook, and related 
issues.  
As you know, financial markets in the United States and in a number of other industrialized 
countries have been under considerable strain since late last summer. Heightened investor 
concerns  about  the  credit  quality  of  mortgages,  especially  subprime  mortgages  with 
adjustable interest rates, triggered the financial turmoil. However, other factors, including a 
broader  retrenchment  in  the  willingness  of  investors  to  bear  risk,  difficulties  in  valuing 
complex  or  illiquid  financial  products,  uncertainties  about  the  exposures  of  major  financial 
institutions to credit losses, and concerns about the weaker outlook for the economy, have 
also roiled the financial markets in recent months. 
As  the  concerns  of  investors  increased,  money  center  banks  and  other  large  financial 
institutions have come under significant pressure to take onto their own balance sheets the 
assets of some of the off-balance-sheet investment vehicles that they had sponsored. Bank 
balance  sheets  have  swollen  further  as  a  consequence  of  the  sharp  reduction  in  investor 
willingness to buy securitized credits, which has forced banks to retain a substantially higher 
share  of  previously  committed  and  new  loans  in  their  own  portfolios.  Banks  have  also 
reported large losses, reflecting marked declines in the market prices of mortgages and other 
assets that they hold. Recently, deterioration in the financial condition of some bond insurers 
has led some commercial and investment banks to take further markdowns and has added to 
strains in the financial markets. 
The banking system has been highly profitable in recent years and entered this episode with 
strong capital positions. Some institutions have responded to their recent losses by raising 
additional  capital.  Notwithstanding  these  positive  factors,  the  unexpected  losses  and  the 
increased pressure on their balance sheets have prompted banks to become protective of 
their liquidity and balance sheet capacity and, thus, to become less willing to provide funding 
to other market participants, including other banks. Banks have also become more restrictive 
in  their  lending  to  firms  and  households.  For  example,  in  the  latest  Senior  Loan  Officer 
Opinion Survey conducted by the Federal Reserve, banks reported having further tightened 
their lending standards and terms for a broad range of loan types over the past three months. 
More-expensive and less-available credit seems likely to continue to be a source of restraint 
on economic growth. 
In part as the result of the developments in financial markets, the outlook for the economy 
has worsened in recent months, and the downside risks to growth have increased. To date, 
the  largest  economic  effects  of  the  financial  turmoil  appear  to  have  been  on  the  housing 
market, which, as you know, has deteriorated significantly over the past two years or so. The 
virtual  shutdown  of  the  subprime  mortgage  market  and  a  widening  of  spreads  on  jumbo 
mortgage loans have further reduced the demand for housing, while foreclosures are adding 
to  the  already-elevated  inventory  of  unsold  homes.  Further  cuts  in  homebuilding  and  in 
related activities are likely.  
Conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  also  softened.  Payroll  employment,  after  increasing 
about 95,000 per month on average in the fourth quarter, declined by an estimated 17,000 
jobs in January. Employment in the construction and manufacturing sectors has continued to 
fall,  while  the  pace  of  job  gains  in  the  services  industries  has  slowed.  The  softer  labor 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 1
market,  together  with  factors  including  higher  energy  prices,  lower  equity  prices,  and 
declining home values, seem likely to weigh on consumer spending in the near term. On the 
other hand, growth in U.S. exports should continue to provide some offset to the softening in 
domestic  demand,  and  the  recently  approved  fiscal  package  should  help  to  support 
household and business spending during the second half of this year and into the first part of 
next year. 
On the inflation front, a key development over the past year has been the steep run-up in the 
price of oil. Last year, food prices also increased exceptionally rapidly by recent standards, 
and  the  foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  weakened.  All  told,  over  the  four  quarters  of 
2007, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased 3.4 percent, 
up from 1.9 percent during 2006. Excluding the prices of food and energy, PCE price inflation 
ran  at  a  2.1  percent  rate  in  2007,  down  a  bit  from  2006.  To  date,  inflation  expectations 
appear  to  have  remained  reasonably  well  anchored,  but  any  tendency  of  inflation 
expectations to become unmoored or for the Fed's inflation-fighting credibility to be eroded 
could greatly complicate the task of sustaining price stability and reduce the central bank's 
policy flexibility to counter shortfalls in growth in the future. Accordingly, in the months ahead 
we will be closely monitoring inflation expectations and the inflation situation more generally. 
To address these developments, the Federal Reserve has moved in two main areas. To help 
relieve the pressures in the interbank markets, the Federal Reserve – among other actions – 
recently  introduced  a  term  auction  facility  (TAF),  through  which  prespecified  amounts  of 
discount window credit can be auctioned to eligible borrowers, and we have been working 
closely  and  cooperatively  with  other  central  banks  to  address  market  strains  that  could 
hamper the achievement of our broader economic objectives.  
In  the  area  of  monetary  policy,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  has  moved 
aggressively, cutting its target for the federal funds rate by a total of 225 basis points since 
September, including 125 basis points during January alone. As the FOMC noted in its most 
recent  post-meeting  statement,  the  intent  of  these  actions  is  to  help  promote  moderate 
growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity. 
A critical task for the Federal Reserve over the course of this year will be to assess whether 
the  stance  of  monetary  policy  is  properly  calibrated  to  foster  our  mandated  objectives  of 
maximum employment and price stability and, in particular, whether the policy actions taken 
thus far are having their intended effects. Monetary policy works with a lag. Therefore, our 
policy stance must be determined in light of the medium-term forecast for real activity and 
inflation,  as  well  as  the  risks  to  that  forecast.  At  present,  my  baseline  outlook  involves  a 
period of sluggish growth, followed by a somewhat stronger pace of growth starting later this 
year as the effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus begin to be felt. At the same time, overall 
consumer price inflation should moderate from its recent rates, and the public's longer-term 
inflation expectations should remain reasonably well anchored.  
Although the baseline outlook envisions an improving picture, it is important to recognize that 
downside  risks  to  growth  remain,  including  the  possibilities  that  the  housing  market  or  the 
labor  market  may  deteriorate  to  an  extent  beyond  that  currently  anticipated,  or  that  credit 
conditions may tighten substantially further. The FOMC will be carefully evaluating incoming 
information bearing on the economic outlook and will act in a timely manner as needed to 
support growth and to provide adequate insurance against downside risks. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2008
