Mervyn King: Banking and the Bank of England 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  British  Bankers 
Association, London, Tuesday 10 June 2008. 
 After a decade or more of economic stability, we are now facing a period of rising inflation 
and falling economic growth. Part of the reason for this change of economic weather is that 
we are passing through the most prolonged period of financial turmoil that most of us can 
remember. Whether, as the IMF has argued, it is the worst period of financial stress since the 
1930s is too early to judge. After all, the crisis is not yet over. 
Since  last  August  there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  soul-searching  about  what  we  all  might 
have  done  differently,  both  before  and  after  9  August  when  the  crisis  hit.  And  in 
circumstances  where  livelihoods  are  at  risk  it  was  inevitable  that  the  “blame  game”  was 
played. Unfortunately, although such a game helped to fill newspaper columns, it generated 
more heat than light. So today I want to step back. 
Financial  crises  have  been  a  regular,  and  disturbing,  feature  of  our  and  other  developed 
economies  for  as  long  any  one  can  remember.  They  are  as  frequent  now  as  in  the 
nineteenth century, when Henry Thornton and Walter Bagehot were developing their ideas 
about how central banks could prevent instability in the banking system. Are these repeated 
crises the inevitable result of human nature at work in financial markets, with greed and fear 
alternating as sentiment swings from irrational optimism to irrational pessimism? Or is it the 
failure over many years to find the right incentive structure for banking markets? Or is it a 
mixture of both? 
I don’t pretend to be able to offer a complete answer to those questions. But I do want to 
focus on the relationship between the Bank of England and the banks because it helps to 
explain why crises occur and what we can do about them. 
Let me start by saying that, although I do think the role of the Bank needs to be enhanced, it 
would  not  be  right  for  the  Bank  to  take  back  banking  supervision  from  the  FSA,  as  some 
have  suggested.  We  should  remember  that  the  period  before  1997,  when  FSA  and  the 
“tripartite arrangements” were set up, was not seen at the time as a golden age of official 
oversight  of  banks.  Before  1997  the  relationship  between  the  Treasury  and  the  Bank  of 
England  in  respect  of  banking  supervision  was  often  fraught.  Remember  too  that  the 
experience  which  shaped  the  design  of  the  1997  settlement  was  that  of  idiosyncratic 
problems  in  Johnson  Matthey,  BCCI  and  Barings,  not  a  system-wide  crisis  affecting  the 
liquidity  of  the  banking  system  as  a  whole.  As  a  result,  the  tripartite  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  which  underpinned  that  settlement  was  not  so  much  faulty  as  incomplete. 
Since the onset of the crisis last summer, the way in which the tripartite arrangements work 
in practice has evolved considerably. 
The concept of a golden age in the relationship between the Bank and the banks is also far 
from the truth. Our relationship was described by David Kynaston, in his magisterial history of 
the City, as “surprisingly prickly”. In the 1920s the Chairman of the Midland Bank, Reginald 
McKenna, derided the Governor, Montagu Norman, as “an intellectual without an intellect”, 
and in turn Norman said about McKenna, “some people cannot avoid the limelight”. Since the 
crisis broke last August we too have had our differences, although more recently the close 
cooperation between the Bank of England and six of the largest banks in working through the 
details of our Special Liquidity Scheme was a model of effective collaboration. 
But perhaps we should not be surprised that sometimes our relationship is “prickly” because 
our  interests  do  not  always  coincide.  Banks  are,  entirely  legitimately,  concerned  primarily 
with their commercial interest. The Bank of England is concerned with the interests of the UK 
economy as a whole. The two sets of interests are not always the same. 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 1
Where  they  may  clash  is  over  the  use  of  our  balance  sheet.  Companies  which  have 
misjudged  risks  or  their  business  model  should  generally  be  allowed  to  fail  to  encourage 
prudent  behaviour  by  others.  But  the  failure  of  a  bank  can  have  an  impact  that  goes  well 
beyond  the  importance  of  that  bank  alone  –  so-called  systemic  risk.  That  is  why  central 
banks  have  sometimes  acted  as  “lender  of  last  resort”.  It  can  then  be  difficult  for  the 
authorities to make a credible commitment that in future banks will be allowed to fail. And 
that can in turn encourage banks to take greater risks – both in maturity transformation and 
lending – enabling them to earn higher profits. Because the authorities will face an incentive 
to step in to rescue banks tomorrow, there is an incentive for banks to take more risk today. 
There  is  a  parallel  here  with  monetary  policy.  In  their  decisions  today,  people  take  into 
account how interest rates will be set tomorrow, just as banks when taking risks anticipate 
how  central  banks  are  likely  to  behave.  In  monetary  policy  we  now  have  in  place  a 
framework  which  makes  the  commitment  to  low  inflation  credible  by  delegating  the 
responsibility for achieving it to an independent central bank. 
We need now to develop an equally strong framework for financial stability. It will be more 
complex than for monetary policy where there is a single instrument – Bank Rate – which 
can  be  delegated  to  a  single  decision-making  body  –  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee. 
Financial  stability  requires  cooperation  among  at  least  three  sets  of  decisionmakers:  the 
supervisor, the central bank and the finance ministry. The existing tripartite framework needs 
to  develop  so  that  the  authorities  are  able  to  reduce  systemic  risk  not  just  by  effective 
management of crises but by creating incentives for financial institutions to avoid excessive 
risks. 
Some  of  the  elements  of  such  a  framework  I  described  in  my  evidence  to  the  Treasury 
Committee on 20 September last year. In line with international experience, they included a 
special  resolution  regime  for  failing  banks,  changes  to  deposit  insurance  to  reduce  the 
incentives for bank runs, and a proper regime for the regulation of bank liquidity. 
At  the  heart  of  the  case  for  a  special  resolution  regime  is  the  need  to find  a  way  to  allow 
banks to fail in an orderly manner. As the Treasury Committee said in its report The Run on 
the Rock, “Banks should be allowed to ‘fail’ so as to preserve market discipline on financial 
institutions”.  It  is  clear  from  the  responses  to  the  Consultation  Document  that  there  is 
widespread acceptance of  the  basic  case  for  a resolution  regime.  But  that  is  tempered  by 
concerns  about  the  details  of  its  design.  I  want  to  highlight  three  key  features  that  will  be 
central to the success of the new regime. 
First, responsibility for resolving a failing bank should be delegated to a resolution authority 
which  should  have  a  wide  range  of  instruments  available  to  help  resolve  a  failing  bank. 
Which body assumes the role of the resolution authority is less important than the granting of 
those powers to some body. 
Second, the circumstances in which the regime would be triggered should be spelt out as 
clearly as possible. It is unrealistic to imagine that entry to the regime could be triggered by 
reference to quantitative triggers alone. Some discretion will be necessary. But the triggers 
should contain some quantifiable measures for both capital and liquidity, and there should be 
transparency  in  advance  about  their  formulation  to  constrain  the  authorities’  discretion. 
Moreover,  looking  ahead,  although  the  regulator  should  have  the  leading  role  in  triggering 
the regime, no regulator, however effectively managed, can ever fully insulate itself against 
the  risk  of  forbearance  which  might  delay  a  necessary  resolution.  That  is  why  the  Bank 
believes that the resolution authority, wherever it is located, should have a powerful voice in 
decisions  on  the  use  of  the  trigger.  Moreover,  any  resolution  authority  will  have  a  natural 
interest in the timing of a decision to place a bank under its control. 
Third,  a  clear  framework  for  accountability  should  be  established  to  give  confidence  that 
decisions  relating  to  the  resolution  regime  are  exercised  in  line  with  the  objectives  for  the 
regime set out in legislation. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2008
Turning to deposit insurance, I understand the concerns that many of you have voiced about 
the reforms discussed in the tripartite Consultation Document. I know that you accept that to 
avoid bank runs there will need to be 100% insurance of deposits – up to a limit. That limit 
should not be too high. And in order to limit risk-taking by banks there is also a strong case 
for relating the payments made by different banks to finance the insurance scheme to the 
risks  that  they  will  fail.  And  in  that  context,  some  element  of  pre-funding  is  natural  and  is 
used in many countries, including those with banking systems similar to our own, such as 
Canada  and  Sweden.  A  degree  of  pre-funding  is  one  of  those  ideas  that  is  bound  to  be 
unpopular  before  the  fund  is  called  upon,  but  seems  decidedly  wise  after  the  event  as  it 
lessens the burden on the banking system in a time of stress. 
On  the  regulation  of  bank  liquidity,  the  FSA  has  already  issued  a  discussion  paper,  and  I 
support strongly the case for reform of liquidity regulation made this morning by Sir Callum 
McCarthy.  I  very  much  hope  that  an  international  initiative  to  include  liquidity  in  the  Basel 
capital regime, in which the Bank is playing a leading role, will come to fruition. For our own 
part we, along with other central banks, have been reviewing the way in which our market 
operations can alleviate stress in the banking system. 
The primary objective of our money market operations is to ensure that the interest rate on 
overnight  lending  in  the  market  is  close  to  the  Bank  Rate  set  by  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee. That constrains the net amount of central bank money we lend to the system. 
But we are also concerned with illiquidity in particular markets when it threatens the stability 
of  the  system  as  a  whole.  It  is  this  concern  that  motivates  the  choice  of  assets  we  lend 
against in both normal and stressed conditions. 
A loss of liquidity in markets on which the banking system as a whole relies can magnify the 
mismatch between the maturity of assets and liabilities on banks’ balance sheets. A banking 
system  in  which  large  volumes  of  funding  need  to  be  renewed  very  frequently  is  a  fragile 
one, vulnerable each day to a shock stemming from rumours and loss of confidence. And it is 
in  those  circumstances  that  a  backstop  is  needed.  The  reason  for  it  is  not  to  support 
individual  institutions.  It  is  to  avoid  an  unnecessary  loss  of  confidence  in  the  system  as  a 
whole. That backstop is central bank funding when private markets important to the stability 
of the system have temporarily closed. 
But central banks are not there to support liquidity in all markets at all times. They are not 
there to create a liquid market in all financial instruments that traders or some rocket scientist 
have  dreamt  up.  Nor  are  they  there  to  maintain  indefinitely  a  market  when  changes  in 
information  or  risk  appetites  make  it  more  difficult  to  sustain  a  private  market,  as  in  some 
asset-backed security markets recently. 
It  was  concerns  about  confidence  in  the  banking  system  as  a  whole  that  explain  why  the 
major  central  banks  acted  together  in  December,  which  in  our  case  meant  extending  the 
range of collateral accepted in our regular auctions of 3-month lending. Auctions like this can 
play a useful role but, as we saw with Bear Stearns, a more continuously available facility 
may sometimes be needed to avoid an immediate loss of confidence. That is why, in April, 
when  confidence  was  particularly  fragile,  we  introduced  a  backstop  that  is  available  every 
day – the Special Liquidity Scheme. 
As  I  said  in  September,  in  providing  such  a  backstop,  we  face  a  balancing  act,  between 
avoiding a major shock to the system and encouraging future reliance on the same cheap 
but risky funding sources. The Special Liquidity Scheme aims to do this by exchanging liquid 
for illiquid assets that existed only before the end of last year. 
We intend to learn from the experience of the Scheme to put in place a liquidity facility that 
works in all seasons – both ‘normal’ and ‘stressed’. It will be part of a set of reforms to our 
Red  Book,  to  be  announced  later  this  year.  Any  such  facility  will  need  to  meet  two 
challenges: it will need the right pricing structure and it will need to overcome the ‘stigma’ 
problem that has affected access to all central banks during the current crisis. 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 3
The pricing structure will be key to striking the right balance. It should vary according to the 
type  of  collateral  which  banks  provide,  as  indeed  it  does  to  some  extent  now.  Access  to 
central bank money or asset swaps should, as far as possible, encourage banks to manage 
liquidity  risk  prudently.  Without  the  correct  pricing  structure,  the  incentives  to  encourage 
future risk taking are obvious and potentially large. 
Valuation margins – or haircuts – are used to protect our balance sheet. By themselves, they 
aren’t sufficient to create a general pricing structure. The cost imposed by a margin depends 
primarily on the difference between the costs of secured and unsecured funding, and that will 
vary across banks and over time. So the key is in the interest rates charged by the central 
bank. 
The  second  challenge  is  to  overcome  the  ‘stigma’  problem  that  has  plagued  the  use  of 
central  bank  facilities  throughout  the  crisis.  Commercial  banks  have  feared  that,  by 
accessing  funding  from  the  central  bank,  they  would  acquire  a  ‘black  spot’  in  the  market. 
They  have  been  reluctant  to  come  to  their  central  bank  unless  in  good  and  extensive 
company. 
These are challenges that all major central banks are grappling with. They will not be easy to 
overcome.  But with our international colleagues we are aiming to devise a framework that 
does so. The prize will be an integrated framework, covering all our lending to the banking 
system and one that I hope, by making clear the terms on which liquidity will be provided in 
times of stress, will focus the minds of banks long before those stresses emerge. 
During my second term as Governor I would like to see us establish a framework for financial 
stability  that  is  on  as  sound  a  footing  as  the  one  we  have  successfully  established  for 
monetary stability. The measures I have described would go a considerable way to achieving 
that. But just as no framework for monetary policy can prevent shocks from hitting the UK 
economy,  we  need  to  think  carefully  about  why  financial  crises  have  been  both  persistent 
and damaging. 
That leads me to one final thought on which I want to end. For reasons of historical accident 
we have created over many decades a financial system in which the incentives to monitor 
risk-taking have been sharply reduced. It is often said that the role of a central bank is to take 
the punch bowl away just as the party is getting going. That approach has served us well in 
monetary  policy.  But  all  those  efforts  will  come  to  naught  if  the  opposite  applies  to  the 
financial sector. If banks feel they must keep on dancing while the music is playing and that 
at the end of the party the central bank will make sure everyone gets home safely, then over 
time the parties will become wilder and wilder.  
That might not matter were the consequences limited to the party-goers. But they are not. 
When the party ends, some innocent bystanders may lose their homes altogether. Moreover, 
the  party-goers  aren’t  just  deposit-taking  banks.  A  wide  range  of  financial  institutions, 
including  investment  banks,  monoline  insurers,  even  hedge  funds,  have  the  potential  to 
cause significant damage to the rest of the economy in the wake of their demise. Are they all 
to be helped to get home safely when the party ends? If so, will they all be regulated in the 
same way as banks? If not, how can we limit the potential cost to the taxpayer? Add to this 
the problem that many of these institutions are global in scope, but the responsibility for both 
regulation and rescue remains firmly at national level, and you can see why policy-makers 
get headaches as bad as the party-goers’. 
No individual bank, or indeed the authorities, can easily find a way out of this because their 
incentives are to continue in the same manner. There is, therefore, no point blaming anyone 
for the outcomes. But together we have to find an answer. Of course, excessively strict and 
detailed regulation would mean that there were no parties worth going to and the economy 
as  a  whole  would  suffer  from  a  suppressed  and  inefficient  financial  sector.  That  is  why 
requiring financial institutions to hold more capital to act as a shock absorber, while reducing 
the  procyclical  nature  of  existing  capital  requirements,  may  offer  a  balance  between 
excessively burdensome regulation and excessive risk-taking. 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2008
The proposals in the Banking Bill, and the other changes I have discussed today, will take us 
an important step forward in the creation of a framework for financial stability. But they will 
not be the final answer to a difficult, at times seemingly intractable, problem of how to change 
the incentives of both private and public actors to reduce the frequency and cost of financial 
crises. For that we will all need to do a lot more thinking. It is important that we do find the 
right  solution.  An  efficient  and  thriving  banking  sector  which  can  intermediate  saving  and 
investment, both domestically and internationally, is essential to our economic prosperity. 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 5
