Jean-Claude Trichet: How to preserve and consolidate the remarkable 
success of the euro and the performance of the European economy? 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Brussels 
Economic Forum, Brussels, 16 May 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would first like to thank the organisers very much for inviting me today to this “Economic 
and Monetary Union in Europe: 10 Years On” conference. It is a pleasure to be here, and to 
share with you my views on the remarkable success of the Euro and on how to preserve and 
consolidate that success by improving the performance of the European economy.  
As the European Central Bank is close to completing its first decade of existence and the 
euro  will  soon  be  ten  years  old,  I would  like  to  take  this opportunity  to  pay  a  tribute  to  all 
those  who  contributed  to  this  great  achievement.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  been 
recognised as a remarkable success. Since 1999 the single currency has fully inherited the 
degree  of  credibility  and  confidence  that  was  the  privilege  of  the  most  credible  national 
currencies before the euro. This has been in particular illustrated by the fact that the medium 
and long term euro market interest rates were at the same low level as the level observed for 
the  most  credible  previous  national  currencies.  In  spite  of  a  succession  of  very  significant 
price shocks of oil and commodities, the average yearly inflation has been 2.1% from the 1st 
January 1999 up to the end of 2007. Since the setting up of the euro 15.7 million net new 
jobs were created, three times more than during the same number of years before the euro 
and around 2 million more than in the US during the same period. This success is even more 
remarkable if you refer to a large number of ex ante statements, some particularly blunt. I will 
not have the cruelty of quoting today those that had prophesised that the European single 
currency was impossible or that its introduction would be a complete failure, or that in any 
case it was impossible for it to be credible given the very nature of its construction.  
Nonetheless, there is no place for complacency. Price stability in the medium term has to be 
permanently ensured. Credibility is not a given: any institution has to prove that it deserves it 
by  its  decisions  and  actions.  Regarding  the  functioning  of  the  euro  area  economy,  the 
success obtained in terms of job creation needs to be complemented and consolidated by 
continuing to implement courageous structural reforms aiming at increasing the flexibility of 
all  markets,  at  supporting  innovative  environments  and  therefore  augmenting  the  growth 
potential of Europe and strengthening the resilience of our economy.  
Achievements of Monetary Union  
With  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  a  completely  new  monetary  policy  framework  was 
introduced in Europe, with the ECB conducting a single monetary policy for the entire euro 
area. Despite the uncertainty that surrounded the transition to this new regime, the ECB and 
the euro have enjoyed a high level of credibility since the very first days of Economic and 
Monetary Union, the level of credibility that was inherent to the most credible national central 
banks  of  the  now  euro  area.  This  achievement  owes  much  to  the  ECB’s  institutional 
framework, which gives a clear mandate to the ECB to safeguard price stability in the euro 
area, and grants it full independence in doing so.  
Price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  to  sustainable  economic  growth,  job  creation  and 
social cohesion. Empirical evidence shows there is a negative relationship between inflation 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 1
and output growth, with a 100-basis-point permanent increase in inflation being associated 
with a 10 to 30 basis-point decrease in trend output growth.1 And central bank independence 
is key for monetary policy to be credibly and effectively geared to price stability.  
From the very beginning, the successful launch of the euro and the strong credibility of the 
newly  created  monetary  authority  led  to  a  convergence  of  market  interest  rates  at  all 
maturities  around  the  lowest  interest  rates  prevailing  prior  to  the  euro.  Monetary  Union 
delivered a yield curve after the transition that was fully in line with the benchmark set by the 
most  credible  national  currencies  before  EMU.  As  a  result,  in  some  euro  area  countries, 
medium and long-term market interest rates fell to unprecedented levels when the euro was 
introduced and have remained there since. 
Of course, the ECB has to be credible in delivering price stability over time. And there is no 
better way to establish a reputation than for the public to see us behaving consistently, in a 
focused way. The ECB is a young institution, but our track record over the past ten years has 
been widely recognised as being more than satisfactory. Since the introduction of the euro, 
average  annual  HICP  inflation  rate  has  been  slightly  above  2%,  despite  a  succession  of 
significant shocks (commodity and food prices in particular). Actual inflation may temporarily 
drift  away  from  the  central  bank’s  medium-term  objective,  notably  due  to  significant 
commodity price shocks. What is important is that the monetary policy stance is permanently 
designed to deliver price stability in the medium term, taking into account the medium and 
long  term  risks  assessed  by  the  economic  and  monetary  analysis.  Overall,  despite  the 
different shocks the ECB had to cope with since its inception, prices have remained stable 
over  this  period,  average  inflation  being  moderate  and  inflation  volatility  being  significantly 
lower in the euro area than it was before EMU.  
This  favourable  track  record  has  been  acknowledged  by  financial  markets  and  the  public, 
with  long-term  inflation  expectations  derived  from  bond  yields  and  surveys  remaining 
successfully anchored at levels that are in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability. I 
would  like  to  stress  that  the  stability  of  inflation  expectations  has  been  remarkable, 
considering the series of adverse economic disturbances which have hit the euro area since 
its inception. And let me add that the ECB has always taken firm and timely actions to pursue 
a monetary policy which best serves the ultimate objective of maintaining price stability. 
The success of the ECB’s monetary policy in delivering price stability and its determination to 
ensure  a  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  has  provided  significant  support  for  other 
European  Community  objectives,  notably 
conditions  and 
macroeconomic  stability,  which  in  turn  favour  investment  and  sustainable  economic 
expansion.  Most  euro  area  countries  have  benefited  from  significantly  better  financing 
conditions  than  in  the  1990s,  a  situation  which  has  supported  fiscal  consolidation.2  For 
instance,  in  the  run-up  to  Stage  Three  of  EMU,  fiscal  deficits  were  considerably  reduced, 
mainly due to falling interest payments, from an average of 5.2% of GDP between 1990 and 
1998 to 3.4% between 1999 and 2007. 
The euro also helps to strengthen trade and financial linkages across euro area countries. 
There  is  clear  evidence  that  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  and  the  associated 
increase in price and cost transparency have fostered both intra and extra-euro area trade in 
goods and services.3  
favourable 
financing 
                                                 
1   See ECB Monthly Bulletin, May 2008. 
2   For  instance,  in  the  euro  area  in  the  nine  years  following  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  real  gross  capital 
formation grew on average by 3.0% per year, compared with only 1.7% during the nine-year period preceding 
the introduction of the euro. 
3   Exports  and  imports  of  goods  and  services  within  the  euro  area  rose  from  about  31%  of  GDP  in  1998  to 
around  37%  of  GDP  in  2007.  The  completion  of  a  single  market  for  services  will  further  facilitate  trade  in 
services. The rate of increase in extra-euro area exports and imports of goods and services even exceeded 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2008
In  addition,  the  euro  is  acting  as  a  catalyst  for  a  single  market  in  financial  services  and  a 
gradual  portfolio  reallocation  away  from  holdings  of  domestic  financial  instruments  and 
towards holdings of financial instruments issued elsewhere within the euro area.  
Performance of the economy of the euro area 
Thanks  in  particular  to  these  successes  in  macroeconomic  stability  and  increased 
integration, the euro area has delivered an impressive performance in terms of job creation.  
The significant rise in employment in the euro area over the past decade, reflects also the 
progress made on structural reforms and wage moderation policy. Since the start of EMU to 
the end of last year, the number of employed people has increased by 15.7 million, in the 
euro area, compared with an increase of approximately only 5 million in the nine preceding 
years,  and  the  euro  area  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  to  its  lowest  level  since  the  early 
1980s. 
This  remarkable  labour  market  performance  could  even  be  improved.  Europe  is  far  from 
having  exhausted  its  potential  for  further  increases  in  participation  rates  and  employment. 
The  overall  employment  rate  in  the  euro  area  remains  modest  by  international  standards 
(65.7% in the euro area compared with 72% in the United States), and the unemployment 
rate is still clearly too high.  
More specifically, while the prime-age male employment rate in the euro area is comparable 
with that in the United States, considerable disparities remain when we look at youth, female 
and older worker employment rates. For instance, in 2007 the female employment rate was 
58%  in  the  euro  area  compared  with  66%  in  the  United  States,  the  older  workers’ 
employment  rate  was  43.3%  compared  with  61.7%  in  the  United  States,  and  the  youth 
employment rate was 38% compared with 54.2% in the United States.4 These features of the 
euro area appear to be consistent with an “insider-outsider” characterisation of the European 
labour  market,  where  structural  impediments,  resulting  from  the  legal  and  regulatory 
environment,  high  taxes  on  labour  and  rigidities  associated  with  wage  regulations,  may 
prevent those groups “at the margin” from actively participating in the labour market.  
The  figures  I  have  just  mentioned  suggest  that,  overall,  structural  reforms  in  the  labour 
market need to be high on the agenda. They appear even more appropriate if we consider 
that in the past Europe’s growth performance has been, and will increasingly be, constrained 
(all  other  things  being  equal)  by  its  relatively  low  population  growth  rate  and  population 
ageing. Since the early 1990s, the population of the euro area has been growing at a yearly 
rate of just 0.4% compared with 1.1% in the US.  
Overall  a  comparison  of  the  economic  performance  of  the  euro  area  with  that  of  other 
industrialised  economies  over  a  longer-term  perspective  shows  that  Europe  has  room  to 
develop its growth potential. Since the early 1990s, real GDP has grown on average by 2.1% 
in  the  euro  area,  compared  with  2.8%  in  the  United  States.  Since  the  start  of  EMU,  the 
annual growth rate for the euro area has averaged 2.2% per year compared with 2.7% in the 
US.  
One of the main reasons for the euro area’s modest performance is the relatively low trend 
growth in labour productivity. During the 1980s, hourly labour productivity in the euro area 
                                                                                                                                                      
that in intra-euro area trade, rising from about 31% of GDP in 1998 to almost 44% of GDP in 2007. Extra-euro 
area trade has, of course, also benefited from a period of strong external demand and increasing integration at 
global level. At the same time, this ratio increased from  about 23.2%  of GDP to 28.9% of GDP in the  US. 
(Balance of payments definition, sources ECB and IMF for the euro area, Bureau of Economic Analysis for the 
US.) 
4   Data for the US refers to the year 2006. 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 3
grew on average by 2.3%, while in the 1990s it declined to 1.8% and further decreased to 
1.2%  between  1999  and  2007.  By  contrast,  hourly  labour  productivity  growth  in  the  US 
accelerated from 1.2% to 1.6% and 2.1% over the same periods.5  
What lies behind these labour productivity developments? 
Specific policies aimed at increasing employment, particularly in the unskilled segment of the 
labour  market,  have  certainly  contributed  to  the  slowdown  in  labour  productivity  growth. 
However, the developments in labour supply are only part of the story. To a large extent, the 
slowdown  in  labour  productivity  growth  can  be  attributed  to  a  significant  slowdown  in  total 
factor  productivity  growth,  or  TFP  growth,  which  is  generally  taken  as  a  measure  of 
technological  progress  and  improvements  in  the  organisation  and  overall  efficiency  of 
production.  In  the  1980s,  TFP  grew  on  average  by  1.6%,  before  declining  to  1.1%  in  the 
1990s and to 0.7% between 1999 and 2007.6 The countries that have managed to exploit the 
efficiency  gains  resulting,  in  particular,  from  new  technology  have  enjoyed  stronger  labour 
productivity  growth.  For  instance,  in  the  last  ten  years,  investment  in  information  and 
communication technology in the United States was double that of the euro area.7  
There  are  many  factors  behind  the  low  level  in  total  factor  productivity  growth  in  the  euro 
area. Most prominently, the structural features of the economies in Europe do not incorporate 
appropriate incentives to invest in real and human capital, to innovate, and to increase the 
flexibility of firms to smoothly and quickly adjust to their new environment. It appears that the 
structural  characteristics  of  the  best-performing  industrialised  economies,  namely  more 
flexible labour markets, greater competition in product markets and lower barriers to entry for 
new firms have been more receptive to the opportunities provided by new technologies. 
Need for further structural reform 
These remaining structural rigidities are, in my view, the main reason for Europe’s relatively 
modest growth performance compared with the most advanced industrialised economies. I 
should like to discuss some of the key priorities for reform in three main areas, namely (i) 
getting more people into work; (ii) increasing competition; and (iii) supporting an innovative 
environment.  These  topics  are  clearly  reflected  in  the  Integrated  Guidelines  for  the  new 
phase of the Lisbon Strategy and the recommendations for the euro area. I firmly believe that 
the Lisbon Strategy, as refocused and reaffirmed by the European Council, is the tool in our 
hands  to  push  forward  ambitiously  with  structural  reforms  and  improve  the  euro  area’s 
economic performance, and therefore consolidate the remarkable success of the euro. 
Getting more people into work 
(i) 
First  of  all,  well-functioning  labour  markets  are  indispensable  in  fostering  higher  economic 
growth in the euro area. Despite an impressive success in job creation, the still relatively high 
unemployment rates in the euro area clearly suggest that there is a need to spur not only 
labour supply but also labour demand.  
As regards labour demand, there is a need to reduce labour market rigidities, for they restrict 
wage  differentiation  and  flexibility,  and  thus  tend  to  discourage  the  hiring  of  younger  and 
older workers in particular. At a time of rapid technological change, a flexible labour market is 
essential  to  facilitate  the  adjustment  of  human  capital  to  labour  market  needs.  Too  rigid 
                                                 
5   Source AMECO database. Data on hours worked per worker for the euro area for 2007 are assumed to be 
constant. Data on hours worked per worker for the US are estimated using the OECD data for 2006 and 2007. 
6   Source: European Commission. 
7  
ICT  investment  represented  4%  of  GDP  in  the  United  States  compared  with  2%  in  the  euro  area  over  the 
period 1995-2004 (source Groningen database). 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2008
employment  protection  legislation  has  a  very  strong  negative  impact  on  industries 
experiencing  rapid  technological  change,  since  it  may  prevent  the  efficient  matching  of 
workers  to  jobs  in  view  of  new  job  requirements.  Progress  towards  greater  contractual 
flexibility remains slow in several euro area countries.  
Moreover,  in  those  European  countries  and  regions  where  competitiveness  has  declined 
and/or the unemployment rate remains high, it is important that wage increases do not fully 
exhaust productivity gains in order to provide incentives for firms to create additional jobs. In 
this  context,  the  Governing  Council  considers  that  features  that  enforce  wage  rigidity  and 
lead  to  non-optimal  wage-setting,  in  particular,  and  indexation  of  nominal  wages  to  the 
consumer price index, should be avoided. This is particularly relevant today with the risk of 
second-round effects stemming from the impact of higher energy and food prices on wage. 
Avoiding these practices is essential to preserve price stability in the medium term and, in 
turn,  the  purchasing  power  of  all  euro  area  citizens.  The  Governing  Council  is  paying 
particularly close attention to wage negotiations in the euro area.  
Finally, as regards labour supply, further reforms in income tax and benefit systems would 
help to increase people’s incentives to work. In particular those people with weaker ties to 
the labour market, such as women and older workers.  
Increasing competition and deepening European integration 
(ii)  
Increasing  competition  by  establishing  efficient  and  well-functioning  product  markets  is 
equally fundamental. Many studies point to the potential of competition to boost productivity 
trends in particular by enhancing the incentive to invest and innovate. This gives already a 
key role to competition policies, since “little else than productivity growth matters in the long-
run”,  as  Bob  Solow8  once  put  it.  But  beyond  that,  relaxing  the  regulatory  regime  supports 
further employment creation. At the same time, it helps to reduce inflation persistence and 
contains upward price pressures, thereby improving the adjustment capacity of countries. 
In the European Union, significant progress has been made in strengthening competition and 
increasing economic integration over the past two decades. The Single Market has already 
yielded  major  benefits  for  the  European  economy.9  The  extension  and  deepening  of  the 
internal market remains a priority as regards further financial market integration, the pursuit 
of  effective  competition  in  the  energy  market  and  the  implementation  of  the  Services 
Directive.  The  growing  role  of  services  in  modern  economies  suggests  that  rising  living 
standards  and  competitiveness  in  Europe  will  very  much  depend  on  improvements  in  this 
area.  
Let  me  now  focus  more  specifically  on  the  financial  sectors.  For  the  ECB,  financial 
integration  is  essential,  given  its  relevance  to  the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy. 
European  financial  integration  is  taking  place gradually,  with  considerable  progress  having 
already  been  made.  The  degree  of  integration,  however,  varies  across  market  segments, 
and integration is generally more advanced in those market segments which are closer to the 
single  monetary  policy.  While  the  euro  area  banking  markets  for  wholesale  and  capital 
market-related  activities  have  shown  clear  signs  of  increasing  integration  since  the 
introduction of the euro, the retail banking segment has remained more fragmented, leaving 
European firms and consumers unable to take full advantage of EMU and the Single Market.  
                                                 
8   See  the  introductory  article  of  the  special  issue  on  the  slowdown  in  productivity  growth  in  The  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives 1988, Vol. 2, No 4. 
9   The European Commission recently estimated that the Single Market has brought about an increase of 2.75 
million  extra  jobs  and  an  extra  increase  in  welfare  of  €518  per  head  in  2006,  corresponding  to  a  2.15% 
increase of the EU’s GDP over the period 1992-2006 (see European Commission, “The single market: review 
of achievements”, November 2007). 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 5
Supporting an innovative environment 
(iii)  
Finally,  to  fully  exploit  productivity  potential,  the  labour  and  product  market  reforms  I  have 
mentioned  need  to  be  accompanied  by  policies  that  support  innovation  and  technological 
change.  These  include  in  particular  measures  to  support  innovation  through  higher 
investment in research and development, and policies aimed at improving human capital.  
First of all, Europe needs more new and dynamic firms willing to reap the benefits of opening 
markets and to pursue creative or innovative ventures with a view to large-scale commercial 
exploitation.  Notably,  it  is  new  and  smaller  firms,  rather  than  large  ones,  that  are  the  job 
creators. An entrepreneur-friendly economic environment would imply less red tape for small 
and  medium-sized  enterprises, and  help  them  to  develop at  home  and  abroad,  as  well  as 
positive  action  to  ease  access  to  the  finance  they  need.  Europe  is  significantly  lagging 
behind in this field; its venture capital financing, for instance, remains only a fraction of that in 
the US, relative to the size of its economy.  
Finally, research and development as well as human capital make valuable contributions to 
TFP growth – a fact that has been known for some time. In 2006, R&D investment relative to 
GDP was only 1.9% in the euro area, compared with 2.7% in the US. While many Member 
States  expect  to  increase  their  R&D  spending,  the  EU  will  fall short  of  its  overall  target  of 
spending  3%  of  GDP  on  R&D  by  2010.  Increasing  R&D  investment  is  not  of  course  an 
objective in itself. If we want to see an impact on growth, it is also the return on that R&D that 
matters. In this context, particular attention should be paid to raising public R&D spending 
efficiency and intensifying cooperation between public research institutes and industry.  
Moreover, meeting the challenges of innovation and its dissemination as well as ensuring the 
labour force’s employability and flexibility requires human capital to be continuously adjusted 
to labour market needs through improved education and training, as well as lifelong learning. 
However, investment in human capital in Europe is still clearly inadequate for a “knowledge-
intensive” economy. There is still a need in Europe to enhance the quality and efficiency of 
our  schools  and  universities  as  well  as  to  increase  incentives  for  all  relevant  parties, 
including firms, to invest in human capital. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  if  I  had  to  list  the  necessary  conditions,  “the  building  blocks”  to 
preserve and consolidate the remarkable success of the euro and to reinforce the strength 
and performances of the euro area economy, I would stress four in particular:  
• 
As  far  as  the  first  building  block  is  concerned,  you  will  not  be  surprised  that  I 
mention first the quality of the monetary policy of the ECB. From that standpoint, the 
clarity of our primary mandate – enshrined in the Treaty – to deliver price stability in 
the  medium  term,  the  full  independence  of  the  ECB,  the  transparency  of  our 
definition  of  price  stability  and  our  two  pillar  strategy,  our  track  record,  and  the 
credibility acquired by the ECB and the Eurosystem are our major assets. 
I will also seize this occasion to underline once more, as a second building block, 
the importance of the Growth and Stability Pact. The fiscal pillar of the EMU is key 
for the cohesion of the euro area. The ECB takes care of the M in EMU. The Growth 
and Stability Pact is a fundamental component of the E, taking into account that we 
are running a single currency for 15 countries that all have their own national fiscal 
policies.  
The  third  building  block  through  which  we  will  consolidate  our  success  deals  with 
structural  reforms.  As  I  said  today,  I  trust  that  the  firm  and  courageous 
implementation of the Lisbon Strategy as refocused and reinforced by the European 
Council is of the essence to augment our growth potential, consolidate sustainable 
prosperity and job creation as well as strengthening the resilience of our economy.  
  6 
 BIS Review 63/2008
 The  fourth  building  block  is  the  attentive  monitoring  of  cost  competitiveness 
indicators and, in particular, unit labour costs at the level of each national economy. 
The smooth functioning of the euro area, taking into account the relative importance 
of the public sector and of the non tradable sector in a number of economies, calls 
for not relying exclusively on the working of the competitiveness channel amongst 
tradable  goods  and  services  to  engineer  corrections  of  deviations  of  relative  cost 
competitiveness inside the euro area. Appropriate handling of the unit labour costs 
in  the  civil  service  and  public  sector,  appropriate  recommendations  to  social 
partners  given  in  a  timely  manner  would  avoid  in  certain  cases  painful  national 
corrections through the competitive channel.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 7
