Ewart S Williams: National Financial Literacy Programme of Trinidad and 
Tobago 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  launch  of  the  National  Financial  Literacy  Programme,  Port-of-Spain, 
22 January 2008. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  am  delighted  that  you  are  able  to  join  us  in  recognizing  (and 
celebrating)  the  one-year  anniversary  of  the  launch  of  the  National  Financial  Literacy 
Programme  (NFLP).  We  are  also  taking  the  occasion  of  the  anniversary  to  release  the 
results of the National Financial Literacy Survey conducted last year. 
Roughly one year ago (on January 31, 2007 to be exact), following the announcement of the 
programme by the Honourable Prime Minister in his budget speech, the Bank launched the 
NFLP  whose  major  objective  is  to  provide  citizens  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  with  the 
knowledge and skills to enable them to make informed financial decisions. One year along 
the way, we can be pleased that we have made an auspicious start but we can also confirm 
that this is going to be a long journey. If there are two things that stand out from the first year 
experience, they are: 
(i) 
the  recognition  that  financial  literacy  must  be  a  critical  element  for  successful 
monetary policy implementation and financial market development; and 
that  we  have  increased  the  awareness  of  the  population  of  the  need  to  become 
more financially literate. 
(ii) 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  you  all  know,  inflation  has  been  one  of  our  principal  economic 
challenges.  One  of  the  main  contributors  to  our  current  inflationary  momentum  is  the 
continued significant growth in credit expansion, particularly credit expansion for consumer 
purposes.  This  has  happened  in  the  face  of  increasing  interest  rates,  induced  by  Central 
Bank liquidity absorption measures. The figures show, for instance: 
• 
Consumer Credit has been increasing at a rate of 24 percent a year, compared with 
9 percent a few years ago; 
Credit for automobiles has risen by about 52 percent in the past year; while 
Outstanding credit card debt has more than doubled since 2000. 
• 
• 
Ladies and Gentlemen if there is a silver lining to the high level of food inflation, it is that it is 
beginning  to  force  consumers  to  be  more  discerning  and  more  price  conscious  in  their 
purchases. I am also told that backyard gardening is making a comeback. We would hope 
that  the  financial  literacy  Programmme  would  bring  an  even  greater  level  of  consumer 
awareness into people’s financial dealings. 
Over the past year we have been able to make a number of important interventions under 
the National Financial Literacy Programme. For example: 
• 
We  have  held  financial  education  classes  in  140  primary  schools  and,  in  a  pilot 
project, in 28 secondary schools. 
We  have  had  75  work-place  “lunch  and  learn”  sessions,  sponsored  by  employers 
but with instructors and material provided by the programme. 
We  have  accepted  invitations  from  several  trade  unions  to  conduct  financial 
management  seminars  for  employees  in  receipt  of  back-pay  or  other  lump-sum 
payments. 
We have had several interventions at the community level, mostly in rural areas. 
   BIS Review 10/2008 
 1
 We  have  used  the  wider  pathways,  the  print  and  electronic  media  and  other 
publications to disseminate basic financial information and types that could be useful 
to consumers of financial services. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  when  we  launched  this  programme  we  emphasized  that  financial 
literacy should be the business of the entire society and sought the support of all those who 
were  in  a  position  to  help.  We  even  suggested  that  some  individuals  with  financial  skills 
should  see  the  financial  literacy  programme  as  a  way  of  giving  back  to  society.  We  are 
pleased that many people have responded to our invitation. We have been able to sign some 
150 volunteers, many from the financial sector but other interested persons from all walks of 
life. We are now trying to encourage sixth form students to join the programme to provide 
instructions to their peers and to other students. 
I  would  like  to  express  our  deep  appreciation  to  those  volunteers  who  have  devoted  their 
time and talents to this very worthwhile venture. Thanks also to our service providers who 
have helped get the programme off to a successful start. 
We saw the programme as an opportunity for good corporate citizenship and much of that 
has  been  forthcoming.  Some  corporations  have  contributed  through  the  financing  of  lunch 
and learn sessions for their employees. A few have provided or have pledged financing. In 
this context, we would like to recognize and express our special appreciation to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Ladies and Gentlemen, this programme will in time have tremendous payoffs for our entire 
society.  The  economy  has  been  going  through  a  period  of  strong  growth  with  increasing 
employment and rising incomes. It is critically important that the current gains in real income 
have a sustainable impact on our economic welfare. And this will only happen if more and 
more people in the society learn to make the right financial decisions. 
And thus I invite those of you here who have not yet got involved, to join the programme. I 
urge you to get your friends and colleagues, who are not here, to also get involved. It can be 
done in many ways. 
• 
• 
Bankers’ Association of Trinidad and Tobago (BATT) 
Trinidad and Tobago Petroleum Company (PETROTRIN) 
BP Trinidad and Tobago (BPTT) 
Telecommunications Services of Trinidad and Tobago (TSTT) 
Trinidad and Tobago Unit Trust Corporation (UTC) 
Trinidad and Tobago Mortgage Finance (TTMF) 
Association of Trinidad and Tobago Insurance Company (ATTIC) 
Get your employers to sponsor lunch and learn sessions, in the workplace. 
Volunteer  to  organize  and  provide  financial  literacy  classes  to  your  community 
groups; your church groups; and your social clubs. 
Teach your kids good financial habits and seek to get financial literacy as part of the 
school  curriculum.  We  will  provide  or  arrange  for  the  training,  the  materials  and 
other back-stopping support. 
 We  continue  to  look  for  financing  for  the  programme.  The  three  year  budget  calls  for  an 
expenditure  of  $10  million  of  which  about  one-half  is  earmarked  to come  from  the  Central 
Government and the Central Bank. We would like to raise the remainder from stakeholders. 
As I said, financial literacy is a national imperative and we would hope to convince a broad 
cross section of the community to get on the national financial literacy bandwagon. 
At this point, I would now like to share some of the results of the base-line national literacy 
survey which was initiated to give us a general idea of the current level of financial literacy in 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2008
the country. The survey results will also help us to make more targeted interventions as we 
move forward. We plan to conduct follow-up surveys to track the progress being made under 
the programme. 
The survey was conducted …. 
  BIS Review 10/2008 
  3
    4 
 BIS Review 10/2008
    BIS Review 10/2008 
 5
    6 
 BIS Review 10/2008
    BIS Review 10/2008 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 10/2008
    BIS Review 10/2008 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 10/2008
    BIS Review 10/2008 
 11
   12 
 BIS Review 10/2008
