European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
10 January 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our first 
press conference of 2008. Let me therefore wish you all a very Happy New Year. I would 
also  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  welcome  Cyprus  and  Malta  as  countries  which  have 
adopted the euro as their currency. With Cyprus and Malta, the euro area now comprises 15 
EU  Member  States.  Accordingly,  Mr  Orphanides,  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Cyprus, and Mr Bonello, the Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, became members of the 
Governing Council on 1 January 2008. 
Let  me  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  our  meeting,  which  was  also  attended  by 
Commissioner Almunia.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. According to the latest information, strong 
short-term upward pressure on inflation has continued, with HICP inflation remaining at 3.1% 
in  December.  As  regards  the  medium  term,  and  in  a  context  of  very  vigorous  money  and 
credit growth, our assessment of upside risks to price stability has been fully confirmed. The 
Governing Council remains prepared to act pre-emptively so that second-round effects and 
upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not  materialise  and,  consequently, 
medium  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price 
stability.  Reflecting  its  mandate,  such  anchoring  is  of  the  highest  priority  to  the  Governing 
Council.  The  economic  fundamentals  of  the  euro  area  are  sound.  However,  the  ongoing 
reappraisal of risk in financial markets is still accompanied by uncertainty about its potential 
impact on the real economy and the risks surrounding the outlook for economic activity are 
on the downside. We will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the coming 
weeks. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
The latest information on economic activity suggests that quarterly growth at the turn of the 
year was at a more moderate pace than the quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.8% observed in the 
third quarter of 2007 (revised upwards from 0.7%). This assessment is in line with indicators 
for  business  and  consumer  confidence  which,  while  declining  over  the  past  few  months, 
generally remain at levels that continue to point to ongoing growth.  
Our main scenario remains that of real GDP growth broadly in line with trend potential. The 
fundamentals  of  the  euro  area  economy  are  sound,  profitability  has  been  sustained, 
employment growth has been robust and unemployment rates have fallen to levels not seen 
for  25  years.  Consumption  growth  should  therefore  continue  to  contribute  to  economic 
expansion,  in  line  with  real  disposable  income,  and  investment  growth  should  provide 
ongoing  support.  On  the  expectation  that  the  global  economy  will,  on  balance,  remain 
resilient – with the slowdown in economic growth in the United States being mitigated by the 
continued strength of emerging market economies – external demand should support euro 
area exports.  
That said, uncertainty about the prospects for economic growth remains high and the risks 
surrounding the outlook for economic activity lie on the downside. The latter relate mainly to 
a  potentially  broader  than  currently  expected  impact  of  the  ongoing  reappraisal  of  risk  in 
financial markets on financing conditions and economic sentiment, with a negative impact on 
world and euro area growth. Further downside risks stem from the scope for additional oil 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 1
and other commodity price rises, concerns about protectionist pressures and the possibility 
of disorderly developments due to global imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate the annual HICP 
inflation  rate  was  3.1%  in  December  2007,  unchanged  from  November.  This  confirms  the 
strong upward pressure on inflation in the short term, stemming mainly from strong increases 
in oil and food prices in recent months.  
Looking ahead, the annual HICP inflation rate is expected to remain significantly above 2% in 
the coming months and is likely to moderate only gradually in the course of 2008. Hence, the 
period  of  temporarily  high  rates  of  inflation  would  be  somewhat  more  protracted  than 
previously expected. Moreover, it is important to stress that the expectation of a moderation 
in  the  rate  of  inflation  –  which  is  embedded  in  the  December  2007  Eurosystem  staff 
macroeconomic projections – assumes some reversal of the recent rises in commodity prices 
–  in  line  with  what  is  currently  captured  by  futures  prices  –  and,  more  fundamentally,  that 
recent oil and food price dynamics and their impact on HICP inflation do not have broadly-
based second-round effects on wage and price-setting behaviour.  
Risks  to  this  medium-term  outlook  for  price  developments  are  fully  confirmed  to lie  on  the 
upside. These risks include the possibility that stronger than currently expected wage growth 
may  emerge,  taking  into  account  capacity  constraints  and  the  positive  developments  in 
labour markets. Furthermore, the pricing power of firms – notably in market segments with 
low competition – could be stronger than expected. At this juncture, it is imperative that all 
parties  concerned  meet  their  responsibilities  and  that  second-round  effects  on  wage  and 
price-setting stemming from current inflation rates be avoided. In the view of the Governing 
Council, this is absolutely essential in order to preserve price stability in the medium run and 
thereby the purchasing power of all euro area citizens. The Governing Council is monitoring 
wage negotiations in the euro area countries with particular attention. Any indexation scheme 
of nominal wages to prices should be eliminated. Finally, further rises in oil and agricultural 
prices, continuing the strong upward trend observed in recent months, as well as increases 
in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those foreseen thus far, could materialise.  
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term  horizons.  Money  and  credit  have  both  continued  to  grow  vigorously  in  recent 
months. The annual growth rate of M3 in November, unchanged at 12.3%, is likely to have 
been influenced by a number of temporary factors, such as the flattening of the yield curve, 
the  financial  market  turmoil  and  specific  transactions  associated  with  the  restructuring  of 
certain  banking  groups.  Nonetheless,  even  taking  these  special  factors  into  account,  the 
underlying rate of monetary expansion remains strong. Moreover, the sustained expansion of 
loans to the domestic private sector, which grew at an annual rate of 11.0% in November, 
points  to  the  continued  vigour  of  underlying  monetary  dynamics.  Monetary  developments 
continue to require very careful monitoring, both to detect underlying trends associated with 
inflationary pressures at longer horizons and to form a better understanding of shorter-term 
monetary dynamics.  
Such  monitoring  will  also  provide  a  more  complete  picture  of  the  response  of  the  private 
sector  to  the  increased  volatility  in  financial  markets.  A  broad  assessment  of  underlying 
trends in money and credit growth is particularly important at present given recent financial 
market developments. Heightened financial volatility may influence the short-term behaviour 
of  money-holders  and  thereby  complicate  the  extraction  of  the  underlying  trend  monetary 
developments. At the same time, monetary and credit data can also offer an important insight 
into how financial institutions, households and firms have responded to the financial market 
turmoil.  
For the time being, however, there is little evidence that the financial market turbulence since 
early  August  2007  has  strongly  influenced  the  dynamics  of  broad  money  and  credit 
aggregates. Indeed, the growth of bank loans to the domestic private sector has remained 
robust in recent months, which may suggest that the supply of credit has not been impaired 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2008
thus far. The growth of M1 and household borrowing have moderated further over the past 
few  quarters,  reflecting  the  impact  of  higher  key  ECB  interest  rates  since  December  2005 
rather  than  the  influence  of  the  financial  turmoil.  Borrowing  by  non-financial  corporations 
remains  very  strong.  Further  data  and  analysis  will  be  required  in  order  to  obtain  a  more 
complete  picture  of  the  impact  of  the  financial  market  developments  on  banks’  balance 
sheets, financing conditions and money and credit growth. 
To  sum  up,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis fully confirms the assessment that there are upside risks to price stability 
over  the  medium  term,  in  a  context  of  very  vigorous  money  and  credit  growth  and  sound 
economic fundamentals in the euro area. At the same time, the potential impact on the real 
economy  of  the  ongoing  reappraisal  of  risk  in  financial  markets  remains  uncertain. 
Consequently, we will monitor very closely all developments. The Governing Council remains 
prepared to act pre-emptively so that second-round effects and upside risks to price stability 
do  not  materialise  and,  consequently,  medium  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain 
firmly anchored in line with price stability. Reflecting its mandate, such anchoring is of the 
highest priority to the Governing Council.  
Turning  to  fiscal  policy,  most  euro  area  countries  have  submitted  their  updated  stability 
programmes. On this basis, after a reduction in the euro area aggregate deficit ratio in 2007, 
an  increase  in  the  ratio  is  projected  for  2008  despite  many  countries  not  having  achieved 
sound fiscal positions. There is a clear risk that some countries will fail to comply with the 
provisions of the preventive arm of the Stability and Growth Pact, thereby undermining the 
credibility of the Pact. In 2008 some countries with fiscal imbalances will consolidate by less 
than  the  required  minimum  of  0.5%  of  GDP  in  structural  terms.  In  these  countries,  much 
more  ambitious  policies  will  be  necessary  to  ensure  that  they  achieve  their  medium-term 
objectives by 2010 at the latest, in accordance with their commitment of April 2007. 
With  regard  to  structural  reforms,  the  new  three-year  cycle  of  the  Lisbon  Strategy  for 
growth and jobs has started. While the achievements made over the last three years of the 
relaunched Strategy are encouraging, it is important that governments step up their reform 
efforts  to  deliver  enhanced  knowledge  and  innovation,  competitiveness  and  labour  market 
flexibility.  Such  reforms  are  crucial  to  raising  productivity  and  fostering  employment 
opportunities in the euro area. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Central Bank of the Philippines in 2008 – 
one dynamic team 
New Year’s message by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the 
Philippines  (Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  to  BSPers,  at  the  BSP  Flag  Raising  Ceremony, 
BSP Complex, Malate, Manila, 7 January 2008. 
 Magandang umaga at maligayang bagong taon sa inyong lahat!  
Fellow  central  bankers.  I  am  very  pleased  that  I  am  the  first  speaker  this  year  for  our 
traditional weekly flag-raising ceremony.  
Alam po ninyo, gusto ko pong magpasalamat muli sa inyong lahat dahil talagang maganda 
ang naging resulta ng 2007 para sa atin sa Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. We were able to 
keep inflation at low and stable rates, our banking system is stronger, we have record high 
international  reserves,  record  high  balance  of  payments  surplus,  and  our  peso  is  the  best 
BIS Review 3/2008 
 3
performing  currency  in  Asia.  For  this,  let  us  give  ourselves  a  well-deserved  round  of 
applause!  
If  you  recall,  the  Monetary  Board  improved  our  salary  scheme  and  incentives  program  in 
2007 in recognition of our good performance. Kaya ba nating ulitin ito?!!! Kaya!!!  
I agree with you; especially if we resolve individually and collectively to find even better ways 
of doing things in our respective sectors. While we have been performing well in terms of our 
mandate, you and I know there is always room for improving our performance.  
It can be as simple as using recycled paper for our draft reports, completing our assignments 
well ahead of time, conserving water and electricity, finding more cost-effective ways of doing 
our  work,  setting  higher  standards  for  the  quality  of  work  we  do,  and  contributing  to  the 
overall  effort  to  transform  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  into  a  world-class  monetary 
authority.  
Fellow BSPers. The months and years ahead hold a lot of challenges that demand new and 
better  ways  of  doing  things.  Our  operating  environment  continues  to  evolve  and  change. 
Therefore,  it  is  not  feasible  to  remain  static  and  continue  to  depend  on  old  systems  and 
procedures.  
Thus,  while  we  have  become  good  inflation  targeters,  we  still  continue  to  seek  third  party 
expert evaluation of the tools we use to craft and implement responsive monetary policies. 
The  Monetary  Stability  Sector  will  also  implement  more  streamlined  cash  management 
operations system this year, among others.  
At the same time, we are reorganizing our Supervision and Examination Sector to adopt to a 
rapidly  changing  environment  and  implement  reforms  that  will  make  our  banking  system 
stronger,  more  efficient,  at  par  with  international  standards,  and  more  responsive  to  the 
needs of our economy and our people.  
The Resource Management Sector, on the other hand, will ensure that BSPers are properly 
equipped  with  the  appropriate  skills  and  expertise  required  by  our  institution.  2008  also 
marks our shift to a more meaningful appraisal system in accordance with our merit system 
for salary adjustments and promotions.  
Even  the  way  we  estimate  and  produce  our  currency  requirements  at  the  Security  Plant 
Complex is undergoing review to make it more efficient and responsive to the needs of the 
economy.  
Indeed,  change  is  happening  around  us.  Now,  more  than  ever,  we  need  to  be  open  to 
change, to be flexible to be dynamic to achieve the goals we have set under our Medium 
Term Development Program.  
Nevertheless, even as we welcome change, we should, at all times, remain faithful to the five 
core  values  of  our  institution,  which  are:  patriotism,  integrity,  excellence,  dynamism  and 
solidarity.  
These  core  values  should  serve  as  our  enduring  and  lasting  guides  as  we  deal  with  the 
opportunities and challenges ahead of us.  
Ladies and gentlemen of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. By tradition, this is the time of year 
when we commit to do better through what we call New Year’s resolution.  
As our joint New Year’s resolution therefore, let us commit to be guided by our core values, 
at all times, wherever we may be.  
Muli  sa  ngalan  po  ng  ating  Monetary  Board  at  nang  aking  pamilya  kasama  na  ang  aking 
maybahay  na  si  Elma  at  tatlong  anak,  ako  po  ay  nagpapasalamat  sa  inyong  lahat  at 
humihiling na sana ay maging masaya, malusog, masagana, at matagumpay ang 2008 para 
sa ating lahat, at sa ating mga kababayan!  
Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2008
