Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile:  Fast 
Monetary Union 
Opening address by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
the Monetary Affairs Committee Meeting on Fast Tracking East African Community Monetary 
Union to 2012, Kampala, 23 January 2008.  
tracking  East  African  Community 
 Ambassador Juma Mwapachu, the Secretary General of the East African Community,  
Fellow Governors from the Central Banks of the EAC Partner States,  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Good morning!  
Let me start by welcoming you all to Uganda "Gifted by Nature" and to Kampala, our lovely 
capital,  the  City  of  undulating  hills  and  the  host  city  for  this  Extra-ordinary  Meeting  of  the 
Monetary  Affairs  Committee  (MAC)  of  the  Fast  Tracking  of  the  East  African  Community 
(EAC).  Let  me  at  the  outset  recognize  the  presence  in  our  midst  of  Ambassador  Juma 
Mwapachu,  the  Secretary  General  of  the  East  African  Community.  Allow  me  also  to 
congratulate Professor Benno Ndulu upon his very recent elevation to the post of Governor 
of  the  Bank  of  Tanzania  by  His  Excellency  Jakaya  Kikwete  the  President  of  the  United 
Republic of Tanzania; and to congratulate Mr. Gaspard Sindayigaya, upon his appointment 
as  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Burundi  by  H.E.  S.E.  Pierre  Nkurunziza  the 
President of the Republic of Burundi. I join my fellow Governors of the Central Bank of Kenya 
and  the  National  Bank  of  Rwanda  in  welcoming  you,  the  Honourable  Ndulu  and  the 
Honourable Sindayigaya, to the Monetary Affairs Committee of the East African Community. 
We look forward to learning from your wisdom and profiting from your able leadership at this 
very important juncture in the process of economic integration of the East African region.  
Ladies and gentlemen, Article 5(2) of the EAC Treaty, Article 5(2) stipulates that  
"....the  Partner  States  undertake  to  establish  among  themselves  and 
in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty, a Customs Union, a 
Common  Market,  subsequently  a  Monetary  Union  and  ultimately  a 
Political Federation in order to strengthen and regulate the industrial, 
commercial, 
infrastructural,  cultural,  social,  political  and  other 
relations  of  the  Partner  States  to  the  end  that  there  shall  be 
accelerated,  harmonious  and  balanced  development  and  sustained 
expansion  of  economic  activities,  the  benefit  of  which  shall  be 
equitably shared...."  
Furthermore,  the  6th  extra-ordinary  meeting  of  the  Summit  of  the  EAC  Heads  of  State 
decided that East Africa should move expeditiously towards establishing a Monetary Union 
by 2012. The Summit decided that a strategic framework to fast track the establishment of a 
Monetary Union should be developed for consideration by the next meetings of the Council 
and Summit.  
As  part  of  the  process  of  implementing  these  decisions,  in  October  2007  the  Economic 
Affairs Sub-committee of the MAC met in Entebbe to develop a strategic framework which 
can fast track EAC Monetary Union in 2012. The Sub-committee discussed the convergence 
criteria  and  timeframe;  the  model  protocol  and  institutional  structure  of  the  EAC  Monetary 
Union; and harmonization of macroeconomic statistics. Fellow Governors, our role today is to 
consider the Report of the Economic Affairs Sub-committee report with a view to agreeing on 
a strategic framework covering the legal, institutional and organizational preparation for the 
region to achieve monetary union according to the timetable that has been determined by the 
Summit.  
BIS Review 23/2008 
 1
The first manifestation of a Monetary Union is a common currency. Therefore the strategic 
framework must include a Monetary policy by the five Central Banks that will serve to ensure 
that  the  unified  regional  currency  will  be  stable  in  order  to  foster  further  economic  and 
financial  integration  among  Partner  States.  While,  it  is  conceivable  that  not  all  the  Partner 
States  may  be  ready  for  accession  at  the  same  time  on  account  of  the  failure  to  fulfil 
simultaneously  all  of  the  macroeconomic  convergence  criteria,  the  Treaty  established 
unequivocal  commitment  for  all  the  Partner  States  to  join  the  EAC  monetary  union  and 
therefore, to adopt policies consistent with this aim.  
It  is,  therefore,  axiomatic  that  the  success  of  the  EAC  monetary  union  will  depend  on  the 
establishment of the EAC currency and single monetary policy; sustainable macroeconomic 
convergence among the Partner States; and a balanced policy mix between fiscal, monetary 
and  other  economic  policies.  The  strategic  framework  should  therefore  provide  for  a 
mechanism  for  monitoring  and  coordinating  Partner  States'  economic  policies  to  promote 
convergence.  Meaningful  monetary  and  financial  integration  can  be  achieved  only  with  a 
sustainable  convergence  of  economic  fundamentals,  particularly  price  stability,  and  sound 
fiscal,  monetary  and  structural  policies.  Short  of  that,  fellow  Governors,  ladies  and 
gentlemen, it may even, be counterproductive to try to artificially forge a monetary union. But 
failure is not on the agenda. Our Heads of State have decided that we must have a Monetary 
Union. Our role is to help to deliver it.  
I  cannot  emphasize  enough  the  need  for  sustainable  macroeconomic  convergence  as  the 
bedrock for the EAC Monetary Union. A durable monetary union depends on a high degree 
of  sustainable  convergence  regarding  price  stability,  sound  fiscal  and  monetary  policies, 
exchange rate stability and convergence of long-term interest rates in the region.  
Ultimately, the strategic framework should stress the application of the convergence criteria, 
institutional arrangements for EAC monetary union and a clear timetable for the preparations 
necessary  to  ensure  successful  establishment  of  a  unified  regional  currency  and  central 
bank. Governors and colleagues, the fast tracking of EAC monetary union is upon us, and 
we must rise to the occasion and meet the challenge head on. We must be strong advocates 
of this noble cause and convert the sceptics. We must seize the day or as they say in Latin, 
carpe diem!  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2008
