Philipp M Hildebrand: Albert Gallatin, one of the financial founding 
fathers – what can we learn from him today? 
Speech  by  Mr  Philipp  M  Hildebrand,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce, Geneva, 10 September 2008. 
I would like to thank Signe Krogstrup for her valuable support in drafting this speech. I also thank Rita Kobel and 
Urs Birchler for their very helpful comments and discussions. 
 Introduction 
1.  
As  always,  it  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  in  Geneva.  I  want  to  thank  the  Swiss-American 
Chamber of Commerce for its kind invitation.  
My remarks today are unusual in the sense that I will not structure them around monetary 
policy, the ongoing financial turmoil, or any other current monetary topic. Instead, I have the 
privilege to step aside temporarily from my day-to-day preoccupations and indulge in a little 
bit of history about a remarkable man whose origins are firmly rooted in Geneva’s beautiful 
“vielle ville”. Ladies and Gentlemen, it is an honor for me to pay homage to Albert Gallatin – 
the Geneva-born fourth – and to this day longest – serving United States Secretary of the 
Treasury.1
Those  of  you  who  enjoy  economic  history  will  be  familiar  with  the  extraordinary 
accomplishments  of  Alexander  Hamilton,  the  first  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  appointed  by 
President  George  Washington  in  1789.  Hamilton  built  the  foundation  of  the  U.S.  federal 
financial system in the late 18th century.2 Albert Gallatin’s efforts to solidify the Hamiltonian 
structure and to establish fiscal discipline in the early years of the United States are less well 
known. 3 As you will see, they clearly merit attention.  
The  story  of  Albert  Gallatin  provides  a  wonderful  example  of  how  Swiss  and  American 
politics  and  economics  have  nourished  each  other  for  centuries  through  the  exchange  of 
ideas  and  people.  Moreover,  Albert  Gallatin’s  legacy  arguably  provides  some  valuable 
lessons which remain relevant in the present time. Today, I would like to focus on a crucial 
part of Gallatin’s legacy – his strong adherence to fiscal discipline. But first, let me take you 
on a brief tour of Gallatin’s fascinating life story. 
The life and achievements of Albert Gallatin 
2.  
For the sake of clarity, allow me to divide Albert Gallatin’s life into four distinct periods.  
1761-1788: Youth 
The first period covers Gallatin’s life prior to becoming politically active in the United States. 
Gallatin was born into a wealthy merchant family in Calvinist Geneva in 1761. He became an 
                                                 
1   Gallatin served 13 years – longer than any other serving Secretary of the Treasury before or since. 
2   Ron Chernov, Alexander Hamilton (The Penguin Press, New York NY, 2004), provides the most recent and 
complete Hamilton biography. 
3   Alexander Balinky, Albert Gallatin: Fiscal Theories and Policies (Rudgers University Press, New Jersey NJ, 
1958),  provides  a  thorough  analysis  and  critique  of  Albert  Gallatin’s  fiscal  and  financial  system  against  the 
background of the political and economic conditions which then prevailed, as well as his party affiliation during 
his time in office. 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 1
orphan when he was only nine. He was raised by his relative, Catherine Pictet.4 At the age of 
nineteen, Gallatin obtained a university degree in Latin and Greek. His classic education was 
not the only early influence on his future political convictions. He was deeply affected by the 
strict Calvinist attitudes to debt and savings that would have prevailed in Geneva at the time. 
Moreover,  he  was  privy  to  and  would  have  actively  participated  in  the  rich  debates  about 
politics and philosophy that took place in his social circles. These debates were inspired by 
the  French  Enlightenment  and  the  influence  and  presence  of  the  likes  of  Voltaire  and 
Rousseau during those years.5 Nonetheless, by the time he completed his studies, Gallatin 
was  disenchanted  with  his  prospects  in  Geneva  as  either  a  civil  servant,  merchant  or 
member of the officer corps. In 1780, without saying a word to his family, he decided to leave 
for the newly independent United States of America. As he put it, he wanted to “drink in a 
love for independence in the freest country of the universe”.6  
Gallatin spent his first years in the US in New England, trying to earn a living. Eventually, he 
taught  French  at  Harvard.  With  his  early  savings,  he  purchased  some  land  in  Fayette 
County, Pennsylvania and in 1784, he settled there.7
1788-1801: Politics 
Once established in Pennsylvania, Gallatin became politically active at the local and later at 
the federal level. This marked the beginning of a second distinct period of Albert Gallatin’s 
life. This period lasted from approximately 1788 to 1801, when the newly elected president, 
Thomas  Jefferson,  appointed  Gallatin  as  his  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.8  These  final  few 
years  of  the  18th  century  were  an  extraordinary  period  in  American  history  and  politics. 
During  the  second  half  of  the  1780s,  the  Constitution  was  written,  adopted  and eventually 
ratified;  the  first  federal  government  under  the  Constitution  was  formed  and  George 
Washington, who had presided over the Constitutional Assembly, was elected first President 
of the United States – in 1789. 
President Washington appointed Hamilton, whom he had relied on greatly during the War of 
Independence,  as  his  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  From  1789  to  1800,  Hamilton  built  the 
foundation  of  what  was  to  become  the  federal  financial  system  of  the  United  States.9 
Hamilton’s system rested on four pillars: The creation and extension of sources of federal tax 
revenues; the funding and management of the federal public debt; the increased use of the 
U.S. dollar as a medium of exchange through the establishment of the United States Mint 
                                                 
4   Albert Gallatin’s father died when he was four, and his mother when he was nine. His mother sent him to be 
brought up by his aunt, Catherine Pictet, just after his father died, as she had to attend to the family’s financial 
affairs.  For  more  on  Gallatin’s  Geneva  background  see,  for  example,  William  Emmanuel  Rappard,  Albert 
Gallatin, citoyen de Genève, ministre des Etats-Unis (Impr. Centrale, Genève, 1917) or John Austin Stevens, 
Albert Gallatin, An American Statesman (Univ. Press of the Pacific, Honolulu HI, 1883). 
5   Voltaire  arrived  in  Geneva  in  1755,  and  moved  to  Ferney  in  1758,  where  he  stayed  to  his  death  in  1778. 
Gallatin’s  grandparents  visited  Voltaire  in  Ferney  and  Albert  Gallatin  was  often  taken  there  for  visits. 
Rousseau was born in Geneva, left at a young age but returned there in 1754. He published Du Contrat Social 
(and other writings) in 1762, a year after Gallatin was born. He was subsequently forced to flee from Geneva, 
so there was no direct contact, but definitely an influence on the intellectual climate of the city. 
6   Stevens, op.cit., p. 10, quotes Gallatin as having used this phrase to explain his departure. 
7  
8   Contrary to  what the party’s  name suggests, the Republican Party  established  by Jefferson  in the late 18th 
In Pennsylvania, Gallatin also founded the colony “New Geneva”. 
century was in fact the forerunner of today’s Democratic Party.  
9   Hamilton only served as Treasury Secretary until 1795, after which Wolcott, a fellow Federalist, took over until 
1801.  But  Wolcott  is  generally  perceived  as  having  continued  and  completed  the  policies  of  Hamilton  until 
Dexter took over, for a few months only. Gallatin took office in May 1801. 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2008
and,  finally,  the  creation  of  the  first  Bank  of  the  United  States.10  The  Bank  of  the  United 
States gave the federal government a tool to manage short-term credit and cash flow and to 
influence – and thereby help safeguard – the stability of the emerging financial system of the 
United States.11 The Bank also significantly extended access to credit for private enterprise. 
During  these  extraordinary  years,  Gallatin  first  served  as  a  representative  in  the  state 
legislature  of  Pennsylvania.  He  was  involved  in  the  adoption  and  ratification  of  the  state 
constitution. After a brief period as a senator, Gallatin became a  member of the  House of 
Representatives in 1795, where he served until 1801.12 As a congressman, he established 
himself  as  a  leading  figure  in  the  emerging  Republican  Party  led  by  Thomas  Jefferson. 
Gallatin  quickly  gained  the  reputation  of  being  the  member  of  his  party  with  the  most 
profound understanding of public finance. In line with the state-based agricultural outlook of 
Jefferson and the Republican Party, he challenged Hamilton’s federalist financial institutions 
and policies.13 Gallatin and Hamilton became enemies, both politically and personally. Part of 
the personal enmity was rooted in the Whiskey Rebellion of 1792, when Gallatin served as a 
member  of  the  Pennsylvania  Assembly.  He  is  believed  to  have  been  the  author  of  an 
aggressively formulated resolution opposing Hamilton’s efforts, as Secretary of the Treasury, 
to collect a “whiskey tax”. This resolution stated that tax collectors would be treated with the 
“contempt  they  deserve.”14  Later,  the  enmity  between  Gallatin  and  Hamilton  was  further 
fueled when Gallatin actively supported Republican attempts to discredit Hamilton and force 
him 
the  Treasury  over  wide-ranging  charges  of  corruption  and 
mismanagement.  
As a member of Congress, Gallatin acquired a solid reputation as a fiscal conservative. He 
relentlessly  demanded  a  high  level  of  fiscal  transparency  and  consistently  challenged  all 
decisions by the government to spend in excess of its current revenues.  
resign 
from 
to 
1801-1814: The Treasury 
Thomas  Jefferson  had  already  relied  on  Gallatin’s  financial  advice  during  his  time  in 
opposition. After becoming President, he chose Gallatin as his Secretary of the Treasury.15 
Thus  began  a  third  distinct  period  in  Gallatin’s  life.  Remarkably,  instead  of  dismantling 
Hamilton’s financial system, Gallatin opted to preserve the most important parts of it. In some 
cases, he even strengthened Hamilton’s system. Most notably, he made extensive use of the 
Bank of the United States to conduct the government’s day-to-day fiscal operations. Gallatin 
also kept Hamilton’s system for keeping the public debt more or less intact. Other parts of 
Hamilton’s  financial  system  were  modified  to  serve  Republican  causes.  Gallatin’s  early 
                                                 
10   See,  for  example,  Chernov’s  description  of  Hamilton’s  achievements  while  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
(Chernov, op.cit., ch. 17-20). 
11   Using the Bank of the United States for the maintenance of financial stability was done both through lending-
of-last-resort  type  operations  and  through  the  restriction  and  extension  of  credit  in  response  to  market 
conditions. Robert E Wright and David J. Cowen, Financial Founding Fathers: The Men Who Made America 
Rich (Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago IL, 2006), ch. 1, provide a thorough exposition of Hamilton’s ideology, 
achievements,  and  financial  system,  as  well  as  his  skilled  use  of  the  Bank  of  the  United  States  for  the 
purposes of maintaining financial stability. 
12   At the end of 1793, Gallatin won the election to the United States Senate, but was removed shortly thereafter 
from the Senate on the grounds that he did not have the minimum nine years of United States citizenship. 
13   Alexander Balinky, Albert Gallatin: Fiscal Theories and Policies (Rudgers Univ. Press, New Jersey NJ, 1958) 
gives  a  very  thorough  introduction  to  the  fiscal  ideology  of  the  Republican  Party  and  how  Gallatin’s  fiscal 
theories and policies were shaped by this. Wright and Cowen, op.cit., p. 103, point out how Gallatin had more 
of a problem with the Federalist domination of Hamilton’s bank than with the bank itself.  
14   Quoted in Chernov, op.cit., p. 469. 
15   Jefferson was elected president in 1800, but did not appoint Gallatin until 1801 – even though it had been his 
intention from the start. See for example Wright and Cowen, op.cit., p. 93, for details.  
BIS Review 106/2008 
 3
priorities  included  a  change  in  Hamilton’s  tax  structure  in  order  to  better  reflect  the 
Republican Party’s ideology and its constituencies. He also focused on the need to increase 
transparency in fiscal policy. He progressed rapidly on both fronts. Internal taxes were soon 
abolished. The federal government came to rely almost exclusively on import tariffs, which 
Gallatin  saw  as  luxury  taxes  that  did  not  burden  his  farming  constituency.16  Gallatin  also 
convinced  Congress  to  pass  the  law  of  1801,  which  required  an  annual  report  by  the 
Secretary of the Treasury to the President. He submitted the first of these reports later that 
year.  Moreover,  the  minting  of  dollars  was  somewhat  scaled  back  under  Gallatin.  To 
compensate,  he  allowed  foreign  coins  to  circulate  along  with  the  dollar.  These  measures 
were not taken because Gallatin was opposed to the Mint. Rather, the Mint proved to be very 
costly for the federal purse. Therefore, Gallatin saw the reduction of its operations as a way 
for the government to save money, in line with his primary objective of fiscal consolidation.17 
For Gallatin, a reduction of the United States’ federal debt burden “was the end toward which 
all  other  fiscal  policy  was  designed.”18  He  argued  forcefully  that  the  federal  government 
should  spend  tax  revenues  on  new  public  services,  goods  or  investment  only  when  tax 
revenues were freed from having to service a large public debt stock.19  
Gallatin’s  cautious  management  and  reduction  of  the  public  debt  during  his  first  years  in 
office  was  crucial.  It  gave  the  United  States  Treasury  the  necessary  credibility  to  access 
financial  markets  and  therefore  finance  extraordinary  expenses.  The  most  prominent 
example, of course, is Gallatin’s arrangement to finance the Louisiana Purchase in 1803. He 
quickly managed to raise the necessary amount – nearly USD 15 million – through a bond 
issue arranged by the British merchant bank Barings.20  
With hindsight, some scholars have questioned whether public debt reduction should be the 
main fiscal policy objective of an emerging country with high growth potential.21 But, given 
Gallatin’s  debt  reduction  objective,  his  efforts  were  extraordinarily  successful.  By  1808, 
Gallatin had managed to reduce the federal debt-to-GDP ratio by an estimated 50 percent or 
so, including the additional debt from the Louisiana Purchase.22 This was a remarkable effort 
                                                 
16   Balinky, op.cit., provides a detailed description of the tax structure of the early United States and its changes 
under Gallatin. 
17   See Balinky op.cit., pp. 101-103, for an account of the United States Mint under Gallatin. 
18   Quoted from Balinky, op.cit., p. 39. 
19   This is not to suggest that Gallatin was opposed to government-sponsored infrastructure projects. Indeed, in 
1808, he presented the Gallatin Report on Roads and Canals. As he put it at the time, the vision of roads and 
canals to link up the young nation “could not be left to individual exertion.” 
20   The federal debt stood at approximately USD 83 million when Gallatin took office in 1801. By 1808, Gallatin 
had succeeded in reducing it to USD 57 million, including the extra USD 15 million added by the Louisiana 
Purchase. United States nominal GDP  has  been estimated at  approximately USD  520 million in 1800 (see 
Susan B. Carter, Scott S. Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright 
(eds.),  Historical  Statistics  of  the  United  States,  Volume  Three:  Economic  Structure  and  Performance. 
Cambridge  University  Press,  New  York  NY,  2006).  Hence,  almost  doubling  the  size  of  the  United  States 
through the purchase of the Louisiana territory from Napoleon in 1803 cost approximately 3% of the GDP of 
the existing territory.  
21   Balinky, op.cit., for example, comes out strongly against Gallatin’s debt reduction strategy, arguing that it was 
a narrow-minded and short-sighted fiscal policy for a country in need of economic development.  
22   More precisely, the United States debt-to-GDP ratio was reduced by an estimated 56 percent between 1801 
and 1808. This estimate is based on nominal GDP estimates for the US in the early 1800s provided in Carter 
et. al, op.cit., who provide nominal GDP figures for 1800 and 1810 (but not for the intervening years). These 
have  been  used  here  as  proxies  for  1801  and  1808.  The  possible  error  caused  by  this  approximation  is 
mitigated  by  the  fact  that  growth  in  1809-10  is  likely  to  have  slowed  considerably  due  to  the  increasing 
prospects of war with Britain. Data on federal debt are obtained from the United States Treasury Department, 
Public  Debt  Historical  Archives  (http://www.treasurydirect.gov/govt/reports/pd/histdebt/histdebt_histo1.htm). 
These data closely match those reported by Gallatin himself in State of the Finances, 1801-1802 (American 
State Papers, Finance, 1832, Vol 1, pp. 701-705; http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/amlaw/lwsplink.html).  
4 
 BIS Review 106/2008
and cannot be attributed solely to the fact that Gallatin’s service at the Treasury coincided 
with a prosperous and peaceful period.  
To put Gallatin’s debt reduction efforts into perspective, it is worth comparing them to more 
recent  developments  in  OECD  public-debt-to-GDP  ratios.  For  instance,  growth  in  OECD 
economies was also relatively robust between 1994 and 2000.23 But only one OECD country 
– Ireland – saw a similar reduction in its debt-to-GDP ratio during that period. Arguably, in the 
case  of  Ireland,  debt  reduction  was  easier.  During  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  Ireland 
enjoyed  roughly  three  times  the  economic  growth  the  United  States  is  estimated  to  have 
experienced in the early 1800s. Ireland essentially grew out of its debt, while Gallatin had to 
save his way out of the debt burden of the United States.24  
Unfortunately  for  Gallatin,  history  took  a  turn  for  the  worse  in  1808.  A  second  war  of 
independence with Britain was looming. A trade embargo with Britain was imposed and led 
to a steady drop in import tax revenues over the coming years. At the same time, Gallatin 
needed additional revenues for war preparations. This left him with next to nothing to sustain 
his debt reduction strategy. By 1809, the first deficit emerged since Gallatin had taken office. 
In  addition,  and  against  Gallatin’s  advice,  Congress  opted  not  to  renew  the  charter  of  the 
Bank  of  the  United  States  in  1811,  just  one  year  before  war  broke  out.  Congress  thereby 
removed  the  main  tool  for  arranging  war  financing  that  Gallatin  would  have  relied  on. 
Foreseeing  financial  disaster  and  unable  to  prevent  it  in  his  capacity  as  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury, Gallatin resigned from the Treasury in 1814.  
1814-1849: Diplomacy  
This brings me to the fourth distinct period of Gallatin’s life, covering his post-treasury years. 
In 1814, Gallatin went to Russia to represent the United States and help settle hostilities at 
the  peace  conference  with  England  and  France.  The  conference  ended  successfully  the 
same year with the signing of the Treaty of Ghent. Much of this success has been credited to 
Gallatin.25 Before returning home, Gallatin made his first visit to Geneva since he had left his 
birthplace  35  years  earlier.  Geneva  received  him  with  great  honors.  According  to  his  son, 
who  accompanied  him  at  the  time,  the  visit  was  very  emotional.  Gallatin  remained  deeply 
attached to his native city throughout his life.26  
Albert Gallatin never returned to Treasury. But he stayed involved in U.S. diplomatic, political 
and financial matters. Until his death in 1849, he served as a diplomat in Paris, and later in 
London.  He  also  directed  the  Bank  of  New  York,  and  indulged  in  economic,  financial  and 
ethnographic  research.  He  was  laid  to  rest  in  the  Trinity  Church  cemetery  on  Wall  Street. 
Years  earlier,  Trinity  Church  had  already  become  the  final  resting  place  of  Alexander 
Hamilton. If you visit Trinity Church, you will find that the two are buried at opposite ends of 
the cemetery, perhaps fittingly so in light of their difficult personal and political relationship. 
                                                 
23   Real growth averaged 3.1 percent in OECD countries between 1994 and 2000, as compared to an average 
growth rate of 2.8 for the period 1980 to 2006. During the more recent seven-year period between 2000 and 
2006, growth  has averaged  2.5 percent, and no OECD  country  has reduced its debt-to-GDP ratio by more 
than Gallatin’s record.  
24   Ireland experienced an average real growth rate of nine percent during the years in question. This compares 
to an estimated average growth rate for the United States between 1801 and 1808 of just over three percent. 
Source:  Author’s  own  calculations  based  on  data  provided  in  Carter  et.  al,  op.cit.,  and  the  IMF  World 
Economic Outlook.  
25   See, for example, Rappard, op.cit. 
26   Rappard, op.cit. recounts Gallatin’s post-treasury diplomatic career as well as his travels in Europe and time 
spent in Geneva. 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 5
The legacy 
3.  
Let me now briefly turn to the legacy of Albert Gallatin’s extraordinary life. It seems to me that 
there are two major achievements to point to. First, there is Gallatin’s singular success in his 
pursuit of debt reduction. Gallatin took advantage of prosperous and relatively peaceful times 
to reduce the public debt of the emerging United States. The second key legacy of Albert 
Gallatin’s  efforts  is  the  way  in  which  he  reinforced  the  financial  institutions  set  up  by 
Alexander Hamilton and made skilful use of them.  
Hamilton’s  financial  system  consisted  of  newly  established  institutions,  which  encountered 
fierce political opposition. They lacked the robustness that only the test of time can provide. 
Gallatin  spent  the  next  13  years  successfully  using  Hamilton’s  system  to  ensure  fiscal 
prudence  and  continuous  sound  financial  management.  Without  this,  it  might  not  have 
survived its infancy. This is particularly true of the Bank of the United States. It is possible to 
argue that Gallatin’s strong support for Hamilton’s bank furthered the process of setting up its 
successor, the Second Bank of the United States, in 1817. Two recent authors have gone 
further. They refer to Gallatin as the “Savior” of Hamilton’s financial system.27  
This  second  legacy  is  remarkable,  given  the  long-standing  animosity  between  Alexander 
Hamilton  and  Albert  Gallatin.  How  are  we  to  explain  Gallatin’s  transformation  from  a 
prominent critic of the Hamiltonian system to its guardian and perhaps savior? One possible 
answer,  of  course,  is  that  when  Thomas  Jefferson  became  President  in  1801,  he  quickly 
realized that the economic consequences of dismantling Hamilton’s financial structure would 
be dramatic for his presidency, his party and the country. Moreover, there is evidence that 
Jefferson may have indirectly given a commitment to the Federalists to preserve at least part 
of  the  Hamiltonian  financial  system  in  order  to  break  the  political  deadlock  during  the 
Presidential election. What is perhaps most remarkable, however, is that Gallatin seems to 
have come to appreciate the genius of Hamilton’s system and advised Jefferson accordingly. 
In  an  attempt  to  firmly  discredit  Hamilton,  Jefferson  –  shortly  after  becoming  President  – 
asked Gallatin to examine the archives and uncover the “blunders and frauds of Hamilton”. 
After searching “with a very good appetite”, Gallatin went back to Jefferson with the following 
remarkable  assessment:  “I  have  found  the  most  perfect  system  ever  formed.  Any  change 
that should be made in it would injure it. Hamilton made no blunders, committed no frauds. 
He  did  nothing  wrong.”  Indeed  Gallatin  went  on  to  say  that  Hamilton  had  done  such  an 
outstanding  job  as  the  first  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  that  he  had  turned  the  post  into  a 
sinecure for all future occupants. As for the Bank of the United States, Gallatin proclaimed 
that “it had been wisely and skillfully managed”.28  
What can we learn from Gallatin’s financial achievements today? 
4.  
What  lessons  can  we  draw  today  from  Gallatin’s  economic  policies?  Let  me  limit  my 
observations to the value of fiscal prudence and sustainability. Arguably, the most important 
lesson of Gallatin’s achievements is that public debt reduction requires unwavering political 
commitment  to  fiscal  discipline.  This  lesson  is  certainly  relevant  in  the  context  of  today’s 
fiscal challenges.  
Gallatin faced an unexpected fiscal time bomb in the form of a war with Great Britain. The 
developed world now faces a predictable and rapidly ticking fiscal time bomb in the form of 
aging populations. The demographic strains on government budgets in the developed world 
are already visible. Pressures will almost certainly intensify in coming years. The implication 
is  that  in  the  not-too-distant  future,  spending  on  public  goods  and  services  will  have  to 
contract.  Alternatively,  taxes  could  be  raised  in  an  attempt  to  maintain  the  level  of  public 
                                                 
27   Wright and Cowen, op.cit. 
28   For all these references, see Chernov, op.cit., p. 647. 
6 
 BIS Review 106/2008
goods and services we currently enjoy. Given these longer-term fiscal strains, we should be 
building up a fiscal cushion rather than becoming more indebted.  
Allow  me  to  review  very  briefly  some  trends  in  budget  deficits  and  debt  levels  in  the 
developed world. Historically, government budget deficits have been typically used to finance 
wars. War time deficits have then been compensated by surpluses in times of peace. This 
cycle of deficit finance and subsequent debt reduction is illustrated in fig 1. It shows historical 
deficits for G7 countries excluding Germany.29 Every  major period of deficits prior to 1950 
has coincided with a time of war. After the Second World War, deficits essentially returned to 
normal.  As  you  can  see,  after  1970  there  was  a  significant  change  –  all  6  countries 
represented  in  the  graph  started  running  sustained  budget  deficits,  and  this  in  times  of 
relative  peace.30  Now  take  a  look  at  graph  2.  It  shows  public  debt  for  the  OECD,  as  a 
percentage of GDP, since 1970. Since the mid-1970s, the accumulation of fiscal deficits has 
led to a near doubling of public debt, as a percentage of GDP, in the OECD area.31 While 
public debt can be desirable for many reasons, it is very difficult to argue that the appropriate 
debt-to-GDP ratios should be this high. Admittedly, the average OECD debt-to-GDP ratio has 
fallen somewhat since the late 1990s. The Maastricht convergence criteria for EMU countries 
and  robust  growth  have  clearly  contributed  to  this  trend.  However,  fiscal  positions  in  the 
United  States  and  in  Europe  have  deteriorated  again  more  recently.32  For  a  long  time, 
Switzerland  stood  out  as  an  exception  in  the  pattern  of  deteriorating  OECD  debt-to-GDP 
ratios.  But  with  the  economic  slowdown  of  the  early  1990s,  Switzerland’s  public  debt 
increased rapidly, and exceeded 50% of GDP in 2003. Fortunately, it has since been brought 
back down. It stood at roughly 44% last year.  
How would Albert Gallatin view such unprecedented increases in public debt-to-GDP ratios? 
Presumably, he would be dismayed. Moreover, I suspect he would conclude that the political 
commitment to fiscal discipline should have been much more pronounced during the last few 
years when the global economy enjoyed broadly robust growth. As the world is entering what 
looks like a protracted period of lower growth, it will be extremely difficult to keep public debt-
to-GDP ratios constant, let alone reduce them.  
Conclusion 
5.  
After this very brief fiscal detour let me conclude by returning to Albert Gallatin. Anyone who 
loves  the  city  of  Geneva  has  many  reasons  to  be  proud  of  the  achievements  of  Albert 
Gallatin. To my knowledge, he is the only son or daughter of Geneva who is honored in the 
form of a prominent statue in Washington D.C. He stands at the entrance of the Treasury 
building, and only a few steps away from the White House. On the statue, he is described 
simply  as  a  “Genius  of  Finance”.  As  Secretary  of  the  United  States  Treasury,  he  made  a 
crucial  contribution  to  the  stability  and  development  of  the  nascent  United  States  financial 
system. Above all, he was deeply committed to reducing the size of the federal public debt 
during his first seven years in office. Only when tax revenues declined, as the threat of war 
loomed, did he allow debt reduction to be relegated to a secondary objective.  
                                                 
29   See Paul R. Masson and Michael L. Mussa, Long-term Tendencies in Budget Deficits and Debt IMF Working 
Paper No. 95/128, 1995. 
30   In spite of the cold war, proxy wars and several wars of independence of colonies, the period after the Second 
World War remains one of relative peace in the developed world, compared with any other period in history. 
31   Most of the sub-periods during which debt grew fastest have coincided with periods of economic slowdown. 
But what is remarkable is that we have not generally seen a reduction in debt levels in good times that would 
match the increases in debt in downturns. 
32  What the graph hides is the fact that most of the increase in the average OECD public debt-to-GDP ratio in the 
late 1990s has been driven by the steep debt increases of Japan in the 1990s. Taking out Japan from the 
sample shows a slight drop in the average debt ratio during this period. 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 7
Gallatin’s debt reduction efforts look even more remarkable when viewed through the prism 
of current fiscal developments throughout the developed world. If Albert Gallatin had been in 
charge of OECD public finances during the decade prior to the onset of the current financial 
turmoil, we might be in a more comfortable fiscal situation today. As it stands, our longer-
term  fiscal  challenges  are  formidable  and  will  demand  courageous  political  and  fiscal 
leadership.  Albert  Gallatin’s  adopted  home  country  is  no  exception.  Regardless  of  who 
moves into the White House in January 2009, the new President’s longer-term fiscal policy 
options will be constrained by the legacy of the past.  
To close, let me thank the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce for providing me with the 
opportunity to honor this extraordinary Genevan-American. Albert Gallatin would find much to 
enjoy in present day Geneva. He would be particularly pleased to discover an international 
city with excellent Swiss-American relations. Thank you for your attention. 
Fig 1.33
                                                  
33   Graph borrowed from Masson and Mussa, op.cit. 
8 
 BIS Review 106/2008
Gross debt as a percentage of GDP, OECD, 1970-2007. 
Source: IMF 
80.0
70.0
60.0
50.0
40.0
30.0
20.0
10.0
0.0
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
BIS Review 106/2008 
  9
