Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Impact of technological innovation in 
Bahrain  
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain,  at  the  Middle  East  Financial  Technology  Exhibition  &  Conference  (MEFTEC), 
Manama, 11 February 2008. 
 Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  Bahrain  for  the  4th  Middle  East  Financial  Technology 
Exhibition & Conference, MEFTEC as it is popularly called. 
This morning, as I look around, I am happy to see that this event is arousing so much interest 
and is attracting more and more participants each year, a clear testament to it’s success. I 
would like to thank the organizers for their efforts in enhancing and improving each event and 
the delegates for their participation. I wish you a pleasant stay here. 
Bahrain, as many of  you may already know, is best known for its success in banking and 
finance,  an  industry  whose  global  reach  and,  indeed,  penetration  into  every  household, 
would not have been possible without information technology.  
In short, information technology has had, and continues to have, a profound impact on the 
way we, as individuals, live and work, on the economies of countries and on the world.  
While we all welcome and embrace technological innovation, the acceleration in technology 
also  brings  with  it  newer  challenges  for  financial  services  regulators,  such  as  the  Central 
Bank of Bahrain.  
Information technology has made possible the creation, valuation, and exchange of complex 
financial  products  on  a  global  basis  and,  often,  in  real-time.  As  our  banks  increasingly 
engage  in  these  technology-driven,  I  would  urge  them  to  take  greater  precautions  in 
managing all the risks involved.  
The management of risk is an issue which the CBB takes very seriously, as demonstrated by 
our regulatory requirements and examination procedures, which we continue to review and 
upgrade, when ever necessary.  
As  the  financial  sector  relies  more  and  more  on  technology,  the  issue  of  maintaining 
business  continuity  in  the  face  of  any  kind  of  disruptions,  we  believe,  is  essential  from  a 
business and reputational perspective. Effective from the beginning of this year, all banks in 
Bahrain are required to maintain proactive business continuity planning that ensures delivery 
of critical services or products is maintained even during a disruption. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am sure you are all eager to see what the exhibitors have to offer. I 
thank you for joining us today and again extend my appreciation and thanks to the organizers 
and exhibitors. 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 1
