Axel A Weber: Financial markets and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
CEPR/ESI  12th  Annual  Conference  “The  Evolving  Financial  System  and  the  Transmission 
Mechanism  of  Monetary  Policy”,  co-organised  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements, 
Basel, 25-26 September 2008. 
 Introduction  
1 
Let me start with a disclaimer: Since we are one week away from a monetary policy decision 
my  speech  today  will  not  make  any  reference  to  the  actual  monetary  policy  stance  or 
monetary policy decisions. Rather my remarks are of a more fundamental nature.  
The financial market developments of the past 12 months and the culmination of events in 
the last fortnight have attracted a lot of interest from the general public. These events have 
highlighted the interlinkages between the financial and the real sphere and the implications 
these linkages have for monetary policy. 
Understanding  developments  on  financial  markets  is  a  cornerstone  for  monetary  policy 
making. This is true in normal times, and even more so in the extraordinary times we live in 
today.  An  analysis  of  the  monetary  transmission  process  is  therefore  of  the  utmost 
importance for central bankers. And a thorough understanding of the ways in which financial 
market  developments  might  influence  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  measures  is  a 
cornerstone of recent research efforts.  
However,  financial  markets  are  also  a  very  important  information  pool  for  monetary  policy 
decision-makers. The current tensions on the financial markets also complicate the task of 
deriving the information embedded in financial markets. In the following I will try to elaborate 
on these two related aspects – financial markets and monetary policy transmission, and the 
information content of financial markets for decision-making.  
I will attempt always to relate to the experiences of the past 12 months in order to give real-
world examples to illustrate the more general aspects of both topics. In order to do so, I will 
give a brief outline of the underlying causes of the recent financial market tensions. 
The underlying causes of the recent financial market turmoil 
2  
When looking at the underlying causes of the recent tensions in the global financial system, 
no one particular development can be clearly identified as the root cause. Numerous culprits 
have  been  put  forward:  securitisation,  quality  of  risk  management,  credit  rating  agencies, 
compensation  schemes,  accounting  standards  –  to  name  just  a  few.  But  I  am  extremely 
sceptical of monocausal explanations. Instead, I believe that a cocktail of various ingredients 
triggered the shock waves that have rocked the financial system. Many of these factors are 
related  to  financial  innovations  or,  to  be  more  precise,  from  a  combination  of  new  and 
complex instruments to transfer credit risks and the “originate and distribute” business model. 
The disruptions of the past few months have highlighted the heightened complexity of credit 
risk  transfer  (CRT)  instruments.  This  would  have  been  less  problematic  had  the  risk 
management systems of financial intermediaries kept pace with the changing characteristics 
of the financial landscape. However, not all of them did. At the same time, the investor base 
has  become  more  diffuse,  with  some  participants  only  recently  having  entered  the  CRT 
markets, maybe not sufficiently familiar with the instruments at hand. All of this suggests that 
several investors may not have fully appreciated the higher-risk nature of CRT products and 
were therefore overly optimistic in their assessments of the risks involved.  
BIS Review 116/2008 
 1
Securitisation activity was fostered by the “originate and distribute” model in place at large 
banks and securities firms. On a positive note, the securitising, tranching and trading of credit 
risks has led to a fairly broad risk dispersion – a feature which most market participants and 
observers  deemed  to  be  purely  positive.  However,  it  has  become  clear  now,  that  the 
“originate  and  distribute”  model  can  actually  improve  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system 
only if a high-quality standard is maintained at all levels of the transfer process and no new 
concentrations  of  risk  arise.  The  past  few  years,  however,  have  been  characterised  by  a 
series  of  distorted  incentives,  which  has  manifested  itself  in  lax  origination  standards  for 
products such as subprime mortgages and an excessive reliance on credit ratings by some 
investors. As a final point, let me add that, at the end of the day, the “originate and distribute” 
model  led  –  rather  unexpectedly  –  to  a  huge  reintermediation  of  credit  risks  on  to  banks’ 
balance sheets; in some sense, therefore, the clock is turned back. 
In other words, the financial market turmoil has demonstrated that (1) risks disappear and 
that (2) removing assets from bank balance sheets does not mean that banks are no longer 
exposed  to  the  risks  associated  with  them.  Hence,  the  designers  of  risk  management 
systems  should  reconsider  their  view  of  credit  guarantees  and  credit  lines  to  off-balance-
sheet entities such as structured investment vehicles and conduits and the reputational risk 
associated with them. In a nutshell, securitisation, as Claudio Borio aptly put it in 2008, has, 
ultimately,  “distributed  fear  rather  than  risks”.  However,  while  financial  innovation  has 
undoubtedly  increased  vulnerabilities  in  the  global  financial  system,  there  is  more  to  the 
present  financial  market  turmoil  than  the  proliferation  of  structured  finance  products.  The 
“originate and distribute” model would arguably not have been possible without the benign 
economic and financial backdrop notably robust global economic growth, low inflation, a low 
level of interest rates, low default rates and rising asset prices in many countries, not just in 
the USA. 
This Goldilocks economy, where conditions were neither “too cold” nor “too hot”, had – as a 
side effect – masked the gradual build-up of financial imbalances; a development many of us 
have seen already before the turmoil. And the BIS is one very prominent example that made 
this very clear already at an early stage of the process. Hence, while lending and risk-taking 
experienced rapid growth, words of warning from central banks and other institutions largely 
went unheeded with the argument that “this time, developments are surely different from the 
past”. The fact that minor financial market tensions in the spring of 2005 and 2006 had left 
financial markets more or less unscathed only served to reinforce that impression. However, 
once the vulnerabilities in the global financial system were revealed in August last year and 
financial imbalances started unwinding, we all witnessed that the environment had changed 
considerably since then.  
Recent financial market tensions: lessons for monetary policy 
3  
The list of lessons to be learnt from the current financial turmoil covers many areas. I do not 
want to discuss in any detail the many proposals that are currently being debated in different 
national and international bodies. 
As the G-7 finance ministers and governors have recently stated, it is important to recognise 
the  need  for  more  effective  regulation.  In  that  context  we  remain  fully  committed  to  the 
recommendations  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  to  improve  the  resilience  of  the 
international financial system. While I do not deny the importance of these aspects, in the 
following  I  would  like  to  focus  on  an  aspect  that  is  more  related  to  the  general  theme  of 
today’s conference, namely the lessons to be learnt by monetary policy makers in their core 
business of setting short-term interest rates to safeguard macroeconomic stability. 
I therefore do not intend to describe the reactions of central banks to the current turmoil in 
terms of money market operations, but take a step back from this sort of crisis management 
to  the  more  general  issue  of  conducting  monetary  policy  in  the  face  of  a  procyclical 
behaviour of financial market participants.  
2 
 BIS Review 116/2008
In the first half of this decade, monetary policy was expansive in most industrial countries. 
This  is  true  of  interest  rate  based  measures  of  the  monetary  policy  stance,  and  it  is  also 
evident in indicators such as money and credit aggregates. The expansive monetary policy 
stance  after  the  New  Economy  bubble  burst  has  been  well  documented  for  the  United 
States. But traditional indicators also signal an expansionary policy stance for a prolonged 
period  of  time  for  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  risk  premia  on  financial  markets  have 
been  historically  low  for  reasons  we  could  not  explain  with  the  aid  of  traditional 
macroeconomic factors.  
As there is empirical evidence that protracted low interest rates may have fostered financial 
market  participants’  grog  risk  appetite  and  contributed  to  the  dynamic  growth  of  credit 
aggregates  worldwide  via  this  risk-taking  channel  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission,  the 
events of the past 12 months also throw up some serious questions on the role of monetary 
policy. 
The  debate  about  monetary  policy  and  financial  markets  is  too  often  slanted  towards  the 
question  of  how  to  deal  with  asset  price  bubbles.  Here,  the  current  majority  view  is:  a) 
monetary  policy  cannot  and  should  not  target  asset  prices;  b)  monetary  policy  should  not 
prick asset price bubbles; c) monetary policy should focus on limiting the fallout from bursting 
bubbles ex post. 
In  my  opinion,  this  view  of  monetary  policy  and  asset  prices  is  too  narrow.  A  more  fruitful 
debate on appropriate monetary policy reactions to developments on financial markets would 
be possible if the focus were redirected from financial bubbles to the issue of procyclicality. 
Monetary policy makers should not view boom and bust episodes on the financial markets as 
unrelated  events.  In  the  medium  term,  the  monetary  policy  reaction  to  downturns  on  the 
asset markets influences market participants’ risk perception in the following upturn. This is 
especially  evident  where  monetary  policy  makers  apply  a  risk  management  approach  that 
asymmetrically lowers rates in times of severe financial market downturns, over and above 
what would be deemed necessary given the baseline outlook on prices and growth.  
A more symmetric approach would treat boom and bust episodes not as isolated events but 
would try to look through the financial cycle in order to steady policy. To be more specific, a 
more  symmetric  policy  would  also  realise  implicit  risks  in  times  when  money  and  credit 
growth  is  dynamic,  asset  prices  go  up  and  risk  perceptions  decline,  possibly  creating  the 
need to act despite sufficiently low current inflation rates. 
This,  however,  does  not  mean  that  monetary  policy  should  downgrade  the  price  stability 
objective for the sake of other objectives. Rather, it means that central banks should take a 
longer-term  perspective  which  takes  into  account  the  future  inflationary  consequences  of 
such unfavourable developments.  
And indeed, empirical work pioneered by the BIS has found that excessive money and credit 
growth has significant leading indicator properties for sharp corrections on asset markets and 
severe repercussions on the rest of the economy. As financial crises increase the volatility of 
macroeconomic  variables  such  as  inflation  and  growth,  and  given  that  monetary  policy 
operates  under  the  traditional  loss  functions,  these  results  indicate  that  a  more  symmetric 
policy would improve welfare and macroeconomic stability. Moreover, it could be argued that 
the  variance  of  macroeconomic  variables  itself  is  not  independent  of  the  monetary  policy 
strategy chosen. A more symmetric monetary  policy approach to financial cycles therefore 
has an additional endogenous impact. 
Given the macroeconomic relevance of financial crises, we have good reason to widen our 
monetary  policy  time  horizon  and  give  low-frequency  movements  in  credit  and  monetary 
aggregates  more  weight  in  our  analytical  frameworks  and  our  monetary  policy  decision-
making processes. That is not to say that such an approach would eliminate financial cycles 
altogether.  However,  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  a  monetary  policy  that  followed  a  more 
symmetric  course  would  do  more  to  dampen  damaging  financial  cycles  than  a  monetary 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 3
policy  that  merely  tries  to  limit  damage  after  the  event  using  aggressive  interest  rate 
measures.  
Given that the eye of the current storm is the US real estate market and that the US Federal 
Reserve  is  well  known  for  actively  pursuing  a  risk-management  approach,  it  comes  as  no 
surprise that most debates currently focus on US monetary policy. But given the prolonged 
period of low interest rates in the euro area over the past couple of years, these issues must 
also be addressed by monetary policy makers in the Eurosystem.  
Here,  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  already  possesses,  in  the  shape  of  its 
monetary analysis, such a stabilising element, which is especially suited for the analysis of 
long-term  developments.  The  recent  financial  turmoil  has  shown  that  the  often  criticised 
monetary and credit analysis has a valuable role to play in monetary policy analysis.  
MTM and financial developments 
4  
The relationship between monetary policy and financial markets, however, is by no means 
one that is of interest to policy makers only in the face of a crisis. Developments on financial 
markets have the potential to modify core economic relationships and are therefore of utmost 
interest for monetary policy. Let me therefore move away somewhat from the recent stress 
episode  to  discuss  other  structural  issues  related  to  financial  innovations  and  monetary 
policy transmission. 
The remarkable financial developments of the past decade brought with them a wide range 
of new financial products, greater competition, a notable increase in securitisation activities, 
disintermediation, and a consolidation process in the banking sector. This has broadened the 
range of financial market participants’ activities and possibly also changed their reaction to 
shocks,  e.g.  to  monetary  policy  innovations.  A  priori,  the  overall  impact  of  such  changes 
caused  by  financial  development  is  unclear,  but  the  empirical  literature  provides  us  with 
some useful hints:  
Increased  competition  in  banking  together  with  enhanced  availability  of  alternative  capital 
market-based instruments for financial investment has likely amplified and/or accelerated the 
effects  of  monetary  policy  changes  on  bank  interest  rates  (and,  ceteris  paribus,  on  output 
and inflation). 
The bank lending channel is generally thought to have lost importance, because  
• 
… banks’ flexibility to react to interest rate hikes has increased and …  
… financial development has broadened borrowers’ financing options, reducing their 
• 
dependency on bank loans.  
With  the  growing  use  of  derivative  instruments,  banks’  lending  policies  might  also 
have  become  less  vulnerable  to  monetary  policy  tightening  (e.g.  Purnanandam 
(2007)).  
 The additional funding opportunities entail a larger share of market-based (rather than bank-
based) products; as these are more standardised and less idiosyncratic, collateral may play 
a  more  important  role  now,  potentially  increasing  the  importance  of  the  balance  sheet 
channel.  
However,  there  is  not  much  evidence  for  the  euro  area  on  whether  and  how  financial 
development  has  changed  the  overall  monetary  policy  transmission  process  in  terms  of 
output  and  inflation  (and  not  just  specific  transmission  channels).  We  in  the  Bundesbank 
have  recently  taken  an  aggregate  look  at  the  data  without  imposing  too  many  a  priori 
restrictions  and  estimated  a  series  of  canonical  VARs  in  order  to  capture  the  overall 
monetary transmission process in the euro area. More specifically, we have checked whether 
there have been notable changes to the general way in which monetary policy affects output 
and inflation. Using a data-driven search based on aggregate data, we found that euro-area 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2008
transmission  did  indeed  undergo  notable  changes  in  the  mid-1990s;  specifically,  there  is 
evidence  of  a  structural  break  around  1996  and  possibly  a  second  one  around  1999. 
Interestingly,  these  changes  to  the  monetary  transmission  process  do  not  seem  to  have 
altered the long-run responses of real output and inflation to monetary policy: notably, long-
run neutrality still holds, and monetary policy is able to control inflation in the long term. But, 
maybe  surprisingly,  monetary  transmission  in  the  period  1980-1996  is  not  significantly 
different  from  that  in  the  period  1999-2006.  We  interpret  this  as  evidence  of  an  “atypical 
interim period” characterised by “fluctuations” or “perturbations” lasting from 1996 to the end 
of  1998.  During  this  period,  the  monetary  transmission  process  in  the  euro  area  differed 
significantly  from  the  periods  before  and  afterwards.  However,  this  result  does  not 
necessarily  mean  that  financial  development  left  monetary  transmission  unchanged: 
Financial  development  may  have  had  offsetting  effects  on  different  transmission channels, 
e.g.  speeding  up  the  interest  rate  channel,  lessening  the  importance  of  the  bank  lending 
channel and boosting the role of the balance sheet channel. Moreover, it could well be that 
other influences were at work as well, possibly mitigating the effects of financial development 
on the transmission process, such as the creation of the euro area or, as a secular trend, 
globalisation.  
To sum up: Since a good knowledge of the monetary transmission process is essential for 
monetary policy, central banks must monitor developments in the financial markets closely 
because they have the potential to seriously affect the monetary transmission process. This 
conference adds a great deal to this issue. At the same time, the existing evidence must be 
“processed”  in  order  to  obtain  a  reliable  empirical  assessment  of  possible  changes  to  the 
transmission process as a whole. For the time being, monetary policy has to be based on a 
broad  range  of  different  indicators  to  avoid  running  the  risk  of  misreading  important 
information. 
5 
Financial market indicators and monetary policy decision making 
Financial market indicators as information variables for monetary policy 
5.1  
The  previous  section  examined  the  possible  effects  of  financial  market  developments  on 
monetary policy transmission. Although the ongoing development of financial markets may 
have induced changes in monetary policy transmission, I – as a central banker and monetary 
policy  decision  maker  –  would  like  to  point  to  another  link  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial  market  development.  That  is  –  as  it  were  –  the  reverse  causation:  How  does 
financial development affect (the) monetary policy decision making (process). 
Important  information  for  monetary  policy  decisions  can  undoubtedly  be  derived  from 
financial market indicators. When considering the usual monetary policy transmission from a 
change in central bank interest rates to the ultimate monetary policy objective, information 
derived from financial market indicators as part of regular monetary policy preparations can 
be divided into the following categories.  
First, information on market expectations about interest rates, including central bank interest 
rates as expected monetary policy moves. E.g., we derive the interest rate path expected by 
financial markets using EONIA swaps. In addition to this path, we assess financial markets’ 
uncertainty  surrounding  their  interest  rate  expectations.  To  this  end,  we  derive  the  risk-
neutral density from the options on the three-month Euribor future. 
Second, information on financing conditions in the private sector (including risk premia in the 
financial markets) as well as market expectations concerning the development of major real 
economic indicators – such as the real interest rate, economic activity or commodity prices. 
Third,  information  on  financial  markets’  expectations  about  future  price  developments, 
especially as an indicator of the credibility of monetary policy and, hence, as an indicator for 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 5
second  round  effects.  Here,  we  use  information  derived  from  inflation-indexed  bonds  and 
inflation swaps.  
All these indicators proved to be very important for assessing the current economic situation 
and for monetary policy decisions. Consequently, financial market are not just important for 
the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  they  also  supply  us  with  important  information  for 
monetary policy decisions.  
Furthermore,  financial  development  has  increased  the  number  of  instruments  from  which 
such information can be derived. However, the financial market turmoil has made an analysis 
of  financial  market  indicators  even  more  important  –  while  at  the  same  time  making 
interpretation much more difficult – an aspect I would like to illustrate in the following section. 
5.2  
Current difficulties in interpreting financial market indicators 
Interest rate expectations 
5.2.1 
Financial  market  expectations  concerning  future  short-term  interest  rates  constitute  an 
important input in assessing the possible impact of monetary policy measures on economic 
developments. Short-term interest rate expectations derived from financial market data show 
whether or not a possible interest rate step is already priced into the financial markets. Thus, 
a change in key interest rates causes market interest rates to react more strongly, the more 
unexpected  the  interest  rate  step  is.  Precise  knowledge  of  interest  rate  expectations  also 
helps  to  counteract  any  undesired  developments,  perhaps  using  communication  policy 
instruments to bring market interest rate expectations more into line with the central bank’s 
own  view.  E.g.,  the  financial  market’s  interest  rate  expectations  for  the  euro  area  can  be 
calculated using EONIA swaps. This exercise yields an expected interest rate path for the 
one-month  interest  rate.  The  key  interest  rates  expected  by  the  financial  markets  can  be 
deduced under the assumption of a fixed interest rate spread between the one-month rate 
and the minimum bid rate. Based on this expected interest rate path one can, e.g., calculate 
the probability financial markets attach to an interest rate change of 25 base points at the 
next Governing Council meeting. It should be clear, however, that this probability is critically 
dependent  on  the  assumption  of  a  fixed  interest  rate  spread  between  the  expected  one-
month  rate  and  the  deduced  expected  minimum  bid  rate.  A  one  base  point  change  in  the 
assumed spread would lead to a change in the probability of a 25 base point hike by 4 base 
points.  
Given the current money market distortions, however, considerable fluctuations in the spread 
between  the  one-month  rate  and  the  minimum  bid  rate  cannot  be  ruled  out.  One  reason 
could be tensions on the swap market owing to a decline in market participants’ willingness 
or  ability  to  take  risks.  Our  assessment  of  financial  markets’  uncertainty  regarding  their 
interest rate forecast could also be distorted by the current financial market turmoil because 
of variations in the risk premia contained in the three-month money market interest rates: In 
order  to  estimate  market  participants'  uncertainty  regarding  their  interest  rate  forecast,  we 
derive  the  risk-neutral  density  from  options  on  the  three-month  Euribor  future.  The  more 
certain  market  participants  are  about  their  point  forecast  on  the  three-month  Euribor,  the 
smaller the standard deviation of the estimates should be. We therefore usually interpret a 
change in the expected three-month Euribor distribution as indicating a change in financial 
markets’ expectation of Eurosystem policy rates. However, currently we cannot rule out the 
possibility that the financial market turbulence has caused volatility in the risk premium which 
is currently contained in the interest rate for unsecuritised three-month-money (Euribor). In 
order to obtain an answer to the question of what factors are driving an expected change, we 
continuously  analyse  the  development  of  the  Euribor-Forward  three-month  EONIA  swap 
spreads.  That  is  the  difference  between  an  implied  three-month  interest  rate  derived  from 
Euribor  rates  and  one  derived  from  EONIA  swaps.  In  general,  this  spread  provides 
information  on  liquidity  premiums  for  different  maturities  in  the  money  market.  Financial 
market expectations of a steady decline in money market uncertainty would imply not only an 
6 
 BIS Review 116/2008
ongoing  drop  in  liquidity  premiums  but  also  lower  premiums  for  time  periods  further  in  the 
future compared to less distant time spans. 
5.2.2   Financial-market-based expectations on important economic indicators 
In  addition  to  this  money-market  analysis,  we  monitor  the  development  of  capital  market-
oriented measures of risk premia. Assuming freedom from arbitrage in capital markets, affine 
term structure models can be used to determine to what extent macroeconomic factors, such 
as  the  inflation  rate  or  potential  output  utilisation,  can  explain  the  current  term  structure. 
Conversely,  such  models  show  the  contribution  of  latent  or  undetermined  factors  to  the 
current  term  structure.  In  Germany,  for  example,  historical  data  show  that,  the  longer  the 
term  to  maturity,  the  smaller  the  amount  of  interest  rate  variation  attributable  to 
macroeconomic factors is.1  
Information about factors driving term structure is important for assessing whether the yield 
curve is influenced by shocks to the term premium. In this case, a monetary policy impulse 
may affect long-term interest rates in a different way than in previous periods. This aspect 
has been particularly important in the recent past when it proved difficult to explain the low 
level  of  long-term  rates  in  the  United  States  despite  increases  in  short-term  rates.  This 
information  is  particularly  relevant  when  looking  at  the  current  financial  market  turbulence. 
On the other hand, however, the current turmoil complicates the derivation of the risk premia 
because  upwardly  “distorted”  money  market  rates  are  usually  included  within  the  set  of 
chosen interest rates.  
5.2.3   Financial-market-based inflation expectations 
It is extremely important for central bankers to know the level of inflation expectations. They 
provide information on what inflation rates are taken into account in wage negotiations, for 
example, and whether there is a risk that temporary inflation shocks will lead to a permanent 
increase  in  the  inflation  rate  which  could  not  be  tolerated  by  monetary  policy.  Long-term 
inflation expectations are therefore a good indicator for the credibility of monetary policy. 
Information on economic agents’ inflation expectations is gained mostly from surveys. Within 
the euro area, Consensus Economics and the ECB regularly ask for such information. The 
plausibility  of  this  survey-based  information  can  generally  be  verified  using  the  inflation 
premiums contained in financial market prices. To determine financial-market-based inflation 
expectations,  we  use  the  breakeven  inflation  curve  as  well  as  information  from  inflation 
swaps.  The  resulting  BEIR  term  structure  is  the  difference  between  a  nominal  and  a  real 
interest  rate  curve.  The  latter  is  derived  from  the  returns  on  inflation-linked  bonds  of  AAA 
rated euro-area countries. Looking at the long-term risks to price stability the fact that both 
survey-based and financial-market-based long-term inflation expectations are now noticeably 
higher  than  they  were  before  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  market  turbulence  is  cause  for 
concern.  
Current  financial-market-based  indicators  for  inflation  expectations  may,  however,  be 
distorted by the turbulence. Like the market for interest rate swaps, the market for inflation 
swaps  may  be  suffering  from  a  smaller  supply  of  inflation  protection.  While  banks  usually 
supply inflation protection, a decrease in their willingness or their ability to take risks – i.e. 
given  less  room  for  manoeuvre  in  liquidity-absorbing  asset  swap  activities  –  could  have 
increased the inflation swap premium. This could be one reason why the difference in the 
long-term measures of inflation expectations using inflation swaps and using the BEIR-curve 
has widened substantially over the last couple of weeks.  
                                                 
1   See ”The determinants of the term structure of interest rates – approaches to combining arbitrage-free models 
and monetary macroeconomics”, Bundesbank monthly report, April 2006, pp 15-28. 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 7
On  the  other  hand,  however,  strong  safe  haven  effects  in  nominal  AAA-rated  government 
bonds may have caused the term premiums of the respective securities to shift, resulting in a 
downwards  distortion  of  the  BEIR  curve.  It  is  consequently  not  immediately  clear  whether 
long-term inflation expectations based on swaps or long-term inflation expectations based on 
the BEIR curve are currently more reliable. Our reaction to this finding has been to increase 
the  weight  we  attach  to  survey-based  indicators  of  long-term  inflation  expectations  – 
although, of course, they too have disadvantages. 
Conclusion 
6  
I have tried to illustrate some aspects of the close relationship between monetary policy and 
financial markets. In so doing, I have tried to strike a balance between focusing on recent 
events  in  financial  markets  and  more  general  aspects.  Financial  developments  have  the 
potential to change the transmission process. Financial markets provide valuable information 
for  decision-makers.  However,  during  episodes  of  financial  turmoil,  the  information 
embedded  in  asset  prices  is  distorted  and  requires  careful  interpretation.  Monetary  policy 
should react to the financial cycle in a more symmetric way in order to reduce low-frequency 
volatility  in  important  macro  variables.  All  these  points  illustrate  the  growing  influence  of 
financial  market  developments  on  monetary  policy.  However,  they  by  no  means  alter  the 
ultimate goals of monetary policy.  
8 
 BIS Review 116/2008
