Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: European financial integration and 
harmonisation 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the International Bankers’ Club, Luxembourg, 16 June 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Carlo Thill and the Board of Directors of the International 
Bankers’ Club Luxembourg for having invited me to speak on this occasion today. I am very 
glad to be here and to share my views with such distinguished audience of the International 
Bankers’  Club  Luxembourg,  who  has  always  shown  a  strong  interest  in  European  Union 
matters.  
In  my  speech  today  I  will  focus  on  the  need  for  European  financial  integration  and 
harmonisation,  and  on  the  ECB’s  endeavours  to  support  these  objectives,  in  particular 
through two important central banking services: TARGET2 and TARGET2-Securities.  
Let me say that it is always a pleasure to be in Luxembourg, a country whose historic and 
strategic importance dates back to its founding as a Roman era fortress site, a country that 
represents  the  junction  between  Roman  Europe  and  Germanic  Europe,  uniting  customs 
drawn from each of these rather distinct traditions.  
Luxembourg has proved to be a pioneer. It was a founding member of the European Union, 
the United Nations, and participated in the EMU from its first day in 1999.  
The evolution of the city as a significant financial centre has strengthened its character as an 
international metropolis. As Jean Monnet said: "the small city has become a cross-road of 
Europe".  
I see Luxembourg as a microcosm of the Europe of tomorrow and I sincerely hope that its 
success, with the highest GDP per capita in the world, will inspire other parts of Europe. 
In that respect, my topic of creating a single European financial market is very relevant since 
it will help to increase economic growth and prosperity in every member state. It will increase 
consumer  choice,  open  a  multitude  of  new  investment  opportunities,  strengthen  the  EU 
banking sector and make Europe a centre for financial innovation.  
I am sure you share this ambition – but the question – of course – arises how we can make it 
happen? Well, as the proverb says: “where there’s a will there's a way”. That means, we all 
have to be determined to undergo the necessary changes that will lead to an integrated and 
harmonized European financial market. That seems the only “way” to go! 
Let  me  be  clear.  The  single  European  financial  market  requires  our  support  if  it  does  not 
emerge by itself. Integration and harmonization are intended to promote economic well-being 
as  increasingly  integrated  financial  markets  that  ignore  national  boundaries  broaden  the 
geographic  domain  in  which  financial  institutions  and  their  customers  make  decisions. 
Competition now has an inescapable global dimension, even for many small businesses.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  do  not  have  to  explain  to  you  neither  the  benefits  of  intense 
competition, nor the risks to those who do not adapt. We in the Eurosystem want to support 
the private sector’s adaptation and success by promoting integration and harmonization of 
the financial system. Both of these enable the realisation of economies scales; they foster 
competition and the expansion of markets, and facilitate a more efficient allocation of better-
priced capital.  
As  you  may  recall,  the  European  financial  integration  objective  was  addressed  in  detail  in 
Lisbon  in  March  2000,  where  EU  leaders  adopted  a  ten-year  programme  (the  Lisbon 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 1
Agenda). The Financial Services Action Plan consists of a set of 42 measures, designed to 
strengthen the European financial industry by encouraging free market access, competition 
and the creation of more efficient markets.  
Some of these measures took the shape of EU law, either as a Regulation or as a Directive, 
such as the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID) and the Collateral Directive. 
These have undoubtedly liberated competitive forces, with positive results for Europe. 
Other initiatives were allocated to the users of markets. In particular, providers of securities 
market infrastructure have adopted, with encouragement from Commissioner Mr McCreevey, 
the Code of Conduct, in which they commit to meet certain standards in the areas of price 
transparency,  open  access  and  interoperability,  and  service  unbundling.  While  there  has 
been  some  progress,  the  jury  is  still  out  on  whether  providers  will  co-operate  enough  to 
achieve the high levels of interoperability required for an integrated infrastructure.  
As  Alexander  Schaub  from  the  European  Commission  said  several  years  ago  in  Dublin, 
“financial integration is not simply a question of turning up and declaring the single market 
open for business”.1 We need to accelerate the harmonization, or removal, of issues which 
are barriers to cross-border business – such as market practices, discriminatory provisions 
and domestic protectionist barriers – so that what is now cross-border business in Europe 
becomes truly domestic. Indeed, we have already helped, in various ways, in the removal of 
the  barriers  to  efficient  and  competitive  markets  identified  by  the  Giovannini  Group,  for 
example by providing advice to the European Commission on regulatory aspects that need to 
be addressed. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  TARGET2,  the  new  RTGS  system  for  the  settlement  in  real  time  of 
predominantly high-value euro payments in central bank money as a perfect example of the 
ECB’s contribution to more integrated and harmonized financial markets. 
TARGET2  provides  a  single  integrated  platform  to  replace  20  decentralized  technical 
TARGET  platforms.  It  has  been  working  very  well  from  its  start  and  provides  the  core, 
integrated and borderless infrastructure that Europe needs. To give you a flavour of the scale 
of  its  service,  in  the  first  week  after  completing  final  migration  TARGET2  processed  1.72 
million payments amounting to a total of 16.5 trillion euro.  
TARGET2  is  a  practical  example  of  a  successful  delivery  by  the  Eurosystem  and  banks, 
working together, of integrated infrastructure which embodies the process of harmonization. I 
also  wish  to  congratulate  the  Banque  Centrale  du  Luxembourg  and  the  Luxembourguise 
banking  community  on  this  occasion  for  their  remarkable  contribution  and  excellent 
preparatory work, and for helping to pioneer the migration to the new system in November 
last year.  
I  would  like  to  turn  now  to  another  large  integration  project  –  namely  TARGET2  for 
Securities, or T2S, as it is commonly known.  
In contrast with the current fragmented scenario, T2S will deliver a single technical platform 
to  provide  very  secure  and  real  time  delivery  versus  payment  for  all  classes  of  European 
securities against central bank money, replacing dozens of local platforms. This will create a 
single  pool  of  securities,  available  to  market  users  and  service  providers  through  their 
chosen CSD. With T2S, the concept of cross-border settlement in Europe will disappear.  
T2S will integrate the security settlement infrastructure as well as embody harmonization in 
important  areas  such  as  common  interfaces,  common  set  of  rules  for  intra-day  settlement 
finality, a common daily timetable, and common messages. These features are an immediate 
contribution to the elimination of 6 of the 15 so-called Giovannini barriers.  
                                                 
1   Alexander  Schaub-  European  Commission:  “Removing  regulatory  barriers  to  international  finance:  Pointers 
from the EU single market”. Dublin, 30th March. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2008
This will – of course – create substantial gains for the financial sector, but also for the society 
as  a  whole,  through  a  reduction  in costs  and  a  better  allocation  of  resources.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  the  economic  gains  will  be  substantial.  T2S  will  contribute  to  increasing 
competition, more transparent pricing facilitating overall the trading activity. Since T2S will be 
operated by a public entity, the Eurosystem, T2S can be relied on to operate in a fair way 
and on a not for profit basis. 
Furthermore, more from a central banker’s perspective, more effective post trading structures 
–  as  achieved  by  T2S  –  will  contribute  to  global  resilience  of  financial  markets  and  hence 
constitutes  an  important  element  to  safeguard  financial  stability.  Moreover,  T2S  will 
contribute  to  lower  cost  of  capital,  hence  contributing  to  the  general  growth  in  financial 
markets and overall economic growth. Let me add that post trading costs in the US are at 
much lower levels than in Europe. Therefore, we need to make Europe more competitive in 
the global financial market, and T2S is an important contribution in this regard.  
Thanks to efforts made by hundreds of experts from over 80 European institutions and from 
the Eurosystem over the last year, the Governing Council of the ECB has been able in the 
last few weeks to invite the European CSDs to express their support for T2S.  
We  distributed  to  the  European  CSDs  detailed  user  requirements,  an  economic  impact 
analysis,  a  description  of  governance  for  the  next  project  phase,  and  a  presentation  on 
harmonization efforts in the context of T2S, which are all the outcome of a transparent and 
constructive consultation process, cooperating with CSDs and market users.  
Let me just point to a few elements of the economic impact study which you can also find on 
our website. The analysis concludes that the costs of settlement can reduced substantially 
from  73  cents  a  CSD  charges  on  average  today  to  32  cents  per  transaction  under  T2S. 
These costs can be even further reduced if more CSDs decide to join the T2S project. These 
numbers represent only the narrow business case and do not capture – of course – the full 
dynamic  impact  of  T2S  arising  from  enhanced  competition  in  a  single  market  for  security 
settlement. Let me stress that while one can be skeptical about the precise numbers I just 
mentioned,  but  we  should  definitely  not  be  skeptical  about  the  overall  benefits  of  a  more 
competitive and more integrated European financial market.  
T2S has been developed in a pure harmonization spirit which excludes – of course – specific 
functionalities supporting local practices. This does not mean that T2S prevents CSDs from 
supporting local practices; it will however give  those concerned – including legislators and 
regulators – an opportunity to consider whether their preservation is in the long term interests 
of the relevant economy.  
We have worked with the T2S stakeholders to identify topics that can be further harmonized 
in the future. These topics fall into three categories: further harmonization within the scope of 
T2S, harmonization to be implemented by the private sector or harmonization that they may 
require action by the public authorities.  
It is clear that the Eurosystem will promote and implement all the issues that can be directly 
harmonized within T2S.  
As regards the private sector, we expect that the market transformation induced by T2S will 
offer  market  participants  to  develop  and  implement  their  own  harmonization  initiatives,  for 
example  in  the  field  of  corporate  actions.  The  Eurosystem  welcomes  very  much  all  such 
efforts towards harmonization and stands ready to give all the support needed. 
As regards harmonization to be carried out by the public authorities, this would fall under the 
responsibility of the European Commission bodies and working groups, such as CESAME, 
the Legal Certainty Group (LCG) and the Fiscal Compliance Experts Group FISCO. Working 
with  the  industry  leaders  and  experts  on  the  T2S  Advisory  Group,  we,  the  ECB  and  the 
Eurosystem  will  advise  and  cooperate  with  such  bodies,  with  a  firm  eye  on  the  need  for 
progress. To focus our own effort, we intend to present a progress report on the achieved 
degree of harmonization to the ECB’s Governing Council by early 2009. 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 3
Overall, integration and harmonization have become a core objective of the European Union; 
the European bodies are determined to support the European financial industry to increase 
competitiveness  by  giving  it  access  to  an  efficient,  state  of  the  art  financial  infrastructure 
supporting a true single market.  
The  Eurosystem  is  ready  to  firmly  commit  to  deliver  T2S  as  a  state-of-the-art  settlement 
system to the market via the CSDs by 2013 at the latest. It is also clear, that the Eurosystem 
cannot  do  it  alone.  As  substantial  financial  investments  will  need  to  be  made  for  building 
T2S, so we need the support and the commitment of the CSDs.  
We have asked all European CSDs to express – by 4 July – their support for the T2S project. 
We are sure that CSDs will consult their clients and other stakeholders, many of whom have 
already expressed strong support, often also in public. The Governing Council will take into 
account  this  feedback  when  it  meets  on  17th  July  to  decide  if  the  Eurosystem  will  further 
support the T2S project.  
As  President  Trichet  has  said  on  many  occasions  “it  is  not,  in  any  respect,  time  for 
complacency”. While we can be pleased to have got so far so fast, we need to keep up a fast 
pace. We are ready to start the next phase of the project immediately after the – hopefully – 
positive decision of the Governing Council in order to meet the next milestone: defining the 
next  level  of  the  detail  in  the  form  of  the  general  functional  specification.  This  will  make  it 
possible for T2S to be live no later than 2013.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  on  behalf  of  the  Eurosystem,  let  me  conclude  by  thanking  the 
distinguished  representatives  of  the  banking  sector  for  their  contribution  to  the  successful 
completion  of  the  work  done  so  far,  and  by  asking  for  your  continued  support  and  co-
operation. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2008
