Nout Wellink: The significant role of microfinance and supervisory 
issues 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the ING Microfinance Seminar “A billion to gain – the 
next phase”, Amsterdam, 16 June 2008. 
 Introduction 
1. I am pleased to be joining you today and to be speaking to so many microfinance experts. 
Before starting I would like to commend the conference organisers for putting together such 
a  comprehensive  programme  on  this  important  topic.  Microfinance  is  becoming  ever  more 
relevant,  and  there  can  therefore  be  no  doubt  that  we  need  to  keep  it  on  our  agendas. 
Today, I want to touch upon two issues. I will start with the significant and increasing role of 
microfinance  to  combat  poverty  in  the  world.  This  role  cannot  be  called  “micro”  anymore. 
Then, I will discuss some supervisory issues that follow from the microfinance concept. 
Microfinance is booming 
2. To start off with: microfinance is booming! It all started in the 1970s with the Nobel price 
laureate Mohamed Yunus, who was the first to experiment with the provision of very small –
or micro- loans to people in Bangladesh. He then founded the famous Grameen bank. And 
nowadays,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  microfinance  has  successfully  enabled  extremely 
impoverished  people,  especially  women,  to  engage  in  self-employment  projects.  These 
people were previously considered unbankable, as they typically do not meet even minimal 
qualifications to gain access to traditional credit, such as steady employment or a verifiable 
credit history. Microfinance allows them to generate income and to begin to build wealth and 
ultimately exit poverty. The term microfinance is generally used for the provision of financial 
services, in most cases micro-loans, to the poor, and many people have begun to realise its 
opportunities. Indeed, the concept of microfinance has been accepted as an effective means 
to reach out to the poor. And this conviction is not just confined to charitable institutions, but 
can  beyond  doubt  be  called  a  worldwide  drive.  Microfinance  institutions  have  notably 
expanded their loan portfolios. Data from The Microfinance Information Exchange show that 
over  the  period  2001-2006,  the  number  of  micro  credit  borrowers  each  year  increased  on 
average by 19%. Over the same time period, the average loan portfolio grew by an annual 
30%. This is huge. For comparison, in the EU-25, the average loan portfolio growth reaches 
a  mere  6.4%.  By  the  end  of  2006,  globally  more  than  1100  MFIs  were  active,  comprising 
over 59 million borrowers. Also savings accounts surge, totalling 16 billion US dollars in 2006 
and 68 million savers. 
3. Meanwhile, also private organisations and investors have found their way to microfinance 
and microfinance institutions, and devote ample resources to them. Although exact figures 
are not available, it has been estimated that in 2006 worldwide $ 4 to 5 billion was invested in 
microfinance institutions. Especially investors with a long-term perspective, such as pension 
funds, consider microfinance an attractive investment. This is no wonder: usually returns are 
in line with market averages, while risks are relatively low. Moreover, microfinance shows a 
low  correlation  with  international  financial  markets  and  hence  provides  diversification 
benefits. 
4.  And  on  top  of  this,  as  we  can  see  here  today,  microfinance  starts  to  attract  increasing 
interest from commercial banks, including ING. One element evidencing this interest is the 
financial support provided by way of loans to or investments in microfinance institutions. But 
in my opinion, a second element is far more important: namely the sharing of expertise in 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 1
banking  business  and  the  provision  of  assistance  and  training.  Enhanced  cooperation 
between  existing  financial  institutions  and  microfinance  institutions  contributes  to  the 
development  of  local  financial  markets.  For  example,  commercial  banks  may  help 
microfinance  institutions  expand  their  portfolios  with  saving  services,  varied  loan  products 
and  insurance,  while  microfinance  institutions  in  turn  may  facilitate  the  development  of 
commercial banks’ customer base. Furthermore, microfinance institutions may build upon the 
existing IT and risk management infrastructure of commercial banks. 
5.  Another  reason  for  the  remarkable  growth  of  the  microfinance  sector  is  that  new 
technological developments are quickly being picked up. Recently, I came across an internet 
organisation set up to enable private individuals to lend money to poor people in developing 
countries. The creditors can actually see and choose the persons to whom they lend. The 
money  is  transferred  to  the  person  via  a  local  microfinance  institution.  Another  innovative 
feature  of  this  concept  is  that  the  loan  providers  receive  regular  updates  on  the  borrower. 
This brings the benefits of microfinance really at your doorstep! And look, for instance, at the 
telecommunication  industry.  Rapid  innovations  have  made  it  possible  to  conduct  your 
banking  operations  via  mobile  phone.  For  banks,  it  offers  the  opportunity  to  transmit  loan 
applications  and  check  credit  details  instantly.  For  microfinance,  this  means  a  real 
breakthrough. As you know, a core problem for microfinance institutions is the geographically 
wide  dispersion  of  their  client  base.  This  makes  it  difficult  to  serve  clients  in  very  remote 
areas and drives up expenditures. Operational costs can be as high as 15 to 20% of loans, 
compared to less than 5% for banks in industrialised countries. The introduction of mobile 
phone banking now makes it possible to reach millions of people, in a fraction of a second 
and without the high costs of establishing an extensive network of offices. Such cost savings 
are important for microfinance institutions, as they allow them to reduce interest rate margins 
while not impairing profitability. 
6.  These  positive  figures  are  truly  good  news.  As  a  central  banker,  I  care  for  economic 
growth and the reliable functioning of financial markets. And microfinance clearly contributes 
to  these  goals.  For  one,  microfinance  stimulates  households  to  start  business  activities. 
Access  to  credit  allows  poor  people  to  take  advantage  of  economic  opportunities,  thus 
contributing  to  local  economic  development  and  job  creation.  Second,  microfinance  fills  a 
gap  in  the  traditional  financial  infrastructure,  which  did  not  provide  for  lending  to  the  poor. 
Indeed,  broad  access  to  financial  services  is  a  key  characteristic  of  a  deep  and  efficient 
financial system. It is encouraging to see that the market is now taking over the role which 
was  previously  only  performed  by  governments  or  NGOs.  And  third,  more  and  more 
microfinance  institutions  have  become  real  financial  intermediaries  and  now  also  offer 
deposit  facilities  to  households.  As  such,  microfinance  can  help  households  to  smoothen 
their  consumption  over  time,  reducing  saving  and  borrowing  constraints.  Such  constraints 
are particularly relevant for poor households because their incomes are often uncertain and 
they generally lack collateral. At the same time, deposits form an additional funding base for 
microfinance institutions and decrease their dependency on external funding. In these ways, 
microfinance enhances economic growth, enriches financial markets and increases welfare 
of individual households. 
Role for the prudential supervisor 
7. But this is only one reason for my interest in microfinance. The other one follows from my 
role as prudential supervisor. This brings me to the second remark I want to make today. So 
far, the growth of microfinance has, by and large, occurred outside a regulatory framework. 
But as a depositor, you expect your bank to be safe and not to take undue risk, so that you 
can retrieve your money at all times. If the bank accepts too much risk, it may no longer be 
able to meet its obligations to depositors. Therefore, in most countries, only licensed banks 
are  allowed  to  attract  deposits  from  the  public.  Licensed  banks  are  subject  to  prudential 
supervision and have to comply with an extensive and strict set of regulations. The prudential 
supervisor  requires  banks,  for  example,  to  have  in  place  an  effective  risk  management 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2008
system  to  screen,  price  and  manage  risks.  For  microfinance  institutions,  the  protection  of 
depositors is especially important. If a microfinance institution runs into trouble and cannot 
repay its depositors, this will affect a very large group of people who do not have the buffers 
to  cushion  such  a  loss.  The  effects  of  such  a  failure  on  individual  borrowers´  and  their 
families´ lives can be disastrous. 
8. The need for depositor protection is underlined by the finding that the quality of the micro 
credit portfolio may deteriorate very rapidly. If some debtors are unable to repay their loans, 
this may induce other debtors to default on their loans as well. This perverse incentive may 
be especially strong in the case of credit provided to a group of persons. Furthermore, micro 
credit  risks  are  usually  more  correlated  than  those  of  a  traditional  bank,  since  the  loan 
portfolio generally consists of a relatively homogenous group of people who depend on the 
regional  economy.  Also,  as  costs  are  generally  higher  microfinance  institutions  may  have 
smaller  financial  buffers.  At  the  same  time,  in  many  cases  it  will  be  difficult  for  the 
microfinance  institution  to  raise  additional  capital  on  short  notice.  For  deposit-taking 
microfinance institutions, prudential supervision is hence of high relevance. 
9. Though most agree that prudential supervision of microfinance institutions is needed, it is 
not  yet  clear  what  this  supervision  actually  should  comprise.  Compliance  with  prudential 
rules  can  be  costly  to  supervised  entities  and  may  be  especially  burdensome  for 
microfinance institutions. Under circumstances, supervision may even stifle such a valuable 
and booming sector as microfinance. In devising a supervisory framework for microfinance 
activities, we therefore have to take the unique characteristics of microfinance into account. 
Most  conspicuous  of  these  characteristics  is  perhaps  the  lack  of  physical  collateral.  Other 
characteristics specific to microfinance institutions that need to be taken into account are a 
quick turnover rate, high operational costs and a different lending process. Also know-your-
customer  requirements  are  burdensome,  as  many  poor  people  do  not  have  a  passport  or 
other proof of identity. 
10. We also need to be mindful of the large differences between microfinance activities and 
microfinance institutions from one country to another. For instance in Brazil, a popular form 
of microfinance is the use of correspondent banking, or in other terms “branchless banking”. 
Due to the sheer size of this country, commercial banks are only located in the main cities 
and did not or could not offer financial services to people in distinct villages until 1999. With 
the  lifting  of  several  regulations  in  that  year,  commercial  banks  were  allowed  to  set  up 
relationships  with  non-financial  and  non-bank  firms  to  provide  a  wider  range  of  services. 
Many  banks  contracted  local  chains,  for  instance  grocery  stores,  pharmacies,  etc.,  which 
were  allowed  to  handle  simple  banking  operations  on  behalf  of  the  financial  institution. 
However,  the  financial  institution  itself  is  the  ultimate  provider  of  financial  services  and 
remains  responsible  in  the  end.  In  India,  in  the  1999s,  microfinance  evolved  quite 
successfully  through  so-called  Self  Help  Groups.  In  these  groups,  10  to  20  persons  pool 
savings, collectively obtain loans and lend to each other. And in Bolivia, the most successful 
microfinance institution was incorporated as a commercial bank in 1992. 
11.  But  despite  these  differences,  microfinance  supervision  should  not  and  cannot  be  a 
complete  divergent  regime.  A  different  supervisory  framework  for  microfinance  activities 
carries the risk of unbalancing the international level playing field. Moreover, many banking 
standards already offer flexibility to allow for the level of complexity and size of institutions, 
the level of risks or the existence of international activities. And all the same, supervision of 
microfinance  institutions  need  not  be  harmful  per  se.  Adequate  supervision  may  also 
enhance the perceived legitimacy of microfinance institutions and improve their operational 
management,  due  to  for  instance  the  higher  standards  for  reporting  and  financial  control. 
This may broaden their access to funding, allowing them to expand their financial activities 
and serving more clients. Furthermore, there may exist a positive relationship between the 
development  of  supervisory  guidance  for  microfinance  activities  and  for  supervision  in 
general.  So  taking  all  this  together,  we  should  search  for  a  tailor-made  solution  within  the 
scope of existing regulation. 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 3
12.  One  such  solution  can  be  found  in  the  Basel  Core  Principles.  To  support  supervisors 
worldwide in building and improving a set of prudential regulations, the Basel Committee for 
Banking  Supervision  has  developed  this  set  of  minimum  standards  for  sound  supervision. 
The Core Principles provide a benchmark for a wide range of supervisory aspects, in areas 
such  as  licensing,  capital  adequacy,  risk  management,  and  more.  In  total  there  are  25 
Principles. But, I stress, these are principles, not rules, and require further specification. The 
Basel Committee considers that many of these Principles would also be appropriate for non-
bank financial institutions that offer deposit and lending services similar to those provided by 
banks. But the Committee also recognizes that some of these categories of institutions may 
be  regulated  differently  from  banks  as  long  as  they  do  not  hold,  collectively,  a  significant 
proportion  of  deposits  in  a  financial  system.  However,  they  need  some  form  of  regulation 
commensurate to the type and size of their transactions. How should we tailor regulation to 
the  unique  characteristics  of  microfinance  activities?  The  Basel  Committee  is  currently 
working on illustrating what forms regulation can take, keeping in mind the diversity of the 
sector. That is why this effort is a collective one, and why the Committee works together with 
supervisors from all over the world in the Committee’s International Liaison Group, as well as 
the IMF, the World Bank, CGAP and regional groups of banking supervisors. 
Concluding remarks 
13.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  will  conclude.  Microfinance  is  booming.  It  is  now  widely 
acknowledged as an effective way to reach out to the poor. And, as I said in the beginning, 
this belief is not just confined to charitable institutions, but felt the world over. Still, the current 
market  size  forms  only  a  small  part  of  the  estimated  global  demand  for  microfinance 
services. As such, the broadening of financial services offered by microfinance institutions, 
specifically  the  deposit-taking  facilities  offered  by  many  microfinance  institutions,  is  a 
welcome development. In parallel with this, the role of the prudential supervisor will become 
ever  more  relevant.  Prudential  supervision  can  contribute  to  inclusive  financial systems  by 
taking  account  of  the  specific  characteristics  of  microfinance  while  not  disturbing  the 
international level playing field. The efforts of the Basel International Liaison Group will be an 
important step forward in this regard. Furthermore, adequate supervision may enhance the 
perceived legitimacy of microfinance institutions, improve their operational management and 
extend their access to funding. 
In this way, microfinance not only contributes to the economic development of a country, but 
also enriches the financial system and financial supervision. So maybe, rather than “A billion 
to gain”, it’s a question of “Billions to gain”! Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2008
