Erkki Liikanen: Is there a Finnish or Nordic Model? Can the Nordic Model 
rescue European values?  
Remarks  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Belgian  Financial 
Forum, Brussels, 15 February 2008.  
The slides (ppt) accompanying the speech can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website.  
 Introduction  
1.  
Are there broadly-shared, characteristically European values? Most tend to agree that there 
are, such as social cohesion and solidarity.  
Market  economy  has  turned  out  to  be  the  best  system  to  create  growth  and  raise  the 
standard  of  living.  Still  there  is  also  a  wide-spread  recognition  that  market  forces  can 
sometimes  result  in  outcomes  that  are  not  in  keeping  with  these  values.  Consequently,  a 
vast  majority  of  Europeans  share  the  conviction  that  the  state  should  promote  equality  of 
opportunity and come to the assistance of those most in need.  
Nevertheless,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  “the  Single  European  Social  Model”.  Owing  to 
historical  reasons  and  differences  in  local  circumstances,  these  models  differ  considerably 
across Europe.  
Some  argue  that,  while  laudable,  the  European  values  are  no  longer  compatible  with  the 
harsh realities of the modern world and the social models need urgent reform. The modern 
world is characterized by ever intensifying competition brought up by globalization. At same 
time the ageing of population sets pressure on the labour market and public finances.  
So, is the distinctly European combination of social values and economic policies an issue of 
the past, a promise that can no longer be fulfilled? Or is it possible to reconcile it with the 
forces of globalization and demographic change without stifling economic dynamism? Should 
it be seen as an asset or as a liability?  
Indeed,  we  can  find  examples  that  show  how  some  features  of  a  traditional  welfare  state 
have acted as a drag on economic growth. On the other hand the Nordic countries provide 
for many an example on how collective risk sharing has promoted opening of economies and 
adjusting to globalisation.  
Variety of European social models  
2.  
Your  compatriot,  a  Belgian  professor  André  Sapir  (2005)  has  divided  the  EU-15  countries 
into  four  groups  based  on  their  efficiency  and  equity.  Efficiency  here  refers  to  sufficient 
incentive  to  work  so  that  employment  rates  get  relatively  high.  Equity1  in  these  models 
means  keeping  the  risk  of  poverty  relatively  low.  Although  all  these  models  share  some 
common European values, there are some basic differences between them.  
The Mediterranean Model has rather low coverage of unemployment benefits increasing risk 
of poverty. On the other hand strict employment protection regulations have contributed to 
low  levels  of  employment.  So  Professor  Sapir  classifies  these  countries  to  the  group  with 
"low equity and low efficiency". Social spending is much concentrated on old-age pensions. 
Early retirement provisions are an important part of the social welfare systems. 
                                                 
1   Sapir included in his Nordic model Denmark, Finland, Sweden and the Netherlands. The two non-EU Nordic 
countries,  Norway  and  Iceland,  also  fit  the  description  of  the  Nordic  model.  See  Sapir,  André  (2005): 
"Globalisation and the Reform of European Social Models". Bruegel Policy Brief, Issue 2005/1. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 1
In  the  Continental  Model  unemployment  benefits  are  generous  and  the  legislation  on 
employment protection is relatively strict (high equity and low efficiency). The social welfare 
system is largely based on insurance-based benefits and old-age pensions. 
The  Anglo-Saxon  Model  includes  relatively  good  unemployment  insurance  but  weak 
employment  protection  (low  equity  and  high  efficiency).  Contrary  to  the  American  system, 
these countries provide relatively large social assistance of the last resort. Income transfers 
are primarily oriented to people in working age and active measures to help the unemployed 
to get jobs are important. Schemes that link access to benefits to regular employment are 
used.  
In  the  Nordic  Model  unemployment  benefits  are  generous  and  comprehensive.  The 
employment  protection  legislation  is  not  as  strict  as  in  many  continental  countries  (high 
equity and high efficiency). The Nordic countries offer good social protection and universal 
welfare provision.  
In reality, the groups are far from being homogenous inside. Also the Nordic economies differ 
from each other for instance in their industrial structure. Neither are their labour market or 
welfare policies uniform.  
But still, the Nordic countries share some characteristic features that constitute the essence 
of the Nordic Model. A recent study of six Nordic economists2 has come to the conclusion 
that the Nordic countries tend to create a cluster of their own along many dimensions. The 
basis  of  the  Nordic  model  is  a  combination  of  collective  risk  sharing  and  openness  to 
globalisation.  
3.  
Globalisation and population ageing – the main challenges for social models  
I will look at two challenges that are of vital importance: globalization and population ageing. 
The responses to these challenges will have an important bearing on the future of European 
social models.  
Globalization and rapid technological change calling for risk sharing  
Globalization  has  underpinned  an  exceptionally  long,  strong  and  broad-based  economic 
expansion. The strong growth in emerging market and also developing countries is reducing 
the number of people living in extreme poverty. The developing countries have grown faster 
than developed economies and so there has been a catching up during the last few years. 
These are most welcome developments.  
Europe has also benefited greatly from robust global growth. But as we know, the risks and 
the  benefits  of  globalization  typically  are  unequally  shared  between  regions,  sectors,  firms 
and individuals.  
Globalization  and  rapid  development  of  technology  are  separate  but  closely  related 
phenomena.  Globalization  reduces  barriers  and  implies  restructuring  and  relocation  of 
economic activities to take advantage of new technologies and comparative advantages. 
This implies accelerated change and a less predictable operating environment. In such an 
environment,  stability-oriented  macroeconomic  policies  are  particularly  essential  as  they 
reduce the overall uncertainty faced by consumers and companies alike.  
                                                 
2   Andersen,  T.M.;  Holmström,  B.;  Honkapohja,  S.;  Korkman,  S.;  Söderström,  H.T.  and  Vartiainen,  J.  (2007): 
"The  Nordic  Model,  Embracing  globalisation  and  sharing  risks".  The  Research  Institute  of  the  Finnish 
Economy (ETLA). 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2008
Globalisation  and  technological  innovation  threaten  the  status  quo  and  raise  calls  for 
protectionism.  Such  calls  must  be  resisted.  Shielding  companies 
from  competition 
undermines  their  long-term  viability.  Thus  the  long-term  success  of  European  companies 
calls  for  more,  not  less,  competition.  Also,  protectionism  will  not  stop  technological 
innovation.  History  teaches  us  that  a  stubborn  refusal  to  accept  technological  advances  is 
not a viable option.  
Having said this, we must recognize that there are challenges associated with globalization. 
Two problems stand out. First, globalisation brings with it painful economic dislocation, and 
many  people  lose  their  jobs.  Second,  technological  advances  tend  to  lead  to  higher 
dispersion of income.  
Governments  can  and  should  play  an  active  role  in  easing  the  pain  of  dislocation.  Social 
safety  nets  are  needed  to  cushion  economic  dislocation  in  a  rapidly  changing  world. 
However, they  must not support unviable structures and practices. The safety nets should 
not lock people but encourage them to adapt and seek new opportunities.  
There  has  been  a  lot  of  debate  whether  a  European  social  model  or  models  are  able  to 
reconcile the benefits and risks of globalisation and find a positive trade-off between equality 
and efficiency.  
The  Nordic  model  has  attracted  considerable  interest  because  it  seems  to  be  able  to 
combine  a  high  level  of  social  protection  and  relatively  equal  income  distribution with  high 
economic dynamism.  
The individuals are not usually able to insure themselves against the risk of losing their job or 
finding their skills outdated. The above mentioned Nordic group of economists3 argue that it 
is  the  collective  risk  sharing  by  the  welfare  state  and  the  labour  market  that  facilitates 
acceptance of globalisation.  
The  traditional  institutional  system  of  the  Nordic  labour  market  has  based  on  coordinated 
negotiations between strong partners and supporting policies by the government. The group 
argues that this may be seen as a way of offering security to workers without drawbacks of 
tight legislative labour market regulation. The risk sharing has made it possible to combine 
the  flexibility  required  by  open  markets  with  the  security  that  workers  and  citizens  want  to 
have.  
According to Professor Dani Rodrik (1998)4 the positive correlation between openness and 
the  size  of  the  public  sector  means  that  external  openness  increases  risks  and  so  the 
demand for the insurance and security that the welfare state can offer.  
Still not to make the issue too easy, there are many concrete cases also in our country which 
show that the closure of a factory which is an important employer in a region, is a painful 
process.  
The economic consequences of population ageing are fundamental  
Ageing of the population will be an increasing problem in most industrialised countries during 
the  next  decades.  In  many  countries  the  birth  rate  was  high  in  the  first  decades  after  the 
Second World War. Later the birth rate lowered strongly, which causes the big difference in 
the size of age cohorts.  
                                                 
3   Andersen,  T.M.;  Holmström,  B.;  Honkapohja,  S.;  Korkman,  S.;  Söderström,  H.T.  and  Vartiainen,  J.  (2007): 
"The  Nordic  Model,  Embracing  globalisation  and  sharing  risks".  The  Research  Institute  of  the  Finnish 
Economy (ETLA). 
4   Rodrik, D. (1998): "Why do more open economies have bigger governments?". Journal of Political Economy 
105 (6), October 1998. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 3
In  Europe,  Finland  is  the  first  country  to  face  the  steep  ageing  due  to  the  baby  boom 
generation born in 1945–1949. In most countries the baby boom was later and it was longer.  
So  the  impact  of  aging  is  not  a  theoretical  question  but  a  reality  for  Finnish  policymakers 
today.  The  demographic  change  will  be  further  strengthened  by  the  increasing  life 
expectancy.  
As you can see from the figure, the cohort of 60-64 years outnumbered the cohort of 20-24 
years last year. The working age population starts to decline soon. There will be increasing 
shortage of labour force in many sectors – especially in services such as health and elderly 
care. The ageing affects not only on labour supply but also on the demand for services. 
The  2005  pension  reform  in  Finland  was  designed  to  ease  ageing  pressures  on  the 
sustainability of the pension system and labour markets.  
The  increasing  old-age  population  together  with  the  increasing  demand  for  welfare  and 
health services set also a pressure on the public economy. The Nordic social model is based 
on  the  idea  that  people  are  in  different  phases  of  their  life  cycle  net  beneficiaries  and  net 
contributors of the social system.  
When the number of net contributors decreases in relation to the number of net beneficiaries 
this causes a serious financing problem. At same time the room for higher taxation is limited 
because of an already heavy tax burden, increasing tax competition and declining trend of 
GDP growth.  
It  would  be  also  politically  unsustainable  if  the  contributing  population  felt  that  the  welfare 
society means for them only costs but not benefits. Public services need to provide a good 
match with the preferences of a median voter. Without such a match, the funding base of the 
public  sector  (taxes)  will  inevitably  start  to  erode.  This  could  lead  to  a  vicious  circle  that 
would be difficult to reverse. This underlines the need to keep the welfare services universal 
(open to all) and high quality. A good example of this is the school system.  
When the labour contribution to growth will be small or even negative, the role of productivity 
will grow in weight. Even though it is difficult to measure productivity in the public sector, in 
aggregate terms it appears to be lower than in the rest of the economy and in particular in 
the open sector (Baumol effect), and grows more slowly if at all.  
Still I am convinced that there are ways to increase productivity in the public services, too. 
The  use  of  information  technology  and  parallel  re-engineering  of  work  processes  and 
organisations,  as  well  as  incentive  based  wage  systems  and  benchmarking  with  best 
practices can bring improvements also in the productivity in the public sector. 
One way is to expose part of the public services to private competition, when provision of 
public  services  does  not  require  that  they  are  all  produced  by  public  sector.  However,  the 
main question is, whether the economic growth will be strong enough to bear the heavy cost 
burden that the ageing causes. The smaller number of working age population must be able 
to  bake  a  cake  big  enough  to  feed  the  increasing  share  of  population  that  is  outside  the 
labour force.  
Meeting the challenges – the Nordic model and Finnish experiences  
4.  
The  Nordic  model  includes  a  large  government  sector,  high  tax  rates,  generous  social 
protection  and  compressed  wage  structures.  However,  the  standard  economics  text-books 
teach us that such features generally distort incentives for efficient resource allocation.  
This notwithstanding, during the past decade the Nordic (EU) countries have achieved higher 
growth  rates  than  the  advanced  European  countries  on  average.  The  Nordics  have  been 
able to achieve high employment combined with macroeconomic stability.  
4 
 BIS Review 18/2008
Part  of  the  strong  economic  performance  in  the  Nordic  countries  can also  be  attributed  to 
luck – both bad and good. As for the bad luck, there was a serious sharp economic downturn 
in Finland and Sweden in the early 1990s. Seen afterwards, it was to some extent a blessing 
in  disguise.  This  is  because  it  gave  impetus  to  structural  reforms  and  disciplined 
macroeconomic policies that ushered in a strong recovery from the recessions.  
As  for  the  good  luck,  both  Finland  and  Sweden  have  been  lucky  to  have  been  in  the 
vanguard of the mobile phone technology during its explosive growth phase.  
During  the  last  10  years  the  average  economic  growth  in  the  Nordic  countries  has  been 
stronger  than  in  the  EU-15  in  average.  Does  the  good  economic  performance  of  Nordic 
countries mean that the economics textbooks are wrong and that incentives and markets do 
not really matter that much? The answer is a resounding no.  
In fact, the strong macroeconomic performance in the Nordic countries owes a lot to policies 
that are well in line with recommendations of mainstream economics.5
So, does the Nordic model offer a way to reconcile the European ideals with the demands of 
the global economy? Are there some practises and solutions in the Nordic model that could 
be  applied  in  other  European  countries?  To  answer  this  question,  we  need  to  look  more 
closely at the Nordic experience.  
• 
Openness  to  competition.  Substantial  product  market  deregulation  has  helped 
underpin  economic  growth  in  the  Nordic  countries.  This  deregulation  took  place 
earlier  than  in  most  other  European  countries  and  the  level  of  product  market 
regulation in the Nordics is low by European standards. The collective risk sharing 
included in the Nordic social model has decreased the political resistance to such 
development.  It  has  got  easier  for  people  to  accept  liberalisation  of  trade  and 
globalisation  when  they  feel  they  have  some  personal  shelter  against  income  fall 
caused by unemployment or other reason.  
Sound macroeconomic policies. Public finances in the Nordics are in better shape 
than in most other European countries although the welfare services are generous. 
Their debt ratio is low and annual budgets are on the surplus. The price of this has 
been the high taxation. But also disciplined fiscal policy has contributed to the fiscal 
balance and created an environment in which consumers and businesses can plan 
for  a  longer  term.  Sound  monetary  policies  have  also  been  instrumental  in 
supporting growth.  
Strong and transparent institutional framework. An institutional environment in which 
contracts  can  be  enforced  and  property  rights  can  be  established  promotes 
economic  growth.  Increasingly,  all  European  countries  share  such  an  institutional 
environment. However, The Transparency International rates the Nordic countries in 
the top ten at to the transparency and integrity of their public sector.6  
  The importance of education and research and development 
5.  
So,  good  policies,  sound  institutions  and  some  luck  go  far  in  explaining  the  strong 
performance of the Nordic countries. However, by digging a bit deeper, we can see also the 
                                                 
5   For a more comprehensive assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the "Scandinavian Model", see 
e.g. Chapter 4 in the EEAG Report on the European Economy 2007, prepared by the European Economic 
Advisory Group at CESifo. 
6   For instance, Denmark and Finland shared the top ranking, and all the Nordic model countries were in the top 
ten, in Transparency International's 2007 Corruption Perception Index that looks at perceptions of public 
sector corruption in 180 countries and territories. See: 
http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2007 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 5
crucial role of education and investments in R&D. The Nordic countries share a long-tradition 
of emphasising the importance of education. 
Nordic countries, particularly Sweden and Finland have high public and private spending on 
Research  and  Development,  comparable  with  that  of  the  United  States.  The  particular 
character  here  is  a  close  partnership  between  public  and  private  sector.  This  has  also 
fostered innovation in the environment of an open economy.  
OECD has recently publicized a third so called PISA-study. Finland has performed well in all 
three studies. It was emphasized in the study that good performance in Finland did not differ 
between the regions and correlated less with family background than in most countries. In a 
small country it is important to get all the talent resources in efficient use. The education is 
here the main tool.  
Nowadays, the share of the working age population with upper-secondary education, as well 
as  tertiary  education,  is  considerably  higher  in  the  Nordic  countries  than  in  the  other  EU 
countries on average. Moreover, the participation rates for non-formal job-related continuing 
education and training are exceptionally high in the Nordic countries.7
The Nordic economies have benefited from a well-educated labour force. The skilled labour 
force  has  contributed  to  a  rapid  diffusion  of  information  and  communication  technologies, 
thus contributing to favourable productivity developments.  
The  causality  between  democracy  and  prosperity  may  run  both  ways.  However,  a  well-
functioning democracy becomes even more vital to economic growth as a country becomes 
more  prosperous.  This  is  because  the  richer  countries  need  to  rely  primarily  on  "smart 
growth",  that  is,  increasing  total  factor  productivity  through  innovation  and  technological 
change, while the poorer ones can grow robustly for long periods merely by imitating more 
advanced countries and adding more inputs of labor and capital.8
Conclusions  
6.  
So, what is the answer to the question that I posed at the beginning, i.e., is a social model 
based on European values an asset or a liability? As is often the case in real life, the answer 
is: "it depends".  
In  a  rapidly  changing  environment  any  static  model  is  likely  to  become  a  liability.  Indeed, 
economic systems are so complicated that no single policy prescription can ensure rapid and 
sustainable growth over the long run. Therefore, it would be helpful to shift the focus from 
copying  particular  "models"  to  analysing  what  structures  are  needed  to  support  successful 
and adaptable approaches.  
I have attempted to do so by examining the experience of the Nordic countries, especially 
Finland. This experience suggests that it is possible – even not without pain – to combine 
economic  dynamism  with  a  system  that  is  consistent  with  the  core  European  values.  The 
sound  macroeconomic  policies  and  social  insurance  typical  for  Nordic  labour  market 
decrease the need for stringent employment protection legislation.  
What  lessons  could  we  draw  from  the  Nordic  experience?  Sound  macroeconomic  policies 
are fundamental as well as structural reforms that promote competition. And we should not 
underestimate  the  role  of  high-quality  public  institutions,  especially  in  education  and 
                                                 
7   See e.g., OECD (2007), Education at a Glance, Paris. 
8   For  an  interesting  discussion  of  determinants  of  growth  in  countries  at  different  levels  of  development,  see 
Baumol, W.J., Litan, R.E. and Schramm, C.J. (2007) "Good Capitalism, Bad Capitalism, and the Economics of 
Growth and Prosperity", Yale University Press, or Eichengreen, Barry and Leblang, David (2006) "Democracy 
and globalization", NBER Working Paper 12450. 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2008
research, in supporting both economic growth and a democracy that is open to new ideas 
and change.  
Going forward, European values of solidarity and social cohesion will be tested by centrifugal 
forces  arising  from  globalization,  rapid  technological  advances  and  population  ageing. 
Ensuring that these values are truly reflected in European social models will require many 
painful decisions, and we must be mindful of the dangers of populism.  
This  calls  for  a  frank  and  honest  political  discourse  that  recognizes  the  benefits  and 
downsides of globalization and other forces that shape the future. This, combined with a well-
educated  electorate,  and  a  culture  of  transparency  provide  a  powerful  antidote  against 
populist policies.  
To survive and thrive in the global competition, Europe must not be focused on preserving 
structures;  it  needs  to  embrace  change  in  order  to  preserve  its  core  values.  This  requires 
innovation not only in business but also in social models.  
BIS Review 18/2008 
 7
