Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Globalisation of Islamic finance services – 
opportunities and challenges  
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Fifth IFSB 
Summit:  Session  1:  Globalisation  of  Islamic  Finance  Services  –  Opportunities  and 
Challenges, Amman, Jordan, 13 May 2008. 
 This  decade  has  seen  the  financial  globalisation  of  Islamic  finance  gain  significant 
momentum.  While  the  early  development  of  Islamic  finance  was  domestic  centric,  its 
internationalisation is now manifested by increased cross border flows, greater participation 
in  international  Islamic  financial  markets,  the  increased  presence  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions in new jurisdictions and more recently, the increased number of Islamic financial 
institutions which have shareholders from multiple jurisdictions. This trend has strengthened 
the  international  economic  and  financial  interlinkages  between  nations  bringing  with  it 
mutually reinforcing gains.  
Financial  globalisation  has  essentially  been  facilitated  by  the  more  rapid  pace  of 
liberalisation, the advancement in the information and communications technology, and the 
significant progress achieved in the development of the international financial infrastructure. 
This trend has also been reinforced by the search for higher returns and the need to diversify 
risks. In the current international financial environment of increased uncertainties, this trend 
has become even more pronounced prompting investors to venture into new asset classes 
and markets that provide stability. 
The globalisation of Islamic financial services 
With the increased significance of the international dimension of Islamic finance, the financial 
landscape  has  been  dramatically  transformed  with  more  diverse  players  and  a  more 
competitive environment. This in turn has been a catalyst for increased financial innovation 
and  resulted  in  a  wider  range  of  Islamic  financial  products  and  services.  This  has  ignited 
interest  from  conventional  global  players  from  Non-Muslim  countries  largely  in  the  form  of 
increased participation in Islamic financial markets and in acquisition of strategic stakes in 
domestic  Islamic  financial  institutions.  With  the  opening  of  borders  for  banking  institutions 
and other players, the Islamic financial system has become more diversified and the Islamic 
financial  markets  deepened.  These  developments  have  contributed  to  its  rapid  expansion 
across the globe, and Islamic finance has now emerged as among the fastest segments in 
the financial services industry.  
The scope of Islamic finance business has thus expanded beyond retail and trade financing, 
to more sophisticated financial products in response to the changing global customer base. 
Such Shariah-compliant products include private equity, project finance, the origination and 
issuance  of  sukuk,  as  well  as  fund,  asset  and  wealth  management  products.  The  sukuk 
market  in  particular,  has  become  an  important  avenue  for  international  fund  raising  and 
investment activities, has expanded by an annual growth rate of 40%. The vast potential in 
sukuk market in the international financial system indeed represents the crest of a new wave 
of innovation in Islamic finance and is very much part of the globalisation process in Islamic 
finance.  Sukuk  Musyarakah  and  Ijarah,  which  command  the  broader  global  acceptance, 
represents the majority of global sukuk issuances.  
As part of the on going internationalisation of Islamic finance has been the development of 
the supporting international financial architecture. Of significance, is the establishment of the 
Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) in 2002 to set the prudential standards for Islamic 
finance,  and  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organization  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 1
(AAOIFI)  that  was  established  in  1990.  The  importance  of  these  international  standard 
setting  institutions  has  been  their  role  in  the  harmonisation  of  prudential  and  accounting 
standards  across  the  different  jurisdictions.  More  importantly  is  their  role  in  instituting 
international best practices in the global development of Islamic finance. It is these concerted 
efforts  to  develop  robust  international  best  practices  in  the  prudential  and  supervisory 
framework that will ensure the resilience and long term sustainability of the Islamic financial 
industry.  
With  globalisation  also  comes  enhanced 
the  strengthened 
interlinkages  can  be  expected  to  bring  about  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital  across 
borders  which  in  turn  would  result  in  lower  the  cost  of  capital,  it  has  also  resulted  in  the 
potential for the transfer of risks across different jurisdictions. This underscores the need to 
ensure  the  quality  of  financial  globalisation.  While  the  intrinsic  nature  of  Islamic  finance 
encourages  risk  management  and  provides  confidence  through  explicit  disclosure  and 
transparency, the new risks resulting from globalisation needs to be taken into account. This 
is to ensure that the Islamic financial institutions have the capacity to manage the risks and 
that the regulatory authorities have the necessary instruments at its disposal to respond to 
any destablising implications. 
interdependence.  While 
Emergence of new set of challenges 
The enhanced international dimension of Islamic finance has thus brought about a new set of 
challenges. The emergence of more diverse Islamic financial institutions and the expended 
development of Islamic financial markets have intensified the development of sophisticated 
Islamic  banking,  takaful  and  capital  market  intermediaries.  This  has  also  resulted  in  the 
creation  of  sophisticated  and  complex  structured  financial  instruments  including  hybrids  of 
debt-equity  structures.  The  increased  competition  has  not  only  intensified  the  pace  of 
innovation  in  products  and  services,  but  also  of  the  operational  processes  and  delivery 
channels. These developments have contributed to the increasing complexity of the risks 
profiles of Islamic financial transactions.  
Global strategic initiatives 
Recognizing the importance of ensuring financial resilience of the Islamic financial services 
industry in this more challenging environment, collaborative international efforts have been 
undertaken.  
Spearheading the strategic development of the industry is the ten-year Master Plan for the 
development  of  the  global  Islamic  financial  industry,  a  joint  initiative  by  the  Islamic 
Development Bank (IDB) and the IFSB. This strategic initiative provides a blueprint for the 
orderly development of Islamic financial system across jurisdictions to achieve the common 
goal of a vibrant, efficient and progressive Islamic financial services industry. This blueprint 
also outlines the broad strategies for the development of the key components of the various 
parts of the Islamic financial sector, including the guide for determining the best options for 
the  different  stages  of  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  so  as  to  ensure  that  it 
would  contribute  to  the  growth  and  development  of  the  economy  and  also  become  an 
integral component of the international financial system.  
Of importance is that the master plan not only represents a blueprint for the development of a 
cohesive  and  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  but  also  it  promotes  increased 
understanding  and  appreciation  for  those  that  wish  to  participate  in  the  Islamic  financial 
system,  including  providing  information  on  the  expected  level  of  achievements  that  are 
required.  
Another important global initiative in Islamic finance already mentioned is the promulgation of 
the international prudential and supervisory standards by the IFSB. The IFSB has fast-
2 
 BIS Review 59/2008
these  standards 
the  development  of 
the  unique  and  peculiar 
tracked 
characteristic of risks of Islamic financial contracts. Fundamental to the implementation of the 
standards  is  the  strengthening  of  the  risk  management  capabilities  of  the  financial 
institutions. In addition, the implementation of these standards needs to be complemented by 
the continuous surveillance so as to ensure the early identification of the new emerging risks 
and to ensure that the institutions undertake to manage the risks.  
to  address 
Resilience reinforced by the intrinsic features of Islamic finance 
The intrinsic features of Islamic finance also contribute to its overall resilience. This is derived 
from the Shariah principles, the key pillar of Islamic finance. The Shariah injunctions require 
that  Islamic  financial  transactions  be  accompanied  by  an  underlying  productive  activity 
resulting  in  a  close  link  between  financial  and  productive  flows.  Under  the  risk  sharing 
concept,  there  is  an  explicit  risk  sharing  by  the  financier  and  the  customer.  In  this 
arrangement, the real activity is expected to generate sufficient wealth to compensate for the 
risks.  Parties  to  the  transactions  would  thus  be  insulated  from  excessive  risks  exposure 
given that the Shariah prohibits the excess leverage and involvement in speculative financial 
activities. The intrinsic principle of profit and risk sharing thus provides an in-built check and 
balance  to  the  Islamic  financial  transactions.  A  combination  of  these  distinct  features 
together  with  the  implementation  of  prudential  risk  management  standards  and  practices 
would contribute to the robustness and resilience of Islamic financial system.  
Mutual respect on Shariah matters 
This decade has thus been a phase of innovation in the global Islamic financial system with a 
number  of  breakthroughs  and  major  milestones  in  innovative  deals  and  structures.  The 
advancement  of  sukuk,  Islamic  securitization,  Islamic  private  equity,  Islamic  real  estate 
investment fund and other financial instruments in terms of sophistication and product range 
has widened the international market reach of Islamic finance, particularly in the cross border 
transactions.  
At the same time, this phase is also seeing a number of key issues being raised, particularly 
in  respect  of  divergence  of  Shariah  views  underlying  a  number  of  the  Islamic  financial 
transactions. While such a divergence of opinions in Islamic financial transactions is not a 
new  phenomenon,  it  has  presented  a  new  set  of  challenges  in  today's  increasingly  more 
globalized  market.  To  forge  closer  linkages  between  the  global  Islamic  financial  markets 
would  require  a  common  understanding  and  acceptance  on  the  applicable  rules  and 
standards.  Indeed,  cross  border  transactions  would  require  the  jurisdictions  involved  to 
mutually recognise the validity of respective rules, practices and underlying Shariah 
interpretations.  This  is  key  for  the  orderly  development  and  for  advancing  the  pace  of 
progress of the international Islamic financial industry.  
For this, it is important to have a concerted effort in providing greater clarity on the mutually 
acceptable strategy for the development of global Islamic finance. In the current globalised 
environment, the role of scholars needs to transcend beyond pure advisory or Shariah rule-
making, to a more strategic role in charting industry development. This could be in part be 
achieved by having global Shariah standards for the Islamic financial industry. A mutually 
agreeable  position  could  be  achieved  with  the  application  of  mutually  recognized 
principles and processes to deduce the Shariah rulings and views.1  
                                                 
1   There  are  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  the  previous  success  stories  in  the  history  of  Islamic  jurisprudence 
whereby  the  strong  sense  of  mutual  respect  prevailed  among  Muslim  jurists  with  multiplicity  of  Shariah 
opinions. The jurists from different mazhab had high regard for differing views expressed by other jurists, even 
in ibadah matters. 
BIS Review 59/2008 
 3
In relation to this, Malaysia has taken a three-prong strategic initiative to promote greater 
mutual respect of the Shariah views. The first is to recognise the principle of mutual respect 
in  Shariah  opinions  issued  in  other  jurisdictions  by  a  recognized  Shariah  committee  for 
transactions  undertaken  in  Malaysia.  In  addition  to  the  key  role  of  a  centralized  Shariah 
Advisory Council as the reference point for all Shariah matters in Islamic finance, Malaysia 
welcomes  Shariah  rulings  by  other  Shariah  committees  that  are  deemed  to  be  deduced 
through generally accepted rigorous principles, processes and rules.  
The second initiative is to have strong resource foundation supported by a pool of qualified 
and  competent  Shariah  talent,  as  well  as  to  accord  more  emphasis  on  extensive  Shariah 
research  in  Islamic  finance.  Given  the  rapid  global  growth  of  Islamic  finance,  there  is  an 
urgent  need  to  meet  the  talent  demand  for  Shariah  scholars  with  strong  interest  in  the 
strategic development of the Islamic finance industry. From the supply side, the International 
Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF) established in 2006 has made significant 
progress  with  more  than  1000  registered  students  in  its  professional  Islamic  finance 
certification. It also has 28 PhD students and has recently launched a Masters Programme in 
Islamic  finance.  The  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  Institute  Malaysia  (IBFIM)  also  offers  a 
structured,  modular  training  solutions  for  Shariah  advisers  focusing  on  practical  and 
operational aspects of Islamic banking and takaful.2
Given the importance of the in depth of Shariah research in Islamic finance, the International 
Shariah Research Academy (ISRA) was recently established as part of INCEIF to conduct 
applied Shariah research on the contemporary Islamic finance issues. The third strategy is to 
provide  a  platform  that  promotes  active  engagement  and  dialogue  among  the  relevant 
stakeholders.  The  annual  Shariah  dialogue  at  international  and  regional  levels  have 
contributed  to  increased  understanding  of  different  views  on  Islamic  finance  matters  and 
enhanced mutual respect of Shariah opinions.  
Closing 
In  conclusion,  against  a  backdrop  of  an  increasingly  uncertain  global  environment,  Islamic 
financial system is indeed well positioned, as a form of financial intermediation in this more 
challenging environment. In the coming years, it is important for adequate focus to be given 
on  the  implementation  of  international  prudential  standards  and  sound  risk  management 
practices in Islamic financial institutions to ensure the financial stability and integrity of the 
financial  system.  According  greater  mutual  respect  to  global  Shariah  views  for  Islamic 
finance  would  also  contribute  to  the  orderly  global  development  of  Islamic  finance,  thus 
sustaining the overall viability and soundness of the Islamic financial system as it becomes 
an integral part of the international financial system. 
                                                 
2  
IBFIM's "Shariah Scholars Induction Programme". 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2008
