Y V Reddy: Financial globalisation, growth and stability: an Indian 
perspective 
Remarks  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  International 
Symposium  on  “Globalisation,  Inflation  and  Monetary  Policy”,  organised  by  the  Bank  of 
France, Paris, 7 March 2008. 
 Chairman  Nout  Wellink,  Governor  Noyer,  distinguished  academics  and  fellow  central 
bankers, 
I  am  thankful  to  the  Banque  de  France  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  participate  in  the 
International  Symposium  on  "Globalisation,  Inflation  and  Monetary  Policy".  I  will  present 
some of the aspects of the Indian experience on the subject and conclude by briefly flagging 
select issues in the light of recent global developments.  
Financial sector reforms 
In India, reforms to improve efficiency and soundness of the financial sector started early in 
the reform cycle that commenced in 1991 – in some ways anticipating the gains that would 
accrue from the resultant flexibility in product and factor markets. However, the process of 
strengthening of the functioning of the financial institutions in terms of prudential framework, 
operational  efficiency  and  regulatory  /  supervisory  regimes  has  been  gradual.  It  was  also 
calibrated with the development of money, forex, government securities and equity markets. 
At the same time, the pace and content of reforms in banking, financial and external sectors 
are closely aligned with the progress in reforms in the real and fiscal sectors and in the public 
sector as a whole, considering in particular that the banking sector in India is dominated by 
the public sector. Our attempts to align the financial sector with the global best practices do 
take into account progress achieved in public policy in regard to similar alignments in related 
areas, especially the real sector flexibilities, fiscal health and overall governance standards. 
In the Indian context, considerable weight is currently accorded by the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI)  to  price  and  financial  stability  while  recognising  its  twin  objectives  of  growth  and 
stability. The large segments of the poor tend to reap the benefits of high growth with a time 
lag while the rise in prices affects them instantly. Further, we recognise the limited capacity 
of the poor to bear risks that may occur in the real sector by virtue of developments in the 
financial sector, in the absence of social security mechanisms and public safety net.  
Let me illustrate with two examples of emphasis on stability in relation to financial institutions 
and financial markets. First, the centrality of the banking sector, especially the retail deposit 
base  and  credit  disbursement,  is  maintained  while  gradually  expanding  the  practice  of 
diversified universal banking. Second, in regard to financial markets, in view of a persisting, 
though moderating, high combined (i.e. federal and provincial debt together) public debt to 
GDP ratio of over 70 per cent, coupled with current levels of fiscal deficits, almost the whole 
of sovereign debt, mostly at fixed interest rates, is denominated in domestic currency and is 
held  almost  entirely  by  residents.  A  small  component  is  open  to  Foreign  Institutional 
Investors and multilateral / bilateral agencies. At the same time, the government securities 
market is well developed and is paving the way for the healthy development of an expanding 
corporate bond market.  
Capital account liberalisation 
Liberalisation  of  the  capital  account  has  been  a  gradual  process  with  a  distinction  being 
made  between  households,  corporates  and  financial  intermediaries,  along  with  the 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 1
recognition  of  a  hierarchy  of  preferences  for  capital  flows.  The  equity  markets  are  more 
liberalised,  relative  to  debt  markets.  Experience  has  shown  that  investment  in  equities, 
especially  in  terms  of  foreign  direct  investment,  may  bring  in  collateral  benefits  such  as 
technological  and  organisational  know-how.  There  is,  therefore,  considerable  openness  in 
regard to equity along with active management of external debt. 
While the policy readily recognises the benefits of liberalisation of trade, it constantly weighs 
the risks and rewards based on both domestic developments and global conditions in regard 
to management of capital account. Thus, the process of liberalisation of the capital account 
reckons the pace of concomitant developments in domestic financial sector, fiscal health and 
flexibilities in the real sector.  
Capital account management 
It is possible to argue that just as “stabilisation funds” take care of current account shocks, 
capital  account  management  and  market  interventions  are  justifiable  to  take  care  of 
cognisable capital account shocks.  
A continued focus on financial market development and its sophistication would, no doubt, 
mitigate  the  challenge  of  capital  flows  in  the  medium  term.  However,  it  is  important  to 
recognise  that  maturation  of  financial  markets  takes  time.  Hence,  sometimes  capital  flows 
may  have  to  be  managed  through  other  instruments  in  the  short  term,  while  continuing  to 
work on development of the financial markets. 
Increase in absorptive capacity of the economy could be a mitigating factor in the context of 
large inflows. It is not easy, however, to develop absorptive capacity of an economy in the 
short run and in any case it is very difficult to calibrate the absorptive capacity of an economy 
to match capital flows if they happen to be volatile. Furthermore, the level of current account 
deficit in respect of emerging market economies that is generally considered as sustainable 
by  the  global  financial  markets  may  be  lower  than  the  sheer  volume  of  capital  inflows  in 
these economies.  
It is sometimes suggested that encouraging outflows would be a good solution to manage 
surging inflows. While there is some merit in this approach, liberalising outflows may not be 
of  great  help  in  the  short  run  because  a  more  liberalised  regime  generally  attracts  higher 
inflows. Hence, such a policy has to be combined with other measures which could help to 
effectively manage the flows. 
In  implementing  a  calibrated  process  of  liberalisation  of  capital  account,  co-terminus  with 
developments  in  other  sectors,  there  are  several  issues  that  are  addressed  in  regard  to 
managing capital flows in the short run. These are: (a) whether the capital flows are judged 
to  be  large  and  lumpy;  (b)  whether  they  are  assessed  to  be  temporary;  (c)  the  limits  to 
effectiveness  of  interventions  if  the  exchange  rate  movements  are  unidirectional;  (d)  the 
desirable  extent  of  sterilisation,  considering  costs  and  the  available  instruments;  and  (e) 
above  all,  the  likely  impact  of  the  relevant  policy  stance  and  procedural  measures  on  the 
exchange  rate  expectations.  Needless  to  say,  monetary  and  exchange  rate  and  reserve 
management are rendered complex in the context of the well known “trilemma”, especially in 
the current global environment.  
Monetary policy 
Monetary  policy  recognises  the  growing  importance  of  global  factors  but  the  domestic 
developments  play  a  dominant  role.  No  doubt,  the  structural  transformation  underway  and 
the continued significance of public sector in financial sector as well as notable prevalence of 
administered  interest  rates  make  the  tasks  particularly  complex.  While  there  has  always 
been  a  dual  mandate  of  the  RBI,  it  has,  in  recent  years,  successfully  articulated  a  self-
imposed  tolerance  limit  of  five  per  cent  on  headline  inflation.  The  tightening  of  monetary 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2008
policy commenced in October 2004 and there have been seven increases of 0.25 per cent in 
the  repo  rates  till  March  2007,  to  address  early  signs  of  possible  overheating  during  the 
period. To meet the challenges of excess liquidity on account of surge in capital flows, the 
cash reserve ratio in regard to banking system has been increased in ten instalments since 
September 2004 till date, aggregating three hundred basis points. Currently, there are acute 
policy  dilemmas  arising  from  global  food  and  energy  prices  as  also  from  financial  market 
turbulence that need to be factored-in in evolving appropriate policy responses.  
Supervision of banks 
In  recent  years,  partly  reflecting  the  buoyant  economy,  credit  growth  has  been  very  high, 
particularly, in select segments and the asset prices have been accelerating. The RBI made 
it clear that while it does not have a view on the market valuations, it would like to sensitise 
the  banking  system  to  the  potential  risks  of  rapid  escalation  in  prices.  The  actions  taken 
since December 2004 to address these issues include increase in risk weights in respect of 
housing  loans  and  sensitive  sectors  viz.,  commercial  real  estate  and  capital  market 
exposure. Further, since November 2005, provisioning requirement for standard advances, 
except for agriculture and SMEs, were increased while the increases in respect of sensitive 
sectors  were  steeper.  Several  procedural  &  suasive  measures,  and  supervisory  review 
processes  over  select  banks  were  also  undertaken  to  sensitise  them  in  this  regard.  In 
particular,  the  RBI’s  concerns  about  credit  quality  in  the  expansion  phase  of  credit,  the 
recourse  to  non-deposit  resources  to  fund  their  assets,  the  uncomfortable  loan-to-value 
ratios and excessive reliance on wholesale deposits were repeatedly expressed, and this has 
been followed up with interactions with select banks, as needed. As a result, overall credit 
growth  as  also  advances  to  sensitive  sectors  have  since  moderated.  The  RBI  has  been 
urging the banks to also monitor carefully larger unhedged foreign exchange exposures of 
their corporate clients.  
In view of the tendency of some of the banks to utilise non banking financial companies as 
conduits  to  channelise  funds  leading  to  regulatory  arbitrage  and  discomfort,  limits  on  both 
direct and indirect exposures were imposed and transparency in their relationship with banks 
was insisted. Further, supervisory review process has been undertaken in regard to the few 
banks that rapidly expanded their off-balance sheet exposures so as to secure supervisory 
comfort.  
As  regards  complex  financial  products,  the  structured  credit  market  is  in  its  infancy.  Both 
mortgage-backed  and  asset-backed  securities  are  in  vogue,  but  in  the  light  of  differing 
market  practices  and  concerns  relating  to  accounting,  valuation  and  capital  adequacy 
treatment of such products, the RBI issued guidelines on securitisation of standard assets in 
February  2006.  Permitting  introduction  of  credit  derivatives,  currency  futures  as  well  as 
interest rate futures with modified product design in India are under active consideration and 
the process of extensive consultations with market participants is underway.  
Regulatory focus on liquidity 
The  overall  liquidity  in  the  system  is  actively  managed  by  the  RBI  mainly  through  the 
operation of Liquidity Adjustment Facility on a daily basis in addition to sterilisation through 
several instruments.  
While  the  RBI  has  prescribed  prudential  guidelines  for  asset  liability  management  by  the 
banks  and  they  have  flexibility  in  devising  their  own  risk  management  strategies  as  per 
Board-approved policies, subject to regulatory limits on mismatches prescribed for short-term 
time buckets, the RBI has taken steps to mitigate risks at the system level as well.  
BIS Review 28/2008 
 3
RBI had, early on, recognised the risks of allowing access to the unsecured overnight market 
funds to all categories of entities and, therefore, restricted the overnight unsecured market 
for funds only to banks and primary dealers.  
Like  other  supervisors,  the  asset  liability  management  guidelines  for  dealing  with  overall 
asset-liability  mismatches  have  been  issued  by  the  RBI.  Since  excessive  reliance  on  call 
money borrowings by banks could cause systemic problems, prudential limits in relation to 
net  worth  have  been  stipulated  on  both  lending  and  borrowing  in  call  money  market  in 
addition to those on inter-bank liabilities.  
The guidelines on securitisation of standard assets have laid down detailed regulations on 
provision of liquidity support to Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs). It inter alia enables grant of 
liquidity  facility,  by  the  originator  or  a  third  party,  to  help  smoothen  the  timing  differences 
faced  by  the  SPV  between  the  receipt  of  cash  flows  from  the  underlying  assets  and  the 
payments  to  be  made  to  investors.  The  liquidity  facility  is  subject  to  certain  conditions  to 
ensure that the liquidity support was only temporary and gets invoked only to meet cash flow 
mismatches and for absorbing losses. Any commitment to provide such liquidity facility is to 
be treated as an off-balance sheet item and attracts 100 per cent credit conversion factor as 
well as 100 per cent risk weight.  
Select issues  
Keeping in view the Indian experience and recent global developments, I will venture to pose 
some select issues for consideration. First, arguably globalisation had helped to bring down 
inflationary pressures. An interesting issue would be as to whether globalisation of trade has 
contributed more to such a process than globalisation of finance or whether it is a combined 
effect.  China's  manufacturing  industry  and  to  some  extent,  India's  services  sector,  have 
admittedly  contributed  to  the  downward  inflationary  pressures  while  more  recent  upward 
pressures  on  prices  of  food  and  fuel  do  not  suggest  significant  role  for  finance  relative  to 
trade. The impact of extensive use of derivative instruments in respect of commodity trade on 
oil and food prices is still indeterminate. 
Further, as illustrated by China and perhaps India, major contributors to the price moderation 
so  far,  consequent  upon  global  integration,  have  remained  relatively  less  open  on  capital 
account and have a moderately integrated financial sector.  
Second, the link between open capital account and growth performance is not fully confirmed 
by  the  experience  of  the  two  largest  emerging  markets,  though  such  a  link  is  not  entirely 
refuted either. In view of limited experience so far it is also useful to explore the link between 
movement  in  asset  prices  and  financial  integration  vis-à-vis  trade  integration.  In  any  case, 
the  assumption  that  a  managed  capital  account  generates  adverse  sentiments  in  financial 
market is not fully borne out so far by the two aforesaid examples which experience large 
capital  inflows.  This  points  to  the  need  for  assigning  greater  weight  to  macro-economic 
fundamentals than to the state of capital account openness. 
Third,  recent  turbulence  in  financial  markets/institutions  and  the  importance  of  harmonised 
and coordinated response of public policies indicate the significance of countercyclical fiscal 
and monetary policies. Is it possible to argue that similar harmonisation between monetary 
policy and prudential policies would be of some value as part of counter cyclical measures? 
Fourth, in regard to regulation and supervision over banks, it is useful to explore whether the 
special status of banks in the financial system and the need for active coordination among 
regulators/supervisors  needs  to  be  reaffirmed.  Further  common  persons  in  most  of  the 
societies would like to have a set of institutions where almost total safety of funds is assured 
and  these  traditionally  are  the  banks.  Hence,  if  the  concept  of  reasonable  expectation  in 
public policies is accepted in regard to banks (as evidenced by the experience with Northern 
Rock),  the  pre-eminence  of  depositors'  interests  come  out  prominently.  In  this  light,  a 
reassessment  of  “originate-to-distribute”  models,  off  balance  sheet  items  and  liquidity 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2008
requirements of banks may warrant a closer examination in regard to banks. Moreover, the 
debate on financial innovation and regulation has to be considered in terms of potential and 
systematic  relevance  of  such  innovations  besides  the  capabilities  for  bringing  them 
effectively under the regulatory umbrella. The extent of relevance of reputational risks in the 
conduct of the banking business relative to the past may also be worth considering. 
Fifth, relative to trade in goods, externalities are more prevalent in regard to financial sector, 
especially the banking sector. Hence, some regulation is essential and it tends to be national. 
However,  the  financial  flows  are  rapid  due  to  modern  technology  and  could  be  quite 
substantial, but in view of global scale, it becomes extremely difficult to identify or enforce the 
rules  of  origin  in  regard  to  financial  flows.  In  this  regard,  the  scope  of  and  limit  to  global 
harmonisation of banking regulations in a convincing and enforceable manner may have to 
be  continuously  assessed  so  that  the  national  regulators  appropriately  build  into  their 
regulatory  regimes 
the  requisite  global  requirements  and  domestic  compulsions  of 
reasonable expectation from the common person that ought to govern the public policy.  
Sixth,  currently  there  appear  to  be  simultaneous  challenges  from  several  angles  to  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  emanating  from  recent  financial  turbulence.  These  relate  to 
abrupt  and  large  shifts  in  monetary  policy  measures  of  the  major  economies,  major 
realignments  in  exchange  rates  within  a  short  period  and  unprecedented  inflationary 
pressures due to food and energy prices. These warrant significant and innovative ways of 
cooperation among the central bankers.  
Finally, from a purely academic perspective, it may not be out of place to explore the issues 
concerning international policy coordination including the political economy considerations, in 
terms  of  interaction  between  governments  and  the  financial  sector,  which  may  have  been 
influenced  by  not  only  by  the  growing  importance  of  finance  but  also  the  cross-border 
linkages  in  the  financial  flows.  Recent  debates  on  the  Northern  Rock,  Sovereign  Wealth 
Funds and financial innovations being ahead of regulation, are symptomatic of this broader 
issue. If I recall, Prof. McKinnon and Prof. Jagdish Bhagwati, among others, had alluded to 
some of these aspects some years ago. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 5
