Jean-Claude Trichet: Opening speech at the conference on “The safety 
and efficiency of post-trading arrangements in Europe” 
Opening speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Joint  ECB/European  Commission  conference  “The  safety  and  efficiency  of  post-trading 
arrangements in Europe”, Frankfurt am Main, 21-22 April 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  welcoming  you  to  Frankfurt  and  open  the  next  one  and  a  half  day’s 
Conference on “The safety and efficiency of post-trading arrangements in Europe”. This 
conference  is  organised  jointly  by  the  ECB  and  the  European  Commission  as  part  of  our 
continuous concerted initiatives to foster European financial integration in general and in the 
post-trading  environment  in  particular.  This  conference  is  distinctive  in  at  least  two  ways. 
Firstly,  it  brings  the  main  European  decision  makers  and  opinion-formers  from  various 
segments of the post-trading activity together, to foster the European debate in an open and 
visionary way. Secondly, as the Conference is organised into distinguish sessions covering 
all  post-trading  activity,  we  have  a  unique  opportunity  to  draw  up  concrete  proposals  and 
recommendations from each field of expertise. I look forward to learn from the discussions of 
today’s conference on how to enhance the safety and efficiency of the European post-trading 
market.  
I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  importance  of  the  post-trading  activities  in  Europe.  Put  into 
global perspective, Europe is comparable to the United States in terms of its economic size, 
but  whereas  firms  in  the  United  States  operate  in  a  single,  large  domestic  post-trading 
environment,  in  Europe,  firms  have  to  operate  across  many  smaller,  national  markets  and 
bear the higher complexity and costs of connecting to all of these markets either directly or 
via manifold intermediaries, implying additional unnecessary costs. As a result of this lack of 
integration, Europe lags behind the United States. 
For example, the cost gap1 is particularly large for cross-border transactions, with estimates 
suggesting that the difference can be a multiple of two or even more. 
This  gap  for  Europe  must  be  closed  and  clearly  demonstrates  that  concrete  actions  are 
needed  to  make  Europe  significantly  more  competitive  and  a  more  attractive  place  for 
issuers and investors.  
This objective is in line with the Lisbon agenda, which claims that not only must Europe do 
better, it can do better. We aim to make Europe a highly efficient and secure place to issue 
and  trade  securities.  However,  Europe  lacks  –  for  instance  –  a  common  post-trade 
“autobahn” or “highway” system, whereas the United States created such a system almost 
10 years ago. The aim of the European post-trading market must therefore be to create one 
single market across Europe which is as secure, efficient and cheap as domestic markets 
are today.  
The Eurosystem takes the view that today’s challenges are best tackled by involving market 
participants in solving the current economic and financial gaps. The Eurosystem is acting as 
a market catalyst and playing a unique facilitation role, bringing together market participants 
to create a truly integrated European post-trading market. The Eurosystem achieved a great 
success by providing – in the form of TARGET2 – borderless core infrastructures for real-
                                                 
1   The difference between the price of an EU bank purchasing a settlement service by a European settlement 
service  provider  and  the  price  an  US  bank  pays  for  the  equivalent  settlement  service  from  a  US  service 
provider. 
BIS Review 47/2008 
 1
time settlement in central bank money. Further support for the single market will come from 
the streamlining of collateral management systems through the CCBM2 (Collateral Central 
Bank  Management)  project.  In  addition,  the  TARGET2-Security  (T2S)  project  aims  at 
building  on  the  TARGET2  system  and  brings  securities  transactions  settlement  with  pure 
cash settlements together across Europe. These Eurosystem initiatives joins other European 
initiatives, such as the Code of Conduct and the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 
(MiFID), in helping to fulfil the objectives set out by the Lisbon agenda for the provision of 
better services to issuers and investors. We firmly believe that these concerted initiatives will 
speed  up  the  long  awaited  market  integration  and  foster  competition  thereby  creating 
opportunities  for  cost  savings  and  allowing  market  participants  to  select  and  choose  post-
trade partners irrespective of their location within the single market.  
This also requires a clear roadmap for securing the “safety and soundness”2 of post-trading 
systems  from  a  European  perspective  and  for  the  relevant  authorities  to  define  common 
practices compatible with a single market, including the dismantling of current legal and fiscal 
barriers, in particular, national differences in the legal treatment of securities and actions on 
conflict-of-laws. 
This  is  in  conformity  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Giovannini  group  findings,  which 
examined  the  EU  post-trading  sector  and  identified  15  barriers  to  be  removed  in  order  to 
ensure and efficient cross border clearing and settlements in the context of completing the 
single  market;  One  of  which  relates  to  the  current  restrictions  on  the  location  of securities 
(barrier 9), which limits the issuers choice to place their securities with foreign depositories.  
All  these  concerted  initiatives  will  bring  benefits  for  Europe.  Commercial  service-providers 
will benefit from the level playing-field that common platforms, harmonised rules and reduced 
complexity will bring. Issuers will benefit from lower capital costs. Investors will benefit from 
better returns.  
However,  the  benefits  go  beyond  the  European  post-trading  activity,  as  an  efficient  post-
trading  market  also  contributes  to  the  safeguarding  of  financial  stability.  Efficient  and 
integrated markets reinforce the shock-absorption capacity of the system, as they are more 
liquid and offer better opportunities for financing and risk distribution. Similarly, in periods of 
high market volatility, the efficency of processing, clearing and settlement and the timeliness 
of  reusing  funds  contributes  to  the  stability  and  shock-absorption  capacity  of  financial 
markets.  
Considering  the  value  of  securities  trading  volumes  in  the  EU  of  approximately  EUR  150 
trillion  in  2006,  the  importance  and  potential  impact  of  the  post-trading  activity  can  not  be 
underestimated. 
Therefore, in summary, the post-trading service providers and their users will benefit from the 
overall economic efficiency within the pre and post-trading industry of an integrated financial 
market.  
Against this background, you have all been invited to this conference as decision markers 
from various segments of the post-trading activity to foster the European debate with a view 
to improving the safety and efficiency of the European post-trading sector. I welcome you to 
take  this  opportunity  to  co-operate  together  and  exchange  visions  and  possible  actions  to 
enhance  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  the  European  post-trading  market,  in  line  with  the 
Lisbon agenda and for the benefit of the 500 million citizens in the European Market.  
I look forward to learn about today’s discussions and I wish you a successful and out bringing 
Conference.  I  would  like  to  pass  on  the  floor  to  the  next  speaker,  Commissioner  Charlie 
                                                 
2   Committee of European Securities Regulators. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2008
McCreevy – responsible for “Internal Market and Services”, to present us with the keynote 
speech of the Conference. 
BIS Review 47/2008 
 3
