Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: High-level panel: Improving the efficiency 
and integration of post-trading arrangements in Europe 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the Joint ECB/European Commission conference “The Safety and Efficiency 
of Post-Trading Arrangements in Europe”, Frankfurt am Main, 21-22 April 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  open  the  high  level  panel  on  improving  the  efficiency  and  integration  of 
post-trading arrangements in Europe and to share with you our visions for a more integrated 
financial post trading market.  
Queen  Victoria  once  said:  “Change?  Why  do  we  need  change?  [Things  are  quite  bad 
enough  as  they  are]”.  Well,  a  few  years  ago  the  post  trading  community  was  facing  the 
question whether to follow Queen Victoria and not to change the post trading environment. 
So I am delighted when I look at today’s post trading environment to see a dynamic change 
environment with a lot of activity and initiative. An important question – that we will address in 
this  panel  –  is  how  we  can  further  shape  and  contribute  to  the  future  post  trading 
environment.  
As  members  of  the  panel,  we  have  the  pleasure  of  welcoming  Mr  Eddy  Wymeersch, 
Chairman  of  the  European  Committee  of  Securities  Regulators  (CESR),  Ms  Pervenche 
Berès, Member of the European Parliament and Chairperson of the Committee on Economic 
and Monetary affairs of the European Parliament and Mr Jeffrey Tessler, Chief Executive 
Officer of Clearstream International.  
I am especially happy to open this panel because the post-trading segment of the financial 
market plays a particularly important role in ensuring the safety and efficiency of allocating 
and  attracting  funds  within  a  globalised  financial  market.  To  put  this  into  perspective,  the 
securities  trading  volumes  for  the  EU  stood  at  approximately  €150  trillion  in  2006,  as 
compared  with  €196  trillion  in  the  United  States  and  €72  trillion  in  Japan,  and  keeping  in 
mind at the same time that the settlement volumes could be as much as three times as high. 
In the light of these significant and increasing volumes, it is evident that today’s challenges 
are best tackled by involving market participants in the definition of concerted efforts to foster 
innovative and operative actions to enhance the safeguarding and integration of the currently 
too fragmented European post-trading market.  
The Eurosystem takes its responsibility and is accountable for acting as a market operator, 
facilitator  and  catalyst  for  new  initiatives  as  part  of  the  common  European  objective  of 
creating a truly transparent and integrated European financial market in line with the single 
market agenda.  
The  Eurosystem  will  continue  to  play  an  active  role  in  the  payment  industry  by  offering 
several  types  of  service  and  infrastructure  to  the  financial  market.  It  has  proven  that  it  is 
capable of managing large-scale facilities and now provides a borderless core infrastructure 
for real-time settlement in central bank money with TARGET 2. Furthermore, a medium-term 
project for the next generation of collateral management has been launched under the name 
of “Collateral Central Bank Management” (CCBM2), the objective of which is to consolidate 
and  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral  management  systems  to  the 
benefit of eligible counterparties. Currently, there is a public consultation on the draft CCBM2 
user requirements under way, in which market participants have been invited to provide their 
comments by 5 May 2008. 
Let me also elaborate on the new TARGET2 Securities (T2S) project. The T2S project is the 
Eurosystem’s proposal for making cross-border securities settlement transactions in central 
BIS Review 47/2008 
 1
bank money as secure, efficient and cheap as domestic settlement transactions are today. 
T2S will build on and benefit from the newly released TARGET2 system thereby combining 
cash and securities settlements – in real time – within a single European infrastructure. This 
will  be  Europe’s  single  “pipeline”  settlement  system,  a  system  similar  to  those  that  have 
already been implemented by other economic areas. I firmly believe that T2S will contribute 
to speeding up market integration and fostering the necessary competition in Europe, to the 
benefit of financial participants and the citizens of Europe. 
The  T2S  project  will  act  as  a  driver  to  remove  even  more  barriers  of  the  kind  already 
identified by the Giovannini Group, as well as help users to identify the irreducible costs of 
unresolved barriers in the new efficient borderless settlement environment. This project will 
also  advance  the  European  harmonisation  process,  creating  opportunities  for  further  cost 
savings  and  allowing  market  participants  to  easily  select  and  choose  post-trade  partners 
irrespective of their location within the single market. The impact of T2S on harmonisation is 
already being felt, building on the valuable work carried out by the CSDs. The harmonisation 
process  goes  far  beyond  pure  settlement  activities  and  will  increase the  pressure  for  swift 
action to harmonise practices, especially in relation to corporate activities, taxes, laws and 
regulations. 
The  dynamic  and  second-round  effects  of  T2S  will  pass  through  the  market  to  increase 
trading activity, reduce trading spreads, increase competition and lower service prices, thus 
improving welfare in general. With T2S, the concept of cross-border settlements in Europe 
will disappear; instead, there will just be a domestic securities settlement for Europe.  
The Governing Council decided to maintain the current governance structure arrangements 
for  the  forthcoming  specification  phase  which  is  scheduled  to  be  completed  by  the  end  of 
2009.  Work  is  under  way  to  present  the  governance  structures  for  the  subsequent 
implementation  and  operational  phases.  Replies  from  market  participants  are  coming-in 
contributing  to  the  assessment  of  costs-benefits  and  economical  impact  of  T2S  on  the 
industry.  
I can assure you that we will carefully weigh all the economic factors, the legal aspects and 
the  risks involved.  We  rely  on  the  dialog  with  you  to  bring  all  the  arguments  on  the  table. 
Preliminary results provide us with the confidence that the economical aspects of the project 
will  bring  savings  to  the  industry  as  a  whole  over  the  medium  term.  Further  results  are 
expected still within April. The Governing Council of the ECB will take the final decision on 
building the T2S project during the summer of 2008. 
The  ECB  is  in  full  agreement  with  the  Commission  regarding  the  Code  of  Conduct,  in 
particular  in  the  core  principles  of  establishing  the  freedom  of  choice  and  competition  in 
trading,  clearing,  and  settlement  on 
transparency,  access  and 
interoperability  and  the  unbundling  of  services,  bringing  transparency  to  the  market.  The 
ECB welcomes initiatives that contribute to creating a truly integrated and efficient European 
financial  market  in  line  with  the  Lisbon  agenda.  I  can  assure  you  that  the  ECB  listens 
carefully to the views of the market, which is another reason for hosting this conference: We 
want to stay in close contact with post-trading partners. I therefore look forward to discussing 
with you – as conscientious decision-makers of the European securities industry – ideas for 
accelerating the fulfilment of the Lisbon agenda in order to obtain a single, transparent and 
efficient post-trading market in Europe. 
the  basis  of  price 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2008
