John Gieve: The credit crunch and the UK economy 
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Family Office 
Leadership Summit, London, 22 September 2008. 
 Introduction 
In  recent  days  we  have  seen  extraordinary  developments  in  US  financial  markets.  At  the 
start of last week we saw the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the merger of Merrill Lynch 
and Bank of America; by Friday the US Treasury had rescued AIG, issued a guarantee of 
Money Market Funds and an outline plan for a Resolution Trust that is now in Congress. And 
this  morning  the  Federal  Reserve  announced  that  Goldman  Sachs  and  Morgan  Stanley 
would become regulated bank holding companies.  
But  I  want  today  to  concentrate  on  the  broader  economic  impact  of  the  crisis  in  credit 
markets,  which  began  over  a  year  ago  with  the  downturn  in  the  US  sub-prime  housing 
market. While the epicentre has remained in the US, it has already had a major impact on 
the structure of our banking sector. Northern Rock was among the first casualties. And this 
year we are seeing a significant consolidation within the UK banking sector, with Santander 
purchasing  Alliance  &  Leicester,  Nationwide  absorbing  two  smaller  building  societies,  and 
most recently the merger of HBOS and Lloyds TSB. 
The turmoil has also affected all of the Bank’s work; from the setting of interest rates, to the 
scale  and  structure  of  our  market  operations,  and  to  our  joint  work  with  the  FSA  and 
Treasury to deal with institutions under stress and to help design an effective international 
response to the crisis.  
For  example,  like  other  central  banks,  we  have  adapted  our  money  market  operations  to 
provide  the  liquidity  the  banking  system  as  a  whole  has  required.  First,  we  have  allowed 
banks  to  increase  their  reserve  balances  at  the  Bank,  increasing  the  size  of  our  overall 
provision of central bank money; second, within that larger total, we have shifted the balance 
towards longer-term lending as the terms of market finance have shortened; third, we have 
widened the collateral we accept for longer-term repos. And in April, we introduced a special 
scheme  to  provide  banks  with  up  to  three  years’  finance  for  legacy  assets  which  have 
become illiquid.  
Last week we offered extra sterling liquidity through our usual Open Market Operations and 
provided  US  dollar  liquidity  as  part  of  co-ordinated  action  with  the  Federal  Reserve,  ECB, 
Bank of Japan and Swiss National Bank. We also extended the window in which banks can 
swap their legacy assets under the Special Liquidity Scheme until January next year. Even 
once the window closes, the Scheme’s asset swap will provide liquidity for a period of up to 
three years, something many people have not fully appreciated.  
Events are still moving quickly, so I hope you will understand why I am not going to attempt a 
live  commentary  on  events.  I  hope  that  the  massive  and  far-reaching  measures  the  US 
Government has now announced will restore greater calm and confidence in their banking 
system. Stabilisation of US markets and banks should have a beneficial knock-on effect on 
wider  international  markets  too.  But  we  will  continue  to  monitor  the  situation  closely,  in 
consultation with our counterparts in the US and elsewhere, in order to judge whether any 
further measures are needed.  
Inflation outlook 
This  morning  I  want  to  take  a  wider  perspective  and  discuss  how  the  credit  crunch  is 
affecting the wider UK economy and draw some medium-term lessons for economic policy.  
BIS Review 114/2008 
 1
And the first point to make is that the turmoil in financial markets has not been the only shock 
to our economy in the last 12 months. In any other week more attention would have been 
given to the fact that for the second successive quarter the Governor had to write an open 
letter to the Chancellor on behalf of the Monetary Policy Committee to explain why inflation 
was more than a percentage point away from the target of 2%. In fact inflation has risen from 
2.1% in December to 4.7% in August and it seems set to peak above 5% soon.  
The immediate driver of that increase has been the international commodity cycle (Chart 1). 
The  rapid  growth  across  most  large  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  in  particular  has 
fuelled global demand for raw materials, which in the short term are in relatively fixed supply, 
pulling  their  prices  upwards.  In  August,  oil  prices  were  up  60%  higher  than  a  year  earlier, 
wholesale gas prices were up 90%, and food prices 40%.  
These sharp increases in costs have fed into food and petrol prices and passed along the 
supply chain, driving up the prices of other goods including in particular household gas and 
electricity  bills  (Chart  2).  But  so  long  as  the  prices  of  wholesale  energy  and  foodstuffs  on 
global markets stabilise at their new higher levels, their direct impact on inflation should wash 
out  after  a  year.  In  other  words,  by  late  2009  these  items  would  not  be  making  any 
contribution to the rate of consumer price inflation: whereas, at present, they are contributing 
almost 3 percentage points.  
Moreover there are some signs that the commodity cycle may have turned down. Since the 
peak in July, the price of food has fallen by 10% and the price of crude oil has fallen by over 
a quarter, and that is consistent with other indicators that point to a slowing in growth in both 
emerging and advanced economies. 
That  good  news  on  commodity  prices  has  been  offset  somewhat  in  the  UK  by  a  falling 
exchange rate. Sterling has been trading at around 1.8 against the US dollar – a year ago it 
was 2.0. But the same arithmetic applies: such price level shocks need have no long-term 
impact on the inflation rate. 
In the medium term the real upside risks to inflation lie at home – in whether we see “second 
round” rises in wages and prices in the domestic economy. It is to counter those pressures 
that the MPC have judged it necessary over the last year for growth to slow and create a 
margin of spare capacity in our economy. That makes it more difficult for companies to raise 
prices and puts more pressure on them to restrain their costs.  
It  also  re-emphasises  our  determination  to  get  inflation  back  to  the  2%  target  and  thus 
influences  the  expectations  of  financial  markets,  price  setters,  wage  negotiators  and 
households generally. And expectations themselves have an important  impact on inflation. 
Broadly, the higher households’ expect inflation to be, the less they are likely to save today. 
Inflation  expectations  also  shape  workers’  wage  demands  as  they  try  to  protect  their 
standard of living. And companies’ expectations will shape the prices they set as well as their 
willingness to concede cost increases.  
We know from the inflations of the 70s, 80s, and early 90s that raising interest rates will in 
time  bring  inflation  down,  even  when  expectations  of future  inflation  are  high.  But  we  also 
know how painful that process is. It works through the increased threat of bankruptcy and 
unemployment. That forces a change in peoples’ behaviour and their hearts and minds and 
expectations follow. Conversely, the more confident people are that inflation will fall back the 
less we have to rely on slowing the economy to force them to hold prices and wages down. 
That is why the risk of inflation expectations drifting up has been such a central concern of 
the  MPC  over  the  last  year.  In  my  view  it  has  been  particularly  important  through  recent 
months, when each forecast has been higher than the one before and each inflation figure 
has exceeded the earlier forecast, not to confuse the central message that we will set policy 
to bring inflation back down to target.  
We  have  seen  households’  near-term  expectations  of  inflation  rise  this  year,  but  that  was 
inevitable  given  experience  and  our  own  forecasts  (Chart  3).  What  matters  more  are 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2008
expectations  of  inflation  over  the  medium-term,  and  whether  they  are  consistent  with  the 
target, and here the surveys are less alarming: according to the YouGov/Citigroup survey, 
those  expectations  have  fallen  back  a  little  and  a  gap  has  opened  up  between  people’s 
perceptions of current inflation and their expectations of a year or more ahead.  
We  can  use  other  economic  data  as  a  cross-check  on  what  is  happening  to  inflation 
expectations.  If  households’  expectations  had  become  detached,  we  should  expect  to  see 
households spending more, and saving less, and pushing for larger nominal wage increases. 
If companies’ expectations had become detached, we should expect to see a broad-based 
pickup in cost and price inflation. But consumer spending appears to be weak, nominal wage 
growth remains relatively muted and once we strip out the impact of rising commodity prices, 
output price inflation has been steady. To paraphrase Sherlock Holmes, if expectations have 
become detached, it is curious that those dogs haven’t barked. So in my view the news on 
that front has been encouraging.  
The impact of the credit crunch 
And of course, we have been balancing that upside risk to inflation from the commodity price 
shock against a downside risk that the credit crisis would drive down activity too far and push 
inflation below target in the medium term. And the news on that front remains worrying.  
The headlines are about the drama on Wall Street but the failure or rescue of even big and 
well  known  financial  firms  matters  mainly  because  of  their  knock  on  impact  on  the  wider 
economy.  The  last  year  has  brought  home  once  again  why  central  banks  have  to  be 
concerned with financial stability as well as monetary stability and inflation. For the biggest 
risk  to  the  financial  sector  is  also  the  biggest  downside  risk  to  the  economy:  namely  that 
damage to bank balance sheets would lead to tighter credit conditions, lower asset prices, 
lower consumption and investment and to a severe feedback loop into more losses for banks 
and so on down a spiral. 
That feedback is already working to some degree not just in the US but in the UK too. Our 
investment  banks  have  suffered  losses  in  their  trading  books  and  a  wider  group  of  banks 
have lost money on their treasury books because of the fall in the values of structured credit 
of all sorts. At the same time they have found that some of their major sources of finance, 
notably  securitisation  and  medium  term  unsecured  lending,  have  dried  up  and  others, 
notably  shorter  term  lending  in  money  markets,  have  become  much  more  expensive 
(Chart 4).  
What is more, all these effects have lasted longer than expected and seem set to continue 
for  some  time.  Banks  have  responded  by  hoarding  liquidity  and  trying  to  reduce  their 
leverage by raising new capital (not without difficulty in some cases) and by constraining the 
growth of lending. One direct effect has been a marked tightening of credit conditions over 
the past year (Chart 5), which seems still to be underway. That in turn is pushing down asset 
prices and demand. 
Our  forecasts  and  our  policy  decisions  have  reflected  our  best  assessment  of  the  likely 
impact  of  this  feedback.  We  brought  down  interest  rates  earlier  in  the  year  to  cushion  the 
impact of the change in bank behaviour. In effect we have relied on the credit squeeze in 
large measure to produce the slowdown we consider necessary. But we are fully aware of 
the  risk  that  the  squeeze  on  banks  and  the  feedback  to  the  economy  could  prove  more 
powerful than expected.  
That risk does not just arise from the drama of the last week or two. We will continue to work 
for the return of calmer financial markets. But we should not rely on that to reverse quickly 
the  broader  macroeconomic  slowdown  that  is  underway.  Indeed  there  are  still  risks  to  the 
downside and I thought it might be useful to spell out how they feed through the economy 
and therefore make plain what indicators I will be focusing on in the next few months.  
BIS Review 114/2008 
 3
Any contraction in lending to the real economy can amplify the slowdown in demand (Chart 
6). Increases in retail lending rates for those who can still get access to credit discourage 
spending. Increases in credit rationing can have a more dramatic impact. If those households 
and companies are unable to tap other sources of finance, then their spending will have to 
fall back in line with income.  
Spending  on  high  cost  durable  goods  –  such  as  purchases  of  cars  and  white  goods  by 
households  and  machines  by  companies  –  are  likely  to  be  particularly  affected.  And  the 
contraction in mortgage lending pushes down house prices, further eroding the value of the 
collateral against which banks’ loans are secured.  
Tighter credit conditions raise income gearing, forcing households and companies to devote 
a  larger  share  of  their  income  to  servicing  debt.  And  as  the  impact  of  those  tighter  credit 
conditions bite on the economy, income is likely to be squeezed and that at the same time as 
real incomes are being affected by higher food and energy prices. The slowdown in demand 
will  fall  disproportionately  on  certain  industries,  starting  with  the  house-building  sector  and 
related services and lead to falls in employment. Some households and companies are likely 
to be driven over the default threshold.  
Tighter credit conditions could also affect the potential output of the economy – reducing the 
capacity  of  the  economy  to  produce  goods  and  services.  The  economy’s  supply  capacity 
reflects  not  only  the  number  of  people  who  work  and  the  number  of  machines  at  their 
disposal,  but  also  how  productive  our  companies  are  at  using  that  labour  and  capital  to 
produce  output.  And  the  innovations  in  new  products  and  new  processes  which  drive 
productivity growth are financed in part by bank lending.  
In  short,  the  process  of  deleveraging  that  was  designed  to  alleviate  pressure  on  banks’ 
capital position can lead to an additional wave of credit losses, coupled with higher write-off 
rates, given the lower level of property prices (Chart 7). And, welcome though the reforms of 
Basel  II  and  accounting  rules  are  in  many  respects,  they  can  accentuate  the  squeeze  on 
capital  because  the  requirements  are  based  on  risk  weights  which  rise  when  arrears  are 
increasing and collateral values are falling.  
House prices and consumption 
One important feedback is through the housing market which is continuing to weaken. The 
number of loan approvals for house purchases is at a record low, the ratio of sales to stocks 
is approaching the levels of the early 1990s, and prices are now down 12% on their peak of 
late last year.  
Of  course  falls  in  house  prices  tend  to  coincide  with  a  slowdown  in  the  wider  economy 
because  they  are  affected  by  the  same  factors  –  notably  falls  in  real  income  and 
employment.  But  they  can  also  feed  back  into  activity.  First  they  slow  housing  investment 
and  transaction  flow  which  hits  builders  and  related  services  like  estate  agents  and 
conveyancers.  The  purchases  of  white  goods  and  furniture  tend  to  go  hand  in  hand  with 
transactions in the housing market. So the slowdown in the number of people moving home 
is likely to impact on spending on those goods.  
Falling house prices limit how much households and small businesses can borrow today and 
that  pulls  down  consumption  and  investment.  Also  by  reducing  their  expectations  of  what 
they  will  be  able  to  borrow  tomorrow  either  to  compensate  for  a  reduction  in  income  or  a 
need to spend, some households and firms may increase their precautionary savings.  
Finally, falling house prices redistribute wealth. Those who already own houses and expect 
to  trade  down  in  future  and  realise  a  capital  gain,  are  worse  off.  On  the  other  side,  those 
hoping  to  trade  up  or  who  are  not  yet  on  the  housing  ladder  are  better  off  (although  the 
tighter  constraints  on  lending  may  mean  they  have  to  save  a  bigger  deposit  to  enter  the 
market).  The  former  will  tend  to  reduce  their  consumption;  the  latter  will  tend  to  do  the 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2008
opposite. In a perfect market these two effects might balance out. But given that some of the 
beneficiaries of house price falls do not yet have independent incomes, and others have a 
longer period ahead to consume their additional wealth, on balance I would expect the net 
effect on consumption to be negative. More widely I would expect some impact from the end 
of a wide perception that in housing you can have your cake and eat it – that the return on 
your house as an investment will in time substantially offset the cost of housing as a service.  
All these feedback channels are at work and economics is better at identifying their nature 
than in forecasting their scale. There is no alternative there to reviewing all the indicators I 
have mentioned month by month and then making an informed judgment.  
Some policy lessons for the medium term 
We  identified  the  mispricing  of  risk,  particularly  in  credit  markets  in  our  Financial  Stability 
Reports over the last two years. But the reckoning has been more severe and destabilising 
than anyone anticipated. Risk premia had become compressed and leverage throughout the 
financial markets had risen too high. The pendulum has now swung back with a vengeance. 
As  the  FSR  noted  earlier  this  year,  risk  premia  now  appear  to  have  overshot  in  some 
markets and that is contributing to the slowdown in the real economy.  
Could  policymakers  have  taken  earlier  action  to  correct  those  imbalances?  Of  course  we 
took the decisions we did on the basis of the available data at the time. But with hindsight, 
seen across the world as a whole, there was a case for somewhat tighter monetary policy to 
prevent the demand for resources outstripping supply (although I would note that our interest 
rates have been consistently higher in recent years than those elsewhere in the advanced 
economies). The rise in oil and food prices has appeared as an external pressure on each 
country on its own but it is not external to us all collectively. A particular problem here – that 
has yet to be resolved – is the expansion of the dollar bloc. The emerging economies were 
importing  loose  monetary  policy,  which  scarcely  seemed  appropriate  to  their  domestic 
conditions.  
However  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  a  somewhat  tighter  monetary  policy  would  have  been 
guaranteed to head off the credit boom and subsequent crunch altogether. Put another way, 
monetary  policy  is  a  blunt  instrument.  To  prevent  excesses  in  financial  markets,  we  might 
have  had  to  generate  an  unnecessary  slowdown  in  the  real  economy.  I  share  the  view 
therefore that we have to look for new regulatory measures to complement interest rates.  
There are a number of specific lessons on regulation which have already been identified. The 
FSA, for example, is already strengthening its prudential supervision. And internationally, we 
need to fill gaps in the current framework – for example on mortgage origination in the US, 
increasing  the  capital  requirements  for  some  credit  products  and  loan  commitments,  and 
ensuring that investors and rating agencies assess new products more diligently. In the UK 
we have also set out proposals to reform the legal framework for dealing with failing banks. 
Through  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  we  also  need  to  strengthened  supervisory  colleges 
and cross-border crisis management arrangements.  
One more general lesson is that we have to recognise the difference between what is good 
risk management in a single company and what is good for the system as a whole. For a 
company the ideal risk management system is one which enables them to take risks, reap 
the rewards but get out first when the music stops. And the right capital and liquidity is one 
which  is  just  enough  to  see  you  through  the  subsequent  downturn  in  asset  prices  and 
transactions. But there is always someone at the end of the queue and it is impossible to be 
sure who they will be. Moreover in a global market the problems of one institution are bound 
to spread quickly to others along a complex web of interconnections in many markets. For 
the authorities what matters is whether the losses to the slower players damage the system 
as a whole. One lesson of recent events is that the capital and liquidity buffers need to be 
BIS Review 114/2008 
 5
higher  for  everyone.  The  long  decline  in  holdings  of  liquid  assets  (Chart  8)  by  banks  for 
example has to be reversed a bit and the increase in leverage likewise (Chart 9).  
In the Financial Stability Forum, which is leading the international regulatory response to the 
crisis,  we  are  also  looking  at  the  scope  for  “macro  prudential”  instruments  to  dampen  the 
destabilising procyclicality in financial markets. To do this we need to do more than simply 
raise  the  minimum  levels  of  capital  and  liquidity  that  regulators,  rating  agencies,  or  the 
markets require. We need to create reserves based on macroeconomic factors, which can be 
drawn down as the cycle turns down and have to be replenished on the upswing when profits 
are  high.  The  system  of  dynamic  provisioning  in  Spain  seems  to  work  effectively  in  that 
respect and may well offer a guide for the way forward.  
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  on  monetary  policy,  we  have  one  instrument,  and  one  goal  –  ensuring  that 
inflation stabilises at target in the medium-term. While we must remain vigilant for any signs 
of inflation expectations drifting upwards, the news on that front is encouraging. On the other 
side, the risk we must be careful not to underestimate is the deflationary consequences of 
the credit crisis. 
 At the moment we are focused on the risk that the slowdown in the real economy will be 
amplified  through  a  contraction  in  banks’  balance  sheets.  But  we  should  also  set  in  place 
longer term measures to prevent such financial imbalances from building up again in the next 
upswing.  In  my  view  the  case  for  macro-prudential  policies  alongside  monetary  policy  is 
compelling. 
 
 Chart 1: Commodity Prices 
 
Chart 2: CPI Inflation 
 
Percentage points
5
Energy
Food and non-alcoholic beverages
CPI (per cent)
Brent oil price
Wholesale gas price
Economist food-price index
Index:  Jan. 2007 = 100
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Jan 07 Apr 07 Jul 07 Oct 07 Jan 08 Apr 08 Jul 08
 2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
4
3
2
1
0
-1
 BIS Review 114/2008
 6 
  Chart 3: Inflation expectations 
Per cent
5-10 years ahead 
[YouGov/Citigroup]
12 months ahead  
[Bank NOP]
12 months ahead 
[YouGov/Citigroup]
2003
2004
2005
2007
2008
5
4
3
2
1
0
    Sterling
Euro
US dollar
Chart 4: Three month Libor spreads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jan Mar May Jul
2007
Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul
08
Basis points
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Sep
09
Chart 5: Credit conditions on mortgage 
lending 
 Net percentage balances(b)
Chart 6: Feedback effects (I) 
Credit 
availability
Factors contributing to 
changes in credit availability 
Changing cost/
availability of 
funds
Changing
economic
outlook
Q2
Q4
2007
Q2
08
Q4
Q2
2007
08
Q2
Q2
Q4
Q2
2007
08
  60
40
20
+
0
 -
20
40
60
 Weaker growth and
Weaker growth and
falling house (and other 
falling house (and other 
collateral ) values
collateral ) values
(3)
(3)
Bank losses (1)
Bank losses (1)
Tighter credit 
Tighter credit 
conditions (2)
conditions (2)
BIS Review 114/2008 
 7
 Higher funding costs
Increase 
in credit 
losses
Squeeze on net 
interest income
Erosion of 
capital ratios
Regulatory 
minima
Increase 
in risk 
weights
Pressure to 
deleverage
 Increase in 
loss given 
default
Increase 
in default
Higher income 
gearing
 Falling 
slowdown
on capacity
house prices
Scarring effect 
property market 
Macroeconomic 
Deterioration in the 
Chart 7: Feedback effects (II) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 8: Liquid assets ratio 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tighter credit conditions
P e r c e nt a ge  of  
t ot a l  a sse t s 
(all currencies)
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1967
1972
1977
1982
1987
1992
1997
2002
2007
Liquid asset s inclues: Cash, BoE balances, money at  call, eligible bills and UK gilt s. 
 8 
 Ratio
Maximum-minimum range
Interquartile range
Median
Chart 9: Leverage ratios of major UK banks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
 
 
 
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
BIS Review 114/2008
