Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – financial stability 
Address by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Institute of 
Bankers Pakistan (IBP) Convocation, Karachi, 23 February 2008. 
 1.  Recent  and  recurrent  episodes  of  financial  crisis  have  magnified  the  significance  of 
financial  stability  and  its  dimensions.  Every  crisis  –  be  it  economic,  currency,  banking  or, 
more  recently,  liquidity  –  has  resulted  in  huge  financial  and  banking  losses  and  adverse 
economic  consequences  that  transcend  beyond  national  boundaries.  Learning  from  the 
crisis, globally, there has been incremental understanding and build up of knowledge of what 
disrupts and promotes financial stability. New approaches and methodologies have evolved 
to assess different dimensions of the risks facing different segments of financial markets and 
their implications. 
Financial stability: approach and dimension 
I.  
2.  Mishkin  in  19911
  defined  financial  stability  to  ensure  and  promote,  in  a  lasting  way  and 
without  major  disruptions,  an  efficient  allocation  of  savings  to  investment  opportunities. 
Generally, maintenance of financial stability depends on effective financial regulation, which 
aims  to  provide  right  incentives  for  prudential  conduct  and  risk  behavior  by  financial 
institutions.  Primary  objective  of  financial  stability  policies  and  assessment  should  be  to 
provide early warning signals for crisis prevention as distinct from crisis mitigation. Stability of 
financial  system  benefits  and  promotes  (i)  smooth  and  efficient  financial  intermediation 
processes  that  allocate  savings  to  profitable  investment  opportunities;  (ii)  balanced 
development  of  different  segments  of  financial  system;  and  (iii)  proper  transmission  of 
monetary policy, whose effective conduct and implementation in turn facilitates price stability. 
3. Price stability and financial stability tend to mutually reinforce each other in the long run. 
High  inflation  creates  financial  instability  since  it  generates  misperceptions  and  creates 
problems in predicting real returns. It can also worsen the asymmetry of information available 
to  lenders  and  borrowers.  A  business  cycle  boom  accompanied  with  high  inflation  is 
traditionally considered as the typical environment in which real over-investment and asset 
price  bubbles  blossom.  Excess  liquidity  provided  by  the  central  bank  is  one  of  the  main 
factors  responsible  for  the  development  of  inappropriately  lax  lending  standards.  Credit 
growth, which is excessive in view of realistic return expectations, is often the foundation for 
financial instability. Hence, monetary policy focused on price stability plays an important role 
in ensuring stable financial markets. 
4.  Keeping  in  view  these  considerations,  most  countries  have  developed  elaborate 
frameworks designed to measure, monitor and safeguard financial stability. It is prudent to 
assess  macroeconomic and  financial  sector  vulnerabilities and  to  judge  the  implications  of 
these two so that appropriate corrective actions and policies may be put into place to prevent 
a  crisis.  A  number  of  advanced  countries  have  adopted  sophisticated  models  to  conduct 
macroeconomic  and  financial  sector  surveillance.  However,  other  developing  countries, 
given the data limitations and size of financial sector, have adopted simpler frameworks for 
assessment of financial stability. 
5. In assessing macroeconomic vulnerabilities it is standard to examine the sustainability of 
the fiscal and external accounts – any drift in these two principal modules of the economy 
creates  monetary  complications  and  can  generate  instability  in  both  domestic  and  foreign 
                                                 
1   Mishkin, F. (1991): “Anatomy of financial crisis,” NBER Working Paper, No. 3934. 
BIS Review 56/2008 
 1
exchange markets. Depending on the intensity of disruptions, there may be implications for 
the financial sector, often resulting in repricing of assets and affecting the growth of private 
sector including banking business. 
6. To comprehensively assess the financial sector vulnerabilities, there is a need to assess 
the risks associated with (a) financial institutions relying on a range of financial soundness 
indicators  that  help  assess  credit,  liquidity,  market,  exchange  rate,  operational  and 
reputational  risks  etc.;  (b)  financial  markets  that  may  face  counterparty  risks,  contagion  or 
asset  price  misalignments;  and  (c)  financial  infrastructure  risks  ranging  from  legal  and 
regulatory risks to the clearance, payments and settlement system. 
7. While assessing the key risks and vulnerabilities in the economic and financial system, it is 
critical to adopt analytical approaches to: 
(i) 
identify,  assess  and  measure  the  source  of  risks  and  track  the  channels  through 
which they may propagate and ultimately affect the financial system; 
developing an understanding of financial stability transmission mechanism; and  
aggregate  the  risks  and  properly  stress  test  the  impact  of  potential  shocks  on 
different institutions and markets. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Pakistan Financial Stability Review 
II.  
8. State Bank of Pakistan (SBP), the central bank and primary regulator of financial sector, is 
responsible for conducting financial stability review given its dual mandate of monetary policy 
and financial regulation and supervision. SBP has a hand on the pulse of economy and as 
such is able to decipher monetary transmission mechanism and its impact on the economy 
and  the  financial  sector.  At  the  same  time,  vigilance  on  banking  sector  helps  SBP  to 
understand the financial transmission mechanism which assists in the formulation of overall 
policy stance for both monetary and banking sector. 
9. SBP has been conducting financial stability analysis for the last 5 years or so. However, 
the  framework  for  financial  stability  is  still  evolving.  Starting  in  2004,  SBP  conducted  an 
annual Financial Sector Assessment Program dovetailed with quarterly and annual Banking 
Surveillance  Reports. 
first 
comprehensive Financial Stability Review (FSR) that offers a rich assessment of risks and 
vulnerabilities of financial sector and macroeconomic challenges. 
10.  Among  other  components,  the  main  component  of  FSR  is  the  assessment  of  banking 
sector as it constitutes the largest segment of financial system. Banking sector has managed 
to grow substantially and its stability can be assessed in a number of ways: 
(i) 
in  2007,  SBP 
Integrating 
launched 
reports, 
these 
its 
Solvency of banking system is safeguarded if the banks’ capital offers necessary 
cushion to absorb unexpected losses. Rising profitability coupled with SBP’s policy 
to strengthen the capital of banks has contributed to rise in the risk based capital 
adequacy  of  banking  system  to  13.6%  by  September  2007  (relative  to  8.8%  in 
2001). Quality of capital has also improved (with the rise in risk weighted assets to 
Tier 1 capital) and the share of risk based capital now constitutes close to 80% of 
core capital. 
Profitability:  Performance  of  banks  has  been  good  converting  the  commercial 
banks’ losses, registered until early 2000, to positive: return on assets is now 2% 
and return on equity 20%. Although, net interest margins have increased from 59% 
in CY03 to 70.5% in September 2007 and cost to income ratio, an important ratio to 
measure  operating  efficiency,  has  improved  from  62.4%  to  42.3%  from  CY01  to 
September  2007,  there  is  substantial  scope  to  enhance  efficiency  in  financial 
intermediation process. Structural change in ownership structure, with private sector 
now  holding  almost  79%  of  total  banking  assets,  has  augured  well  to  enhance 
(ii) 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2008
foreign  ownership  and  acquisitions  have  paved  way 
profitability of banking sector while ensuring professionalism in the management of 
banks.  Growing 
for 
strengthening the capital base of banks and is helping to enhance competition. In 
addition,  in  line  with  the  empirical  evidence  in  other  countries,  it  is  expected  that 
entry  and  growth  of  foreign  banks  will  contribute  to  higher  average  loan  growth, 
better  risk  management  practices,  greater  provisioning  and  loan  loss  absorption 
capacity. 
Asset  quality  has  benefited  from  loan  restructuring  and  write  offs,  stronger 
regulations, prudent lending and growth in advances. Non-performing loans (NPLs) 
to  gross  loans  fell  from  17%  in  CY03  to  7.7%  by  September  2007  and  net  NPLs 
from 7% to 2.3% over this period. Concurrently, provisions to NPLs ratio improved 
from  64%  to  72%.  Bank’s  capacity  to  absorb  losses  has  grown  as  net  NPLs  to 
capital  ratio  declined  from  over  150.5%  in  CY01  to  merely  11.4%  in  September 
2007. Furthermore growth and sector diversification of loan portfolio has helped to 
reduce the risk of overexposure. 
Market  risk  has  different  dimensions  as  banks  are  engaged  in  a  variety  of 
businesses that expose them to interest rate, foreign exchange and equity market 
risks etc. The principal market risk facing banks is interest rate risk. The duration of 
assets  and  liabilities  offers  an  accurate  indicator  of  interest  rate  risk.  With  banks 
primarily raising short term deposits and lending for longer maturity the asset-liability 
mismatches are significant, though banks are being encouraged to raise long tenor 
deposits through exemption of cash reserve requirements. 
Liquidity risk: Liquidity management is a key banking function and it helps banks 
withstand  shocks  and  losses.  Liquidity  risk,  as  measured  by  liquid  assets  to  total 
assets  and  other  indicators,  has  remained  stable  over  the  last  5  years  albeit  a 
modest  decline  recently  along  with  decline  in  liquid  asset  to  deposit  ratio  while 
advance to deposit ratio rose modestly. 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
11. While these indicators allow us to gauge the soundness on selective basis, the Financial 
Soundness  Index  (FSI)  indicator  offers  a  more  holistic  measure.  FSI  is  calculated  as  an 
aggregate index assigning 0.25 weights to four key financial soundness indicators including 
capital  adequacy,  asset  quality,  profitability  and  liquidity.  This  index  was  negative  for  a 
number of years but since CY02 it has been positive and has consistently improved. 
12. Another major aspect of effective surveillance is checking the resilience of the banking 
system  to  various  shocks  through  stress  testing  exercise.  SBP  performs  stress  testing 
through  a  set  of  exceptional,  but  plausible,  assumptions  using  simple  sensitivity  analysis. 
The shocks cover different risk factors namely interest rate, forced sale value of collateral, 
NPLs,  stock  prices  and  foreign  exchange  rate  in  addition  to  liquidity,  credit  and  market 
shocks. The stress testing exercise allows SBP to gauge the possible adverse impact on the 
banking  system  and  provides  basis  for  taking  future  regulatory  measures.  In  principle, 
fortifying capital base has lent greater resilience to the banking system against the adverse 
shocks. As of September 2007, capital of all banks can fairly absorb the impact of a shock of 
10%  in  increase  in  total  NPLs.  None  of  the  groups  would  experience  a  fall  in  its  CAR  to 
below 8%. In consumer finance category, however, a rise in NPL-to-loan ratio to 10% (which 
is at 4.4% as of 30 Sep 2007) of total consumer loans can have adverse impact on some 
banks. Individually, four banks holding a share of 11% in the assets of the banking system 
would experience a decline in their CAR to below 8% under this sensitivity test. The impact 
of  interest  rate,  exchange  rate  and  equity  price  shocks  can  also  be  well  absorbed  by  the 
healthy capital base of banks. 
BIS Review 56/2008 
 3
(iii) 
(iv) 
Key policy drivers of financial stability 
III.  
13.  Financial  stability  in  Pakistan  has  benefited  from  structural  transformation  of  banking 
sector  and  wide  ranging  policy  initiatives  of  the  central  bank.  In  particular,  Pakistan’s 
prudential  regulatory  regime  has  been  crafted  to  promote  and  preserve  financial  sector 
stability. Regulatory framework encourages 
(i) 
(ii) 
financial sector growth, diversification, and innovation;  
healthy competition and risk taking to ensure a sustainable and aggressive income 
stream; 
opportunities for enhancing the franchise value of banks;  
prudent  behavior  and  effective  risk  management  to  discourage  infection  of  loan 
portfolio; and 
safeguarding social obligations and consumer interests. 
(v) 
14.  Promoting  sound  banking  practices,  SBP  has  implemented  exhaustive  guidelines  for 
corporate  governance  and  on  risk  management,  business  continuity  plan,  internal  controls 
and  stress  testing.  In  2007,  SBP  has  been  stringent  in  overseeing  the  Management  and 
Board conduct and their conformity to fit and proper criterion. Furthermore, two major sets of 
new  regulations  were  introduced  under  which  banks  were  required  to  induct  independent 
Board  members  and  adopt  umbrella  risk  management  guidelines.  A  survey  is  currently 
underway to assess corporate governance practices of banks. 
15. Financial stability has been further fostered by the strengthening of banks’ system-wide 
capital  base  to  Rs  372  billion.  Process  of  consolidation  has  been  catalyzed  by  30  odd 
mergers  and  acquisition  (both  domestic  and  foreign-led),  moratorium  on  licensing  of 
conventional  banks  and  rise  in  minimum  capital  requirements  for  banks  and  DFIs.  To 
streamline  capital  with  risks,  banks  have  initiated  implementation  of  the  standardized 
approach,  as  prescribed  under  Basel  II  regulations.  Over  the  period,  this  is  expected  to 
augment  the  economies  of  scale  and  improve  efficiency  as  competition  and  innovation 
grows. 
16. Enhanced push from SBP for delivery of development finance will help diversify the credit 
portfolio  and  will  alter  risk  profile  as  there  is  relatively  low  correlation  of  the  inherent  risk 
factors among different sectors. 
17.  Financial  stability  will  further  benefit  from  SBP’s  operationalization  of  the  Real-Time 
Gross Settlement System (RTGS) named PRISM (Pakistan Real Time Inter-bank Settlement 
Mechanism) in June 2008 which will allow shift from traditional paper-based, end-of-the-day 
settlement system to electronic payment system for large value, low volume inter-bank fund 
transfers and settlements. 
18. Money market stability has improved with SBP’s efforts to develop an effective market 
determined yield curve for government securities which sets the stage for development of the 
corporate debt market. Moreover, derivatives market, which is an important pillar for effective 
risk  management,  though  still  in  its  infancy,  has  taken  off.  Presently  there  are  five  banks 
which have been given the status of Authorized Derivative Dealers by SBP. The derivatives 
market is being regulated under SBP’s Financial Derivatives Business Regulation and covers 
interest rate swaps and forward rate agreements, in Pak Rupee and other currencies (after 
SBP approval). 
Risks to financial stability 
IV.  
19. The financial sector of Pakistan has experienced an extraordinary growth in recent years. 
Financial  assets  have  grown  to  $180  billion  and  are  now  equivalent  to  125%  of  GDP 
(compared  to  95%  of  GDP  at  end-1997)  reflecting  strong  growth  in  banking  sector  assets 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2008
and  stock  market  capitalization.  The  substantial  growth  in  financial  sector  brings  with  it 
associated risks. Results for banking sector surveillance, as highlighted above, give comfort 
that  financial  risks  are  well  contained  though  growing  macroeconomic  imbalances,  unless 
addressed urgently, could threaten the financial stability. 
20.  A  principal  risk  to  financial  stability  is  often  country’s  economic  structure  and  the 
macroeconomic  framework.  Country’s  with  high  concentration  in  one  or  two  sectors  often 
face  risks  to  financial  sector,  if  there  is  an  over-exposure  of  the  system  to  these  sectors. 
Similarly, macroeconomic imbalances introduce economic vulnerabilities which in turn induce 
inflationary  pressures  and/or  exchange  rate  volatility.  These  factors  do  pose  system  wide 
challenge to financial stability. 
21.  Another  risk  to  Pakistan’s  financial  stability  is  its  overall  lack  of  financial  sector 
diversification. Of particular concern is the size and issues surrounding the nonbank sector. 
Of  the  total  financial  sector  assets,  insurance  companies  account  for  barely  3%,  mutual 
funds  3%  (and  are  largely  sponsored  by  banks)  while  other  non-bank  finance  companies 
(NBFCs)  are  2%  of  the  system  and  holders  of  listed  private  bonds  are  less  than  1%. 
Furthermore, NBFCs are fragmented and weakly capitalized. For financial sector stability, it 
is critical that such institutions be better capitalized and a conducive environment is created 
for  the  growth  of  promising  segments  (collective  investment  schemes,  including  mutual 
funds),  niche  markets  and  products  are  introduced  for  leasing  companies,  modarabas, 
housing finance and venture capital, and penetration is enhanced in the insurance industry. It 
is also important to consider that while market capitalization has grown impressively, its role 
in raising long term risk capital or debt for new industry over the last several years has been 
limited. 
22. There is further scope for enhancing banking sector stability too. Although competition is 
emerging with the growth of mid-sized banks and foreign acquisitions, five largest banks hold 
50.6% of total banking sector assets; though there has been a clear reduction in the level of 
concentration  which  was  at  63.2%  in  2000.  While  this  is  a  concern,  the  presence  of 
undercapitalized  small  banks  is  likely  to  pose  risks  particularly  during  periods  of  adverse 
economic cycles. 
23. Another area where there is scope for strengthening financial sector stability is greater 
credit diversification. Over 50% of the bank credit portfolio is concentrated in corporate sector 
serving  fewer  industries.  Diversification  of  bank’s  loan  portfolio  to  support  more  retail  and 
infrastructure financing will be critical for the growth of banking sector. SBP needs to develop 
its  capacities  to  monitor  financial  position  and  probability  of  default  of  the  corporate  and 
household sectors within the stability framework. 
24.  Cognizant  of  maturity  mismatches,  SBP  has  introduced  different  cash  reserve 
requirements (CRR) for demand and time liabilities to encourage banks to mobilize long term 
deposits. Specifically, while the demand liabilities (including time liabilities of less than one 
year  maturity)  attract  CRR  of  8%,  time  liabilities  of  more  than  one  year  maturity  are 
exempted from CRR. 
25.  Finally,  now  predominantly  private  sector-owned  financial  sector  presents  its  own 
challenges.  SBP  is  working  towards  developing  adequate  policy  framework  for  consumer 
protection, development of Financial Safety Nets such as Deposit Insurance and a well-laid 
out  “Lender  of  Last  Resort”  procedure  to  strike  a  balance  between  enhancing  consumer 
protection  and  minimizing  moral  hazard.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  need  to  encourage 
efficiency of financial intermediation by reducing banking spreads. SBP is further developing 
capacities to monitor operational risks associated with weak internal control systems, delays 
in adoption of information technology solutions and outsourcing of processes by banks. 
BIS Review 56/2008 
 5
