Petar Goshev: South Eastern European countries’ competitiveness and  
challenges on the road to EU 
Introductory speech by Mr Petar Goshev, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of 
Macedonia, at the international conference “Competitiveness of the South Eastern European 
countries and challenges on the road to EU”, organized by the National Bank of the Republic 
of Macedonia, Skopje, 30 May 2008. 
 Honored guests,  
Dear friends,  
I wish you a very warm welcome to the Conference of the National Bank of the Republic of 
Macedonia  on  the  Competitiveness  of  the  South  Eastern  European  Countries  and 
Challenges  on  the  Road  to  the  EU.  Similarly  to  the  several  conferences  and  workshops 
organized by our Bank in the recent years, this one will also seek to develop a discussion on 
a very important topic for the countries in transition striving to reach the income level of the 
EU member states. Although real convergence is not directly in the focus of interest of the 
monetary authorities, the unbreakable tie between the nominal and real convergence makes 
this topic extremely important also from a viewpoint of the monetary policy. Therefore, at this 
Conference  we  will  try  to  analyze  once  again  the  achievements  of  the  new  EU  member 
states,  particularly  their  experience,  their  successes,  but  also  their  failures  regarding 
competitiveness  of  their  economies  on  the  road  to  EU  and  EMU  membership.  I  am 
convinced  that  South  Eastern  European  countries,  that  is  EU  candidate  and  potential 
candidate countries, will have an opportunity to broaden their knowledge about what to do 
and what to avoid on the road to EU. At the same time, we will also share the experiences 
about the challenges that the South Eastern European countries face with on their way to the 
real convergence. 
The  transformation  of  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  and  their  final 
membership in the EU is one of the most remarkable events in human history. Never 
before  had  so  many  countries  and  people  made  so  many  changes  in  such  a  short  time. 
During  the  1990s,  we  witnessed  a  complete  renewal  of  entire  systems  and  institutions, 
implementation of structural reforms, but also establishing new ways of living and thinking. 
What is important for us here is that these changes were happening simultaneously with a 
huge rise of income and living standards in general. Although not a perfect indicator for the 
remarkable  changes,  the  comparison  of  GDP  per  capita  in  the  beginning  of  transition  and 
now shows a clear picture of the progress. In 1993, the group of 10 new EU member states 
had a GDP per capita that was 37.2% of the euro-zone level at that time, but in 2007 this 
indicator reached 56.4%.1 Certainly, not all transition countries were moving with the same 
speed, and not all of them reached the same level of income. Among this group of countries, 
the three Baltic countries were moving the fastest. In 2007 they had an average GDP per 
capita of 56.8% of the average level in the euro-zone (it was 28.2% in 1993). Although the 
process of income growth is present also in South Eastern Europe, its pace is slower. For the 
period 1996-2007, convergence was made to the income per capita in the countries of the 
euro-zone  by  8.2  percentage  points  (from  20.8%  to  28.9%).2  What  is  clear  from  these 
                                                 
1   Source: World Economic Outlook Database, April 2008 and NBRM calculations. The indicator is unweighted 
average of GDP per capita of these countries. The indicators are according to the purchasing power parity. 
2   Source:  World  Economic  Outlook  Database,  April  2008  and  NBRM  calculations.  The  indicator  for  SEEU  is 
unweighted average of GDP per capita of Macedonia, Albania, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia 
(for 2000). The indicators are according to the purchasing power parity. 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 1
comparisons is that the achievements are huge, but also that much more remains to be done 
in order to reach the level of old EU members.  
Why the speed of real convergence of the new EU member-states and of the candidate 
and  potential  candidate  countries  is  different,  is  one  of  the  frequently  discussed 
questions. Taking classical theory of growth as a starting point, income actually depends on 
the  factors  of  production  and  technological  growth,  meaning  that  the  reasons  for  the 
differences  should  be  sought  in  these  factors.  According  to  research,  the  productivity  rise 
was mostly due to what we call "total factor productivity", that is improvements that can be 
attributed  neither  to  capital  nor  to  labor,  but  to  specific  organizational,  technological  and 
institutional changes that result in productivity rises and GDP growth. In the past few years, 
the  new  EU  member-states  register  trends  of  positive  influence  also  of  the  labor  to  the 
economic growth, while among the SEEU countries this contribution is still mainly negative.3 
Structural  and  institutional  reforms  also  had  key  influence  on  the  accelerated  productivity 
growth.  Transition  indicators  of  the  EBRD  that  are  commonly  used  for  assessment  of  the 
reforms  indicate  that  the  new  member-states  have  already  reached  the  level  of  the 
developed  countries  in  the  fields  of  privatization,  price  liberalization,  trade  and  foreign 
exchange  systems  (although  they  are  still  lagging  behind  with  respect  to  the  enterprises 
restructuring,  competition  protection,  banking  reform  and  liberalization  of  the  interest  rates 
and  financial  markets  and  institutions,  as  well  as  the  overall  infrastructure).4  On  the  other 
hand,  these  indicators  clearly  point  to  the  fact  that  the  SEEU  countries,  are  significantly 
lagging behind with the reforms in all these areas, except price liberalization and to a certain 
extent trade and foreign exchange systems. 
The process of accelerated income increases, that is the process of real convergence, 
also  initiated  the  process  of  nominal  convergence.  Nominal  convergence  about  which 
we, central bankers, speak the most, is consisted mainly of convergence of price levels, but 
also  of  exchange  rate  changes,  interest  rates  and  budget  deficits  to  EU  levels.  As  an 
empirical  fact,  rises  in  relative  CPI  usually  move  together  with  rises  in  relative  GDP,  and 
emerging Europe was not immune to this trend. The CPI level in the new EU member states 
in 1995 ranged from 29.2% of the EU-15 level in Lithuania to 44.9% of the EU-15 level in 
Poland. In 2006, the CPI level ranged from 42.7% in Bulgaria to 71.8% in Slovenia, which 
clearly shows fast price rises in these countries.5  
It is obvious that the parallel processes of real and nominal convergence of countries in 
transition  pose  numerous  challenges  for  their  economic  policies  in  general  and 
particularly  for  their  monetary  policies.  The  process  of  real  convergence  creates 
inflationary pressures through a number of channels, thus making it difficult to fulfill one of 
the  Maastricht  criteria  for  entering  the  monetary  union,  and  also  the  higher  inflation 
generates negative effects on the competitiveness of the domestic economy. The Balassa-
Samuelson  effect  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  indicated  channels  through  which  real 
convergence leads to higher inflation rates. According to this concept, the faster productivity 
growth in the tradables sector compared to the non-tradables sector of a country will cause a 
positive  inflation  differential  and  afterwards  real  appreciation  –  through  the  rise  of  market-
determined prices of non-tradable goods.6 Although there are certain dilemmas regarding its 
importance, most estimates show that the contribution of this effect ranges between 1 and 3 
                                                 
3   M. Morgese Borys, E.K. Polgar and A. Zlate, "Real Convergence in Central, Eastern and South-eastern 
Europe", Background paper prepared for the Economic Conference on Central, Eastern and South-eastern 
Europe, 1-2 October 2007, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main. 
4   Source: EBRD Transition Report 2007: November update. 
5   Source: Eurostat, NBRM calculations. 
6   Jane  Bogoev,  Sultanija  Bojceva  Terzijan,  Balázs  Égert,  Magdalena  Petrovska,  "Real  exchange  rate 
http://www.economics-
in  Macedonia:  Old  wisdoms 
insights", 
new 
and 
dynamics 
ejournal.org/economics/discussionpapers. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2008
implementation  of  structural  reforms 
percentage points of CPI inflation. Therefore, for countries with a fixed exchange rate regime, 
such as almost all transition countries had in the beginning and quite a few of them now, the 
higher  inflation  is  reflected  directly  into  real  effective  exchange  rate  appreciation.  On  the 
other hand, countries with flexible exchange rate regimes also face their share of difficulties. 
Since  they  allow  their  currencies  to  fluctuate  (and  usually  try  to  target  inflation),  their 
productivity  growth  is  reflected  first  in  higher  nominal  exchange  rate,  and  consequently  in 
real effective exchange rate appreciation as well.  
Besides  the  Balassa-Samuelson  as  a  supply  side  effect,  there  were  also  factors  on  the 
demand  side  which  contributed  to  higher  inflation  in  these  countries  during  the  transition 
process.  As  productivity  and  income  grow,  people  start  spending  relatively  more  on  non-
tradables and services, which are usually considered more luxurious and are therefore more 
expensive.  In  addition,  there  were  huge  quality  improvements  in  products  and  services, 
which also contributed to price rises. Last but not least, as these countries were establishing 
functional  market  economies,  they  had  to  allow  for  market  rather  than  administrative 
determination of prices. As prices were previously kept artificially low, these changes caused 
additional  inflationary  pressures.  The 
that  are 
prerequisite for real convergence, also creates pressures on the fiscal policy, i.e. the budget 
deficit  and  consequently  inflation.  Part  of  the  costs  for  the  economic  reforms  are  financed 
from EU pre-accession funds, whose utilization, although it does not imply direct increase of 
the budget deficit and jeopardizing one of the nominal Maastricht criteria, still could have a 
significant liquidity effect, creating inflationary pressures. 
The combined effect of the of these factors on the supply side and on the demand side, is 
reflected in the relatively high inflation in these countries, the average annual rate of which in 
the period 1993-2007 in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe ranged from 6% in the 
Czech Republic to 38.6% in Lithuania. (By mid-90s, in South Eastern Europe, and in Bulgaria 
and Romania, there were frequent instances of extremely high inflation. In this group, in the 
period  1998-2007,  the  average  annual  inflation  rate  ranged  from  2.1%  in  Macedonia  to 
31.1%  in  Serbia).7  Such  movements  caused  appreciation  of  the  real  exchange  rate, 
which was especially emphasized in the new member states. Thus in the period 1994-
2006, the cumulative appreciation of the real effective exchange rate ranged from 8% 
in Slovenia to 105.9% in Lithuania.8 Economic theory offers arguments that real exchange 
rate  appreciation  is  not  dangerous  as  long  as  it  reflects  changes  in  the  equilibrium  real 
exchange rate. However, policy makers in these countries, especially in the recent years, are 
not really comforted by these theoretical discussions which consider that real appreciation is 
only movement to equilibrium. What they are seeing in their countries are common signs of 
overheating  of  the  economy  and  loss  of  competitiveness,  which  deepens  the  external 
imbalances. In the beginning of transition, current account deficits were understandable and 
not  too  much  cause  for  concern,  as  these  countries  were  importing  technology  and 
previously  unavailable  goods.  However,  the  size  of  the  deficits  in  the  last  several  years 
exceeds the level that is usually deemed sustainable. Thus, the current account deficit in the 
new member states in the period 1996-2005 ranged from 5% to 7.7% of GDP, but in the last 
two  years  it  has  been  reaching  10.1%  and  11.3%  of  GDP.  The  average  current  account 
deficit in the SEEU countries in the same period is even higher, and it is estimated that in 
2007 it will reach 16.3%.9 Even though deficits are projected to fall in some of the countries, 
in general they remain a cause for concern in most of them. Besides the trade deficit which, 
                                                 
7   Source: IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2008. 
8   Source: Eurostat. For the SEEU countries data are available only on Croatia and Macedonia, from the IMF 
International Financial Statistics. Cumulatively, in this period in Croatia there was real appreciation of 9.1%, 
while in Macedonia there was real depreciation of 18.2%. 
9   Source:  EBRD  Transition  report  2007:  November  update  and  NBRM  calculations.  Data  for  2007  are 
estimates. 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 3
due  to  lower  competitiveness  and  higher  consumption,  is  one  of  the  main  causes  for  the 
current account deficits, some of these countries are also experiencing deficits in the income 
balance, which mainly reflects repatriation of profits from foreign direct investments.  
Most certainly, such high current account deficits would not have been possible if there were 
not such large and continuous capital inflows in transition countries, mainly in terms of FDI, 
but also of portfolio and other types of investments. For example, in the period 1989-2007, 
total  FDI  amounted  to  around  3,600  USD  per  capita  in  the  new  EU  member  states  and 
around  2,000  USD  per  capita  in  the  SEEU  countries.10  Again,  in  the  earlier  years  of 
transition, capital flows partially substituted for the insufficient savings in these countries and 
allowed  for  the  necessary  transfer  of  technology  and  expansion  of  production.  However, 
there  are  concerns  that,  in  the  recent  years,  and  particularly  in  the  countries  with  fixed 
exchange  rates,  capital  inflows  are  dangerously  adding  to  domestic  demand,  thus  putting 
further pressure on inflation and increasing imports.  
In addition, the rise in incomes, the presence of abundant foreign capital, the expansion of 
the banking sector and sometimes negative real interest rates all contributed to rapid credit 
growth in transition countries. Again, the rates of growth were almost unprecedented before, 
and in 2007 they reached around 60% year on year in Bulgaria, Romania and around 40.6% 
in Lithuania.11 After a previously suppressed consumption, the process of credit growth was 
understandable and desirable for economic growth. However, the rates of growth  are only 
adding to demand pressures in these countries, and in combination with the other factors, 
adding to the rise of inflation, rise of imports and further worsening of the current account 
position.  
Dear guests,  
At  the  current  time,  these  developments  pose  two  particular  challenges  for  the  policy 
makers in transition countries, one a short-term and the other a longer term.  
The short term challenge is how to lower the risk of high current account deficits, which 
can  cause  wider  financial  crisis,  combined  with  a  currency  crisis  in  countries  with 
pegs and currency boards. Both the economic theory and the economic history are clear 
that current circumstances are not the most favorable for these countries. Worsening current 
account deficits are not sustainable and can not continue forever. The more they widen, the 
bigger  the  pressure  becomes  for  real  exchange  rate  depreciation  as  a  way  of  restoring 
competitiveness. This of course can be a bit easier for countries with flexible exchange rates, 
which  can  achieve  it  by  nominal  depreciation  (and  thus  risk  rise  in  inflation).  However, 
countries with fixed rates are sometimes forced to abandon their exchange rate regime, as 
they do not have any other way out of real overvaluation of their currencies. Another risk in 
the short term might be the contagion of financial crises from abroad, which would combine 
with fragilities and thus prompt financial and economic difficulties in these countries.  
the  simultaneous 
The 
maintenance of competitiveness and nominal convergence. What is next for the new EU 
member  states  is  certainly  achieving  EMU  membership  and  all  of  them  agree  that  the 
stability and opportunities of the single currency are their goal. While achieving this seemed 
easier  a  few  years  ago,  the  prospects  are  somewhat  worsened  in  the  light  of  the  recent 
developments. The record high oil prices and the high food prices additionally augmented the 
inflationary pressures in these countries. The high inflation in most of the transition countries 
makes them breach the first of the four Maastricht criteria. What is even worse, the forecasts 
for  the  next  several  years  for  most  of  the  countries  show  they  will  probably  not  meet  the 
transition  countries  are  related 
long-run  challenges 
for 
to 
                                                 
10   Source:  EBRD  Transition  report  2007:  November  update  and  NBRM  calculations.  Data  for  2007  are 
estimates. 
11   Source: EBRD Transition report 2007: November update. Data for 2007 are estimates. 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2008
thorough 
transformation  and  rapid  growth  of 
inflation  criterion.  This  is  particularly  troubling  for  the  countries  on  a  fixed  exchange  rate 
regime or currency board, which do not have the exchange rate flexibility as an instrument 
for handling inflation.  
Another part where there might be trouble is the exchange rate criterion. Now it is the floaters 
that  could  have  bigger  difficulties,  particularly  if  the  current  developments  continue  and 
capital keeps to flow in these countries, thus making pressures for nominal appreciation. As 
far as the budget deficit criterion and the interest rate criterion are concerned, it appears that 
in  these  areas  there  will  be  less  difficulties  in  fulfilling  the  Maastricht  criteria,  under  the 
assumption there will be maintenance and strengthening of fiscal discipline. 
Of course, not all is bad and unreachable as far as Maastricht criteria are concerned. These 
countries are not giving up and they stand ready to increase their efforts in order to achieve 
their goals. While it appears that most transition countries have postponed their euro-zone 
entry a little bit due to the abovementioned difficulties, there are also two remarkable success 
stories from the transition countries. We already have Slovenia which has been in the euro-
zone  since  last  year.  In  addition,  we  have  Slovakia  which  got  a  positive  opinion  by  the 
European Commission on fulfillment of criteria and is getting ready to adopt the euro in the 
beginning of next year.  
The  remarkable  success  of  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  of  achieving  EU 
membership  after  a 
living  standards 
undoubtedly  holds  a  lot  of  recommendations  and  lessons for  the  South  Eastern  European 
countries. These countries had similar, maybe even more advanced starting positions than 
the other transition countries, but South Eastern Europe is now lagging far more behind in 
terms of progress towards the EU. However, we should bear in mind that the main reason for 
this is definitively the political instability and war conflicts in the region, which understandably 
prevented  faster  economic  transformation  and  reforms.  Luckily,  it  appears  that  political 
support for EU accession and the determination to pursue EU membership, including all the 
necessary economic and political reforms, are strengthening. 
In  analyzing  the  economic  developments  in  the  region  of  South  Eastern  Europe,  some 
notable differences with the CEE countries appear. South Eastern Europe has much lower 
pace of reforms and lower growth rates. Related to this, capital inflows in the region have 
been  much  smaller  and  have  shown  a  much  bigger  dispersion  among  countries,  ranging 
from 834 USD per capita in Albania to 3,932 USD per capita in Croatia, cumulatively in the 
period 1989-2007.12 Credit expansion has been high, but has still to reach rates and length 
of the one seen in more advanced transition countries. Consequently, there have been less 
demand  pressures  as  well  as  comparatively  lower  inflation  than  in  the  other  countries, 
although inflation has been rising recently. Exchange rate regimes in the region are various, 
ranging from currency board in Bosnia and Herzegovina to almost free float within inflation 
targeting in Serbia. What is common is that during the transition process all these countries 
dedicated  particular  attention  to  their  exchange  rate  regimes  and  they  were  mostly  using 
fixed  rates,  which  reflects  their  high  trade  openness  and  their  efforts  to  establish  strong 
monetary authority. 
Regardless of the exchange rate regime, the real exchange rate appreciation in the countries 
in the region has been considerable, although maybe a bit lower when compared to the new 
EU member states. As a result, these countries have been suffering  from competitiveness 
loss as well. This can be clearly seen in the movement of their current account deficits, which 
are considerable in all of these countries. For instance, current account deficits in 2007 range 
from  3.1%  of  GDP  in  Macedonia  to  36.2%  of  GDP  in  Montenegro.13  However,  SEEU 
                                                 
12   Source: EBRD Transition report 2007: November update and NBRM calculations. Data pertain to FDI. Data 
for 2007 are estimates. 
13   Source: EBRD Transition report 2007: November update. 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 5
contains  two  distinct  patterns  of  the  structure  of  the  balance  of  payments.  The  first  is  the 
conventional  one  for  the  transition  countries,  where  the  current  account  deficit  is  covered 
mostly  with  FDI  and  portfolio  investments  (e.g.  Croatia).  On  the  other  hand,  the  second 
pattern is consisted of huge trade deficits, which are covered much more by remittances from 
abroad  than  by  foreign  investments  (e.g.  Macedonia,  Albania).  However,  the  dilemma 
appears whether these high current account deficits are sustainable. 
Regarding  the  economic  history,  despite  the  fact  that  in  certain  areas  Macedonia  was  a 
pioneer  in  the  implementation  of  reforms  in  South  Eastern  Europe,  under  the  influence  of 
negative  external  and  domestic  shocks  it  had  relatively  low  rate  of  economic  growth  of 
averagely  2.7%  in  the  1997-2007  period.  This  resulted  in  a  relatively  low  level  of  real 
convergence of 25.7% of GDP per capita in the euro-zone (23.6% in 1996). The use of the 
exchange rate as an anchor for inflation expectations has been effective until now, producing 
low  and  stable  inflation  rates.  In  circumstances  of  high  import  dependence  and  relatively 
slow  implementation  of  structural  reforms  aimed  at  increasing  the  export  potential, 
contributed  to  the  maintenance  of  high  trade  deficit,  which  was  mainly  financed  by  high 
private transfers.  
However,  the  transition  process  in  Macedonia  is  specific  because  of  the  relatively  slower 
process  of  real  convergence  and  the  continuous  real  depreciation  of  the  Macedonian 
Denar. Namely, according to some research,14 there has been an absence of the Balassa-
Samuelson effect in Macedonia, that is the productivity in the tradable sector compared to 
foreign  partners  rises  with  relatively  lower  rates.  This  was  a  result  of  the  absence  of  big 
foreign  companies  and  the  loss  of  important  foreign  markets,  particularly  after  the 
independence. In such circumstances, the only way to maintain the competitiveness of the 
Macedonian producers was the specialization and exports of lower quality products. These 
developments  did  not  generate  inflationary  pressures,  which  caused  absence  of  real 
appreciation that was evident in the other transition countries.  
In  the  past  several  years,  Macedonia  is  quickly  moving  closer  to  the  more  advanced 
transition economies. Several years in a row we have achieved positive and stable growth 
rates,  equaling  5.1%  in  2007,  which  is  the  highest  growth  rate  since  independence.  Even 
though economic growth rates are lower than the ones in Baltic countries as well as some of 
the  countries  in  the  region,  this  is  a  sure  sign  for  the  acceleration  of  the  process  of  real 
convergence. This process is also supported by the foreign direct and portfolio investments 
(6.3% of GDP in 2007) and the faster credit expansion, with annual growth rate of 39% in 
2007. As far as nominal convergence is concerned, Macedonia is facing challenges that are 
common for most of the economies in the region and elsewhere. Since the last quarter of 
2007,  we  are  having  an  acceleration  of  the  inflation  rate,  which  is  mostly  caused  by  the 
global rise of food and energy prices. Therefore, the uncertainty regarding the movement of 
these  prices,  as  well  as  the  expectations  for  pressures  initiated  by  the  process  of  real 
convergence are the main challenges for monetary policy in the medium term. 
Dear guests,  
I  hope  that  with  my  introductory  speech  I  have  identified  issues  that  are  in  the  focus  of 
interest of the economic policy-makers in the transition countries, and which I expect to be 
further elaborated by the participants in the conference. Today we have with us guests with 
diverse backgrounds. We have presenters from EU institutions, from old and more advanced 
new EU new member states, as well as from the South Eastern European countries, which 
                                                 
14   Loko B. and Tuladhar A. (2005), "Labor Productivity and Real Exchange Rate: The Balassa-Samuelson 
Disconnect  in  the  former  Yugoslav  Republic  of  Macedonia"  IMF  Working  Paper  No.  113  and  Jane 
Bogoev, Sultanija Bojceva Terzijan, Balázs Égert, Magdalena Petrovska, "Real exchange rate dynamics in 
Macedonia: 
http://www.economics-
ejournal.org/economics/discussionpapers. 
insights", 
wisdoms 
new 
and 
Old 
6 
 BIS Review 74/2008
are  determined  to  work  hard  for  European  integration.  I  hope  that  we  can  share  the 
experience  of  the  existing  EU  member  states,  including  the  more  advanced  transition 
countries,  in  the  process  of  EU  and  later  EMU  integration.  I  am  sure  that  South  Eastern 
European countries have a lot to learn, both in terms of successful strategies and steps and 
mistakes to avoid. I am also sure that our capability as central bankers to successfully face 
the challenges of faster accession towards the EU and EMU will be enhanced by this and 
similar conferences. The high quality of the speakers and the guests and the diversity of their 
background make me an optimist that we will have a fruitful Conference, which will broaden 
our knowledge with new experiences. I wish you a successful work in the Conference and to 
the representatives from abroad I wish a very pleasant stay in Macedonia.  
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 7
