Erkki Liikanen: Electronic and mobile payments – moving towards a 
cashless society? 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  European 
Parliamentary Financial Services Forum, Brussels, 1 April 2008. 
The Slides (ppt) can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website. 
 Introduction  
The move to a cashless society has been a topic of discussion for a long time. First, in the 
1960s and 1970s plastic debit and credit cards were expected to take the place of cash. And 
then in the 1980s and 1990s the implementation of chip cards and, e-money was to replace 
cash.  
But still, cash remains popular and its market share has fallen only gradually over the years.  
Will we see a major difference next decade? I want to put this question to the panel today.  
I start by analysing some statistical trends. Then I shall review the possibilities that the new 
technology offers and look at some use-cases for mobile payment services. I also want to 
highlight the need for strong data security and customer identification. Finally I shall wrap up 
with some comments on the change process and its incentives in payment services.  
Statistical developments  
Statistical  data  shows  that  there  has  been  clear  growth  in  non-cash  payments  within  the 
EU15  area  over  the  years.  The  strongest  growth  has  been  in  card  payments,  on  average 
12% annually over the last few years.  
The  use  of  payment  instruments  varies  considerably  within  the  EU15.  (EU15  figures  are 
used in order to harmonise the chart's information).  
In high usage countries such as the Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland and Sweden), the 
average  number  of  card  transactions  per  person  is  130-150  transactions  per  year.  In  low 
usage  countries  (Austria,  Germany,  Greece,  Italy  and  Spain)  figures  are  below  40 
transactions per inhabitant per year. (The figures for Austria and Germany would be a little 
higher if card-based direct debit transactions were included.).  
Card payments are the most important instrument to replace the use of cash. We can see a 
correlation between ATM withdrawals and card payments.  
When  the  number  of  card  payments  per  inhabitant  increases  to  over  70  annual  card 
transactions  per  person,  the  number  the  number  of  ATM  transactions  starts  to  decrease. 
Several  countries  below  this  card  usage  level  still  show  increasing  ATM  usage,  when 
customers move from branch teller withdrawals to ATM withdrawals.  
There is no accurate statistical data on cash withdrawals at branch level or cash payments at 
merchants.  Anecdotal  or  survey-based  evidence  tells  that  Iceland  is  the  most  cashless 
society measured based on purchase value in shops. Only about 9% of the turnover is paid 
by cash. In Iceland debit and credit cards are the main payment instruments at points of sale.  
A  colder  climate  seems  to  promote  the  use  of  cards  and  other  cashless  instruments,  as 
internationally  low  cash  usage  are  found  in  Nordic  countries  ranging  from  about  28%  in 
Norway, 32% in Finland to about 37% in Sweden.  
BIS Review 40/2008 
 1
Surveys in Belgium and Holland report cash purchases ranging between 40-50% of value, 
while southern countries show levels between 60-80% or even higher. Austria and Germany 
are also traditionally cash-based countries.  
Also  the  level  of  electronification  in  payments  varies  a  lot  among  the  EU15.  Most  of  the 
cashless account payments have paper-based and electronic versions. 
The electronification level is a measure of to what extent paper-based credit transfers and 
direct debits are replaced by electronic file transfers or Internet e-banking initiation. It also 
captures to what extent slip-based card payments are modernised to EFTPOS-based, (that's 
electronic funds transfers at point-of-sale-based) electronic card payments.  
Although all countries show increasing numbers of e-payments per inhabitant for the years 
2002-2006 and most countries show an increasing level of automation, the actual variations 
between countries are very large. Holland and Finland seem to be the leading countries, only 
3-4% of transactions are initiated by paper formats.  
From the statistical data, we can conclude that there is a clear trend towards a cashless and 
e-payment based society among all EU15 countries. However, progress is quite slow and the 
use of cash currently seems to be decreasing at only 2-3% a year.  
If  this  trend  does  not  accelerate,  the  use  of  cash  will  remain  dominant  for  many  years, 
especially in the central and southern parts of Europe.  
Technology developments  
Still, it would appear that we are approaching a turning point in payment practices. Mobile 
terminals, mobile phones are fast becoming everybody's personal electronic device, and can 
perform an increasing range of services.  
In  fact  modern  smart  phones  are  small  PCs  with  a  wide  set  of  input,  output  and 
communication features. These even surpass standard PCs in communication capabilities. 
True, they have somewhat lower processing capacity than standard PCs, due to the need to 
save on battery power. But this is not a barrier for payment processing as the capacity need 
there is quite low.  
Smart  phones  today  are  equipped  with  emailing,  calendar,  contact  information,  camera, 
music, radio, games, GPSS and maps, dictionary, word processing capacity, spread sheet 
and  presentation  processing  functionalities,  amongst  others.  The  range  of  mobile  phone 
features  and  services  seem  to  grow  at  an  increasing  speed  and  versatility.  Especially  the 
young generation appears ready to adapt rapidly to new telephone use patterns.  
The mobile phone can become the ideal platform for personal payments. One can easily see 
online account balances and the complete transaction details on the phone's screen.  
It also has all the necessary communication capabilities: long-distance communication and 
complete  internet  access  for  e-banking  and  payment  authorisation  connection  to  banks' 
payment  accounts  and  short  distance  communication  for  terminal  and  phone-to-phone 
connections  
The user interface is familiar to everyone with a colour screen; it has a secure keyboard for 
PIN and other payment input and it has sufficient processing power including encryption and 
other  security  processing.  The  SIM  (Subscriber  Identity  Module)  card  used  in  the  GSM 
mobile  phones  could  be  re-used  for  payment  security  solutions  as  it  follows  the  security 
norms for the chips used in modern payment cards.  
The mobile phone could easily store the card data of all personal cards in the same way that 
it  stores  connection  information  for  all  friends  and  business  partners.  It  would  show  the 
available card alternatives on the screen and, over time, probably learn the preferred one to 
use in given payment situations.  
2 
 BIS Review 40/2008
interact  with  payment 
Card information would be easy to update over the air to the phone. The banks' and credit 
card  companies'  data  bases  would  store  the  necessary  back  up  copies,  so  in  case  of  a 
hardware failure or loss of the telephone, all important data could be downloaded to a new 
phone or SIM card without difficulty.  
The phone could also contain or access all the payment details of an account in the same 
way as the email details can today be accessed using a smart phone.  
Mobile  phones  can  also  introduce  more  convenience  to  the  payment  process.  The  phone 
could  automatically 
terminals  using  near-field  communication 
capabilities (RFID, Radio Frequency Identification communication).  
The point-of-sale terminal would transfer the payment information to the phone and the payer 
would just need to check the payment info and accept it by pushing the OK button. For larger 
payments the payer would be asked to confirm with a PIN number.  
It  seems  also  likely  that  phones  will  be  equipped  with  some  form  of  biological  recognition 
capacity. A mobile phone can function both as a sending and receiving terminal and thereby 
as a platform for person-to-person payments, which is seldom possible with traditional card 
services.  
Mobile phones can also carry ticket and boarding card information making it a good device 
for  all  kind  of  transportation  and  event  ticketing.  The  RFID  interface  could  be  used  for 
automatic gate controls.  
There  are  many  reasons  to  believe  that  the  “chicken-and-egg”  situation  faced  by  all  new 
payment innovations will be overcome by mobile payments and we will see a new convenient 
payment practice emerging.  
Requirement for strong data security and customer identification 
Of course we need to emphasise the need for improved security and customer identification 
in electronic payments. The current PC and Internet environment contain well-known risks in 
the form of viruses and spyware. The Trojan horse type of malware can seize control of a PC 
and act as a “man-in-the-middle” by reading and changing keyboard input, altering screen 
views  and  file  content.  At  worst  it  can  change  sent  transactions  and  thereby  make  fake 
transactions in the user's name.  
Because the security solutions inside a mobile phone are more robust than in standard PCs, 
mobile phones could become an important part in secure e-banking and other remote service 
requiring strong customer identification and data security.  
There are an increasing number of service providers, who want to provide network-based e-
interfaces for their services. Most of these, however, require secure customer identification 
and  authentication.  This  is  the  case  with  taxation  authorities,  insurance  companies,  social 
security and registration offices on top of financial services companies.  
This  question  will  require  a  general  and  common  solution  in  order  to  be  convenient  and 
efficient  for  all  parties.  A  different  solution  for  each  service  provider  would  be  costly  and 
require  customers  to  carry  different  identification  devices  and  passwords  for  each  service 
provider.  
Internet  globalisation  will  require  a  standardised  solution  working  cross-border  in  order  to 
avoid a “jungle” of non-interoperable national solutions. We need a network of interoperable 
secure  ID  service  providers  in  the  same  way  as  we  have  interoperable  GSM  service 
providers using a common standardised SIM platform.  
Could the mobile phone become a general identification device? It already contains the SIM 
card  developed  to  identify  the  subscriber  for  phone  account  purposes.  The  use  of  this 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 3
module could be expanded into a general authentication and identification device resulting in 
synergy benefits.  
There  are  also  other  technical  solutions,  but  they  would  require  an  additional  security 
processor  either  within  the  phone  or  separately.  A  key  question  is  what  institution  could 
provide  the  identification  service?  Would  it  be  a  TELECOM  operator,  a  bank,  a  special 
e-identification  authority?  Could  the  development  be  based  on  cooperation  between  all 
stakeholders? In any case, cooperation will be essential for the implementation of a common 
solution.  
In Turkey, TELECOM operators, banks, authorities and a private e-identity service-providing 
company have agreed upon a common SIM-based identification solution.  
Turkcell,  a  leading  telecom  operator  is  the  business  manager  and  E-Güven  is  the  secure 
certification  authority,  which  is  used  by  all  e-service  providers  for  e-identification  of  their 
customers. Turkish customers can use their mobile phone for secure connections to online 
banking, government services etc.  
Development incentives and disincentives  
How could one speed up change in this payment area? Generally, competition in the market 
place pushes market participants to increase their productivity. If the incumbents are not able 
to change, they are pushed out of the market.  
Customers and service providers and customers need as cost-efficient solutions as possible. 
The most competitive solutions are soon replicated across the sectors.  
In some cases the contribution of the authorities is needed. Otherwise the public sector is not 
able to reap the productivity benefits of ICT and digitalisation. Examples of this can be found 
in the areas of e-health, e-government, e-learning and e-transport. But here too, there are 
also forces which try to maintain the current status quo, due to legacy interests.  
The  structure  of  the  payment  industry  contains  many  barriers  to  change  in  the  form  of 
monopolistic  processing  networks,  coordination  requirements  among  competitors  and 
regulatory limitations on service provision.  
Implementation  of  new  payment  services  will  require  cooperation  among  the  sending  and 
receiving banks as well as within the interbank networks and clearing centres. This is needed 
for any new feature to become available to end-users.  
As  I  said  earlier,  competition  is  the  main  driver  for  productivity  growth.  In  the  area  of 
payments there are, however, non-transparent pricing conventions, and for that reason, end-
users  experience  very  little  visible  price  or  cost  benefits  from  among  the  payment 
alternatives. Cheques, cash and card payments seem as efficient to the average consumer, 
when the costs are cross-subsidised.  
Merchants  do  not  generally  surcharge  payment  instrument  costs  separately,  but  include  a 
general  payment  mark-up  their  prices  on  goods  and  services.  Banks  often  price  payment 
costs  via  merchants  to  the  end-users  or  they  are  hidden  via  float,  value  days  or  interest 
margins.  
The lack of visible transaction costs and efficiency-based pricing means that the proper price 
signals  don't  reach  the  end-users  and  thereby  impede  an  efficient  choice  of  payment 
instrument.  
So  if  we  want  to  speed  up  development  in  payment  services,  we  need  to  increase 
competition in the market and reduce the disincentives.  
Based  on  our  past  Finnish  experiences  in  major  payment  innovations,  I  predict  that  the 
implementation  and  penetration  of  mobile  payments  among  the  general  public  will  take  its 
time following the introduction of a general and user-friendly mobile payment solution.  
4 
 BIS Review 40/2008
Our payment habits are deeply rooted. Merchants need time to adapt their systems. Banks 
want to be assured that the business model of the new payment instrument is a sufficiently 
rewarding opportunity for them.  
Here too we face the traditional chicken-and-egg situation. Still, I am convinced that recent 
developments in ICT in general and in mobile technology in particular have provided a solid 
platform for building a new generation of payment technology.  
My  forecast  is  that  the  convenience  and  efficiency  of  mobile  payments  will  have  general 
appeal among advanced users of mobile phones. 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 5
